A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION Of the four Prisoners
Executed At TYBURN On Wednesday the 5th of this Instant February 1684.
Isaac Davis, George Stokes, Mary Williamson. Alice Patteson, who was burnt at
Tyburn for High Treason

THe most considerable in his Crimes of these miserable Wretches, who this day
satisfied the Law in their Execution, for those heinous offenses, for which
they, were most justly. Condemned, was Edward Conyers, a person from whose
reverend Age, being above threescore, might have been expected a more honest
course of life in those his latter days, since he was from the common frailty,
and decay of nature obliged constantly to attend his call into another world
which Summons he by his Vicious and Covetous desires of living in ease and
plenty, has now fatally hastened upon himself. He was born at New Castle, and
since lived in St. Giles in the Field with his wife and family, in the
Reputation of an honest Man, though not very considerable for his Riches in the
Eye of the World.

He (...)he last Sessions at the Old Bailey Arraigned with his Wife Jane, and
both Condemned for High Treason, for Clipping and otherways Diminishing the
Current Coin of this Kingdom, the Discovery of which was as follows.

A Daughter of Edward Conyers, being sent out by her Mother to buy Bread and
other Commodities they wanted, offering two Shillings which appeared lately
clipped in payment was seized, and being examined how she came by that money, she
answered, she had it from her Mother, when being told that they were clipped, and
if she did not discover all that she knew about it, she must be presently sent
to prison, she immediately confessed that her Father used to clip money, and that
they had Sheers, Files, Melting ^^^s, and other Instruments necessary for that
wicked Trade; upon this a Constable with a Warrant went immediately to search
the house, where they found in Conyers Lodgings the said Implements as also
clipped money and Clippings, upon this they were both sent to Newgate: and at the
Old Bailey the last Sessions, upon plain and undeniable Evidence they were found
Guilty of Felony and High Treason and accordingly condemned, but Jane his Wife,
by his Majestys great Clemency is Repreived upon her great Penitence and
Contrition, Edward Conyers the Husband, did not till a little before Execution
seem to be so nearly touched in Conscience, as a person in his unhappy
Circumstances ought to have been, he was willing to own himself in General a
great Offender, and one who was grown old in Vicious Courses, but such as yet
were rather the common Lapses of Mankind, than particular Vices from his own
depraved affections. He was ready to Exempt himself from the Guilt of that
Crime he was Condemned for, either in hopes of a Reprieve, supposing his
seeming innocence and denial of the Fact might prove a good Argument for Royal
mercy. But the Night before Execution, he seemed to have a true sense of his
sad condition and often prayed and read much in the Holy Bible, and was deeply
concerned for the Deplorable condition of his poor Children, the care of which
he very earnestly recommended to his Friends But this Morning was Repreived, by
his Majestys Grace and Favor.

Jsaac Davis, was another of those unhappy Criminals who this day suffered: his
Crime for which he, suffered was this.

On the 30th of December last, he with two others, between one and two in the
Morning, broke into the house of Mr. Marshfield living near Knights-bridge; the
said Marshfield hearing a noise below in his house came down in his shirt,
imagining two of his own Servants were up at that unseasonable hour; as soon as
he was got to the bottom of the Stairs, they fell upon him, and cut and wounded
him in several places, discharging a Pistol loaded with Bullets; upon the
report of which and the outcry he made calling for help his Son came down and
they immediately Fled, the Prisoner for haste left his Hat behind him which was
known to be his, both by Mr. Marshfield and his Son who had seen him wear it,
he having been formerly Mr. Marshfields Servant, was personally known to him
tho under a disguise. He could make very little defense for himself at his
Trial, and since sentence has, by the extraordinary pains of that worthy
person Mr. Ordinary been brought into a deep sense and utter abhorrence of
those Vicious Courses which have brought him to this untimely End.

John Stokes, a young man about eighteen years of age, was Indicted for picking
the Pocket of Elizabeth Rosse, of her Purse in which was 38 Shillings in Money;
as she was passing along Pie Corner; his Hand was taken in her pocket, but he
Violently snatching it out ran away with the Money, but upon persuit was Seized
and was Committed to Newgate, an^ (...) the Sessions upon plain Evidence was
found Guilty: Tho he was but young in Years he had been long acquainted with
such wicked practices, and now brought to Condeign punishment: Upon the near
appoach of Death he began to receive the impression of those Religious dutys
with more Zeal and Attention and to appear more sensible of his miserable and
forlorn Condition.

Mary Williamson, alias Jones under the pretense of Service, hired her self to
Mr. Powney of St. Lawrence Poultney London, and lived with him from Michelmas
to the. 26th. of October following, at which time her Master and Mistress being
gone a Journey, she broke open a Trunck where their Plate and Money lay, and
Robbing them thereof, to the value of three hundred pound fled: Being
afterward aprehended, and this appearing upon full Evidence against her, as
also that she being an old offender, and had been formerly convicted of the
like; she was now found Guilty, and this day Executed with great remorse and
sorrow for those wicked practices she had been to frequently guilty of, and now
deservedly suffered for.

Alice Patteson; lived in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields and lodged at
the House of Mary Hern, who was the most material witness against her. She was
Indicted for Clipping six Half-crowns, of the Lawful Coin of this Kingdom,
called King Charles the first his Half crowns, diminishing each of the said
Half-crowns to the value of 4 d. Her aforesaid Landlady seemed to connive
thereat, by procuring her broad money, and after it was clipped by changing it
into Guinys, allowing 21 s. and 8 d. a Guiny, which they at another place,
changed again into Silver at 21 s. and 6 d. per. Guiny. The said Mary Hern
confessing she had in this manner changed away several consider able sums, and
also deposed, that she had seen her Cliping Fileing and diminishing money; a
melting pot, melted Silver, Clipt-Mony and other Evidences thereof, being found
in the House: She was therefore brought in guilty of Felony and High Treason
and was this day burnt at Tyburn: she spoke not much in public, but in her
Behavior appeared very penitent and being brought to the Stake where she was
chained, made often use of several pious Expressions and Religious Exhortations
to her nearest Friends, after some little time of Devotion the Fire was
kindled, the Smoke of which suddenly choack'd her: She Expired only with he
single Groan.

There were in all 12. condemned, of which Number through his Majestys Grace
and Clemency, six had a Repreive, and two others, viz. Joan Nicholas, and Mary
Defoe, pleaded their Bellys, and being by a Jury of Women found to be with
Child, Execution was respited till after their Deliverance, when they must
suffer according to Law, unless by his Majestys Gracious pardon they obtain a
New Life.

On Wednesday the 5th. of this Instant M^^ch, about Nine of the Clock the Cart
was brought into which ^^ey were put, about Eleven the Cart drevv on to the
place of Execution. Alice Patteson being drawn upon a Sledge. They behaved
themselves with a very devout and Christian-like Carriage, desiring the
prayers of all present, and commending their Souls unto their most merciful
Redeemer, were turned off by the Cart dravving away, where some of them hung
a great while before they were dead.

Entered according to ORDER.

LONDON Printed by E. Mallet, in Black-Horse-Alley near Fleet-Bridge.


