THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION of Elizabeth Hare which is
burnt for High Treason, IN Bun-Hill FIELDS On Tuesday the 30th. of this Instant
October. 1683 But Sydley Vanderlyn had his Majesty's most Gracious Reprieve.
ON Tuesday the 30th. of this Instant October, Elizabeth Hare, Condemned lately
at the Old Barley, and received Sentence to be burnt alive, and it being left to
the Discretion of the Sheriff of Middlesex, to appoint a fit place for the
Execution: Bun-Hill Fields was accordingly appointed: she was brought under a
strong Guard of Middlesex Officers Commanded by Mr. Rouse the present under
Sheriff, accompanied by great Numbers of Men on Horseback; the Fields being
crowded to behold the direful Exit. About eleven a Clock she arrived at the
Stake, where was prepared a convenient quantity of Bavins, Reeds, and Fagots,
and as expected, she made a clear Confession of all the public offenses she
had been guilty of such as relate to her present end, and many more of the same
nature: and that one part of her life she lived about Bun Hill Fields where she
had a Bastard Child, and although she had forborne Confessing thereof till this
time that she was wholly Convinced she must now die, at that time she was so
void of Remorse, to the young Infant that she buried it a live in Bun hill
Fields, and at this last Instant of time, she could no longer forbear revealing
the same, it being so great a Terror to her Conscience; These Words being
directed to a Learned Divine Which did there officiate most earnestly, desiring
his prayers and the prayers of all good Christians. A Halter was fixed at the
uper end of the Stake to the Neck of the Sufferer, who was placed on a Block
which the Executioner removed at convenient time, which prevented her from
making any Skreecks or outrages by reason of any pain she might receive from
the Fire; in which manner she was consumed to ashes, which sad Spactacle may be
sufficien tto warn all who have the least all Remnant of good in them, to be
watchful and at times so careful, that when any vain temptations of worldly
Riches, or any seeming Vanities thereof shall in the least measure incline
their purposes, that they apply themselves to allmighty God in prayer, to
enable them to with. stand all such, Devilish inclinations, that lead to no
other end then the Gates of Death and Destruction in this world, besides the
great danger there is of eternal Destruction in the World to come. For it is
daily experienced, that such practices do seldom pass unattended with all
manner of ^ickedness and Debauchery that it may be possible for Humanity to be
capable or Guilty of; being naturally attendant for Men not to shrink at any
wickedness if once they trample upon any part of the Fence that preserves the
Common Rule of Moral Justness, that being the Grand step that is made to the
Destruction of all the Religious duties accompanied with all Atheistical and
Fanatical Principles as tend to nothing but the Total Rooting up of all Order
and Good Government, that the providence of almighty god has been please to
establish amongst us, not only for our present Comfort and Well being in this
present Life. but with the assistance of Divine Grace, may enable all that
truly fear God, and work Righteousness to receive those blessings laid up for
the Faithful to all Eternity, and all persons whether young or old, that have
been tempted by any of the Emissaries of such wicked and dangerous projects let
them cease from any such evil practices for the future, and praise God for his
Providence, in preserving them this time from the jaws of Death, that every
hour is ready to seize them and give them a time of amendment of Life in this
World, and that God in his great Mercy for the Future, would prevent and give
such that have been any ways Concerned in that Course of Life (that caused this
Dreadful history) a true sorrow and amendment of Life.

Entered according to order,
London Printed by E Mallet, 1683.


