A TRUE NARRATIVE Of a strange Prodigious TOAD For Size and Shape full Fourteen
Inches Long, and Ten over: the Back on the Hinder-parts: with a Tail Three
times as long as his Body, with a Forked Sting at the end.

SEEN BY SEVERAL LATELY AT A HUNTING ABOUT THE Devils-Arse-oth-Peak in
DARBY-SHIRE.

The Sculpture of which, in Copper, will shortly be Published, And Examined as
to both more Narrowly by some who are now in the City, and whose usual
Curiosity in things so rare, led them to this Exactness of Observation.

With Allowance; To. L'Estrange.

Printed in the Year, MDCLXXVII.

A True Narrative of a Prodigious Toad, seen at the Devils-Arse-o'th- Peak, in
Darby-Shire.
THere is nothing so common as Natures variation through luxury or poverty of
matter, and some concurrent accidents, which taking the opportunity of time and
place, assist in producing such an Animal Mineral, or Vegetine, as because of
it is rarity will seem strange to the world.

For Barnicles some years ago, nay now, are not believed by the ninth part of
ten of the Nation, though several Authors have writ, and many thousands seen
the manner nature has contrived for them; they therefore that can have little
belief for any thing, of which they have not had an occular demonstration are
not expected to give credit to this ensuing Relation.

HAlf a Dozen of the meaner sort of Darbyshire designed a Hunting, Coursing or
Potching rather, having for that purpose got Beagles, Greyhounds, and a Piece
or two, thus furnished, they beat about the Peak, where they started a Hare as
some held, others a Rabbet, which they eagerly followed, until that frightened
Creature ran into a hollow in the earth; at the entrance of which stood the
Dogs, not daring to go in; but when the company came together, and had
consulted a while, they resolved to enter and drive out the prey, the cavity
being large enough, the most courageous went in a good way, but one whose heart
or weariness had caused to stay behind, sat him down on a great stone loose and
moveable; and whether by fitting down he stirred the Stone, he presently
conceived his fellows were gone too far, he called them back, telling them,
that what they looked for was under the stone he sat on: upon which they
returned, carrying a Beagle or two in, which durst not voluntarily approach,
then very circumspectly they turned the stone, but found their expectations
jilted, for which they called the Informer a silly Coxcomb, who had hindered
their further search; but he confidently aver'd he perceived something move,
and laying his hands angerly upon the stone, laid his fingers upon a round hole
in it, into which he tried to thrust his hand, but failing, cried, he would lay
his Soul to a Pot of Darby-Ale, that the prey got in at that hole, upon which
they all tried, and one whose hand was slenderer, thrust it in, arm and all,
and finding his utmost finger to touch a hairy live body, swore bloodily, and
cursed himself to the Devil, it was a Rabbit, for he felt it; upon which the
Inventor replied, I knew I could not be deceived, then they all agreed to roll
the stone out, being near to the mouth, but they were never the better to
further their design.

The most ingenious of them cut a Bryer, slitting the end of it a cross, and
afterward cut it to point toward the middle, and gently thrust it in, until
he found it stopped upon something that was soft, then he began tenderly to turn
it, and drew out a hoary furr, which they concluded to be the belly of the
Rabbet; after many essays, finding themselves disappointed, they resolved
rather then loose their expectations, to get some Iron Mawls and Bars, and so
break the stones to pieces; which they borrowed, and presently fell to Work, and
after considerable pains they split the stone, in the midst of which to their
amazement and great disappointment, they found a Toad of prodigious shape and
size.

After their astonishment was something over, their anger took place, which
they intended to vent against the innocent poor creature; when by mere accident
a Stranger came by, and seeing in what confusion they stood, drew near and was
equally surprised, but finding that they had prepared to brain the poor
Creature with part of his own Castle, entreated them to forbear, and to
recompense their pains in some measure, he would gratify their Civility with a
Dozen of Ale, which they gladly accepted of, and immediately went to Drink,
whilst he had the liberty of viewing this monstrous creature, which he found to
have all the parts of a Toad and more; therefore having competent skill in
Limning, and having the advantage of Pencil and Paper about him, did with all
exactness Draw this strange Animal, which from his own hands came to mine,
whose Description you shall now have, and when the Engraver with whom the
figure is, has finished it, that shall be also presented to you.

This Creature was in Length exactly Fourteen Inches: as it Sat it was Ten
Inches and a Half over; upon the hinder parts of his Back, and the forepart
eight and a Barley Corn, how high it might stand he knew not, for it sat all
the while crooling down; its nose was as black as jet, proportionable to the
rest of its body, and of each side adorned with Bristles; under his Eyes was a
perfect Seaming made Cistern-fashion, of a Green color, whilst his eyes most
delicately beautiful, seemed to drop that way; over which were placed bristles
of a muddy green; under his Gills were Flapps like two scollop shells, of the
Color of a Gurnets fins, admirably blew and shining, and always expanded;
under them were two Pouches or Bladders, of a deep Orange color, larger then
the Fins, being a big as ordinary Pearplumbs, and something of that figure* the
head had a Seagreen scaly Armor on, which ran along its back within four
Inches of its tail; the hinder-part was covered with perfect Hair, but dusky,
hoary colored, of the same manner was that as went along the sides and feet.
But what is yet most strange, is his Tail, which was thrice as long as its
body, which it wore on its back, something like the True-Lovesknot, and though it
seemed so intricate, yet when he offered to turn this creature on its back to
view its belly, it flung its Tail as sudden as the jirk of a Coachmans Whip,
and had not he stood sideways, he might have had too much cause to have
repented his curiosity; but as it happened it is tail fell into a slit of that
stone which was its former Mansion, and though the poor Creature strove hard,
yet it could not release it thus engaged; upon which there appeared as close as
might be, only reckonable, a hundred ninety seven scaly rings, jetty, black,
and shining, which he made a shift by this means to reckon, and may be guessed
to be the indications of its Annual extension; at the end of the Tail was a
forked sting, within an Inch of which was a small Pouch, of the color of Gum
Bugiae.

The Gentleman finding his Overgrown Toad in this posture, would have gagged
the Toad, but no sooner had he touched its Nose, but it recoiled backwards,
even off the Stone, which it seemed so to Hatch, and Cherish before. But there
being an unfortunate hollow or miss of ground, where this rare Animal falling,
and not coming quick enough to the ground, the said Satchel or Pouch near the
sting broke, out of which there issued the most Diaphanous Yellow Liquor as
ever was seen, deeply staining the stone, upon which the Toad that then hung
above-ground fell down, his Tail freely coming to him; which he had not enjoyed
above three Minutes e're he departed this scurvy world: but before it received
its change, it gave three such shrieks that the stranger was not only forced
to stop his ears: But this Lamentable Dirge, forced the Neigbours out of their
Houses: He perceiving the Creature quite dead, took a fresh resolution, and
turned it upon its back, and found its belly to be as white as the driven snow;
covered with a most delightful down: about that time when he was busy viewing
this pleasing Object, his Nose was surpised with a most ungrateful Stench,
which he found to proceed from that Limpid Yellow substance that the Toad had
spilt, in which (it seems) its Seal of Life was placed. Just at its Departure
its Head moved, and it vomited forth a Triangular Stone, being an Inch from
each Angle, and in Depth according, which he drew to him with a Staff, keeping
his Fingers upon his Nose: and when he had got it at a Convenient Distance, he
Doubled some Paper and took it up, folding it in several folds of the same
Paper, and after lapt it carefully in his Handkerchief, and presented it me,
with the Figure: And though before, I was in the number of the Incredulous, and
so far from giving credit to the many Excellencies of this Stone, that I
questioned its Existence, and guessed it to be only the offspring of some
pregnant, yet imposing fancy: Yet now upon my short experience, I dare assure
the World, that the virtues ascribed by Authors to it, come far short of its
performance: And questionless had some curious Virtuosus of our times been
present at this Prodigious Accident, they might have prepared Medicines of
equal Memory with their Fame.

FINIS.

