A True NARRATIVE OF All the PROCEEDINGS AGAINST The Weavers, At a Court of
Oyer and Terminer, held at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly upon the same
occasion, On Thursday the 16th of September 1675.

With an Account of the manner of their Deportment there, and also of the
Punishments allotted them for their Offense.

How many are to be fined, and how many to stand in the Pillory.

London: Printed in the Year 1675.

A True NARRATIVE OF All the PROCEEDINGS AGAINST The Weavers.
IT is, sufficiently known to most person about this City, what great mischief
and disorders happened by the Insurrection of the Weavers in August last, not
only to the breaking of the public Peace, but to the great damage of several
persons whose Looms and Instruments of Trade they forcibly took away from them
and burned.

Great care was then taken by the worthy Sheriffs and other Magistrates of the
City, by all fair means at first, if possible, to suppress them, and to
persuade them to be quiet; and that if they were grieved as they pretended they
were, they should take what remedy the Law would allow them, and not persist to
disturb the Peace of the City: but when such softer allays could not assawage
the Calenture of their raging fury, but they persisted day after day in
continual Tumults to prosecute their Riotous designs, some of the principal of
them were taken and committed to several Prisons, in order to be proceeded
against by Law, for an Example and warning to others that should offend in the
like nature.

And to this end a Court was held by special Commission of Oyer and Terminer at
Justice Hall in the Old-bayly upon Thursday the sixteenth of September Instant,
for the Trial of the said Malefactors, where were present several Justices and
other Magistrates.

After the Commission read, the Prisoners were Arraigned, and then the Jury
were called, which consisted of Esquires and Gentlemen of good Quality; and as
they were called over, the Prisoners being Eleven in number, standing at the
Bar, had liberty given them to make their Challenges; after which the Jury
being sworn, the other ten were withdrawn, and the eleventh continuing at the
Bar, they proceeded first against him, and the Indictment read, which was to
this Effect: That he with several other persons to a great number, did
Riotously assemble together upon the nine and tenth of August, and did break
open the houses of one J. M. and C. and took away and burned their Goods, to
the great disturbance of the Peace, etc. after which the Kings Council opened
the Charge and the Witnesses were sworn, which were the aforesaid C. and M.
with several other persons, who by their Evidence did satisfy the Court the
prisoner was one of the Rabble, who were about an hundred in number; and that
he with the rest, were out on Monday and Tuesday the ninth and tenth of August,
and that he was one of them that laid hand on their Goods, and was aiding and
assisting to the burning of them. This Evidence was proved against him.
Notwithstanding he began a plausible story for himself, as that he kept in all
day on Monday, and that on Tuesday he was with the Constable on the Watch till
four in the afternoon, and then in his way homewards lighting on the place
where the said Rioters were assembled near the house of the said C. and an out
cry being made as if some Murder were done in the house, the said C. desired
that he and two other men would come into his house to be witnesses what the
matter was, where they found all things peaceable and quiet; and that then he
and the said C. went to drink together; and that by his own confession he got
the said C. to give a Bill of the Penalty of one hundred pound that he should
never use the Engine as they called it, any more; which Bill was read in the
Court, and it appeared that upon his giving of the said Bill, the Rioters
departed; by which, and other circumstances, the Court observed that this man
was a principal Ringleader of the Faction.

After his Trial was over, another was called: it appeared by the Evidence that
he also was one of the number; and that although he did not lay violent hands
on the Looms that they had taken, yet that he had persuaded the party from whom
they were taken, to deliver them up into their hands, to avoid the trouble of
having them taken from him; which the Court said was all one to make him guilty
with the rest, for that he might be persuaded to, out of fear of worse
mischiefs that they might do to him; And that to be present in any such Riotous
meeting, and not to endeavor to suppress them, or be in the least abo^^ing to
them, was sufficient to make a person Equally Guilty with them.

After this, two more were called up; one of them carried himself very
Insolently, and stood upon his Justification, although the Fact with which he
was Charged, which was of the same Nature with the former, was Evidently proved
against him. It is Observ^^^e, that the Court of their abundant Clemency
toward the Prisoners, endeavored both with him, and the former Prisoner to
bring them to an ingenuous Confession of their Faults without troubling the
Court with bringing Proofs (which were not wanting) against them, acquainting
them, That the King of his gracious Clemency to them, had ordered the
Indictments to be such, as should neither extend to Life nor Member, but only
Trespass; And that if they would ingenuously Confess the Matters Charged
against them, and humble themselves to the Court, they should find the more
Favor: upon which, One of the Two last mentioned Prisoners fell on his Knees
and begged Mercy, confessing his Indictment, and so did two others after him;
which carriage of theirs, the Court was pleased to take into Consideration, and
it fared the better with them. The rest stood upon their Trial, and their
several Facts proved against them, which being for the manner much of the same
Nature of the former, it would be too redious to recount the Particulars. In
fine, therefore, after a full hearing of the several Evidences against them,
and what they could severally say in their own Defense (in which the Court gave
them a great deal of Liberty, the Jury went upon their Verdict, and returned
them all Guilty; upon which the Court broke up for the Forenoon.

In the Afternoon after the Court had dispatched some other business the
Prisoners were again called to the Bar to receive their Sentence, in which the
Court first acquainting them of the Notoriousness of the Crimes they had been
Convicted of, told them next, what Penalty they had thereby made themselves
liable to: that the same might have been made High Treason, and they therefore
have suffered as Traitors: But that his Majesty of his Gracious Goodness had
been willing to dispense with the Rigor of those Sanguinary Laws, and to suffer
them to be proceeded against upon such Indictments as should endanger neither
Life nor Member; And therefore that those Three Persons who had Confessed their
Indictments, and submitted themselves to the Court, should be Fined Twenty
Marks apiece, to lie in Prison till their Fines were paid, and to be bound to
their Good Behavior for their Lives. And for the other Eight, for their
Contumacy, they were thought worthy of a greater Punishment; and so were Fined
Five hundred Marks a Man, to lie in Prison till their Fines were paid; to stand
three several Days on the Pillory: to find Sureties for their good Behavior
for their Lives. After which Sentence Pronounced, in a little time the Court
broke up, and the Sessions concluded.

FINIS.

