A Warning from the LORD to this Nation.
July 9 1655
O England, England, who art departed from the living God, full of wickedness
and abominations, full of deceit and hypocrisy; how art thou bettered for the
judgments of God that have passed thorough thee? where is thy repentance and
thy serving of the living God? now when the Lord has given the Rest, and Peace
on every side; the sword of thine enemy is not now within thy land, and thou
did make large promises and protestations, if the Lord did but deliver thine
enemy into thine hands, and overturne and cut down thine oppressors, and give
the rest, thou would serve the Lord thy God alone, to signify thy
thankfulness to him for all his benefits toward thee; when thou wast in
distress thou sought the Lord and cried unto him, and he delivered thee from
those that tormented and vexed thee; but where is now the fear of the living
God found in thee; O unthankful England, thou now fittest quietly under thy own
Vine and Figtree, and enjoyest a land that flows with plenty of abundance of
all things, but thou art careless and regards not the fear of the living God,
Pride and Oppression did never more abound in thee than now it does, thou art
haughty and lifted up in pride more than ever, never wast thou so full of gaudy
attire and proud inventions as now; and because of oaths the land mournes, and
the cry of the oppressed does reach the ears of the Lord of Sabbaths; thou
have a name that thou live, but thou art dead; all thy former zeal which was
kindled in thee in the day of thy exercise, thou now being at ease is turned
into pride, and pleasures, and oppression; What are we bettered by you the
Powers of the Earth? where is Oppression taken off? how are we eased? Nay you
have forgotten the Lord your God who did deliver you from the house of Bondage,
and are set down in their seats who were Oppressors, and know not the Lord;
therefore the Lord is now witnessing against thee oh England, and laying open
thine Hypocrisy, and calling the to repentance, and every one that comes out
of thy sins, does deliver his soul, and his life is given him for a prey; for
^^s Lord is riding on in mighty power to cut thee off for ever, and remove the
far away out of his sight, that thou shall no more be called the People of
the Lord; for thou imprisonest the Prophets, and mockest, stonest, and
persecutest those that are sent unto thee, and sheddest inocent blood; Is this
thy reformation, when drunkards, swearers, and cursed speakers, go openly up
and down thy streets unpunished in the sight of those who are set up to do
Justice, and those thou pretends to be thy Teachers, are fleecing thee, and
oppressing and imprisoning those that will not put into their mouths as the
false Prophets of old did, who live in pride and are called Masters, and
flatter thee and do thee no good, but divine unto thee out of their own brain
for money; Thus thou art all corrupt full of deceit and hypocrisy, therefore
will the Lord plead with thee by fire and sword, and thy slane will be many
heaps upon heaps; then all thy laughter will be turned into mourning, and all
thy glory and renown will wither and be consumed into ashes in this day of the
Lord which will burn as an Oven, for the Lord is showring down his indignation
in flames of fire, to render vengeance upon all that know him not, and that
which is for the fire, must to the fire, and that which is for the sword, must
to the sword, and instead of well set hair will be baldness, and of a sweet
smell will be a stink, and an ill savor in your noistrils, and you shall be
consumed for ever the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. And this is the day of
the Lord which you put of, and continue in wantonness and pleasures, living
merrily upon the Earth, marrying and giving in marriage, as the old World did
who regarded not Noah the Preacher of Righteousness, who foreseeing their
destruction, prepared an Ark for the saving of himself and his family, and the
Flood came and swept them all away in the height of their abominations, as he
will do thee O England, who art warned and hardened against the fear of the
Lord, increasing in Wickedness, and filling up thy measure of abominations;
Therefore will the Lord come upon the suddenly, and when thou cries Peace,
Peace, then will come sudden destruction; and this thou shall witness to be the
word of the Lord from the highest to the lowest, that you may all see where you
are, and how you are running on the broad way that leads to destruction; And
return unto the fear of the Lord now whilst thou have time, that the Lord may
repent him of his fierce wrath that is gone out against thee, least thou be
consumed in the fierceness of his anger and indignation, which will burn like
fire against all the ungodly; and if this anger be but kindled a little,
blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

Christopher Tailor.

A Warninig, a Warning from the Lord unto you Oh all People.
Repent, Repent oh all People, repent, and return to the Lord speedily now when
he is calling you, and giving you all Warning and space to Repent, oh Repent,
repent spedily, and fear the living God, the day of the Lord is at hand, the
mighty, dreadful, and terrible day of the Lord to all the ungodly is nigh at
hand, and then must all the Tares, and unprofitable ones, and fruitless Trees,
Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, Blasphemers, Slanderers, Scoffers and Scorners, and
all proud and lofty ones, and lustful ones, Couzeners, and Cheaters, and
Dissemblers and Hypocrites, and all Earthworms, and Raylers, and Persecuters of
the innocent, be called to an account before the Almighty God, who will sit
upon the Thron of Justice, and reward every one according to his works, and
will be no respecter of persons, Kings, and Rulers, Judges, Justices, and
Magistrates, Lawyers, and Gentlemen, or however they be called or styled, all
that are proud and do wickedly shall be cast out and consumed for ever: Howl,
howl, howl and lament ye tall Cedars, who are proud and lofty, who live in
pride and pleasures, ye strong Oaks the Lord is coming to make ye bow before
him, and tremble in his presence, the terrible and dreadful Judgments of God
will be poured forth upon you; Oh bow before him, ye that have the stoutest
looks you shall be as stubble in the fire, and chafe before the wind, and all
your glory will wither, and your remembrance will shrink, the mighty powerful
God will dash you a sunder, oh all ye Heathens, Hypocrites, and ungodly ones,
and cast you out of his presence for ever, and give ye your portion in the Lake
that burns for ever; And you that laugh now and live merrily upon Earth in
pride and pleasures, shall then howl and mourn, and lament and weep and roar,
and there shall be none to pity you; Oh Repent, repent spedily oh all ye
workers of iniquity, Priests and People sigh and bow, the day of the Lord is at
hand, from the Lord God Almighty do I declare it unto you; fear, fear, tremble,
tremble, tremble before the Lord, least you all be consumed utterly and cast
out into everlasting misery; Oh all People prize, prize your time, and come
down, and fear the Lord, and mind his voice, and teaching, the light in thy
conscience which shows you sin and evil, and be obedient, and cast off the
deeds of darkness; Terrible fearful and dreadful will the Lord be to all the
ungodly; merciful and loving to all that speedily return unto him; Now you have
time oh all People prize it, this is the day of your visitation; Woe, woe, woe
for ever for ever will be your portion if you harden your hearts, and live in
carelessness and do not regard the day of your visitation; know thou oh fool
but this night thy soul may be required of thee, thou that puts the day of the
Lord a far of, and cries peace, peace: Therefore oh all People mind and
consider how you spend your time, and prize the everlasting health and peace of
your souls, before the enjoyment of earthly vanities, which will vanish away in
a moment, and to you all this is the word of God.

C. T.

Oh all People who have ears and cannot hear, eyes and see not, who run on
headlong to your utter destruction in the broad way that leads to perdition,
acting contrary to the pure law of God, the light that shines into the
conscience, which shows you sin and evil, and yet can rejoice in your pleasures
and delights, and in the midst of your abominations, the Drunkard rejoicing and
delighting in drunkenness, the Swearer in oaths and cursed speaking, the
Scorner in scorning, the proud and Lustful one glorying in their uncleanness
and abominations, as if there were no God, tracing out their time without the
fear of the Lord, and yet make a profession of God and godliness, but deny the
power and spirit which should cleanse them from their sins, and destroy the
works of the Devil, and purge out the old leaven, and make them a new lump; and
are warned from the Lord God to return from their iniquities, and put away the
evil of their doings from before the Lord, that they may come to inherit
eternal life, and are directed to the true light in the conscience, the light
of Christ, wherewith he has enlightened every one that comes into the world to
be guided by it, in what it makes manifest, which light does search the heart,
and lays before every one that turns within to mind it all that they do in
secret, every secret evil thought and action; and calls every one that minds it
unto true repentance, and the fear of the Lord, and leads into the ways of
holiness all that hearken to its voice and are guided by it; and you who are
exhorted to hearken to the teachings of the Lord within the conscience, the
light there which is true, and does truly if you mind it show you all your vain
course of life, and cheks you for all sin and evil, and shows the way unto God,
and will show you that without holiness no man shall see the Lord; and evcept
you be born again of the spirit you cannot enter into the kingdom of God, for
no unclean thing enters there, but is shut out. And you who are exhorted to
cease from man whose breath is in his noistils, and to mind that secret voice
behind you, which checks you when you turn to the right hand or to the left to
sin against the Lord, which says, this is the way showing you that you should
repent and return from iniquity, and fear the living God, and not live in
hypocrisy, in profession and not in possession: And this light lets every one
see that minds it, plainly where the world lies, how all the world lies in
wickedness, in pride and envy, in covetousness and oppression, swearing and
drunkenness, and lying, and all manner of uncleanness, in scoffing and
scornfulness, and have light minds, living merrily and wantonly upon Earth,
sporting themselves in the day time, living in fraud and deceit, couzening and
cheating, and over reaching one another for filthy lucre, the rich oppressing
the poor, and exhauncing and treasuring up the Creation unto themselves, and
are devourers, and devours the Creation upon their lusts, whiles the poor are
oppressed, and go begging up and down the streets, they are inventing what they
shall eat, and what they shall drink, and what they shall put on, feeding upon
the lust, living in pleasures and pride, and going in gaudy attire, making
their fellow creatures who are their equals dust and ashes, all of one mould
and nature, to be their slaves, and to give them worship and honor, which is
due unto God, unto whom alone belongs all glory and honor for ever. And to all
you who take no warning nor do not repent and return unto the Lord, but turn
the grace of God which has appeared unto you into wantonness, and mind not the
law of God written in the heart to be obedient to it, but walk contrary to it,
living in pleasures and hate to be reformed, thus says the Lord, my fury
shall surely come upon you to overturn you and cast you out of my presence for
ever, and give you your portion in the lake that burns, I am calling upon you
and you regard not, I am waiting and am a God of long suffering, and of much
patience, and do not desire the death of a sinner, and you return not, but you
harden your hearts from my fear, you hate to be reformed, and do cast my law
behind your backs, and every one does that which is pleasant in your own eyes,
my ways you abhor, my messengers you hate and persecute, stone and imprison,
and shed inocent blood, scoffing, scorning, and deriding, woe be unto you, you
that inhabit the earth, whom do you contend against, shall the clay strive with
the potter, my sword is drawn out against you to cut you all down ye fruitless
trees which cumber the ground and are unprofitable, and who shall deliver you
out of my hands, you that are careless and mind not to return when I call, but
put the evil day a far of, and cry peace, peace, when you call and cry out of
the lake and pit I will not hear your cry, but will surely turn away from you,
and woe and misery shall be your portion for ever; the Lord by his mighty power
will pull down all that are proud and lofty, and all that live wickedly, though
now they regard not; therefore woe unto England if thou continue in hardness of
heart, ye Judges, Rulers, and Lawyers, Priest and People, the light of God is
arisen, and iniquity is found in you, the decree from the Lord is gone out
against you to cut you down, you who fight against the Lord and know him not,
who should punish evil doers, and be a terror to them, and encourage and
cherish them that do well; but the hands of evil doers are strengthened by you,
who are one with them in the same nature, living in pride and envy, and feeding
your selves fat for the day of slaughter, whiles you imprison the just, and
scorns those who are sent of the Lord to forewarn you of all the evil to come,
and to declare unto you the day of the Lord, which is nigh at hand upon all the
ungodly, and yet you and the deceitful proud Priests say, let the Lord be
glorified, but he will appear to their everlasting joy, and you shall be
ashamed, and better that a Millstone were hanged about your necks, you proud
ones, and you cast into the Sea, than to offend one of these little ones that
believe in Christ, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, for the Lord will
surely come to reward every one of you according to your doings, you cannot
escape. And that power which you now despise and blaspheme, and call the power
of the devil, which makes proud flesh to tremble before the Lord, O all ye
cursed blasphemers will rent you all to pieces, and spoil you of all your
glory, and pull down all your pride, and lay you in the dust, and you shall
know there is a God who will render vengeance upon you, and hew you down ye
fruitless trees. And that simple and despised light by you in your consciences,
which shows you sin and evil, and calls you to repentance, which you call
natural, will be your eternal judge, to condemn all your natural abominations
and inclinations to evil, and the servants of the living God whom you despise
and scorn, shall rejoice and sing praises unto the living God, when you shall
howl and mourn for the misery that shall come upon you; therefore tremble,
tremble thou earth before the Lord, thou that art exhalted, bow down before thy
Maker, and humble thy self in dust and ashes, come down and stoop before the
Lord, and give glory to him, least you be all consumed in his fury and
indignation; for the loftiness of man shall be laid low, and the crown of pride
shall wither as the flower of the field in a moment, and then where are you,
and what will all your glory avail you, when the Lord will reward you according
to your deeds, and cast you into the lake that burns, who is no respecter of
persons, but he that works righteousness is accepted with him; Now you have
time prize it, and mind the light and be obedient to it, which if you do, it
will lead you down into humility, and the fear of the Lord and cleanse your
hearts, and purge out the unclean nature and bring you to true happiness, and if
you disobey it, it will be your eternal condemnation. And whether you hear or
for bear all people, you shall witness this to be the eternal word of the Lord
unto you.

Christopher Tailor, a Prisoner of the Lord in outward bonds for the truths
sake, at Appleby i^ Westmerland.

FINIS.

