THE True MAGISTRATE, OR THE MAGISTRATES DUTY, AND POWER In matters of
RELIGION, OR In things merely relating to CONSCIENCE.

By a well wisher to a Public Good

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Brewster at the three Bibles at the West end of
Paul's, 1659.

The PREFACE.
THe Author in duty to his Country and love to a public Good, is induced to
publish this short Discourse concerning true Magistracy; but the chief reason
that has prevailed with him, is to vindicate that truly sober and Christian
Principle, (of liberty of conscience) from those false and scandalous
aspersions, wherewith evil-minded men (of corrupt Interests and Principles)
endeavor to bring the same into disgrace and obloquy.

Here first is laid open a great mistake most men, either out of ignorance, or
a blind peevish zeal, make themselves guilty of, As if by allowing Liberty of
Conscience, a flood-gate were set wide open to let in all manner of errors and
heresies, when on the contrary a way is made for truth to come forth in its
proper power and evidence; the only means to convince and confute all
opposition.

Secondly, warning is given to all Christian Magistrates, not to involve
themselves with any faction or corrupt interest, that under specious pretenses
may swallow up the rest when in power, but to cherish and countenance the life
of godliness in all forms that are not contrary to the being of Christianity,
and destructive to the civil society under their protection.

And lastly does show the necessity of allowing this Liberty of Conscience,
according to the Apostles Rule, Let every man be fully persuaded in his own
mind, since without it we must expect biting and devouring one another, and
consequently a spirit of wrath, to tear in pieces all those that differ from
our selves, which will prove an Inlet of the highest persecution and tyranny,
then which nothing can be more contrary to a well ordered Christian
Commonwealth.

Of the Magistrates Duty, etc.
THat the Magistrates power is limited by God and Man, and the exercise
thereof, more for the Good of the whole then any part, or for himself, is
agreeable to the light of Nature, Reason, and sound religion, being so evident
in it self, that it stands in no need of any proof: And were there no more to
evince the unreasonableness of such a Power, this would be sufficient, that by
it man would run into his own destruction; for having no bounds set to his
ambition and unraly lusts, What can hinder the raging ways of this sea,
suddenly to overflow and drown the whole man?

God therefore and Man, have set their limits to Magistrater, which they ought
not to transgress, and by transgressing they make themselves guilty, and so
accountable to both. That God has done it, appears by the creation of Man at
first, when he gave him the sole rule and dominion over all the Earth, or all
the visible parts of the world he confined him not to eat of the forbidden
fruit; for the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die: and by woeful
experience we find the consequents of this transgression, or aspiring to an
unlimited power to be independent from his Maker.

That man has done no less, is manifest in all the well regulated Governments
that have been extant in the world, where the governed (in the primary
Institution) have always had this care, by oaths and other ties, to limit their
Governors, which shows plainly, that in themselves, they still reserved a
Power, to call their Governors to account, for male administration contrary to
their Oaths and Promise. And though (de fact) the governed have not always
done it for want of power, but that (de jure) they have power to do it, is
plain by their always putting the same in execution when God gave them
opportunity.

But that which we have to speak of in this short discourse, chiefly relates to
the Magistrates power, in things spiritual, or merely relating to conscience.
And therein we shall first consider what duty or commerce the Magistrate is to
have over Gods people, or all the professors under his charge; next what power
God and Man have given him in things merely relating to conscience.

Kings or Magistrates in Scripture, are called Nursing Fathers, and nursing
Mothers, which place most miserably has suffered wrack, by the strange
interpretations, some (for their own ends and advantage,) have put upon the
same, thereby attaining a power over the very Church of God, which Christ has
reserved to himself, and not given to any Mortal. But the more genuine
construction seems to be taken from the words themselves, and the nature of
what they hold forth: For Nursing implies a tenderness and care mothers
actually have over their little Infants, which are not able to provide for
themselves; just so ought the Magistrates care to be over the people of God
under their protection, who are sent into the world as sheep among wolves, and
are exposed to the utmost rage and malice the world can put forth against them;
For (as Christ says,) if they were of the world; the world would love its own;
but because they are not of the world, but chosen out of the world, therefore
the world hates them.

The Magistrates duty then in the first place, is to give countenance and
protection to all the people of God under their several forms or appearances,
that so they may live a quiet and godly life under them, thereby engaging the
hearts and prayers of all the Saints to be mindful of their Governors, in their
access to the throne of grace; which doubtless, is no small thing, (if rightly
considered) to engage God himself to be on their side. And if God be with us,
what need we fear who is against us? Besides, it answers the true end of
Magistracy, which is to punish evil doers, and to give encouragement to those
that do well. Now this is most certain, (by evil doers) must be meant those
that make no conscience of their ways, but run out into all manner of excess,
committing sin with greediness: And consequently (the well doers) are such, as
follow the light of their consciences in what they have received, and practice
the same, according to their best skill and knowledge, so that an erroneous
person, cannot properly be called an evil Doer, unless his error lead him into
evil practice.

Secondly, The Magistrate is to be careful, not to side, or engage with any
party, or opinion, whereby the ballane is cast to favor one judgment more
then another, but to consider the power and life of godliness in all, putting
a great price and value upon the same; Neither is this to hinder him from the
exercise of his own private judgment, wherein he may adhere to one, more then
another; only in relation to public, he is not to prefer them for judgment
sake, but (as they may be serviceable) he is to advance and make use of all in
whom he finds the power of godliness and suitable ubility to perform the public
service.

But you may argue, how shall the Magistrate be able to judge the power of
Godliness? since he is to be kept within the Sphere of his own activity; and
this seems to be above him: I Answer, he may judge by our Saviors rule, the
tree by it is fruits: In which though sometimes we may be mistaken (as when
Hypocrites come forth in all those seeming Acts of goodness) yet we must not
expect thorns and briars out of a figtree, but corrupt water out of a polluted
Fountain, for every good Tree brings forth good fruit, and every pure Fountain
clear water. The Magistrate then judges the power of godliness, as the same
appears in life and conversation.

Thirdly, The Magistrate is to cherish a godly spirit, or a spirit fearing God
and hating covetousness; and as much to discountenance and rebuke, (by putting
all wholesome Laws to that end in due execution) a wretched profane spirit that
delights in sin, and manifests it self in all manner of wickedness; and as the
first is to be owned (without respect of persons) as the same appears in all
forms or judgments, so the other is to be punished and disowned without
partiality.

Fourthly, The Magistrate is not to involve himself with any corrupt interests
under any pretense whatsoever, whereby he insensibly becomes ensnared, to
preserve and keep up what God has given up to destruction, especially when
times of reformation are growing upon us; when God will lay open every corrupt
Person, and thing, that set themselves in the way against his design, to bring
in new Heavens and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, which he has long
promised to make good in the latter days, a Pet. 3.13.

The next thing to be considered is, what power either God or man has given to
the Magistrate, in things spiritual or merely relateing to conscience; for this
is most certain, if neither have given him power, he has none but what he
assumes of himself, which is a plain intrusion, and so the exercise of it must
needs be unlawful.

But before we proceed to determine the question, we must first take notice;
that God has given all power in Heaven and in Earth to his Son (the Person of
Christ) for none can pretend to any power, (whether in civils or spirituals)
which he derives not from him; in civils we have already shown that there are
subordinate Magistrates set up in the world under Christ, (the great Potentate
and King of Kings) to whom we are to be subject for conscience sake, being an
Ordinance of God, Romans 13.2.5. in spirituals is now the question, what power
Christ has derived to man, or whether he has reserved the sole power to himself
in things that merely relate to conscience, wherein we are to stand and fall to
our own Master, and not to be judged by others.

Secondly, By things merely relating to conscience, we must understand, those
inward workings in our spirits, that form a persuasion in us of what we receive
to be according to the mind of God; tending either to his service and worship,
or to the increase of knowledge in things of a better life, for as to matters
of conscience, order, or discipline in the Church, we do find a latitude left
us in the Scriptures, and by the practice of those primitive times, (it not
being yet, nor like to be agreed) which form of Church Government, is most
according to the mind of Christ, and consequently the best; some apprehending
that to be Episcopacy, others Presbitery, others the Congregational way etc
(For it were end less to enumerate all) these may suffice to let us see those
places of Scripture, and the practice of those primitive times do admit variety
of interpretations. As if God (by way of condiscention to the weakness of man)
would leave in the Magistrates power, (as to a National Religion) to choose what
form of Church Government may best suit with the civil; provided he assume not
a power which was never given him, to impose the same upon others who dissent
from him or are of another mind.

Thirdly, As God allows this liberty to the Magistrate, so likewise he gives
the same to private Christians, (under the Magistrates protection, and united
together in Church fellowship) to choose for themselves, what government appears
by the Scripture most agreeable to his will; that two diverse Churches growing
up together (under one civil Magistrate) may set up that order of discipline
amongst themselves as to each appears most consonant to the word; for the
Magistrate in this case is not to infringe them of their liberty, but to
rejoice at the presence of the Lord so accompanying them in their several
apprehensions as to see the power of godliness coming forth in its kinds and
practice.

And that this liberty is intended by God himself both to the Magistrate and
the several Churches is manifest by this, that all those places of Scripture,
that relate to Church Government speak the mind of Christ so obscurely and in
such dark expressions, that to this day they that pretend to the best, are
forced to borrow from humane inventions, to make up a complete form; and those
that stick closest to the Scripture, (not admitting any thing but what they
bring from thence) are not able to satisfy others; nor scarce themselves with
clearness of Scripture expressions to prove their form Jure divino, so that
this liberty must needs be allowed till Christ set up his spirit (in power and
evidence) in the hearts of his Saints, to make up that unity of spirit to which
all must yield subjection.

Now to answer the question clearly and positively, I affirm that Christ (who
is the immediate and sole Trustee of all power from his Father) has given none
to the Magistrate in things spiritual or merely relating to conscience, the
reasons are these.

First because the Magistrate is no proper Judge of the inward workings of men's
spirits, but only God who searches and tries the Reins, and therefore has no
power given him in matters of that nature, least by mistaking light for
darkness, and darkness for light, he offend one of them little Ones that are
precious in the sight of God.

Secondly, because we are to stand and fall to our own Master who is God,
having power to destroy both soul and body; but the Magistrate has only power
over the body and what relates to the outward man.

Thirdly, Because the Magistrate (whose Office and charge chiefly relates to
civil things) may easily judge truth for error, and error for truth, as did
Pontius Pilate and the ruling Elders amongst the Jews when they delivered up
Christ to be crucified for the greatest Malefactor, who was the most innocent
Person.

Neither has man given to the Magistrate any such power over the consciences of
their brethren; because the Magistrate can pretend to no power but what is
derived to him, from the people or Governed. (for they are the Original of all
just power) but the people have no such power in themselves, and therefore can
by no means give the same to others; For the people till by consent and compact
they were gathered together, were a confused distracted multitude, every one
his own Lord and Master, each doing what was good in his own eyes, and when
afterward by agreement they were brought into order to be governed by Laws,
and the rules of justice; that only related to the outward man.

As for the inward, it rationally cannot be supposed, they would give that away
which is not in the power of any one, over his fellow creature, especially that
being one of the prerogatives of the Creator, to know and judge the inward man,
which belongs not to the creature; therefore the Magistrate can pretend to no
such power from the people, and consequently if he exercises the same, it is
usurped unjust and unlawful; usurped because he has it not from the people or
Governed, unjust, because by it he does a plain injury to his fellow creatures
over whom he has no such power, and unlawful, because it entrenches upon the
prerogative of God himself, who reseves the power over the inward man, or
persuasions of men's consciences and gives it not to another.

From hence we may conclude, what a groundless foundation they build upon that
are so much for an exercise of civil power in matters of religious concernment,
since the Magistrate can lay no claim to any such power, either from God or
Man; The one reserving that prerogative to himself, the other not being able to
give what he never received. And yet this principle is exceedingly cried up by
some, under the plausible names of advancing Religion, and keeping heresies and
errors out of the Church; as if true religion had need of such broken props,
whose foundation stands in so manifest untruth. As for heresies and errors,
does not the Apostle expressly tell us, There must also be heresies amonst you,
that they that are approved may be made manifest? And can there be a more clear
convincing way of confuting them, then by suffering truth (by its own power and
evidence) to gain ground by degrees upon the understandings and consciences of
Men's which will be sure to make way for it self (maugre all opposition) to the
leading at last in triumph all false disguises and mists of darkness, which may
for a time possess the mind of frail creatures, especially since truth (in the
midst of all contradiction) can be in no danger of miscarriage, being seated
upon a rock) over which the strength of hell can have no prevailing.

Besides all this, there arises naturally from this principle, the most
unchristian, if not inhumane persecution, for differing persuasions in matters
of religion, when the Magistrate shall take upon him to judge, and establish
his judgment by saw, to the oppressing all others that dissent from him; nay,
may he not proceed to the taking away estate and life it self, if they will not
comply with his Religion: As some do that terminate in a perfect inquisition,
others more moderate do suffer such as dissent; but all the discountenance
that can be possible, is cast upon them.

But doubtless, the growing light of these times, will more and more open our
eyes to discover this great mystery of iniquity, which by the Devils artifice,
has been set on foot, by working upon the blind zeal of some, and by interest
blinding others, that to this day, this persecuting spirit is kept alive under
pretense of proferving truth, when thereby truth it self may be trampled under
foot, and falsehood established by Law.

By all which appears the necessity of owning (in well regulated Governments)
that truly sober Principle, of liberty of conscience, so much exploded and
endeavored to be cried down by men of corrupt interests, time-servers, who
have gain and worldly advantage more in their eyes, then the glory of God; for
by this Principle only is meant, a Christian forbearing and tenderness one to
another in matters of religion, till God even reveal that unto us; not in the
least to give liberty to the flesh, or any licentious practice, which first is
rational in it self; for how can we expect others to be of our minds, till by
conviction and letting down light into their understandings, they may be
awakened to receive what with God's blessing may be offered: Besides God gives
differing measures of light and knowledge on purpose, that we may learn
condiscention, and not to impose upon our Brethren, but wait God's time of
discovering to others what is already made known to us; for what reason have we
to be offended at another ignorance, because he knows not so much as our self?
as if we should quarrel with all those that bear not our resemblance, or
fimilitude.

And lastly, The very light of nature teaches us not to do that to another
which we are not willing another should do to us in the like case; Neither will
the Magistrate be hereby obliged to allow liberty of those religions, that
either are contrary to Christianity or whose interest is so involved with
foreign States, and Princes that they have a greater dependence upon them,
then their own Magistrates.

Because the first destroies the very being of Christianity, the latter admits
those within our bowels, that upon all occasions may be ready to shake off
obedience from their Governors and entice others to do the same; nevertheless
according to liberty of conscience, none is to be persecuted for conscience
sake, but laws being provided by the Magistrates against such inconveniences,
it is at their own perils if they transgress them.

FINIS.

