A true NARRATION OF THE Title, Government, and Cause OF THE DEATH Of the late
CHARLES STVART King of ENGLAND.

Written for the satisfaction of all those that are not wilfully obstinate for
a Regal Government, and neglecters or contemners of their own Just Liberties.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed for R. W. 1649.

A True Narration of the Title, Government, and Cause of the death of the late
Charles Stuart King of England.
THe Title of William the Conqueror, (by some surnamed the Bastard) who first
compelled our English Necks to bear his Norman Yoke, (whatever others may
pretend) was by his sword only, by power whereof, his successors (even to this
Charles Stuart, late King of England) have, as it were, forced the suffrage of
the people to their several Elections and Coronations, and by the same power
have maintained all their Actions, howsoever Injust, Tyrannous, and Illegal,
contrary to that ancient, known, and received opinion in Law, that the King is
Singulis major, universis minor; by which unjust, usurped, and Tyrannous power
of Kings, they are become indeed (instead of shepherds, careful to defend their
flocks) most ravenous Wolves, whose panches are never longer full, then they
are devouring the silly sheep, as may most plainly appear in the late Bloody,
and Tyrannous reign of this Charles Stuart, whose boundless prerogative (had
his sword prevailed) had like a general inundation, at once swallowed up both
the Laws of the Land, the Liberties of the Subject, the Privileges of
Parliament; and turned the sweet, and pleasant streams of the Gospel (into that
sea of Antichrist) into popish superstition. In the times of Peace, he was the
most Covetous P. that ever reigned in England not caring how his Subjects were
impoverished or abused, so his private Coffers were enriched. He never cared to
maintain the Laws, Witness the Monopolies, and Ship Money. Witness the long
vacancy of Parliaments, and the Illegal, proceedings against the Earl of Castle
haven; the overawing the Judges about shipmoney, and the Tyrannical proceedings
of the Star Chamber.
except such as conduced to his own particular profit, or to the augmenting his
Prerogative to that unlimited Power, that his Will like the great Turks,
might-command the lives and fortunes of all his subjects. In point of Religion,
his intents may be easily discerned, by intruding the new liturgy on the Kirk
of Scotland, and that too immediately after his Coronation there, he well
knowing that it could be no way consistent with the Covenant by them taken, and
maintained for some ages before, as also by enjoining, and compelling the
Communion Tables in England to be removed, and set Altar wise, with
Altar-worship, (thereby making way for the introducing of Popery,) it being
contrary to the known Laws of this Kingdom: We let slip his ambition of rule,
though by common fame sealed in his fathers blood. And fall to the point of
that unparaleld piece of Tyranny begun against the Scots, and since prosecuted
against us, his late subjects of England: To begin therefore with the Scots,
who after many humble Petitions, and fruitless answers, were forced, for their
own safeties, to take arms, yet with all submission (upon a Treaty, taking the
Kings solemn engagement) laid them down, notwithstanding the great charge they
had been put to, and their unability to bear the same; after which peace, the
end of war being then expected; the conditions of the Treaty were so well kept,
that the Spring following they were again forced, (for their refuge) to take
Arms, in which then success is so notorious to all men, that the King not able
to raise, or maintain an Army able to oppose them, was by necessity compelled
to call a Parliament, only (as by the issue it appeared) to borrow moneys,
(without any intent to satisfy the Subject) which when he found he could not
accomplish, he not only suddenly dissolved, and imprisoned the Members, but by
power of his own royal prerogative, as he calls it, (without consent of
Parliament) endeavored to impose on the free people of England the heavy tax of
Tunnage and Poundage; which when he found that he could not wade through, The
Scots ly still liable to be questioned for their first coming into England, not
being authorized by King, nor Parliament.
the Scots at that time being come into the Kingdom, necessity once more
compelled him to call another Parliament, who in their wisdoms, Contracted with
the Scots for a great sum of money to depart the Kingdom, and willingly
condiscended that the King should go into Scotland, to compose, and settle
businesses there; which was no sooner effected; and he well rid of the Scots,
and received into the City of London with Joy and Triumph, but he had presently
his design on foot, how to be rid of this Parliament also, which by reason of
the Act of Continuation, could not be otherwise effected, then by bringing up
his Northern Army (not then, disbanded) which sailing, he resolved to render
his Act of Continuation (of Grace he called it) as fruitless as possible might
be; whereupon he first makes way to send the Queen beyond Seas with the chief
Jewels of the Crown, endeavoring, through her means, to move foreign Princes
to send him aids, to make war upon his Rebellious Parliament, (as he called
them) after whose departure, (contrary to all Laws, or the president of any his
predecessors) he associated with a company of rude and uncivil fellows, armed,
came to the house of Commons to demand the five Members, and notwithstanding he
received the assurance of the house for their forthcoming, never so much as
brought in any Charge against them, but finding himself frustrated in that his
Tyrannous design, immediately left the Parliament, and repaired to Windsor,
where he mustered together many deboysed persons, and Cavaliers, with promise
of great preferments, and moneys, if they would attend him at York, which they
accordingly did; he in the mean while trifling out the time (under the pretense
of a Treaty about settling the Militia,) with the Parliament, first at Tyballs,
after at Newmarket, and at last at York in the mean time, demanding the Town of
Hull, and providing Arms, Money, and Men to make an Army (the Parliament not
yet dreaming of any such matter) which he soon after performed, by setting up
his Standard at Nottingham. And as this Army was trecherously raised, under the
cunning pretense of a Treaty; so he has proceeded with them, Witness the
falling on at Brainchford, on Col. Hollis his Regiment.
to destroy the good people under the same color ever since, so long as he had
an Army; in which time, on both sides, above an hundred thousand of the good
people of England have been murdered and destroyed. And since the said Armies
by him raised, have been routed and dispersed, and he himself as a prisoner at
the dispose of Parliament and Army; how many new commotions (in Wales,
Scotland, Kent, Essex, Surrey, and the West) he has contrived (as much as in
him lay) to the utter destruction of this whole Nation, is sufficiently
manifest to all men, who are not more blinded in affection to the name of King,
then in love with their own just liberties. And in the last Treaty in the Isle
of Wight, it did most evidently appear to the High Court of Justice, upon the
examination of sufficient witnesses, That Charles Stuart (what pretenses so ever
he made, or what assurances soever he pretended to give) never did, nor ever
would decline the late murder of his Subjects, but would ever approve it as an
act most just. Yet notwithstanding all these tyrannies (so unwilling were the
Parliament to depose him, much more to take his (long since forfeited) life;
that had he not sent his two sons beyond Seas, with Commission to invade this
Nation, and to rob and murder his good Subjects, both by Sea and Land (and at
this very instant time of Treaty, plotted and endeavored a new disturbance, by
all means, laboring to engage the City of London to join with him in the same
bloody design) he might have yet remained unquestioned.

Thus having given the Reasons that forced on the Kings ruin, and in him the
disabling the Norman Line for the future. All those that are true lovers of
Liberty, the Laws, Religion, and the Kingdoms welfare, may both feel and see
themselves unloosed from the Norman Yoke, under which our forefathers have
suffered for the space of five hundred sixty and two years; for which let all
true Englishmen rejoice, and with the Author, cry, Vivat Lex, Exercitus, vera
Religo Senatus populusque Angliae.

FINIS.

