THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE CONFESSION AND EXECUTION of the seven Prisoners AT
TYBURN On Wednesday the 24th. of this Instant October. 1683.
Viz. Charles Butler, who was Drawn, and Hanged for High Treason
John Quarles, John Smith, Mary Phelps, Charles Dod, Hugh Jones, Edward
Williams,
For Murder, Felonies, Burglaries, and diverse other crimes. And also a
particular Account of their several Facts, and where Committed.

Every Sessions produces the reiterated Effects of abused Grace, and
notwithstanding his most sacred Majesty's continued Clemency to the most
Notorious Offenders, almost even to a Miracle yet such is the obdurate
Resolutions of many wretched and miserable Transgressors, as to continue in
their Diabolical Practices, till it becomes an Act of Necessity for the Sword
of Justice to cut off all such, as dead Branches: lest the most delightful Tree
of Community should become withered and of no use in the Garden of this present
world.

I will not insist on the particular Crimes of many of the present sufferers
which his Majesty's Transendent Charity' and Mercy has covered in times past;
a and indeed in those virtues daily Experience manifests him to be the true
Image, He represents: and it may be as truly said his Mercy is above all his
Judgments: and at this very Instant time many have been restored to Life (in
hopes of their Repentance and Amendment) who had forfeited all that this
present world is sensible of to the Justice of the Law, and those whose wicked
inclinations may inc^^ them to such Courses, as end in nothing but Death and
Destruction in this World, besides the danger they are in, by provoking God to
Anger and Justice, and become Liable to Eternal Death in the World to come: I
will mention such of their Crimes only for which they now lie under a Sentence
of Death, and this very day, are to pay their Lives, as a satisfaction to the
Good Government, they have so often, most wickedly and unjustly abused, that
they may be an Example of Terror to all evil doers, who by this may pray to God
to send them his Grace, that they may be incliend to live a more honest and
Christian-like Life; and thereby avoid the Shames and Miseries, that they bring
upon themselves, their Families, and Relations.

Charles Butler, under a Judgment of High Treason, for Clipping, Fileing and
Counterfeiting the Current Coin of this Kingdom, was drawn upon a Sled to the
place of Execution, he confessed that which induced him to this Course of Life,
was a design to enrich himself sooner then he could b^ an honest Course of
Life: but with an Admonition, to all people, that it was in vain, to go on in
such kind of unlawful ways, and that though they did prosper for some time they
must expect Justice to seize them at last: though they might continue in it
undiscovered for some time, and that those ways might to appearance seem very
pleasant in the sight of those which began to undertake in that of unlawful
gain, and that he had employed that trouble and care, in honest endeavors
might (he is now sensible) have been to him as great profit in the End.

Mary Phelps, was the Wife of a Baker by Trade, who has the report of an
honest, careful, industrious Man: She is under a Judgment, for the Murder of
John-Charlton in Covent Garden, and has lived a very suspicious and wicked kind
of life, in the Apprehension of most of her Neighbors: she confessed in
general, that she had been a great sinner, and acknowledged the justice of the
Proceedings against her Life, and submitted her self to the hands of the Law.

The Innocent Man, that was inhumanly Murdered by her procurement, has left
behind him a careful Mother and severa^ small Children, that received a
Competent Maintenance from the honest industrious Endeavors of the Deceased,
it being a Character, that most of his Neighbors give him, and no doubt will
contribute to the induceing of good minded people to lend their Christian Aid
to the destressed Widow and Fatherless Children, that are by this cruel
Murder exposed to the want of those helps, which in his life time they
received from his daily Labors.

Charles Dod, Edward Williams, and Hugh Jones, were all three Executed at
Tybourn, the oldest of them scarce having seen 20 years, yet some of them have
been convicted at least four or five times, of Crimes much of the same Nature,
with this which they have now suffered for: they showed great Penitence, and
confessed that they had followed this way of living, ever since that they were
seven years old, and that they had deserved death several years ago, advising
all young men to study honest ways of living, and to carry themselves
Dutifully, and Obediently, to their Parents and Masters, the want of which was
a great cause of bringing them to this, their shameful End.

They confessed they had been instrumental in Debauching a great many young
men, who were the children of honest parents that lived in good Credit in the
City. And prayed if any of them were Spectators of their shameful end, they
would thereby be Admonished to forsake all their leiud Aquaintance, that are
the abettors and encourgers of those Vice, that brought them to be made the
public Spectacle of Justice: And prayed that they would submit themselves to
the care of their honest Parents whom they had too long abused, and that they
would make it their endeavors to restore a just satisfaction to all such
persons as they knew were injured by them, and that they would apply themselves
to God in continual prayer to enable them by his grace to withstand the wicked
temptations of the Devil, the vain lusts of the Flesh, and all other
allurements of this World.

John Smith, was under a judgment of Death, for a Felony and Burglary, upon the
House of the Right Honorable the Earl of Lindsey, and stealing thence, Goods,
Plates, and other things of a great value: some of the Apparel of the Covntess
of Lindsey, being found upon him he confessed he had been a Notorious Offender,
and commended the Justice of the Court in the proceedings of his Trial. He has
been an old Offender, though but a young man; and it is reported the Thieves,
and Pickpockets themselves, were amazed at the impudent Methods, he took in the
Management of his Viloanies: Admonishing all people to forbear the practice of
such Vilence, that were against the Laws of God and Man, and desired all people
that were there present, to pray for him, having hopes of finding mercy where
he was going, though the Crimes he was guilty of, were of too deep a Dye to be
washed away in this world with any other thing but his Blood; yet he hoped that
of his Saviors, would cleanse him from all Corruption, and thanked the
Ordinary, for the great pains and services he had done him since the time of
his Condemnation.

John Quarles, was under judgment of Death, for a Felony and Burglary, to the
value of between threescore and fourscore pounds: he confessed he had been an
Offender for many years past, and that the longer had Acted in his ungodly way
of Life, the less he was sensible of the wickedness he acted: and declared he
was heartily sorrowful for the injuries he had done to all people, and he hoped
that they would (if any were there present) join with him in their prayers to
God, to bestow his mercy on him in the world to come (...) being very willing
to resign his Life which he had justly forfeited, and hoped that if any were
present (that had followed such like Courses that they would be warned by his
shameful end, to forbear their wicked practices, and to sin no more, lest a
worse thing befall them.

He confessed he had Received Grace and Mercy, no less then four times, having
had the benefit of his Clergy twice, and his Majesty's Gracious Pardon of
Transportation, as many times; acknowledging that he might have lived
plentifully well by his labors in a lawful way, being a Goldsmith by Trade:
But that the wicked lusts of the flesh and the vanities of this world so far
prevailed upon him as to slight and set light esteem of all just means of
honest living: and acknowledged he had drawn too many others into the same
wicked practices of which some had paid their blood as a just satisfaction for
the wrongs and injuries they had done.

Mr. Ordinary, having prayed with them, and admonished them of the Judgment
they were suddenly to appear before, where no secrets were hid advised them to
make a clear and a full Confession of all their crimes, which they might
hitherto Conceal, and that with such Submission, Confession, and Repentance,
God might be pleased to show forth the fullness of his mercy, and appear a
mighty Deliverer to them, in this time of their of their great Necessity, and
pronounced the Blessing, and took his leave of them, and immediately the
Executioner did his Office.

Mr. Butler, being Requested by the Ordinary, to speak what he knew concerning
the Fire in the Temple, his Answer was, that upon the Words of a dying Man, and
as he expected Mercy from the Almighty, he was so much a stranger to it, as the
Infant at his Mothers Breast, and he himself lost above threescore pounds.

Entered according to order,

London Printed by E Mallet, 1683.


