A True Copy of the LETTER sent from the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and
Common Council, at a Common Council holden in Guildhall London, on the 29th. of
December, 1659. Directed to the Right Honorable GEORGE MONCKE, General of the
Forces in Scotland.
Right Honorable,
WE dare not enter upon the Answer, to the merits of your Honors Letter of the
12th. of November, (which was the first and only, that came to us) without
prefacing our hearty and thankful admiring, and acknowledging the transcendent
mercy of God, in putting into your heart those Pious and Noble Resolutions, to
appear at such an Exigent, to be the glorious Instrument in his hand to assert
and vindicate the greatest interess of these Nations, both Religious and Civil.

And next, That, your great humility of spirit, and singular affection to this
City, in communicating to us, so early, those your just Resolves; and inviting
us to share in the honor of assisting to the obtaining of those great and
glorious ends, in which the happiness of these Nations in general, and of this
City, as a Corporation, consists.

In all which, our spirits were both enlightened and warmed by a spark from
your Zeal, and actuated by God to a present activity in our Sphere and
Capacity, in compliance with your Honors advice, as we hope, the whole world
that has seen our actings, can bare us witness; and that, we trust may be our
sufficient plea for pardon, for our not returning a more timely Answer to your
Honors said Letter; But we pray you to believe that it was principally retarded,

First, by suspicion cast on the Authentickness of it, by those who had the
confidence on that score, to Imprison the Deliverers. And next, by the
Interposition of the Forces here, and led out against your Honor, who lay in
the passage to you.

But now (may it please your Excellency) seeing it has pleased God in some
degree to remove those obstructions, we presume by this, to assert in writing,
what we hope all our actions since the receipt of your Honors advice, have
evidenced.

That we have cordially concurred with your Honor, in disowning the Authors of
that Force who Interrupted the Parliament, and Ravished the Birthright of
these Nations, by daring to null and make void Acts of Parliament: And we hope
we have contributed somewhat, by Gods blessing, in our Councils, and Actions,
to the preventing of the sad consequences of that exorbitant Presumption.

How fully and entirely we comply with your Honor, in asserting the Authority
and Freedom of Parliament; a National Ministry, for the enlightening of the
Ignorant, and suppressing of Atheism; and the Peoples just Rights and
Liberties; We humbly refer your Honor to our enclosed Declaration: And do
seriously assure your Honor, that we shall by Gods assistance persist
faithfully and vigorously in this good Cause. And praying God to preserve your
Excellency, and those noble Commanders with you in those Just, Honorable, and
Christian undertakings, shall remain

Your Honors humble Servants. Signed, Sadler Clerk.

[The City Sword Bearer was appointed by the Court to carry this Letter; and he
was ordered to ride post with it: Accordingly he went away on the 30th. of
December, being Friday, in the morning early.]

LONDON, Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1659.


