THE TRUE COPY OF A PETITION Promoted in the ARMY, And already presented to His
Excellency The Lord General, BY The Officers and Soldiers of the Regiment under
the Command of Commissary General JRETON.

8ber ye 19th. London, Printed in the year 1648.

To his Excellency the Lord Fairfax our ever honored General;
The humble Petition of the Officers and Soldiers of the Regiment of Commissary
General Ireton;
SHOWS,
THat although we are as earnestly desirous of a safe and well-grounded Peace,
and that a final end were put to all the troubles and miseries of the
Commonwealth, as any sort of men whatsoever: Yet considering,

I. That there is no Justice done against, or trial of the Contrivers or
Abettors of the Rebellion in Wales, Kent; that of Holland, Buckingham, and
their Accomplices: or of the Confederates with the Apostate Scots: and indeed
little Justice by the Parliament done upon any Offenders of that kind. By which
we have too much cause to fear, that there may be a party in the Parliament
abetting and corresponding with (if not guilty of) the same Designs.

II. That notwitstanding the King has betrayed the trust reposed in him, and
raised War against this Nation to enslave it, violating his Oaths and trampling
under foot our Laws, (then which no Engagement now taken can be more binding:)
notwithstanding he is guilty of all the bloodshed in these intestine Wars, as
may appear not only by the Declaration of the Parliament of England, and that
of Scotland, but even by his own confession in his late agreeing to the
Parliaments first Proposition: being also a person who was so far concluded
incapable to govern, that the Parliament voted no Address should be made to
him. There is yet a prevalent party of his Creatures, who in Parliament, and
elsewhere, act his Design, and endeavor to re-inthrone him, and are (as we
conceive) the Authors of our present Distractions.

III. That through the evil Designs and Practices of the foresaid Party, the
intolerable burden of Free Quarter is continued upon the people,
notwithstanding the unreasonable taxes daily extorted from them, in the name of
pay for the Army: By which means we are not only rendered odious to others, but
a burden to our selves, not being able to cloth our selves, shoe our horses,
or free our Arms.

We therefore cannot think any thing can safely be done in order to a peace,
until some speedy and effectual course be taken, which we humbly desire your
Excellency will be pleased, to your utmost power, to endevor,

1. That there may be a strict scrutiny, for the more full discovery of such
persons as were contrivers or encouragers of the Rebellions aforesaid, and that
Justice speedily be executed on them according to the late Orders of Parliament.

2. That impartial and speedy Justice may be done upon all criminal persons,
and especially upon such as have or shall endeavor to obstruct the course
thereof, or have betrayed their Trust, or bin Authors of shedding that innocent
blood, which calls to Heaven for Vengeance, that so we may be at peace with
God.

3. That the same fault may have the same punishment in the person of King or
Lord, as in the person of the poorest Commoner.

4. That all such may be proceeded against as Traitors, who act or speak in the
Kings behalf, till he shall be acquitted of the guilt of shedding innocent
blood.

5. That the Army may speedily have their pay, or a present course be taken
against those who unjustly withold it; and that they may have the Arrears due
since January 15. before they be ordered to pay Quarters, and effectual
provision made for the payment of former Arrears.

6. That the intolerable oppression of free Quarter be immediately taken off,
and that for the time to come, whilst there is necessity for an Army, there may
be Assignations given to each Regiment, Troop and Company, which may be
constant, during the Establishments of the Army, that the money may not pass
from hand to hand till it is half imbezelled, but be paid immediately from the
Countries to the Soldiery, that so all free Quarter for ever avoided, it may
return from the Soldier to the Countryman again

And now fearing, lest the inveterate malice of our Adversaries should asperse
us with a design to destroy Magistracy and propriety; we cannot but declare,
that we shall constantly endevor to defend them both with our lives and
fortunes, and in expectation of your Excellencies favor in the Premises, we
shall ever pray, etc.

The great Necessities and pressing Grievances of the Soldiery have enforced us
to make these out Addresses (by way of Petition) to the Lord General, for the
redress of them; and knowing that our present undertakings will ere long be
presented to public view, the Officers in the Regiment, under the command of
Commissary General Ireton, by whose appointment this is already presented to
his Excellency the Lord General, have (to prevent any prejudice, which
otherwise might accrue to our present proceedings, by any false or mistaken
Copy, surreptitiously gotten and published in their name) desired me to print
the same, with the name of an Officer of each Troop subscribed, in the behalf,
and at the request of the Officers and Soldiers of the said Regiment, that so
the Reader may be the better satisfied.

Anthony Morgan. Sampson Tongood. James Gennings. Iervice Iefferis. William
Rauce. Henry Clare, junior. H. C.


FINIS.

