A true COPY OF THE MASTERPIECE Of all those PETITIONS which have formerly
been presented by the Major, Aldermen, and the rest of the Common Counsel of
the City of LONDON.

BEING, TWO PETITIONS; The first whereof was presented to the Honorable House
of PEERS now assembled in Parliament; with a Certificate of the Major,
Aldermen, and the rest of the Common Counsel of the City of LONDON.

THE OTHER PETITION, was likewise presented to the Honorable House of Commons
now assembled in Parliament; with their humble Answer, and Reasons thereof to
the Message which the Honorable House sent to them upon Saturday, being the
22. of this instant January.

These two PETITIONS were presented the 25. of this instant January 1642. to
the Honorable Assembly of both HOUSES, by the Committee of Aldermen and Common
Counsell-Men, selected for Martial AFFAIRS.

Printed at LONDON by R. Olton. and G. Dexter. for J. B. An. Dom. 1641.

HONI SOIT (...) MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE HOUSE OF PEERS, now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition and Certificate of the Major, Aldermen, and the rest of
the Common Council of the City of LONDON.
Shows,
THat in obedience to an Order of this Honorable House, the Petitioners do
humbly present a Certificate hereto annexed, importing, That the Continuance of
Sir JOHN BIRON in the Office of Lieutenant of the Tower is the Cause of
forbearance of bringing Bullion to the Mint. And because that diverse other
Forts and Strengths of this Kingdom by Land and Sea are not placed in such
hands, in whom the Parliament may confide (with which and no other this City
(as the Petitioners humbly conceive) will rest satisfied, and such supplies
have not been timely sent unto Jreland with full Commissions as were necessary
to withstand and suppress the power and r^ge of the Rebels there; but that the
Kingdom is in great danger to be lost, and this Kingdom also very much
prejudiced and hazarded thereby, and all this by reason of the many sad and
ominous obstructions of timely and wholesome provisions of Parliament so often
desired against these growing evils which threaten the destruction of all.

That the Petitioners have already lent diverse great sums of money at the
request of your Lops before the Parliament, and of the Parliament since the
Calling thereof, beyond all President, for the service of the King and Kingdom
(A great part whereof they were constrained to borrow, and cannot to this day
repay, by reason that they are not yet reimbursed of the said Moneys) And now
they are further importuned by a Committee of the Honorable House of Commons
to lend 100000 l. more for the supplies of Jreland, which they are neither able
nor willing to do, till they shall have received the Moneys already lent, or
that the obstructions, (which they shall speedily represent more at large to
that Honorable House by way of answer to their said last request) be removed.

Besides all which pressures under which they groan^ and languish, they cannot
but represent further to your Lordships, that very many thousands of Clothiers
and Handicrafts men and their Families, who have their dependence for their
liveli-hood upon this City, do daily more and more make sad mones and
lamentable cries that they are no way able any longer to subsist, because the
Petitioners and others do not buy off their wares as formerly they did; That
the Petitioners cannot so do till Trade be quick^^ (...) ^ly relief of
Ireland, till Papi^^s be fully di^ (...) and the strength of the Kingdom by
Land and Sea (...)into the hands of such as the Parliament may confide i^,
through want whereof the Trade of the Kingdom is ^allen to so low an ebb, that
the Petitioners are not able longer to proceed therein as formerly: Which
necessitated forbearance of Trade and scarcity of money, will (as they verily
believe) in very short time cast innumerable multitudes of those poor men into
such a depth of poverty and extremity, as will in^orce them upon some
dangerous and desperate attempts not fit to be expressed, much less justified,
which they have held their duty to intimate, and so to leave it to the wisdom
of this most Honorable House to consider and prevent.

The Petitioners humbly pray, That there may be a speedy and effectual course
taken for relieving of blee^^ng IRELAND; for removing all distractions, and
fears at home, by disarming of Papists, by putting the Forts and strength of
this Kingdom by land and Sea into safe hands as the Parl^am^n^shall confide
in, and by the speedy passing of Bills conceived by the House of Commons and
sent up to your Lordships for the general good of the King and Kingdom;
whereby the former Course of Trade may be opened, and the Petitioners enabled
and encouraged to take off the wares, stop the cries, and relieve the miseries
of so many thousands of poor people, that otherwise threaten too plainly the
transgression of their Duty in such dangerous ways as may disturb the public
peace, and hazard the Honor and safety of the King, Parliament, and Kingdom.

And they shall daily pray, etc.
blazon of the City of London VNHABILITYE

ANGVYSHE

THANCKFVLN^^

GRIEFFE

GOOD WILL

HOPE


TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS and BVRGESSES, of the House of COMMONS
assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition and Answer of the Major, Aldermen, and the rest of the
Common Council of the City of LONDON.
Shows,
THat the Committee of this Honorable House upon Saturday the 22. of this
instant January, sent a message to the Petitioners for the loan of one hundred
thousand pounds, or of so much thereof as could conveniently be forthwith
raised for levying of forces to suppress the Rebels in Ireland; To which
Message something was then answered, and a further answer in writing promised.

In performance whereof they humbly present the answer following, together with
the Reasons thereof, desiring that the same (being the best that for the
present they are able to give) may favorably be accepted.

And they shall ever pray, etc.

The Answer.
THe Petitioners are duly and deeply sensible of the great miseries of their
Brethren in Ireland, and of the eminent danger, not only of the total loss
of that Kingdom, but of the ruin of this also, if that of Ireland should
(which God forbid) be lost. And as they have hitherto showed themselves ready,
even beyond their abilities to serve the King and Parliament; so shall they
ever continue to the utmost of their power, with all cheerefulnes and duty. But
at the present they are compelled to repea^ their former Answer; That they have
no power to raise any Sums by way of Tax for any foreign use; and do
further answer that they have no means to do it, otherwise then by the
immediate personal Consent of every particular Lender, which they cannot hope
to obtain in regard of these obstructions following: Which the Petitioners
humbly present, together with this their further Answer, as the Reasons
thereof.

1. That immediately before the Parliament and sithence diverse great Sums for
the service of the King and Kingdom have been already lent by the Citizens of
London, besides 50000. l. for the supply of Ireland, in particular; a great
part whereof some of the Lenders were compelled to borrow, and cannot to this
day repay.

2. That such part of those moneys as are already due to the Citizens from the
Parliament, and should have bin repaid out of the Pole-moneyes and Subsidies,
is not yet done, because there is not any considerable sum come in from the
Country as was expected to satisfy the same.

3. That the said 50000 l. lent for Ireland was hastened and speedily paid
within near about 2000 l. upon this ground then urged by the Parliament; that
if it were forthwith lent, it might be of more use to preserve that Kingdom
then the lone of 200000 l. could be, if deferred but six Weeks; yet no
considerable Forces are sent thither to this day. And we find that men will not
be willing to lend any thing till they be assured that a good strength be sent
thither with full Commission to relieve Londonderry and other parts of that
Kingdom.

4. The general withholding of very great Sums of money from the
Petitioners, and many others, which moneys have been long due, not only from
Chapmen and other debtors in England; but from very many in Ireland (who owe
many hundred Thousands of Pounds to the Citizens of London) does render diverse
persons of good, Estates and credit hardly able to go on with Trade; or to pay
their debts and maintain their Charge.

5. The Brotherly offer of Scotland to send 10000 men into Jreland, not yet so
accepted as to produce any relief to that bleeding Kingdom, while yet our
Brethren are daily massacred there, discourageth most men from lending any
Money, were they never so able.

6. The not passing the Bil for pressing of soldiers here, whereby such forces
as are requisite might be timely sent from hence into Ireland, puts many men
into fears, that there may be some design rather to lose that Kingdom, and to
consume this in the losing of Ireland, than to preserve either the one or the
other; for that it cannot be conceived, that the Rebels (being grown so
powerful) will be suppressed by volunteires.

7. The slow issuing of Commissions to those who being in Ireland, or going
thither, are willing to enter the field against the Rebels, disables them from
doing any effectual execution upon the enemy, unless in their own defense;
and so all the moneys that have been, or may be sent thither, are exhausted to
maintain our forces to do little or nothing worthy of them, rather then
employed to chastise the Rebels, and to reduce them to obedience, by means
whereof the number and power of the Rebels are greatly increased, diverse
castles and towns are by them taken, much Protestant blood is daily spilt,
many thousand families destroyed, the malignant part of Papists and their
adherents here are encouraged, and those Rebels so much in boldened, that they
boast, they will extirpate the British Nation there, and then make England the
seat of war.

8. The not disarming of Papists here in England, after many discoveries of
their treacheries, and bloody designs upon the Parliament and Kingdom, the
great decays of Fortifications, Blockhouses and other Sea-forts, the not
managing of them, nor furnishing them with Ordinance and Ammunition, the not
placing all of them in such hands in whom the Parliament may confide, and the
not settling this Kingdom in a posture of defense, in times of so many fears
and jealousies of foreign invasions and intestine conspiracies, the not
removing the present Lieutenant of the Tower, and putting such a person into
that place, as may be well approved by the Parliament, notwithstanding the
earnest petitions exhibited to this honorable House for that purpose, which
has produced a forbearance to bring Bullion into the Tower in this time of
scarcity of moneys; all which cannot but overthow trading more and more, and
make moneys yet more scarce in the City and Kingdom.

9. The Kings Ships which ought to be a wall of defense to this Kingdom, and a
convay to the Merchants (for which Tonnage and Poundage was granted) are not
fitted and employed, as the present condition of this Kingdom and Ireland
requires, but some of them for the conveying away of Delinquents, who durst not
abide the test of the Parliament, to the great encouragement of the rest of the
malignant party here, who when their designs and themselves be detected, know
how to escape the hand of Justice through the abuse of a Royal conduct.

10. The not questioning those many thousands of unknown persons, who are
sheltered in Covengarden, and thereabouts, which do not employ themselves in
any lawful calling, and it is very probable, lie in a readiness to adventure
upon some desperate attempt, to the endangering of the welfare, peace and
safety of the Kings Majesty, Parliament and City.

11. The misunderstanding between the King and Parliament, the not vindicating
the privileges of Parliament, the not suppressing of Protections, the not
punishing of Delinquents, and the not executing of all Priests and Jesuits,
legally condemned, while others contrary to privilege of Parliament have been
illegally (as the Petitioners conceive) charged with Treason, to the deterring
of worthy Members from discharging their duties, and to the destroying of the
very being of Parliaments, do exceedingly fill the minds of men well affected
to the public, with many fears and discouragements throughout the Kingdom,
and so disable them from that cheerful assistance which they would be glad to
afford.

12. By means of the Premises there is such decay of trading, and such
scarcity of money (neither of which can be cured, till the former Evils be
removed) as it is likely in very short time, to cast innumerable multitudes of
poor Artificers into such a depth of poverty and extremity, as may enforce
them upon some dangerous and desperate attempts, not fit to be expressed, much
less to be justified: which they leave to the wisdom of this House speedily
to consider and prevent.

These are the Evils under which the Petitioners do exceedingly labor and
languish, which they humbly conceive to have sprung from the employing of ill
affected persons in places of Trust and Honor in the State, and near to the
sacred person of his Majesty; and that these Evils are still continued by
means of the Votes of Bishops and Popish Lords in the House of Peers.

And now, that the Petitioners have faithfully represented the true Reasons
which do really enforce them to return this answer, most of which have been
formerly offered to this Honorable House in sundry Petitions; and that they
have done all that in them lies (even beyond all president) to serve the King,
Parliament and Kingdom; They humbly crave leave to protest before God and the
high Court of Parliament, that if any further miseries befall their dear
brethren in Ireland, or if any mischief shall break in upon this Kingdom, to
the endangering or disturbing thereof, it ought not to be imputed to the
Petitioners, but only to such as shall endeavor to hinder the effectual and
speedy cure of the evils before recited, that so much disable and discourage
the Petitioners from doing that which by this honorable House is desired of
them.

FINIS.

