A True Coppie of the DECLARATION Published at SANQHAIR Upon the tenth day of
August 1692.

Sic enim omnino statuo, Non ideo interire in Ecclesia veritatem, etiamsi ab
uno Concilio opprimatur: Sed mirabiliter a Domino servari, ut iterum suo
tempore emergat and superet.

Calvin. Printed in the Year M.DC.XCIII.

THE DECLARATION Of a Poor wasted, misrepresented Remnant, of the suffering,
Anti-Popish, Anti-Prelatick, Anti-Erastian, Anti-Sectarian, True Presbyterian
Church of Christ, IN SCOTLAND, United together in a General Correspondence
Published at SANQHAIR.
IT will, no doubt, be reputed by many, a work both superfluous and
Unseasonable at this time, to publish any thing of this Nature. Superfluous, in
regard that our Principles and practices are already abundantly manifest to the
world, particularly in our Informatory Vindication, The Testimony against the
Toleration, and the Contendings and sufferings of many of our dear brethren in
their adhering to the same. And unseasonable, by reason of our present
Circumstances, being this day as sheep scattered upon the mountains, without a
sheep-herd to gather or lead us: No man taking care for our souls: But in stead
thereof, all or most part waiting for our halting, Looking for and Lying in
wait, to catch Advantage against the Cause, through the least misbehaviour of
any of those who oun it: And would, we doubt not, be glad of any thing whereby
they might get the least shadow of ground to reproach; Now when we are as
signs and wonders, and have for more to Criticize upon our words and actions,
than to kyth any Sympathy with the scope and design of what we intend by the
same. Upon these and the like considerations, it may be a question, whether at
this time it be our duty to appear in this manner? Seeing much of the Beauty and
Luster of a Testimony, yea and much of its weight, depends upon its being both
seasonably exhibited, and by men of understanding, that have knowledge of the
times, and what Israel ought to do. These and many other things relative to
the same, as they have in some measure been pondered by us; so have not
altogether wanted their oun weight, to deterr us from any thing of this nature
in such a Juncture. But yet upon the other hand, When we consider, that ever
since the Lords Outstretched Arm brought redemption to this Land from
Antichristian Darkness, and in ane eminent way made it his oun, by bringing us
under these Sacred and Inviolable Bonds of holy Covenants; As Enemies to that
Covenanted work of Reformation, have not been, neither at this day are wanting
for their part, in carrying on their Malignant Designs, in Opposition to and
for destruction of the Covenant and Cause of God, and have been not a little
helped thereto by the faintings and Dastardly yeeldings of Unfaithful and
Declyning Ministers and Professors of the same. So Likewise, the Lord has
glorified his Name, and has so far Dignified this Church, as to have the
honor (to the honor of his Name be it spoken) of having still a Party in her,
who notwithstanding the Hellish Cruelty of open and avowed Enemies in their
persecution on the one hand, and the base and treacherous Dealings of
backslyding Ministers and Professors in their Reproaches and Misrepresentations
of that poor Party on the other hand. Yet over all these Difficulties,
accounted it their glory to be faithful for him in their places and stations:
And esteemed the least hoof of the attained unto Reformation, preferrable to
their Dearest Interests: Laid hold upon all opportunities that were offered for
giving a Testimony of their Love to himself, and zeal for his Public Glory,
although seldom or never thought seasonable by the wise and Learned Rabbis of
the time. Considering how they were helped to resist unto blood, in striving to
keep the word of his patience, and contend for the faith once Delivered to the
Saints. How the Lord smiled upon their honest Designs, and received them with
good will at their hands. And Likewise considering, what God-provocking,
soul-ensnaring, and Land-Desolating Courses are now on foot in these Lands; as
if all we have done these years bypast were not sufficient to Draw down the
Lords deserved wrath upon us, without putting on the Capestone on all our other
defections, by Joining once more in Affinity with the people of these
Abominations, and carrying it on under the Name of Protestant Interest, and New
Reformation. And then, what strange Apprehensions the Land has conceived of
us, upon the account of our non-concurrence with the same, looking upon us as
men misled, drinking in and mentaining strange and pernicious principles,
Despisers of Government, and Rejecters of the Gospel. We say, upon these and
other weighty Considerations, we Judge our selves some way obliged, if we can
do no more, at least to kyth our desire to follow that Noble cloud of
Witnesses, and to go forth by their footsteps in contending for Truth, by
adding our mite of a Testimony to all the Truths that are this day Practicallie
Controverted: and against all defections either on right or Left hand,
whatsoever plausible pretenses they may be covered with. Although we judge our
selves, at this time, Incapable of Publishing any thing that can either make
Truth more clear than it is, or yet escape the sneaking Censure of those, whose
station (if they were faithful in it) Leads them to be far more forward in
this work than we.

We therefore Declare to the world, our hearty desire to embrace and adhere to
the written Word of God, contained in the holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, as the only and complete Rule of Faith and Manners: And whatsoever
is founded thereupon, or aggreeable thereunto, such as Our Confession of Faith,
Larger and shorter Catechisms, Directory for Worship, Our Covenants, National
and Solemn League, The Acknowledgment of Sins, and Engadgment to Duties,
Causes of Gods Wrath, The Ordinary and Perpetual Officers of the Church by
Christ's oun appointment, as Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons, and the Form
of Church Government, Commonly called Presbyterial. We Declare our Adherence
to all the faithful Contendings for Truth, whether of old or of Late, by
Ministers or Professors, against whatsoever sinful Courses, whether more
refined or more gross. And particularly, against the Public Resolutions,
Cromuels Usurpation, the Toleration of Heresies and Sects in his time. Against
the Sacrilegious Usurpations and Tyranny of Char. 2d. The Unfaithfullness of
Ministers and Professors in complying with him, by accepting his Indulgences
first or last. And in a word, to every thing aggreeable to the Matter of our
Testimony as it is Declared page 25. and 26. of our Informatory Vindication
printed Anno 1687. Likewise, our adherence to he Testimony against the
abominable Toleration granted by the Duke of York, given in to the Ministers at
Edinburgh by that faithful Minister and now glorified Martyr Mr. James Renuick
Janr. 17. 1688. And to whatever faithful contendings have been made, or
Testimonies given against the endeavors of any, in their striving to engadge
us in a sinful Confederacy with a Malignant Cause, contrary to this our
Testimony, since the Late Revolutions.

Next, we Declare our Rejecting of whatever is Contradictorie or contrary unto
the written Word of God, or not founded thereupon either Expressly, or by Direct,
near-or necessary Consequence. More particularly, we Testify our Detestation
and Abhorrence of Popery, Quakerisme, Libertinisme, Antinomianisme,
Socinianisme, Anabaptisme, Independency, Prelacy and Erastianisme, and all
Extravagancies and Errors on the right or Left hand, such as the Doting
Delusions of these draun into a Consortship in and about the COTE-MOORE.
Together with all Kinds of Idolatry, Superstition and Profannesse, and
whatsoever is found contrary to sound Doctrine and the Power of Godliness, and
against every other thing, contrary to the Testimony of this Church, as they
are particularly enumerated in Page 27. and 28. of our forsaid Vindication. And
in Like manner we Disoun as a step of Defection, Declyning from, and
contradictory unto the Covenanted Reformation of the Kirk of Scotland, and
inconsistent with the Testimony of our Ancestors, The Publishing of that
Declaration, called, The Declaration of HIS HIGHNESS WILLIAM PRINCE of ORANGE
etc. And espousing it as the state of the Church and Kingdom of Scotlands
Quarrel, while he then was, and yet is, surrounded in Counsel and Army with
many of the old and Inveterate Enemies of Christ's Cause and people, both at
home in these Lands and abroad, except France and his Associates. His
unconcernednesse with the overturning the work of God in these Lands these many
years, till his oun Interest, and the Call of the Prelates in England did prompt
him to his Undertakings. Their Being set up by the Suffrages of these men of
blood here in Scotland, notwithstanding of their being Immediately before
Crouned and Anointed King and Queen in our Neighboring Covenanted Land,
according to all the English Popish Ceremonies, upon their engadging on their
knees, before the Altar etc. To the utmost of their power to preserve unto the
Bishops and Clergy of that Realm, and to the Churches committed to their
Charge, such Rites and Privileges as do or shall appertain unto them, or any
of them. As also, if we consider his other Declaration of the Reasons inducing
him to appear in Arms in the Kingdom of England, Scotland and Ireland, emitted
at the same time; Wherein he Labors to put shame and contempt upon most of all
the contendings of this Church, and to bury many of the most material points
of her Testimony. Thereby declaring his principles, and what he resolved upon
in his after practice: And his thereby rending and overturning that desirable
Uniformity in Religion attained unto with England, which these Lands cannot
break without manifest Perjury; being sworn thereto by the first Article of the
solemn League and Covenant. At Least it is a walking in their Counsels who
rent the same before him; and an undeniable Corroborating and Ratifying the
Statutes of Omri and the works of the house of Ahab, that thereby these
Covenanted Lands should be made a desolation, and the Inhabitants thereof a
hissing. Upon these and other very weighty grounds and reasons, which (if the
Lord will) we may have the occasion to make knoun afterward; We Declare the
Refusal of our Concurrence with the present Course now on foot; It being no way
Concerted according to the ancient Plea of the Scottish Covenanters, for the
Covenanted Reformation of Religion in Britain and Jreland, for the Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline and Government of the House of God, against Popery,
Prelacie, Malignancy, Sectarianisme, Erastianisme, and whatever is contrary to
sound Doctrine and the power of Godliness. But in stead thereof, a joining and
concurring with the Promotters of all these, in their Popish, Prelatick,
Malignant and Sectarian designs, whereby Error, Profanity, and Wickedness is
Encouraged and Tolerated; The Lord highly dishonored; His avowed and Declared
Enemies brought in to places of greatest Power and Trust, in stead of bringing
the wheel of Justice over them; Together with the addition of most of all
those, who have been the chief Ringleaders, Fomenters and Favorers of
Indulgences, Toleration, and all other Defections of this Church. This quarrel,
we say, we refuse to espouse in Lieu of that other: But to signify our
displeasure therewith, refuses to concur in any thing that we know will
strengthen or encouradge the same, such as taking the Oath of Aleigance,
Randivouzing at their command, Paying any Subsidies Imposed for that end, or
doing any thing that may tend to the weakening the hands or saddening the
hearts of our brethren, in their Honest, zealous and faithful contending
against the same. For which Let all concerned see the Seasonable and Necessary
warning of the General Assembly of this Kirk to all the members thereof, July
27. 1649. Sess. 27. Gen: Assem: July ult 1648. Sess. 21. with the Humble
Supplication of the Assembly to the Committee of Estates August 2. 1648. Sess.
25. Act Gener. Assem. Aug. 3. 1648. Sess. 26. Act 4. Parl. 2. Char. And what
our Land mourned for Art. 9. Step. 5. of the Causes of Gods Wrath. With many
places of Scripture, Acts both of Assemblies and Parliaments, which are so
clear, that if they were made judges, and durst come above-board to examine the
present Course; It were no great difficulty to the meanest capacity, to see as
great disparity between this and what our Fathers contended for, as between
Defection and Reformation. But Lest we should be hereby suspected of mentaining
the Principle of disouning all Government: Therefore, as for such Magistrates,
as, being rightly and Lawfully Constitute over us, shall employ their Power for
setting the Mediator on His Throne, and the Croun upon His head, and in defense
of his Croun-Rights and Royal Prerogatives, shall act as the Ministers of God
in a direct Line of Subordination to him, in Defense of our Covenanted
Reformation, and the Subjects Liberties, against Popery, Prelacy, Erastianisme,
Superstition, Heresy, Profannesse, and whatever shall be found to be contrary
to sound Doctrine and the Power of Godliness: and thus become a Terror to evil
Doers, and encouragers of them that do well. We Declare, whenever we can
obtain and enjoy such Rulers, we will Oun, Embrace and Defend them to the
utmost of our Power, and prove encouraging subject and obedient to them in our
places and Stations. And here in pursuance of our former Testimony, we resolve
to stand and wait.

Moreover, we Testify and declare against the unparallelled unfaithfullnesse of
the Ministers in Scotland, as in what they have done before these Revolutions
to the detriment of the Cause: So especiallie-since; in Contributing and
Concurring they and their Accomplices, in their stations and to their power,
with the bulk of these Old* bloody and perjured Enemies of Christ, his Cause
and people, in their setting up HIS HIGHNESS THE PRINCE AND PRINCESS OF
ORANGE, King and Queen over these Covenanted Lands, while acting directly
contrary to the Covenants; being without Covenant-Qualifications Viz. of known
Integrity, Approven fidelity, Constant Affection and zeal to the Cause of God,
Such against whom there is no Just Cause of exception nor jealousy; which our
Covenants and the Laws of the Croun require to be in Judges Superior or
Inferior, whom we are allowed to set over us and join with, according to Exodus
18.21. 2. Sam. 23.3, 4. Nehem. 7.2, 7. Being not of one perfect Religion with
our selves; neither in Covenant, nor admitted Covenant-wayes: without the
sealing and swearing of which, our fathers, or rather we our selves, refused to
receive Charles the second to the Croun. It being the very foundation, whereupon
any right they have to Govern is founded: And without the Approbation and
Subscription whereof, the people can never have from him, Sufficient security,
either for Religion or their Just Liberties. And, if the Prelates in England,
with their Associates, were so peremptory, as not to admit him to the exercise
of the Government, until they had him engadged to mentain and defend that
Abjured Hierarchy; How Astonishing is it that Presbyterians should not have
waited, till the Lord had raised up Instruments, rightly Qualifyed, and from
whom sufficient Security for the Covenanted Reformation of the True Religion in
these Lands might be had: and not to have made have, in building up Zions
breaches with the stones of that burnt mountain of BABYLON? Their
unfaithfullness to their souls, In not representing to them the Hazard they
were and would be in, if they entered themselves heirs to the sins of that
Throne, against which the Lord has such a Long and Eminent Controversy, In
seeking to establish his oun Interest upon the Ruins of the Interest of Jesus
Christ; which is nothing else, but to oppose the Kingdom of the son of God, by
whom Kings do reign. If he should cleave unto these men as his Trusty
Counselors, Who, as they never had the Glory of God nor the good of his People
before their eyes; So now, in all their Ways and Counsels, are seeking nothing
but their oun Interest, to the Hazard and Destruction of Religion and the
Desolation of the Kingdoms. If he should settle a peace with Gods Avowed and
Declared Enemies, the murderers of his poor innocent People, by ouning them as
his good and Loyal Subjects, upon condition of their peacable submission to his
Government. And if he should Employ, Help, Concur or Join with Antichristian
Forces, either at Home or Abroad. All which he has done, and this day is
doing; which cannot be otherwise Judged, but a giving of his Royal Power and
strength unto the Beast: and an accession to all that blood of the Lords
people, wherewith those sons of Babel have made the Lands under their Respective
Tyrannies to Suim. Their unfaithfullness, in not Laying plainly and seasonably
to his Consideration, what the mouth of the LORD of HOSTS has spoken of all
the Accounts of People, Nations, Kings, and Rulers against the Kingdom of His
Son; that they Imagine a Vain thing, and that he that sits in Heaven will
have them in derision, and vex them in his sore displeasure. What marks of
desperate Malignancie; Enmity and hatred to the Cause and people of God, has
appeared, these Years bypast, in these men that now bear the SUAY in his
Councels and Armies. How the Anger of the Lord has been kindled, even against
his dearest Saints, when they have joined themselves to such men as he hates,
and is Cursed. And how severelie he has threatened and punished such Kings, as
have Associate with Idolaters and Leaned to their helps. And next, Their
Unfaithfullnesse to the poor guilty Land, in not forseeing the Evil and fore
showing the Danger, of setting up Magistrates without asking Counsel at the
mouth of the Lord; Although a Duty Incumbent on faithful Watchmen, to set the
Trumpet to their mouths in such Cases, and give Faithful and Distinct Warning,
lest Israel cast off the thing that is good, and the Enemy pursue him, for
setting up Kings and not by God, and Princes without his knowledge. Nor yet
declaring the sin and Danger of Associating in War with known Enemies of Truth
and Godliness, such as are employed in the present Expedition: Whereby a door
is opened for the Introduction, Toleration, and Encouragment of Papists,
Malignants and Sectaries; And the state of the Quarrel, in stead of being
rightly proposed, according to the Ancient PLEA, against both right and left
hand opposites; it is thereby betrayed, lost and buried. Add to all these, their
pretended Fasts and Thanksgivings, for Success and prosperity to the Enemies
of God, his Church and people: Whereby the Lord is mocked, His Truths buried,
The peoples Souls ensnared, The Godly stumbled, A Course of Reformation rather
buried than raised, prosecuted or defended, And a Malignant Quarrel embraced;
Yea that same Course which has been always Cursed of God, and upon which he
has set evident marks of his Displeasure. The Public Sin, for which he is
this day contending against the Land: and the ACHAN which has made Israel so
often to fall before their Enemies.

Now, if this be no false Charge, as, Alace! it is not: And if these be not
only pieces of unfaithfullnesse, but manifest breaches of Covenant, and very
great steps of defection from the Principles and practices of the once famous
Church of Scotland, as indeed they are. And if our hearing and Joining with
them, will Infer a Concurrence with their Course, A participation of their
Guilt: And a rendering of us obnoxious to the Judgments to which breach of
Covenant is Liable: Since it is such a Communion, as in the present
Circumstances is Interpreted by all to be a Tessera of Incorporation with them,
and a sign of Approbation of their way, with which all must be Interpreted
Consenters that are not Contradicters. And Lykwise a laying down of our former
Testimony, before the Courses Testified against be forsaken, as none will deny.
Then we see not, How any Honest man, Zealous Christian, or Faithful Minister
can Condemn us, for Declaring our cheerful Resolution, in the Lords strength,
to stand off, and not to Concur with them in this their New and strange way,
by hearing them, paying their Stipends, observing their Fast or Thanksgiving
days, Compearing before their Kirk-Sessions, Presbyteries, Synods, General
Assemblies or the Like. But on the Contrary, To protest and Testify against
the Constitution of these Ecclesiastic Meetings; In Regard they are made up of
such a corrupt mixture of Members. Some of them having embraced Indulgences;
Some having given Bonds to the Council not to preach for an Indefinite or
Longer or Shorter time; Some having ordinarily heard and Communicated with the
Curates; Some having come under sinful Bonds of Peace and Oaths of Aleigance,
and the like, to the persecuting Adversaries, Repugnant to the Oath of our
Covenants. Against the breaches of which Covenant, We Testify, And against all
the Injuries and Affronts that have been or are offered to the same by the
Ministers in Scotland, in not preaching the perpetual Obligation of them, nor
Renewing them; Neither discovering particularly the breaches thereof: Yea many
not once mentioning them in the Engadgments which they Require of parents, when
they present their Children to Baptism, or in their Licencing and Ordaining of
persons to that Holy Function of the Ministry. Oh! How Astonishing! The like
not to be heard among the Heathen; That these Solemn Vows and Covenants should
not only be Scorned, derided, and openly burnt, and made a Capital Crime to oun
them, by Open and Avowed Adversaries; But also cast by and buried by the
Ministers of the Church of Scotland, called Presbyterians. A Covenant, without
the Swearing of which, none was capable of the meanest Employment either in
Church or State. A Covenant, to which Christ's witnesses did always Adhere: and
for which they did Suffer and Contend. That Covenant, which the Representatives
of Church and State in the three Kingdoms, Did Solemnly Swear and Subscribe for
themselves and Posterity; Of which the Obligation, either to the Duty or
Punishment, continues Indispensible upon the Generation; which for the Moral
Equity of its Matter, the Formality of its Manner, the Importance of its
Purpose, the Holiness of its Solemn Engadgment, and the Glory of its Ends, No
power on Earth can disannull, Disable or dispense. That Covenant, which was
justly thought a fit and excellent Mean, not only to strengthen and fortify
the Kingdoms against the Common Enemy of the True Reformed Religion, Public
peace and. prosperity; But also, to acquire the favor of Almighty God toward
the three Kingdoms of Scotland, England and Ireland, as is expressed in the
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons for taking of the Covenant Dated February
20. 1643. Surely then, the Authors and Chief Instruments of the breaches of
that Covenant, are to be looked upon as those that strengthen the hands of the
Common Enemy, and provoke the wrath of Almighty God against these Kingdoms. And
if by the Declaration of both Kingdoms, Joined in Arms Anno 1643. Such as would
not take the Covenant, are declared to be Public Enemies to their Religion and
Country, and to be Censured and punished as Public Adversaries and
Malignants: Who sees not now a strange falling away from these first
Principles and Professions among those who either Magnify and Cry up, or at the
least Connive at and Comply with such as have not taken the Covenant, Yea are
known Enemies to it? Yet notwithstanding, These same Enemies have been Complied
with and Connived at, by many Ministers, in their taking Oaths Imposed by them,
Repugnant, we say, to the Oath of our Covenants. And others of them having gone
on in sundry other steps of Defection: and to no small Contradiction of Christ's
more faithful Sufferers and Witnesses; Most part having Addressed for, and
accepted of the late Antichristian Toleration: And to this day are treading
the same paths that lead to Defection, and to a detestable Indifferency and
Neutrality in the Lords Matters; without any shadow of their Cordial
Abandoning such Woeful Courses: But on the Contrary, a wyping of the mouth, and
saying, We have done no Evil: A Fasting, praying and Giving Thanks for success
and Prosperity to those who have devoured Jacob, and laid his habitation
desolate; Under whose shadow they Enjoy this unhallowed ease, as if they were
delivered to retain and mentain all these Abominations. Can such a work be of
God? Can tender Zealous souls Concur with it in Faith? Or, Can it stand? Which
has its foundation laid upon the Ruins of TRUTH? Such a Superstructure, as
building up ZION with blood, and Jerusalem with Iniquity. Such measures, being
bounded by the decrees of Gods Enemies. And such Workers, who by the word of
God and decrees of our Church, would be suspended, if not deposed from their
Office, and brought in as delinquents to undergo Censure, and not as
Constituent Members of a Judicatorie. In regard they have yielded up the
Liberties of the Church into the hands and will of her Enemies: and in regard
they carry on a Course of defection, contrary to the Scriptures, our Covenants,
and the Acts and Constitutions of this Church. We say again, upon these
grounds, We, in our places and stations, Testify against all that they may
Conclude or Determine in these their Ecclesiastic Courts, by Acts,
Ratifications, Declarations, Sentences, Censures or Commissions etc. that shall
be made or Given out by them: And protests that the samen may be void and null,
and not Interpreted as binding to the Church of Scotland. But let none think,
that what we have here said can be Interpreted to be a vilipending or Rejecting
of the Free, Lawful, and Rightly Constitute Courts of Christ: For we do
Acknowledge such to have been among the first and most effectual Means
Appointed of God, for preserving the purity, and Advancing the Power of
Reformation in the Church; The sweet fruits and blessed effects whereof this
Church has sometime Enjoyed: which we have been endeavoring after, and are
this day longing for.

We Detest and Abhor that principle, of Casting off the Ministry, wherewith
we are maliciously Calumniated, by those who Labor to fasten upon us the
Odious Names of Schismatics and Separatists, Despisers of the Gospel and the
like. But as herein they bewray their enmity to the Cause we oun; So, till they
bring their oun Principles and Practices, and ours both, and try them by the
Law and the Testimony, the measuring Line of the Sanctuary, The Word of God,
and the Practice of this Church when the Lord kept house with her, and rejoiced
over her as a Brydgroom over the Bryde, They can never prove us Schismatics or
Separatists from the Kirk of Scotland, upon the Account of our Non-Union with
the Backslyding Multitude therein. And herein we may have a sure and well
grounded hope, that when the Lord shall decide the Controversy in the favors
of Truth; In that Day, Union in Truth and Duty, and Separation sinfully
considered, will be otherwise applied than now they are. Besides, we may say
(without boasting) we suppose it may be gathered from what we have done for the
faithfully preached Gospel, and what Love and Respect we have ky^^ed toward
faithful Ministers, whilst such, what our Carriage to them would yet be if we
had them. Yea, we are so far from having any stated Prejudice (as some
foolishly think) at any of them, for whatever their strayings have been, either
as Ministers or Christians; That we Declare by these Presents, whenever the
Lord shall send us such, as out of Love to God, zeal for his Public
Concernments, and Conscience of their Duty, will kyth their Resentment of their
former Backslydings and Defections, by Condemning and forsaking the same, and
satisfy the offended Consciences of the Lords People, by their Public
Declaring the mi^^ of God Faithfully and Freely, and the Peoples Duty in order
to the past and Present Courses of the time; Keeping nothing back that may be
profitable for our building up in Holiness, our manadging a Testimony for
Christ, against all the forementioned or the like steps of Defection, and that
the same may be Faithfully Transmitted to the succeeding Generations; That they
may know what the Lord has done for our Land, and may not be like their
Fathers, a race not right in ^^eart with God, Unsteadfast and Perfidious in his
Covenant. Upon these CONDITIONS, and Upon Removal of Just Exceptions, w^^
Promise our hearty Concurrence with them, in hearing them, and to do every
other thing, that Precept or former Practice to Ministers in the like Case, can
oblidge Persons in our Circumstances to do to or for their Faithful Leaders,
to whom they may safely, without scruple, Commit the Charge of their souls.
Withal Protesting, that this our Declaration may be a standing Answer to all
the Lies, Reproaches, Misinformations, or Misrepresentations whatsoever, that
shall be brought in against us in time coming, by whatsoever Party or Persons,
upon the Account of our Non-confederating with them; Seeing what we here
Require, is both Religious and Reasonable; And seeing what we oun, is of no new
Extraction: But was esteemed Truth before we had a tongue to speak for it; and,
we hope, shall be so, when its Enemies and betrayers shall want a mouth to
speak against it.

And now, having thus Declared our Testimony in as Compendious and Innocent a
way, as the Nature and Circumstances of it will Allow. As we are not altogether
Ignorant what Acceptance it shall find from Persons of all tempers to whose
hands it may come; So especially from those Ministers, Master ALEXANDER
SCHIELDS, Master THOMAS LINNING, Master WILLIAM BOYD, and others their
Accomplices, who have lately gone from us and left us, after the Lord (in his
mercy to us) had frustrate their design of Precipitating us into a Confederacy
with all those to whom the Nations are saying, A CONFE DE RACY, by Regimenting
and Uniting with the destroyers and betrayers of the Cause, and that both in
Church and State; and casting in our Lots, and Interweaving our Interests with
theirs; As they had done with many of our Brethren before, and also with many
of our selves, which this day we desire to mourn for, And longs for that day,
wherein we may Confess the same before a Competent and Faithful Judicatory.
But if we durst say, that what we have here done, was not intended to please
our selves, so neither to give Just ground of Irritation or Stumbling to any of
the Lords People. And as for the wicked, who know not at what they Stumble, we
may warrantably say, It was not designed to Please them, be the Event what it
will. Only this, To let the Indifferent and Lukwarm Party on the one hand know,
that the Lord is keeping up a handful to witness for him, against their past
and Present Rotten Courses of Defection, Notwithstanding their cutting off the
Hair, and putting out the eyes of these three Ministers beforementioned, and
carrying them in their Printed Acts and Letters through the Nations, as Trophies
of their victory over them; as men whose former Lives and Doctrine had been
Contrary to the former Rules and Principles of this Church, nourishing and
encouraging Schism, Division and Defection, and their former Testimonies made
up, in many things, of several Peremptory gross mistakes, uncharitable and
Injurious Reflections tending rather to kindle Contentions, than remove
Divisions. All which are plainly Insinuated in their Act, Called. The
Proceedings of the Assembly annent Master Linning and others. Thereby
laboring, through them, to reach a blow to the Cause of God, and to all the
faithful Witnesses and Witnessings of the poor Remnant with whom they were
once embarked. And that the Malignant Party may likewise know, that we look
upon them as the Murderers of our dear brethren, whose blood, as it is
precious in Gods sight, so no humane power can Indemnifie; for though it be
Gods glory to pardon, yet man's duty and glory is, to Administer Justice
Impartially. We are not changed from our former Principles and Intentions, but
our Cause is the same, whatever those who have fallen off from us may plead
for. And Finally, we desire all Persons, of whatsoever new Party they be,
Minister or other, that would appear more Refined than the rest, and Pretending
to Act separately from our Enemies and Antagonists, whilst yet really
Incorporate with them, and carrying on their designs more effectually, though
more smoothly, and Isntrumental to break and Divide us more than any, as if
purposely sent forth by the Rest for that effect; Not to mistake us, as if what
we have said in order to the Rest, were not applicable to them. But on the
Contrary, that we look upon their Course, as Accompanied with many Aggravations
that others are not Capable of. And so, as more loathsome to God, ought to be
the more Detestable to us. And as for Neutralists, who account it wisdom to
Condemn all, and Pretend to side with none, we referr them to the last Article
of the Solemn League and Covenant (without forgetting the rest) Namely, That
we shall Assist and Defend all that enter into this League and Covenant, in the
mentaining and Pursuing thereof, and shall not suffer our selves Directly nor
Indirectly, by whatsoever Combination, Persuasion or Terror, to be Divided or
withdrawn from this blessed Union and Conjunction; Whether to make Defection to
the Contrary Part, or to give our selves to a Detestable Indifferency and
Neutrality in this Cause. According to which Article, men's Reality and
Integrity in the Covenant will be Manifest and Demonstrable, as well by their
Ommissions as by their Commissions; as well by their not doing good as by their
doing of evil. He that is not with us, is against us; and he that gathers not
with us, Scatters. And whatever our Complaints be this day, tossed with
Tempests and not Comforted; Yet we hope he has thoughts of Peace and Purpose
of mercy toward us. We do not mourn as those without hope: But we will bear
the Indignation of the Lord, because we have sinned against him, Until he
plead our Cause and Execute Judgment for us. He has lifted Up our Enemies that
their fall may be the greater: and that He may cast them down into desolation
for ever. He will make his Cause to Triumph at last, over all Opposition, and
the Enemies foot to slide in due time: And so put a new song of Praise in the
mouths of all the faithful friends and Followers of the LAMB.

Therefore we Appoint and Ordain, that Incontinently ye our Emissaries pass
upon the tenth day of August 1692 years, unto the Market Cross of SANQHAIR, and
there by open Proclamation make Intimation of this our Declaration, leaving
Coppies of the samen Affixed upon the forsaid Market Cross and other patent
places of the Kingdom necessary. Given at....... upon the tenth day of August
1692 Years.

LET KING JESUS REIGN AND LET ALL HIS ENEMIES BE SCATTERED.

FINIS.

