A true Copy of a Speech made by an English Colonel to his Regiment,
immediately before their late Transportation for Flanders at Harwich.
THus far, Gentlemen and Fellow Soldiers, I have conducted you, in order to
your Transportation for Flanders: The Honor of that Post which I now enjoy is
due only to his Majesty's Goodness; but the Happiness which I propose to my
self in possessing it, is a Gift which none but your selves can bestow upon me.

Your Civil Deportment, and Strict Obedience hitherto, I take as an Earnest to
me of my good Hopes and Successes for the future; and when I considered you are
English Men, whose Loyalty to your Kings, and Natural Courage, are celebrated
and feared all Europe over; I once thought I might have spared both my self and
you the trouble of this Meeting. But though long Speeches are now grown out of
Date, yet having Something of high Importance to communicate to you, I was
resolved to be rather out of Fashion than out of Humor at an old Custom, at
this time so necessary for the good of the Nation, and service of Our King.

I must acquaint you then, that notwithstanding our Loyalty and Courage may be
at as high a pitch as any mortal Men upon Earth can boast of; yet the greatest
Loyalty may be debaucht, and Courage daunted, by the false Suggestions and
malicious Insinuations of our cunning Enemies at home; which, captivating our
Understandings, and perverting our Judgments, disarm us more effectually than
the Force of our declared Foes abroad could have done.

Honor is such an inseparable Qualification of a Soldier, that when the
Honor is gone the Soldier dies, though the Man perhaps may drag on miserably
a despised Life. Now the Justice of the Cause in which we engage has ever been
esteemed the first and greatest Motive to Men of Honor to venture their Lives
and Fortunes, to endure all the Hardships of a tedious War, and to appear
Glorious with all those Wounds, those Scars, and Deformities upon them, which
still from the Justice of the Cause have been ever reputed Honorable. What Man
of Honor then would appear in a villainous Cause, and venture his Limbs and
Life, nay, and his Salvation too, in an unjust War? Slaughter in such becomes
Murder, Plunder is Robbery and Theft, and Victory it self (if ever it happens
to them) oftentimes ends in their Destruction.

Having premised these things, I must now mind you, that probably most of your
selves, as well as I, cannot but have observed how industrious our Enemies at
home have been, in representing our Cause as unjust, nay, as Villainous and
Scandalous to the Reputation and Name of an English Man, much more of
Christian; and, with Grief and Abhorrence, I must acknowledge, that the
Generality of most Towns, Cities, and Provinces too, have of late so altered
their Opinions, and so publicly asperst our Cause, with injurious terms, not
now to be repeated, that I think my self bound in Conscience to put some stop
to this growing Mischief, especially since our Courts themselves have not been
free from the Contagion, no, not that most Honorable Court in Parliament
assembled; in which (to our Grief, and great Amazement) some of those very Men
have appeared the most constant Enemies to our Cause, who have been reputed Men
of the best Estates, and to this day looked upon as the truest Patriots of the
English Nation: What then can be less expected from me (who have the Honor to
command such brave Men as you are) than to instruct you in those things which
may preserve your Loyalty, as well as inform and teach you that military
Discipline which may animate your Courage? Most of you have come in Volunteers
to recruit that Regiment of mine, the greatest part whereof lie buried in the
Bed of Honor. To you therefore, who have never crossed the Seas, it may be
acceptable to know what kind of Entertainment and Reception you are like to
meet with abroad: You Gentlemen, and Fellow Soldiers, who have been Partners of
our Sufferings, and our repeated Victories abroad, will be informed of what
has past at home, since you left your Native Country; and All of you will be
convinced (I hope) how Just and Honorable the Cause is, in which we are
engaged.

I shall begin at the Fountain and Head of all Justice and Honor, (I mean) the
King; and follow the Stream of his most admirable Qualifications until they are
Lost in the Vast Ocean of noble Thought. First then, he is our Natural and
Hereditary King, and Sovereign Liege Lord, and We his Natural-born Subjects:
Had I no more but this to say of him, it were more than sufficient to confirm
our bounden Duty and Loyalty to him: What can be more Just and Honorable than
to observe the inviolable Laws of Nature, especially when they are enforced by
the positive Laws of God? What Man of Honor can forbear to Blush, or Rage with
Indignation, should he hear himself accused of some unnatural Sin? The Crimes
which we commit against Nature, make us degenerate below the Condition of
unreasonable Beasts, who (even without Reason) preserve the Law of Nature: From
the Kid and its Dam to the Lion's Whelp, and the fiercest Lioness, all
Creatures by Nature love and follow those which nourish and preserve them; and
shall we, whose Profession and Reward is Honor, forsake our Natural Hereditary
King, who is our Father and Protector too?

But to proceed: Were he not our King, yet since he is so, Who does not wish
him so? He it is, who at the hazard of his own dear and precious Life, and at
his own vast Expense, for our sakes alone, accepted of Three troublesome
Crowns, to deliver us from those two dreadful Monsters Popery, and Slavery: He
it is, who brought in Peace and Plenty among us, and has entailed them upon us
too, beyond the Prospect of the most descerning Eye: He it is, who so tenderly
and compassionately Loves us, that he holds our Lives in the Palms of his
Hands, and is so Cautious of exposing them to the ordinary Dangers of an Enemy,
that he heaps up his own dear Countrymen as a mighty Bulwark, before us, whilst
himself remains in the Rear, as a safe retreat, when dangers overtake us. In
his nature he is Affable, Courtious, and Liberal, event to a fault: He is
Merciful, and so free from Ambition and Tyranny (the Common and darling Vices
of Kings) that he has divided his Throne with the Consort of his Bed, and has
entrusted his Power to the Will of his People. But not to dwell too long upon
Words, let us proceed to Effects which are the more convincing, by how much
they are the more sensible to us: And,

First, How free have we been from the intolerable burden of Eternal Taxes? How
do we wallow in Wealth, and Plenty, and secure even from the Noise and Rumor
of War? Is not our Trade encreast, and our Merchants freed from the anxious
Fears, Dangers, and Losses of the Seas? Do not their Numbers daily grow upon
us; insomuch, that many of them are necessitated to take up with obscurer
Apartments in private Corners, for want of larger and freer Houses in the
nobler Streets? Are not the prizes of Food and Raiment, and all the necessaries
of a Comfortable Life, diminished to almost one half of what we paid in former
Reigns? Is not Justice administered with Mercy, is not the Liberty, and Property
of the People, as Sacred to him as his Prerogative is, and ought to be to us?
Have the Nobility, Gentry, or Comonalty known, or heard of any illegal
Imprisonments or excessive Fines? Have any Arch Bishops, or Bishops been turned
out of their Chairs for Conscience sake, or Fellows of Colleges from their
Fellowships and Properties by Mandamus? Have there been any Pensioning or
Bribing of Parliament Men, and buying the Misery and Slavery of the People with
that very Money, which they themselves had so largely given? Have not the Votes
in Parl. been as free and unbiassed, as in the blessed time of Mr. Johnson's
quandam Calends of May? Have any Publik Bills for the common Good, and
impartial Justice, which had past both Houses, ever been refused, by this our
just Judge, and Father of his Country? Has not the Old Church of England
flourished again under him, like a green Bay Tree, and her younger Sons grown
up like fruitful Vines about the House of the Lord? And does it not daily more
and more appear how Studious he is to preserve it? Have the Spoils of our
Native and homeborn Enemies been given to Foreigners; or Honors, Estates and
Employments bestowed upon Strangers? Are not our Councils guided by the best
among the Nobility, in which a Foreigner has no place, and the Cabinet Council
by those who most love and are most beloved of the English Nation, And approved
themselves Men of Honor in former Reigns? Is not the Trade and English
Interest promoted, almost to the ruin of Holland, and are they not ready to
sink to their first poor State for want of Traffic, whilst we ride Masters of
the Ocean, and import to them all Foreign Commodities upon English Bottoms, and
upon an English account, to the Eternal Glory of our King, and our own vast
inexhaustible Profit? Is not the Gold and Silver Coin of his own Native Country
imported hither, to enrich his English Subjects, and not returned till most of
it has paid the Duties of a Circumcised Toll? Are we infested with swarms of
French, who like Maw-worms in our Bowels, eat up the Bread of the poorer
Tradesmen, and starve the hands of our willing and industrious Natives? Or have
we any reason to fear the French at home, like Wolves, lurking in their Dens?
Are our Palaces guarded by Frags in Armor, to the dishonor of the Loyal
English Man? Or our English Armies commanded abroad, by Hogan Mogan Generals,
who hate us? Have we not the preference abroad, both as to Pay and Post of
Honor; and have not those small, inconsiderable Supplies of Money, which our
Parliaments have presented to the King, been first applied to the constant Pay
of the English Army? Have we not been always led on to certain Victory, by the
Courage and Conduct of our Invincible Monarch, and the Sick and Wounded
provided for beyond their Expectations, by his Care and Piety? Have we not
treated the Prisoners of our Enemies with an humanity becoming the English
Nation, whilst ours have perished among them, by a barbarity unexpressible? Are
we not made welcome by the Dutch as more than half Brothers, and nourished,
supported, and trusted by them for more than we shall ever be able to repay? Do
they not Congratulate our arrival among them, with all the demonstrations of
wonderful love and honor, and lament our departure from them, as if they had
believed us their Guardian Angels? Are not our Admirals, Sea Officers, Sea Men,
and our whole Fleet, honored, rewarded, paid, and provided for to that degree,
that Sea Men abound in every corner of the Nation, and have prevented the
utmost care and diligence of the Press Masters? Are there such Grievances among
us, as vast Arrears, and Debenters? Or is there a Debt of Millions due from the
Crown to the Fleet and Army, the Victuallers, Docks, Shipyards, Transport
Ships, etc. to the ruin of many hundred of industrious English Families, and
the increase and multiplying of thousands of poor neglected Widows and Orphans?
But to conclude, (for what Pen, Pencil, or Tongue of Mortal Man, can fully
represent to you all the inconceivable Graces of our illustrious Hereditary
Monarch) would I compare him with his immediate unfortunate Predecessor, it
would raise his Glories to so high a pitch, that nothing could blind the Eyes
of the whole Universe, but by gazing too steadfastly upon his insupportable
Luster. Comparisons we say, are edious, therefore I shall forbear giving that
trouble either to my self or you; yet, least after all I have said, any thing
material should be neglected, I shall first admonish you, after what manner the
Contagion before mentioned may possibly insinuate it self among us, and then
conclude with its certain Cure and Antidote.

Some of our home bred Enemies, in order to render ineffectual what I have here
affirmed to you, might probably suspect the Truth of what I have here proposed
to you; but till I meet with that bold Man, who dares deny me the least Article
of it, I shall desire all of you to take it for granted, as I my self do. The
other sort of Men are indeed more sober, more numerous, and more considerable,
both for Estates and Quality; and these, under the specious Pretense of
Compassion for an unfortunate Exiled Prince, endeavor to Extenuate the Faults,
and magnify the good Qualities of the late King James: They will tell you (it
may be) First, That he was the Son and Lawful Successor of our blessed King and
Martyr Charles the First; but this can be no Argument in his favor, since some
of our Learned Divines, even upon the late Anniversary Fast for his Martyrdom,
and before the most August Assembly of our great City Governors, have delivered
from the Pulpit, that Both might very well deserve the Punishments they
underwent; and who cannot easily conclude, that if they might, they did. They
will tell you again, That he was Merciful and Just, a true born English Man,
and as true a Lover of his Country; That he was a most indulgent Father to our
present Gracious Queen, and the Princess her Sister; a kind Father in Law, and
Uncle, to our present dear King, and so guiltless of ever having done him any
Wrong, that, from his own Innocence, he would not be persuaded his Nephew and
Son would have attempted any thing against his Crown, or Person; which (they
tell you) prevented him from taking those reasonable and just Measures, for his
own Security, which otherwise he ought, and might have done. Some will say,
That he was a good Play Master, both to his Creditors and Servants, and to all
poor Tradesmen; a very Father to his little Army, who never wanted their Pay
during his whole Reign; and such a Lover of a Seaman, that he would even have
lived among them; with whom he had ventured his Life, to vindicate the Honor
and Interest of the English Nation, against these very Dutch, who are now (by
the goodness of our King) our intimate, bosom Friends, and something more than
Fellow Subjects. They will say moreover, That he put no such heavy Tax masters
over us, nor oppressed the poorer Trades with intolerable Excise; nor forced us
to redeem our Heads over and over again at a Price more valuable to him than
the rest of our whole Bodies. That he would never introduce the French Mode
(which we say he always favored) of wearing Sabots, or wooden Shoes; no, nor
the Dutch Fashion of woollen Mittins instead of Gloves, through the excessive
Tax put upon all Sorts of Leather; nor yet forbid us the old English use of
powdered Beef, and Pork, by raising the Price of our old English Salt. In a
word, That he would never have swept away all our English Liberties and
Properties at once, with the Dutch Broom of a General Excise; nor our Native
Privileges and Birthrights, by an English Bill of as General a Naturalization.
Others will tell you, That he was Careful and Provident, especially in
refitting and augmenting his Fleet, which is the Honor and Security of the
English Nation; That he studied the Honor and Interest of England, and had he
staid till now among us, would have secured to us the whole uninterrupted Trade
of Europe; which the Dutch foresaw, feared, and have prevented; and, moreover,
would have been the only Potentate that could have put a Stop to the excessive
Power of France. That he always promoted an impartial Liberty of Conscience, in
Matters of Religion, to those who would live. Quietly, and obedient Subjects to
the Civil Government. This, they say, the Dutch also foresaw, and the ill
Consequences which it might bring upon them, and therefore opposed it underhand
in the Reign of King Charles the Second, and turned it (among other things) to
the Ruin of his Brother. They will tell you, he was easy of Access, even to the
meanest of his Subjects, and had a due Regard to his Nobility; and they will
affirm to you, by many undeniable Testimonies (as they pretend) that his
Authority, and Presence in Ireland, chiefly protected the Protestants there
from the Violence of their Irish Enemies, notwithstanding a Famous Divine has
written largely to the contrary. But then they proceed to Justify all they have
said, by the Effects of that Cause which they are so industrious to promote;
and then they tell you, That the Nation was never so Rich, and in such a height
of Prosperity, as during his Reign: That our Trade and our Merchants were in a
most flourishing Condition: That the Taxes were not felt by us, or known to us:
That all manner of Provisions, especially Bread, were cheap and plentiful: That
the hands of the poorer English Manufactorers were in constant Employment: That
we had no Apprehensions or Pretense of War whilst he kept to the Treaty of
Nimegen, as they say he did, and was obliged to do: That he really and
sincerely intended and studied the Good and Prosperity of his People, which
nothing so much prevented, as our own unreasonable Fears and Jealousies; and
that those were maliciously aggravated and promoted by such as had resolved to
make themselves great under this Government, at the Expense of his and our
Ruin; and a great deal more to this Purpose.

Then they come to the Crimes Objected against him; and they tell you in short,
That as to some public but insignificant Favors granted to some of his own
Religion, he was overruled in that point, by the treacherous Advice of some of
his Protestant Favorites who betrayed him, after they had (by their own false
Councils) first exposed him, and then left him. And as to those greater and
villainous Crimes, which (they tell you) his Soul abhorred; they say, That he
was most unjustly, irregularly and impiously Accused; and as a Confirmation and
strong Argument of this Truth which they affirm, they say further, That had he
been Guilty of any one Article, nothing could have been more absolutely
necessary for the Honor and Justification of the English Nation, and the
Severity of those very Persons who gained most by this Revolution, than to have
proved the late King James Guilty of all or any one single Article of that
Nature objected against him, which yet to this day they have not been able to
do, nor will or in truth can do, to the Worlds End. And lastly, they conclude
with the Violences and Indignities put upon him; as his Imprisonment in his own
Palace, and else where under Foreign Guards; turning out of his own Palace,
and Royal Bed too, at such an unseasonable time, when an English Gentleman
would scarcely have disturbed his Vale de Chamber; The Execrable Insolence of
his own Subjects, by beating and striking at him; and using such Irreverences
toward him, as greater were not offered to his Royal Father; and such, as
would have been severely punished under his good Government, had they been
offered by any English Man to a Mogan Foot Man. Many things more they tell of
him, which I have not Patience to relate; and, in short, they would make him,
falsely appear what our most gracious King really and truly is, which I am so
far from believing, that I persuade my self, there are not two Princes in
Europe more opposite in all manner of Qualifications, than our present King
William and the late King James.

Now Gentlemen and fellow Soldiers, you must take a great care not to believe
what I have reported concerning the late King James; Nay it is absolutely
necessary, that you should obstinately disbelieve it all; for it might possibly
make you Relent, and insinuate a certain Softnefs, and tender Repentance into
your minds, which would, above all things debauch that Loyalty, which I would
confirm to you. And some may say, if all this should be true, Why then (besides
many other Violences) do we draw our Swords so eagerly against that only
Prince, who is willing and able to Protect, and give Bread, to our Poor,
Exiled, Wronged Master? Conies have Burrows, and Foxes have Holes where to hide
their Heads, but our late poor King, and the Son of a King, Martyred for the
good of his People, is still Persecuted by his own English Subjects through the
Sides of that Prince, who has so much Royal Charity, and Generosity, as to
protect the Declining Shipwrack't, Injured, Exiled, Unfortunate Life, of our
Late, Lawful, Gracious, English King.

But to conclude, if all that has been spoken were unsaid, any, even
unthought, yet there remains still one Consideration hitherto untoucht; which
of it self is more than sufficient to elevate your Noble Courages, and fix you
in the very Center of Love and Loyalty. In short, we are now (by the Care and
Goodness of our King) upon the very Brink of entering upon that Stage of Glory,
where the greatest Generals and Heroes of the Age are proud to bear a Part; we
our selves shall, with them, be Actors in those Famous Tragedies which will for
ever be represented in History to the end of all Ages: To us is granted the
inestimable Advantages of being taught and continually practicing the military
Discipline of Marching, Watching, Fasting, nay, and Starving too, which is the
Perfection and Consummation of the utmost Art of War: To us it is given to
divide the rich and heavy Spoils of our Enemies, by the means of those constant
Victories to which we have, and (for the same Reasons) still hope to be led on,
by the Courage and Conduct of our Invincible Monarch. But to be short, How much
is our Condition preferable to that of the miserable, neglected Dutch? They are
excluded from those glorious Blessings which we True, Loyal English Men enjoy;
nay more, They are barrel'd up like Herrings, and sent as poor and despicable
Merchandise to every Port of England, where they no sooner Arrive, than they
are forced to take upon them the Nature and Condition of English Subjects, by
which hard Tenure they will be obliged to do the Drudgery of the Nation, they
will be necessited to serve in our Parliaments, to be at the ungrateful Expense
of serving the Country as Sheriffs, Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace,
nay, as Constables and Churchwardens too. And what is still an Aggravation of
their Hardships (which more particularly concerns our selves) they will be put
even upon doing our own private Drudgery; they must become Husbands to our
Wifes, Fathers to our Children, Guardians to our Orphans, Stewards to our
Estates, Executors to our Wills; they must cultivate our Pastures, and plough
up our fertile Fields; they must thrash our Wheat in our musty Barns, whilst we
are reaping substantial Honor in their Fields of Mars. In a word, they must do
all which we our selves should have done, had we been left behind in their
ignoble Places. All this, and abundantly much more which might be said, will (I
hope) fully convince you, how great is the Honor, Justice, Equity, Piety,
Prudence, and many more innumerable Advantages of our glorious Cause.

Thus far, as I said at first, Gentlemen and Fellow Companions at Arms, I have
brought you; and if I have detained you longer than I intended, remember, That
the great Character of our most Gracious King, and his innumerable good
Qualities, have been the occasion of it. I shall now dismiss you, until a fair
Gale wafts us over to the Elizian Fields of Holland and Flanders; where,
probably, most of you will put an end to the many Misfortunes of a Soldier's
Life.

When the Colonel had ended his Discourse, a brisk, gentile young Fellow, who
came early in to the new Recruits, addresses himself after this manner to his
Officer.

Most noble Colonel, your fine Speech has been (I believe) so pleasing to us
all, that (for my own part) I rather wish you had added something more than
left off so soon; but since your Honor has been pleased to take all this
Pains for our Satisfaction, I beseech you, in all Humility, that your Honor
will give a poor Soldier leave to mind you of one Point which may require a
more full and particular Explanation. The Colonel having given a gracious Nod,
by way of Consent, the young Fellow proceeded -- I had the Fortune (said he) to
be born the younger Son of an English Yeoman, now called, forsooth, a
Gentleman: my father had 80 good Pounds, per Annum; he kept a good House, and
we had Beef, and Pudden, and Nogg good Store. My elder Brother had the good
luck to be brought up according to the way of his Ancestors, that is, to the
Plough, and a quiet Country Life; but for my part, my Father, who was now a
Gentleman, resolved that I should be Book learned, and so I was lasht from
School to School until at last I become a poor Scholar in the University of
Cambridge: But the excessive Taxes, Polls, and Prizes of all Necessaries, etc.
since this late Revolution, growing extremely burthensom to all, and my Father
in no Condition upon that same Account to allow any thing toward my
Subsistence, I was forced to beat upon the Hoof to my Father's House. I had not
been there long, when I perceived his way of Living so altered, and our Commons
so short, that my poor Brains were almost turned with Grief and Melancholy; and
to add to my Afflictions, the Vicar of our Parish, who had been an honest good
Fellow, had shut up his Shop, and boarded upon mere Element and Barley Dumplin,
at a poor Farmer's House in the Village. Lord! (noble Colonel) had you seen
this dismal Revolution in our Town, it would have broke even your own
Courageous Heart; for my part I was not able to bear it any longer, but had
fixed my Thoughts upon seeking my Fortune. In short, I resolved to abandon
Dwelling, and (saving your Presence) out I went a Colonelling. I had soon fixed
upon the noble City of London for the Center of my hopes. I had not been there
long, when my small Stock being almost spent, I found it absolntely necessary
to think of some Employment. I had heard of such as Knights of the Pad, and
some of the Post, which, they said, many Gentlemen (through the Hardness of the
times) had taken upon them: Or (...) proposed that I should admit my self into
he English or Dutch Company of Clippers and Coyners; but observing many hopeful
young Gentlemen of those Professions sadly conducted ((...) Robbers) up High
Holborn, it quite baulkt my Fancy to any of those Trades. I resolved then to
ramble into the City, and view the noble Street of Cheapside, intending, if
possibly I could, to bind my self Apprentice to some honest Trade; but when I
looked into their Shops, I found most part of the 'Prentices either playing at
Shuttle Cock, or asleep, or the Shops as empty as if visited only by the
Plague. I easily invited one or two of them to drink a Pot of Ale, where they
told me most dismal Stories of Trade; and, in a word, They swore to me, that a
Man in these times had better be a Hangman than a Tradesman. I soon took
leave of my young 'Prentices, and resolved to view the remoter Parts of the
City, thinking with my self, That possibly the Calamity might not have spread
so far. I found my self at last about Spittle Fields; but noble Colonel, had
your Honor seen the poor English Weavers, Button-makers, etc. sitting at their
Doors all along the Streets, with their Heads in their Hands, whilst their
Wives were cursing the French Dogs, (as they called them) who had taken the
Bread out of their Childrens Mouths, for which they were sadly Bawling; had you
heard them blaspheme the Government; or had your Honor's delicate Nose smelt
the strong Smell of Garlic, Onions, and Cabbage, which abounded, your Honor
would have thought your self rather in some Common Shore than in the famous
City of London I soon took my leave of this sad Country, and seeing no hopes of
Employment at Land, I resolved to try my Fortune at Sea; to that purpose I
traveled down to Wapping, hoping to meet with some honest Master that might
entertain me; but (would you believe it) the Seamen had fled with as much
diligence from thence, as I had taken care to get thither; so that I scarce
found any body, besides whole Shoals of Sea men's Widows and Wives, with their
Children and Orphans, all bitterly cursing Press-masters, the Navy Office, etc.
nor did they spare Whitehall, or Kensington. I was soon weary of this Place
also, which I looked upon as a Representation of Hell it self, for I found
nothing but weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of Teeth: Back then I returned
to Holborn, where hearing the Noise of a Drum, and seeing the Majesty of a
Sergeant, and his Halbard marching before it, and observing the Huzza's of
three or four Children at the end of [ God save King W. and Queen M.] I was so
animated at this time that I resolved immediately (right or wrong) to List my
self a Soldier. I inquired after the Colonel, which I found to be your Honor;
and hearing all People give you a good word, I was presently entertained, and
here I am at your Service. I have troubled you with all this, noble Colonel,
only to show you, That it was Necessity which brought me hither; I neither
regard the Justice nor Injustice of the Cause; I neither fight for King W. nor
against King J. but I venture my Life to preserve my Life by Bread and Pay.
Your Honor is sensible that a young Man's Life is valued at Seven years
Purchase; and to venture Seven years Purchase against Nothing, is such a
Bargain as the Devil himself would be ashamed to accept. Now if we want our
Pay, we want all Things, and by consequence have Nothing, which I hope will
never be our sad Case. And now (most noble Colonel) I only beg the Liberty of
one word more. Since I was admitted into this Honorable Employment, I have
kept Company with many of my own Profession; some served in Flanders under the
D. of Monmouth, and these unanimously applaud the good Usage, and the Pay they
received in that Service; I have converst with others who served under the late
King J. and when I enquire of them, how they were treated and paid in those
days, they fall a sighing and sobbing, as if their Hearts would break, and I
can scarce get any thing from them, but, ah, shall we never see those days
again? And such Raptures of Grief and Love for his Memory, that they almost
amazed me. But truly, noble Colonel, when I discourse with those who have made
these late Campaigns in Flanders, all of them universally (except those in your
Honors Regiment) have given us a Relation so contrary in all Particulars to
those of the former Reigns, and especially, as to the main points of Pay and
good Usage, that, if your Honor will vouchsafe to give us a Satisfactory word
or two, particularly to those two points (which I can assure you are the great
Motives and Concern of us all) your Honor may be confident that we will follow
you through Fire as well as Water, even to the Gates of Paris, if you command
us. The young Fellow having made a low obeisance, the Colonel smiling, thus
replied. Young Man, I have heard your long Speech with Patience, and forgive
many Impertinences in it. But that nothing may be wanting to your entire
Satisfaction, take this in answer to the two main Points you speak off. First,
Gentlemen, I do solemly promise that your Usage in Flanders shall always be
worthy of English Men, and the Goodness and Justice of our Cause; and next, as
to your Pay, I do here plight my Troth, and my dear Honor, which I value above
my Life, that you shall be all of you constantly, certainly, and soundly Paid
before you come back. In the mean time return to your Quarters till further
Orders. Having said this, he mounted Pad, and took the fresh Air.

FINIS.

