A TRUE NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings At the Sessions House IN THE OLD-BALY
Begun on Wednesday the 8th. of this Instant December, 1675- and there
continuing till the Saturday Following.

Wherein Seventen Men, Two Women, and a Boy about Fourteen Years of Age
Received Judgment to Dye for their several Offenses.

Besides, near Twenty that Received the Mercy of the King for Transportation;
Twelve had the Benefit of the Clergy, and were only Burnt in the Hand, Sir to
be Whipped at the Carts Tail, etc.

With all the Particular Circumstances of their Trials, and the Nature of their
Crimes.

With Allowance,

Roger L'Estrange.



Printed for Benjamin Pierce* 1675.

An Account of the Proceedings at the Sessions House in the Old-Bayly, etc.
AT the Sessions holden at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly, on Wednesday the
eighth of this instant December, 1675. were tried diverse Malefactors, almost an
hundred in number to answer for their several misdemeanors; such as Murder,
Robbery, burglary, Theft, etc. of which one and twenty received sentence of
condemnation, and are accordingly to suffer unless they find His Majesty's
gracious pardon for the same, the principal, and most remarkable for these were.

FIrst of all a parcel of Bailiffs with their followers, being in all five in
number: these having a Writ against a person living near Turn-stile in
Holbourn, went to serve it upon him accordingly, but failing in their
enterprise, and being incensed by the hissing and floutings of the Shop keepers
and Apprentices thereabouts, one of them drew his Hanger, and making at one of
the crowd cut clean through the brims of his Hat, but by his stepping back
escaped without any further harm. The tumult no way terrified hereby began to
revile them more than before; insomuch that the Bailiffs (a sort of Men not
very apt to take affronts) began to be so highly enraged, that one of them
calling to his Companions, swore in (the too vulgar Prase) Damme! Draw, and we
will clear the way. Whereupon it is said that all of them (however, as many as
had swords) drew, and cutting as it were a passage thorough the crowd, till
they came to the end of Turn-stile-Alley, they met with one Richard Allen, by
profession a Sea-Chirurge^^, who being inquisitive into the cause of that
disturbance, and, as some say, concerned in it; they fell upon him so severely;
hacking and hewing him without any mercy, that they left him dead upon the
place; for besides the terrible wounds he received in his Legs, Thighs, and
especially his arms, the only defense he had for his head, the most mortal and
dangerous was that in his skull, a good part of which was taken clean off.
Hereupon they were apprehended and committed to the Prison of Newgate, and the
Coroner sitting on the body returned it murder, as it was likewise found in
Court, and three of the principal of them convicted of the same, and received
sentence of condemnation accordingly.

After these a Boy of about fourteen or fifteen years of age took his Trial, it
seems he was removed by Habeas Corpus from Northampton-Goal, where the fact was
committed as follows. The aforesaid Boy being the Son of an Yeoman in the
said County of Northampton, was employed by his father to receive a sum of
money, which accordingly he did; but upon I know not what occasion misspent, or
lost the greatest part of the money, and being conscious to himself how ill a
thing he had done, and how dearly he was like to suffer for it, resolved upon
an Adventure far more mischievous in it is nature, and dangerous in the
consequences of it. For his money being so far spent that he was afraid to
return home, he bought him three Pistols with the remainder; not doubting as
young as he was, to make up his fortune upon the road, and return to his father
with credit, and satisfaction; but when the most hardy and resolute gallant of
our times do daily miscarry in ^^^^mpt of this kind, what success can so small
a Gamester hope for, who nevertheless was more desperate in his first adventure
then could be expected, or would have been wished. For the first Person he met
with being a Citizen of London traveling that Road, he passed him by, and
turning his horses head about followed him, and shot him in the back, but not
so as to make him fall, whereupon not having strength or courage enough to
complete his villainy, he fled, and the Gentleman, though too much wounded to
pursue him, had yet strength enough to ride to the next town, where he made a
discovery of the fa^t, upon which the boy was pursued, apprended, and this
sessions received sentence for the same.

In the next place was Tried a Butcher, against whom it was alleged that he
and his Companions robbed one Thomas Barnard of about five or six pound in
money, and afterward desperately wounded him, with an intention, as was
thought, to have killed him, to prevent Discovery, being, it seems, known to
the said Barnard; But he by providence escaping with his life, declaring the
manner of the fact, and naming one of the principal persons concerned in it,
upon a diligent search it was not long ever he was apprehended. This Felony and
Robbery was committed a little beyond Islington, between which place and Barnet
diverse others were robbed that Evening, and as was supposed, by the same gang,
but no more of them were taken, neither did any of the persons so robed give
Evidence against the Prisoner, but only the said Thomas Barnard, who knowing
him so well, and giving in so plain an Evidence against him, the Jury could do
no less then find him Guilty, according to which evidence he now stands
Condemned.

After him were Tried other 3 Persons for Padding upon the Highway, and
particularly they were charged with the Felony and Robbery committed upon a
person of Honor at Hide-Park-Corner. It was sworn that they discharged three
Pistols at the Coach, one of which wounded the Nobleman that owned it, who
besides Money, lost a Beaver-Hat, Silver-Hilted Sword, and other things of
Value: a Gentleman who was present when the Robbery was committed, came in as
Evidence, and swore possitively as to the matter of fact, but being asked
whether or no he knew the Prisoners at the Bar, and would swear they were
concerned in it, he made answer, he could not; so that it is probable they
might have escaped, had not a Person formerly Convicted, but since pardoned,
upon the Account of Discovering his Accomplices in this and several other
Robberies come in against them. It Is true, they had several ways to evade the
Accrimination, one of them pleaded that he had not for many weeks stirred abroad
for fear of an Arrest, and being proved that he was abroad the same day the
Robbery was committed, he alleged he was forced thereto upon the account of
borrowing Fifty Shillings, which accordingly he did, of a person living behind
St. Clements. A woman likewise witnessed that they were all three Drinking at
her house the same day, till ten a clock at Night, even at the very time that
the Robbery was done, but her Evidence stood then in little steed, for the
person above mentioned swore quite blank that he himself was one of these that
Robbed and wounded the Person of Quality as aforesaid, and that those three Men
at the Bar, pointing to them, and calling them by their Names, were the
persons that were with him, and some others (since Fled) as Confederates and
Assistants.

There were likewise two others that had formerly been convicted of Felony,
and receiving the benefit of their Clergy had been only burnd in the hand that
were again Apprehended with several bunches of Pick-locks of all sorts and
sizes wherewith it seems they had done several offenses; but their conviction
came from a Woman that keeps a public House, who possitively made oath that
she was robbed of a considerable sum of money and goods, to a great value, and
that the prisoners at the bar were the very persons, so the pick-locks being
all battered and broke in Court, the Malefactors were found guilty and received
sentence.

There were as I have said several others condemned, to the number eighteen
Men, and two Women, upon all which it will be too tedious to enlarge myself. In
short thus.

One other for breaking into the house of William King, and taking away goods
to a considerable value.

Two persons for breaking open a Gentleman's House at Kentish-town, and taking
away several goods.

One for felony and burglary, firing a Pistol, and drawing his Weapon at the
constable.

Two others for felony and burglary committed in White-Chappel.

One other for stealing a bay-Gelding which he sold at Bulwick in
Northamptonshire, and another for stealing two Horses which he confessed.

Likewise two Women formerly convicted of felony that might have had the mercy
of the Court, and the Kings pardon for Transportion, but refused it, so they
had sentence passed upon them.

These are the several crimes of such as are to suffer Death; besides near
twenty that received the Mercy of the King for Transportation, twelve burnt in
the hand, and six to be whipped at the Carts-tayl.

FINIS.

