THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT The Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY
Which began on Friday the 25th of this Instant February, and ended on Saturday
the th 26 following.
Giving an Account of most of the Remarkable Trials there, viz. For Murder
Fellonies and Burglaries, etc. with a particular Relation of their Names, and
the places of their committing their Facts, with the number of those Condemned
to die, Burned in the Hand, Transported and to be whipped.

THe first we shall give you an Account of, is one John Sadler, who was
Arraigu^d and Tried, for that he was the main Agent in the Murdering of one
Elizabeth Holton, the manner of which was as follows, The Prisoner being by
Profession a Bailiffs follower; and Lodged in the house of Lutice Winnington a
Sempstriss, or Schoolmistriss at Ratcliff, who kept several Children to work,
and some Apprentices, and one amongst which, was this deceased Child, a Girl
about thirteen years of Age, whom she having employed to carry some moneys, she
pretended the Child had wronged her of two shillings, which so far transported
her, that she on the 24th of December last got the now Prisoner to hang up the
Girl up by the wrists and with certain twisted cords, called Cat of 9 Tails,
whipped her for four hours, and then rubed Salt upon her; the Woman the mean time
stoping her mouth; of which beating she died; for which the Woman was tried and
condemned last Sessions; and he this, found guilty of willful Murder, having
been apprehended after 3 Weeks absconding.

Thomas Cranwell, Elizabeth Stains, Elizabeth Hurst, and Mary Cranwell, were
tried for Felloniously breaking open the House of Richard Rawlings, of St.
Bot^lph's without Aldgate, and taking thence Linen, Woolen Clothes to the
vallue of 3 Pounds, and carrying them to an Alehouse where they were Apprended
with them, as likewise for a former Robery committed in the House of one Thomas
Sims of White-Chappel, (the 3 first were tried, but not the latter;) where they
took Shifts, Sheets, Puter, Beding, and other things to a considerable value
both the Roberies were plainly proved, whereupon all but Mary Cranwell, were
found guilty of the Felony, but she being Wife to the Prisoner, could not be
found guilty the Law having otherways provided.

Major Oglethorp, was tried for the Murder of Captain Richardson, lately
belonging to his Majesty's Guards; the Manner thus, they being at a Tavern near
Chearing-Cross, the Prisoner began a health to the confussion of all double
hearts, or such as said one thing, and meant another, which the Deceased taking
as an afront to him, began to provoke the other to a quarrel which in a short
time grew to that height, that though the mediation of several worthy Persons
were used in that behalf, yet they prevailed not, for this being about Four of
the clock in the after noone on the 10th of January last, about six they met by
appointment, as it is thought before Clarendon-house where they fought; the
Prisoner, running the Deceased into the Belly and quite through; of which, and
an other wound in the Back, he died the next morning; but it being proved that
they had been formerly good Friends, and this quarrel occasioned by a
suddain-heat, the Major was found guilty of Manslaughter only and had the
benefit of his Clergy

John Roberts, was indicted for breaking open the Chamber of Esquire Fountain in
Lincoln's Inn, on the 12 of September last, and taking thence; one pair of cloth
Breeches, and about 16 Ounces of Plate, with a case the which he afterward
broake to pieces and sold to a Goldsmith in Lumbard-street, but being taken
with the Breeches and Case he confessed he had the Plate, but said he bought it
of a certain Friend of his, the which he likewise insisted on at his trial, but
that Friend not being produced the Jury brought him in guilty.

William Abbit, being indicted and arraigned for stealing of a considerable
quantity of Plate and Monys from one Mr. Horwood, pleaded guilty to his
indictment.

John Clark, was tried for stealing about 60 Pounds from one Robert Jones, the
manner thus, the Prisoner having Lodgings in the aforesaid Jones's House, next
to a Garret he had the use of, the Woman of the House, had hid 100 l. Pounds
amongst old Baskets, where as she said, she caught him rumaging and she asking
him what he did there, he said, the Cat lead him thither; a short time after
she looking missed the greatest part of her Moneys, upon which she laid it to
his charge; it not being proved that he had the Moneys, but on the contrary,
that he was an honest man, the Jury thought fit to aquit him.

Ralph Timberly, was tried for stealing one Pendilum-dial-Watch, with an
Olive-wood case, one the 31 of January last, from James Blows in Black-Fryars,
the which he pawned or sold to another of the Trade upon proof of which he was
found guilty to the value of 10 d.

Roger Maiden, a most notorious Offender, was Arraigned and tried for no less
than eight notorious Fellonies and Burglaries by him committed, within two
months space, the first of which was for breaking open the Dwelling House of
one James Porter, in the Parish of St. Paul's Shadwell, and taking away Linen
and Woollen Apparel to the vallue of five pounds on the sixteenth of January,
the second. for breaking into the House of William Harris, of the Parish
aforesaid, and stealing thence Gowns, Petticoats, Hoods, Scarves, and other
things to a considerable vallue, the third for breaking open the House of one
William Addams, of the Parish of Stepny, from whence he conveyed a Trunk full
of wearing Apparel, a considerable sum of moneys on the 22d. of Jaduary, the
fourth for breaking open the House of Sammuel Banfield, of Spittle-fields, from
whence he took a Tortershel-Cabinet, with about twenty pounds, a Watch, and
several other Goods, the fifth for Breaking open the House of Thomas Hopkins of
Stepny, and taking away Silks, Linen and Puter the sixth for breaking open the
House of James Forth, and stealing thence several parcels of Linen, and some
small matter of money, He also committed two other Burglaries and Fellonies,
the which would be too tedious to mention; most part of these Goods were found
at a Cousens of his, in Acorn-Ally in Spittle-Fields, who is now in Newgate, to
all these Indictments he pleaded not Guilty, and although they were severally
sworn to by the Witnesses, yet he continued to outface them all, saying he knew
nothing of the matter, but after some debate the Jury brought him in Guilty of
seven of the Indictments, and acquitted him only of one.

John Baily as principle, and Thomas Mace as Accessory, were tried for Robing
the House of one Peter Vauder in White-Chappel, about two years since, by
setting up a Ladder to his Window, and entering the Chamber-Window, where they
had notice by the latter, of the Prisoners, who was formerly a Servant of his,
that he had laid three hundred pounds in a Closet, but not finding that; they
took about 150 pounds worth of silk, as Murrina and Farendines, the which they
sold to a Broaker in Long-Lane, and gave the latter of the Prisoners forty-five
shillings for his Intelligence, but upon one Mathews's being Apprehended, who
was in the Robbery, it was discovered, and the now Prisoners taken and
committed, the latter upon his Trial did confess that he directed them to the
Robbery, and that he had the moneys before mentioned for his pains, but the
latter utterly denied it, and offered to prove his Life and conversation, but
the Evidence was so plain, that the Jury thought fit to find them both Guilty.

John Bully alias Edwards, a most notorious Popish-Priest, was brought to the
Bar, where he produced a Plea, and desired he might stand by it, it being
signed by one Counselor Sanders, which was accordingly Read, and his Trial
deferred till next Sessions.

John Smith was tried for stealieg a silver-headed- Cain in the Parish of St.
D^nstans in the West, and upon proof found Guilty.

John Aris, received his trial for stealing 2 Mares vallued at 9 Pounds, out of
Warw^^k and Northamptonshire, which he brought up and sold in Smithfield where
he was apprehended, which trade he had for a long time used though but a young
Man; upon his Examinotion after some denial he sell upon his Knees, desiring
the Mercy of the Bench, and confessed the Fact.

Hugh Walton, was indicted for High Treason, for that he coming into a House at
Old Brandford; reported that he was a Soldier under the Command of my Lord
Bellasis, and received 4 Shillings and 6 d a Week, and that between 30 and
40000 were in readiness at a days warning to fall upon the Protestants, saying,
That himself was a Roman Catholic, but upon his trial it being supposed he
might say the words by way of discourse, and not in earnest, he was not found
guilty.

R^ger Car, and William Carry, were indicted for Cliping and F^eing several
parcels of Money, but the Evidence for the most part consisting of Fellonious
Person they were acquitted.

There were to Condemned to die, viz. 7 Men and 3 Women, 5 Burnt in the Hand, 1
to be Transported, and 8 to be Whipped, and so ended this Sessions.

London, Printed by D. Mallet, 1681.


