THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT The Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY
Which began on Monday the 17th of this instant October, and ended on Wednesday
the 19th following.
Giving an account of most of the Remarkable Trials there, viz, For Murder,
Fellonies, and Burglaries, etc. with a particular Relation of their Names, and
the places of their committing their Facts, with the number of those Condemned
to die, Burned in the Hand, Transported and to be whipped.

But more especially the Trial and Condemnation, of John King and John Winnel
for Murdering Robert Reeks Yeoman of the Guard, and several persons for
High Treason.

John Pack was indicted for stealing a Horse from one William Pack, living near
Rochester in Kent, the which he brought up to London, and sold for about 4
pounds to one in Salsbury Court in Fleetstreet, where upon Search, the Horse
being found, he was apprehended, upon his Trial he pleaded that the prosecutor
being his Master had lent him the Horse, but not being able to make it appear
and having at the same time Robbed his said Master of several other goods, for
which he broak open diverse Chests: Upon the Courts directing that although the
Felony was committed in another County, yet the goods being found in London
was a Felony there, they found him guilty of the Felony.

One Fulnum a Dray-man was Arraigned For the Killing of Sarah Richardson a Girl
of about 4 years of Age, the manner of which as it appeared upon his Trial was,
that he coming along the Lane with a loaded Dray, in which were two Horses
which were somewhat unruly, one of them Flung out of the way, and run the Dray
up to the Wall, where near to a Stoan-cutters Shop a stone of about 4 Foot long
and 1 Square, stood up an end, behind which the Girl Run to save her self, but
the Dray coming, one of the Wheels threw down the stone upon her, which crushed
her immediately to Death, without so much as her making the least outcry:
Whereupon the Dray and Person being seized; the Crowners Jury upon inquiry
found it special, but it being proved in Court that he did all he could to
prevent the Accident, and that he was exceeding sorry for what he had done, the
Jury brought him in not Guilty; but the Court thought fit to bind him over to
his good behavior, as likewise his Master the Brewer to answer it at the next
Sessions for the Peace at Guild Hall.

Francis Ferdenando a Dutchman, was indicted for Felony and Burglary, for he
about the 17 of September last in the day time, entered the House of Philip
Frond in the Parish of St. Mary Woolnoth, where going up Stairs he broak open a
Trunk or Chest, and took thence several Half-shirts and other Linen, but the
Mrs. of the house coming up, he hid himself under the Bed, where he had the
Iron in his hand with which he committed the Burglary, but being a Dutchman
and pretended he could speak no English, the Court allowed him as the Law in
that case requires: A mixed Jury, of half English and half Dutch, he pleading
by an interpreter, his plea was that he being set upon, run in thither for his
own security, but that allegation proved too weak the Jury found him Guilty.

The Petitions of the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury, William Lord
Howard, John Wilmore, John Rouse, and Edward Whittakar, were presented to the
Court and read the substance of them imparting that they being Prisoners in the
Tower of London, under commitment for High Treason, and having petitioned the
Honorable Court several times; once more besought their Lord-ships that they
might be brought thither by Habeas Corpus, and either Bailed or Proceeded
against according to the Proviso made in the Act for the securing the Liberty
of the Subject: As likewise another Petition of Samuel Wilsons, servant to the
Eearl of Shaftsbury and Prisoner in the Gate House under a commitment of
Treason was delivered, to which the Court made answer, that as for the 4
former, they had formerly had the opinion of all the Judges, that it is not in
the Courts Jurisdiction to Bail them, but the must apply themselves to the
King's Bench Court in Term time, and if there is prosecution they might be
releived, as to the last their Commission by which they sat being only for the
Jail-delivery, and the Prisoner not being in the County Goal they could not
relieve him.

Thomas Baily wos indicted for High Treason in cliping the Lawful Coin of this
Kingdom, the indictment specifiing 40 Elizabeth shillings. 40 of King James's
shillings, and four half-Crowns of King Charles the first. The Evidence against
him was, that he being apprehended, in Carter Lane London, a pair of Sheeres
and several other Clipping Instruments were found about him, the which he
endeavored to conceal, and that he had been known to give several people two
shillings in the pound to put away clipped moneys, by which means he had
disposed of several hundreds of pounds, the which in other men's Names he was
wont to put to Goldsmiths and in a short time call it in again, by which means
he got large money in exchange and that several parcels of Clipped money was
found in his Custody, to which he pleaded that as for the Tools they were
delivered to him by one Hix, whom he supposed designed to bring him into the
Trade, and for the moneys, he said it was not his, but appertained to other
persons, in whose behalf he had received it, and being in Debt, feared if he
should have lodged it in his own Name it might have been Attached, so that upon
the hearing of the whole Evidence, the Jury acquitted him, though to the no
small wonder of the Court.

Anthony Morgan was indicted for Robing Anthony Dudy upon the Highway near
Bagshot on the 10 of May last, and taking from him his Horse, Watch, and 45
shillings in moneys numbered, the prosecutor, Swore possitivly that he was the
man who rifled him, and that some time after he found his horse where he had
sold him, as to the Horse several came in upon oath that it was the same Horse
he road out upon, but when the Prisoners evidence came to be heard, the scene
was altered, for they deposed that the Horse so challenged was bought at
Kettering in Northhampton shire, and from thence the Buying and Selling of him
was traced for two years space, during which time he had not been let or hired
to any person that was suspicious, and the Master of the Horse which was
seized, deposed upon oath that the horse found in Custody of the Prisoner was
not the Horse he lent the prosecutor, but that they had far different marks
upon which they left that and went on to the Robbery, when the Prisoners
Wi^nisses declared that he was at home at the same time the Ro^bery was
committed, and the better to strengthen it, one of them deposed that he had
paid him six pounds that very day, and was in his company at the time the
Robbery was committed and produced a book with a Receipt in it bearing that
date to which he had set his hand, as likewise several other Circumstances,
that the Jury upon the whole matter acquitted him.

A Bill of Indictment against John Rouse now prisoner in Newgate, was presented
to the Grand Jury for London, in which was Expressed many horrid Treasons which
the prisoner had uttered at several times against his sacred Majesty, and to
the endeavoring the Subversion of the Government; the Witnisses that were Sworn
to it, were these John Wyat, Thomas Corbin, Brian H^ines, Elizabeth Haines,
B^rnand Denis, John Macknamara, Edward Ivy, John Smith, and Edward Turbervil,
who at the request of the Kings Counsel gave their evidence in Court, and
afterward at the request of the Jury were examined one by one, so that after
about 2 hours examination the Jury went out, and staying about 4 hours returned
the Bill Ignoramus,

John Winel, and John King, were Indicted for Murdering Robert Reeks a Yeoman
of the Gaurd in the Parish of St. Clements Danes, the manner thus, they
accidentally meeting in a Coffe-house near the Maypole fell to quarryling about
drinking of Healths, where after some pause they seemed to be reconciled and so
parted, passing from thence to a Tavern where again faling at varience they
parted, but had not gone far ere they drew and as the deceased fled into a shop
to avoid his death, the prisoners pursued him and gave him two Mortal wounds,
of which he instantly died, the Prisoners pleaded that the deceased gave the
first afront, and that he struck one of them on the head with his Cane calling
him Coward, and afterward drew his Sword against which they only drew to defend
their own lives but not being able to prove the same they were both found
guilty of Felony and Murder.

Alexander Younger was Indicted for Robbing one John De Bule, a Frenchman
living in St. Martins in the fields, of some Buttons, Silver and other things
to a considerable value, but upon the examination of the Evidence, it appearing
that he had been formerly a Custom-house-wayter, and at that time came to Aid
and Assist one that seized uncustomed goods in the possession of the said De
Bule, he was aquitted.

Mary Marshal was indicted for steal a Coral and several other things from one
Thomas Jackson living in Holburn, the which she had confessed, nor did upon her
Trial greatly deny; whereupon the Jury brought her in guilty.

Elizabeth Warner was Arraigned for that she on the 24th of September last
Robbed one Thomas Toply her Master of several sums of money the which she had
confessed when she was carried before a Justiee of Peace, but having learned he
lesson in Newgate, again denied the same but the Evidence being plain against
her, she was found guilty.

Ruth Carter a Charwoman who had been acquainted in the house of the Lord
Brunkard was indicted for Fellonously entering the said house by taking a pain
of Glass out of the Window and opening the Cagement and entering, conveyed
thence Lenin and such like to the value of 30 pounds, which being found in
places where she had disposed of them, she confessed the felony, but would by
no means confess the breaking the Glass, yet it being evident she was found
guilty.

George Mathews a Soldier belonging to the Tower was Tried for killing one
Penner being his fellow Soldier, by knocking him down with his Musket, but a
quarrel and sufficient provocations being proved, he was found guilty of
Manslaughter only.

At this Sessions there were five persons Condemned to dye, viz. John King, and
John Winnel for Murder, John Pack for Horse-stealing, Mary Marshal, Elizabeth
Warner, and Ruth Carter for Felony and Burglary, there were seven burnt in the
hand; four to be whipped, and two to be Transported, and so ended this Remarkable
Sessions.

LONDON Printed by D. Mallet. 1681.


