A True NARRATIVE Of The RECEPTION OF THEIR Royal Highnesses At their Arrival
in SCOTLAND. With the Councils Letter directed to the KING Upon that occasion

Printed by Command of His Majesty's Privy Council.

Reprinted Anno Dom 1680.

A true NARRATIVE of the RECEPTION of their ROYAL HIGHNESSES at their Arrival
in SCOTLAND.
M^NDAY the 15th. of October, Their Royal Highnesses Arriving with the Evenings
Tide, in Kircaldy Road, about Ten of the Clock at night, The Duke of Rothes
sent His Nephew Mr. Francis Montgomerie, to Complement the Duke and Duchess:
And the next morning His Grace sent the Lord Justice Clerk for that same end,
and to receive His Highnesses commands concerning his Landing. That same day
about Eleven a Clock in the forenoon, Their Royal Highnesses Arrived at
Kirkcaldy Road; where ^ving Landed, They were met by his Grace the Duke of
Rothes, Lord High Chancellor, with many of the Privy Council, and most of the
Nobility and Gentry of the Shires next adjacent, who kissed their Royal
Highnesses hands, at their Landing upon the Shore, which was crowded with a
multitude of People, to Congratulate their Royal Highnesses safe Arrival to
this His Majesty's ancient Kingdom. From Kirkcaldy, their Royal Highnesses set
forward to the Lord Chancellor's House of Lesly; whither they were attended
with a noble Train of Coaches, and many of the Nobility and Gentry, on
Horseback; and Guarded by His Majesty's Troop of Guards, At Lesly the Royal
Highnesses were Magnificiently Entertained, till Friday the 20th. W^ (having
^ted thence) they were attended to Bruntisland Their Royal Highnesses ^ain
still growing more numerous: At Bruntisland They were Received with Shooting of
great Guns ringing of Bells, Acclamations of the People, and all other
Expressions of Joy imaginable; which continued till their Royal Highnesses were
aboard the Churlot Yaught, attended by His Grace the Lord Chancellor, and many
of the best of the Nobility: The other Yaughts, with several other Boats, and
all the Boats about Bruntisland, were filled with the Nobility and Gentry of
the Train.

In their passage to Leith, they were saluted by the Great Guns from His
Majesty's Castle of Edinburgh, with the Guns from the Bastions at Leith, from
the men of War, and other Ships, both in the Road and Harbor of Leith.

The Shore was so throng with Persons of all Ranks, that the noise of the
Cannon, Trumpets, Kettle-Drums and Drums we almost drowned with the loud and
reiterared Acclamations of the people, for the safe arrival of their Royal
Highnesses, which was about five in the Afternoon.

At their Landing at Leith, their Royal Highnesses were met by the Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council, Ushered by their Macers; where several Ladies were
attended to wait on Her Royal Highness: Here their Royal Highnesses, were
received by the Earl of Linlithgow, Colonel of His Majesty's Regiment of
Guards, upon the head of several Companies of the Regiment, and were attended
by the Sheriffs, and most of the Gentlemen of the three Lothians and next
adjacent Shires; which made a Lane on both sides of the street, through the
whole Town of Leith: After the Kings Troop of Guards, Marched the Nobility and
Gentry that were on horseback, and after them a great train of Coaches, filled
with the Council and Nobility; their Royal Highnesses having made choice of the
Lord Justie Clerk his Coach.

From Leith, to the Watergate, at the Abbey of Halyrudehouse, their Royal
Highnesses were Guarded by the Train-Bands and Militia Regiment of this City,
consisting of 44. Companies, who made a Lane for their Royal Highnesses and
their train to pass betwixt Leith and Edinburgh: All the while they were upon
the way, the great Guns from the Castle, and other places, prepared on purpose,
saluted them; the whole body of the people universaly, shouting with great Joy
and cheerfulness, Lord preserve His Majesty, and their Royal Highnesses the
Duke and Duchess of Albany: Being come to the Watergate, near the palace
Royal, They were met by the Lord Provost, Magistrates, and Town Council of
Edinburgh, in their best formalities; where the Lord Provost kneeling, and
having Kissed His Royal Highness hand, delivered to Him the Silver Keys of the
City, and heartily welcomed Him, in Name of the whole Citizens, to His
Majesty's good Town of Edinburgh.

From this to the Palace, their Royal Highnesses were guarded by two or three
hundred of the best Citizens with Gilded Partisans, and in the outer Court were
received by several other Companies of His Majesty's guards: In the Guard-Hall
they were received by their Graces, the Lords Archbishops of St. Andrews and
Glasgow, and several others of the Lords of the Clergy, where His Grace, the
Lord Primate Complemented their Royal Highnesses in name of the Orthodox
Clergy. Where the Lieutenant Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh, delivered to
His Royal Highness the Keys of the Castle.

All the Bells of this City continued Ringing most of the night, and all the
streets of the City were filled with great Bonefires, whither many of the
Citizens repaired to Drink their Majesty's and Royal Highnesses health Nor was
any thing to be seen but an universal Joy in the Countenance of all here.

Saturday the 3. of October. the Lord Bishop of Edinburgh with all the Clergy in
and about this City, in their Canonical Habits, Kissed His Royal Highness hand,
where the Bishop of Edinburgh expressed the general satisfaction of the Orthodox
Clergy, for His Royal Highness safe arrival; and assured His Highness of their
Fervent prayers for His Sacred Majesty, and the Royal Line. Tuesday the ^. of
Nov. being the first day of Sessions, the Senators of the College of Justice,
with all the other Members thereof in a great Body, in their Gowns, Ushered by
their Macers, went to the Palace, where having Kissed His Royal Highness hand,
The Lord President of the Session, in Name of the Lawyers of this Kingdom,
complemented His Royal Highness upon His Arrival; As did the Lord Justice
Clark, in Name of the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's Justiciary, who in
their Scarlet Gowns, attended by the Members of their Court, and Ushered by the
Macers, waited likewise upon His Royal Highness, and Kissed His hand. Nor indeed
was there any thing wanting to Express the General Joy of all here, for the
happy Arrival of so Excellent a Prince and so Dear to this Kingdom.

The Letter directed from the Council to the KING.
May it please your Sacred Majesty
WE have good reason to believe, that your Majesty's just commands shall never
be obstructed by the unwillingness, nor returned by the negligence of the
Subjects of This your Majesty's Ancient Kingdom, being fully convinced, that
nothing is required of Us, save that we may preserve our selves, by suitable
and easy means, against those formidable and imminent dangers, which threaten
us now from the same principles, by which we were formerly Ruined: so that the
only thing which is forced upon the worst of your Subjects, is, that they must
unavoidably confess, that nothing can lessen their happiness, except their
being unsensible of it, and an thankful for it. And your Majesty, by dispensing
for our protection, all the Revenue which is raised in this your Majesty's
ancient Kingdom, lets Us see, that all you crave of us, is, that We would be
true to our own interest, and all that you get by us, is the care of governing
us to our own satisfaction. That prosound respect, and sincere Kindness, Sir,
which we observe in your Majesty's Subjects here, to your Royal Brother, the
Duke of Albany and York, assure us, that we want nothing but occasion to hazard
for the Royal Family, these lives and fortunes which you have made so sweet and
sec^re to us, and as our esteem for his Royal Highness at his last being here,
grew daily with his stay, so our expectations of Security and satisfaction,
return naturally with him. And therefore we are obliged with all zeal and
sincerity to return your Sacred Majesty, our most humble and hearty thanks for
securing the just and natural descent of that Royal Family, which is the Chief
Glory and only Security of this Kingdom, upon which the least invasion, would
be so great an invitation to all insolence and arbitrariness in your Subjects,
as could not but procure us a Civil War in every Age; for m^n of Parts and
Interests being discon^ted or factious, would by promoting colorable Titles,
and pretenses, make the body of your people, the price of their avarice, and
the prey of their ambition; and ren^ not only these Kingdoms from one another,
but amongst themselves: nor can We sce^y every man may not pretend to be King,
when the lawful Successors are debarred, nor how we can be fixed in any thing,
when we loose: this great Fundamental. And in the next place, we do likewise
return your Majesty most humble and hearty thanks for sending your Royal
Brother to be an example to, as well as a witness of our Loyalty, and affording
us in him, the renewed occasion of letting the world see that no humor nor
jealousies, shall for the future divert that Dutifulness, to the Royal Line,
which our Predecessors have maintained for so many Ages. Nor doubt we very
shortly to let your Majesty find, what happy effects his stay here will produce
for promoting your service, and cementing our differences, in all which his
Royal Highness shall be most obsequiously assisted, By

Edinburgh, Nov. 2. 1680. May it please your sacred Majesty, your Majesty's
most Faithful, most Humble and most Obedient Subjects and Servants, ROTHES
Chancell. ALEXANDER St. And. ATHOL. DOUGLAS. MONTROSE. GLENCAIRN. WINTON.
LINLTTHGOW. PERTH. STRATHMORE. ROXBVRGH. BALCARES. CATTHNES. LORN. JO.
Edinburgen. ROSS. JA. DALRIMPLE. CHAPTER MAHLAND. THOMAS MVRRAT. GEO. MACKENZIE.
RICH. MAITLAND. TH. DALTEA. JA. FOVLES. A. RAMSAT. JO. WAVCHOP. GEO. GORDON. J.
DRVMMOND.


