A TRUE RELATION OF Some passages which passed at Madrid in the year 1623. by
Prince Charles, being then in Spain prosecuting the match with the Lady
Infanta. AS ALSO, Several Observations of eleven Ominous Presages, some of
them happening in the same year whilst the said Prince was in Spain, the rest of
them happened from that time until his death. With a discovery of some of the
ways which the then Popish Bishops used to bring Popery into this Nation.

By a lover of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the welfare of this Nation.

Printed at London, 1655.

To the Impartial Reader.
READER,
I Had no intent ever to have put in print these Ominous Presages, for they
have been of an ancient standing in my head; (the most part of them) old things
being fit for nothing but to be forgotten, or at least laid aside. But a friend
of mine knowing that I had observed them long ago (some of them being of 30.
years standing or more) desired me to give him a short brief of them, which I
did, but when I had collected my memory, and saw the troubles that do daily
increase by some who delight to fish in troubled waters; and considering that
there are many good people that are not yet settled in their hearts concerning
these mutable times, but do still continue opposite to the Government as now it
is, and do not once think of, or it may be never heard of any of those sad
Presages which the Lard sent to give warning to those that would take warning
or notice of them and lay them to their hearts. I did also then consider with
my self, that if they were published to the view of all the Nation, that they
may give good satisfaction to some, and might draw them from their
self-opinions, which of a long time they have had of these most turbulent
times, so that if they will but look up to God, they shall plainly see, that
the hand of God is in all the actions that has passed until this day; and
that no one tittle of the work that the Lord has appointed to be done, but it
shall be fully effected, though men strive never so much against it. Therefore
I desire thee to consider well of what thou shall find written in these few
lines, (for they are truth) and were acted by those which sought to bring in
Popery to this Nation, in those days when they had the reins in their own
hands. And certainly these Predictions are true, and were purposely sent by God
to some (though not to all) that they might take notice of them. I having long
ago spoke with some that did take notice of them as well as my self (and did
look upon them as from the hand of God). And I do wish in my heart that all
those into whose hands they shall come, to read them carefully and imprint them
in their hearts, and be well advised how they do practice or contrive any thing
tending to the shedding of any more innocent blood in this Nation; for
certainly they will be found out, and themselves will have as great a share in
the destruction which they do practice as any of those shall have which they
shall practice against, either in their lives, Limbs, Estates, Wives, Children,
and all that is deer unto them; nay which is the greatest of all, their souls
will have the greatest loss when they shall lose heaven, without the great
mercy of God. I will conclude with the words of the Psalmist, O that men would
fear the Lord and praise his holy name, for his mercy endures for ever! For
certainly he will (as heretofore he has done) overthrow the horse and his
rider if they do persist in their exorbitant ways. And I will now say with
Paul, as in an other case, My hearts desire to God is, that men would serve the
Lord with fear and trembling, and fit still and see the Lords work done in his
onwn good time.

A true Relation of some passages which passed at Madrid in Spain, in the year
1623. by Prince Charles, being then prosecuting the Match with the Lady
Infanta. As also some Observations of several Ominus Presages, some of them
happening the same year, 1623. the rest of them happening from that time until his
death.
Reader,
I Do desire thee to consider with thy self if thou have hard of, or seen any
of these observations following; if yea, then whether thou did make that use
of them, as was expected from Gods hands thou should have done; for certainly
they were not done in a corner, but were sent from God as forerunners of his
wrath against the late King, and all those Popishly inclined Prelates, and other
his abetters, that did assist him in those Practices and Councels, for the
bringing in of Popery into this Nation, as it did plainly appear by the
s^encing of so many Godly and Orthodox Ministers, as then were put from their
preaching and livings since his coming from Spain, at which time many young
Divines at receiving their Orders for preaching, were forbidden to read certain
men's works, as M. Perkins his works, Clarks Sermons and others, and were
likewise limited what subject, they should preach on, as the Lords Prayer, the
Belief, the Ten Commandments, and the like, and the better to bring their
practices to pass, they did cause all. Orthodox books that were out of print,
and to be reprinted, (although the Authors of them were dead many years before)
to be brought to the Bishops Chaplains to be reviewed by them, who were half,
if not altogether Popish, or at least Arminians, and they to expunge, or put in
any Popish tenet, which they thought fit to put in, although those men which
wrote those books were men of as sound judgment as any of those that did
corrupt or abuse their works, and it is very likely that if the Bishops
themseves were so much given to Popery they would entertain none to be their
Chaplains but such as should be as themselves were, and by that means many good
Ministers works were corrupted, and themselves counted Popish by all that
should read their new revised works, which the Authors were no ways guilty of.
But you will say that many of the Bishops were free from Popery. It is very
true, some of them were so, but those that were nearest to the King in his
Councels were not, as Neal, Wren, Laud, and others were not; but mark I pray
you, 30. years before the Angels of England did begin to fall, (which were the
Bishops, as Mr. Brightman a famous Divine did call them; and one whom the then
Bishops persecuted even to the forsaking of his Native Country) he the said
Brightman did prophecy the downfall of them to begin in the year 1639. which
fell out very near the time, for in the year 1640. or very near it, they were
expelled the Parliament for their misdemenors their, for many of them appeared
then to be Popish.

And after the wars began, Bishop Wrens house being searched, there was found
in it a new set of Massing plate, it was as neat a set of plate as the Pope
has any in his Chapel. And Doctor Peerce the then Bishop of Bath and Wells
(as it was confidently spoken of, and likewise written, did send word to the
then Bishop of Canterbury (Laud) and in his Letter to him, did thank God that
he had not left a Lectur in all his Diocese, (a thing very fit to thank God
for) But I pray take notice that all these things were acted after the King
came from Spain (by the Bishops), for the late King being in the year 1623. but
Prince, was sent into Spain by King James, accompanied with George Duke of
Buckingham, and Sit Francis Cotington, where after some treaty with the King of
Spain concerning the Infanta, (whom he conceived should have been his wife) the
Divines of Spain opposing the match, did put many rubs in the way, but the
chiefest of them was the unlawfulness of matching the daughter of Spain with
an Heretic, and one that they could have no assurance of, that she should have
the free exercise of her religion, for her self and her retinew without good
caution given for the same, and no other caution would be excepted on but the
two Port Towns of Plymouth and Dartmouth, neither did they conceive it fit to
have any further treary on the premises, until approbation thereof were first
had and obtained from the Popes Holiness.

And to that end the Prince writes his Lemer to his Holiness, wherein he gives
him the style of most Holy Father, and after Complements used suitable to the
dignity of his Holiness, he makes known unto him the cause of his so sudden
coming Spain, (which as he said) was to gain the Lady Infanta to be his wife,
and withal related to his Holiness what a dangerous consequence it would be
to the Catholics of England, if the Divines of Spain should make any further
scruple in opposing the match; and he did also profess upon the faith of a
Christian Prince, that he would hazard his life and all his Kingdoms, for the
propagating of the Roman Catholic Religion, with other circumstances of the
like nature.

His Holiness answered his Highness Letter with the like Complemers, laying
before him the Valor of his noble Ancestors, who hazzarded their lives and all
their fortunes, and all that was deer unto them in defending the Catholic
says, and did not only merit unto themselves eternal glory and happiness in
heaven, but gained unto themselves also, and to their posterity, everlasting
same and renow here upon earth, and then exciting him) as his Ancestors had
done) to go forward in promoting the Catholic faith and so with is holiness
his benedict on he bequeathed his highness, to the protect on of the Almighty.

Yet the Divines were not satisfied with his Highness so large promises to his
Holiness, but still opposed the match with might and main, so that the Prince
was constrained to send another writing to the King of Spain, of one whole
sheet of paper fully written and sent it by the hands of the Duke de Olavarce,
intimating what a dishonor it would be both to his person and reputation, if
he should not obtain the prize which he so much aimed at, and which he did
esteem above all the treasures in the whole world, and that it would be a great
hindrance to the Catholics of England from attaining that which now they might
obtain, if he might not have her which his soul so much desired; but he hoped
that those so celebrious Divines would not put him to give such caution as was
desired, and as they propounded, and could not be by him with honor granted,
especially in regard his Father had granted the Catholics of England the free
exercise of their Religion seven years before his coming into Spain, and with
all exciting them to consider that neither his Father nor himself had broken
their words in the least title of any the capitulations that had past between
them, ad the Divines in not taking the word nor Oath of his Father nor of
himself, for performance of what had been capitulated, would be a means to
cause his Fathers vassals every day to raise new scruples and obstructions, so
that the Catholics of England should not enjoy that freedom of the exercise
of their Religion which now they have, and that if he might enjoy her whom his
soul so much desired, it would be a means that none of his Fathers vassals
should dare to stir.

And he does also promise upon the faith of a Christion Prince, that nothing in
the world should make him break his word in the least jot or tittle of any that
should be capittulated on, but would hazard his life and all his Kingdoms,
and all that was deer unto him, for the promoting of the Roman Catholic
Religion, for he would not be joined to one in the affinity of marriage, whose
Religion he should hate, which promise he did faithfully keep, to the ruin of
himself, and all his Posterity.

But the first foundation of his ruin, and all their Posterity, was laid by his
Father King James; for in the matter of Sir Thomas Overbury his death, he did
send for the Judges and gave them a strict charge to examine the matter
thoroughly concerning the death of Sir Tho. Overbury, and did imprecate Gods
curse upon them if they did not discover it to the full; and did upon his knees
call for a curse from God, and desired that God would never prosper him nor any
of his Posterity, if he did spare any guilty person that had a hand in that
poisonous murder: and the Judges having prosecuted the business so far, that
they found Sommerset and his Lady to be the chief actors in this murder, for
they found that Sommerset did write a friendly Letter to Sir Tho. Overbury,
that he would use all the ways and means to get his enlargement that possibly
he could, and in that Letter he sent him a paper of Powder for him to take, as
being the best thing that himself took in his sickness, (Sir Thomas being then
sick of Poison sent him before) but this powder which was sent in this Letter
was a poison of a lingering nature, whereof (with some other poison which Mris.
Turner had sent him of the like nature) he died, and after it was sound out,
there was justice done upon many of the actors, where of Weston was the first,
then Sir Jarvis Elway, the then Lieutenant of the Tower, was the next that
suffered, and after him, Mris. Turner was also hanged, besides others; and when
it was punctually proved that Summerset and his Lady were sound to be the chief
actors of this murder, and that he himself had sent the poison aforesaid, the
King contrary to the curse which he had formerly called from heaven upon
himself and all his posterity, did pandon both him and her, after the Lord Coke
had past sentence of death upon them, and the Lord Coke was ever after in
disgrace with the King, for passing this sentence against them, and for some
other small marter which he crossed the Kings humor in; and so this noble
Gentleman was poy soned, for no other cause but for opposing Summerset in the
marriage of Essex his wife. But the Lord did show a great example upon them
both, but especially upon her, for she died a more ^thsome death then any woman
ever died, but for civilities sake I will forbear the particulars thereof.

But let us now leave this, and speak no more of this curse, but let us look up
to heaven upon him that sees all the actions that are done on earth, and that
is the contriver of all marriages on earth both great and small, and you small
see how he does frustrate the designs of all those that have plotted the
downfall of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, by bringing them to utter confusion in
all their enter prises, and I pray observe with me, how in the very interim of
this treaty the Lord did look down from heaven upon them, and did send his
thunders as messengers of his wrath to give them warning, that he would meet
with them and confound all their devises.

And in the first place be pleased to take notice that on Thursday the 30. of
June, 1623. whilst the Prince was in Spain, it being but two days after the
Letter was written to the Pope (for it was written the 28. day of June)

I. The Lord was pleased to send one great clap of Thunder, which stroke away
the flag and flag-staffe from the main-top-mast-head of a Ship then riding at
Blackw^ll and bound for Spain with provision of fresh victuals to fetch the
Prince home: as live Muttons, Capons, and other fowls fit sot such a voyage,
Spain being barren of such provisions (so that they could not be furnished
there) It was as fair a day as any has been seen; it also split the
main-top-mast, as own would have split an Osier twig, it threw one part on one
side of the Ship, and the other part on the other side of the Ship, it raised
the mainmast down to the deck, but did no other hurt to the Ship; it killed
two men and one woman at Croydon in the Bishop of Canterburies Diocese, in a
field where they were making hay. But you may object, this was but an accident,
for thunders have done many such things, the bodies being soorched, and their
clothes not so much as once to smell of the fire. it is very true, such things
have happened many times and in many places, but look a little further and you
shall see such other prodigious things that you will not say they were
accidental.

And now I beseech you consider with me whether these follow Presages be
accidental or no.

II. And see what happened on the very next Thursday being the 7. of our July,
the Letter to the Pope being written the 8. of their July at Madrid in Spain,
it pleased, the Lord to send many great: claps of Thunder, with abundance of
rain, and withal so great a pillar of fire from heaven out of the South (which
is the due course from Spain) that it reached from the heavens to the earth,
not as a flash of lightnings gone in the very sight, but a very firm pillar of
fire, which I believe did amase any that did behold it. It was my hap to be in
the Park near Southwark, when it fell right before me, and so deterred me,
that I prayed that the Lord was not angry with this Nation, for seeking to
match with one whose Religion was not agreeable to the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
but one of those claps of Thunder did strike away the Crown and Vane from the
top of the Gatehouse of St. James whereon the clock stood; it melted a piece of
the bell (which house was then the Princes house at that time) and he
constantly kept his Court there, it also struck down a Gardner and his wife in
a Garden near the Neathouse near Westminster, and brak through several house in
the bowling-alley near Westminster aforesaid, the man before mentioned was
dead, but the woman revived and was well again, the body of the man was
scorched, but his clothes had no hurt. It split wainscots, chaires, tables and
stools in the houses aforesaid. It killed also another man at Croydon the same
time. Surely these things cannot be accidental, when both these thunders did
aim, both at the head and Crown as we may see it did, for the flag is as the
hat on the Kings head, for all Ships when they meet with any the King or States
ships at Sea, they strike their topsails or the flag in obedience or homage to
the Admiral; there is no man that not is wilfully blind but he may see that
these two days Thunders were not accidental, but from the hand of God.

There is one thing more which a Heathen or an Infidel will not say was
accidental, and that is this:

III. Old Thomas Earl of Arundell a great lover of Statues, had sent for the
Kings Statue in marble out of Italy; it being come it was landed at a little
garden house in Greenwitch which the Earl then had there; his Lordship with
others coming to view the Statue, did very much commend the workmanship of it,
but while they were discoursing of it, their fell three drops of blood on the
face of it, no man knowing how it should come there; the Earl seeing the blood
was very much moved at it, they used all the means they could use to get away
the blood, but could not; this questionless was not done by accident, but as
the Egyptian Sorcerers said to Pharaoh in the plague of the lice, This is the
finger of God.

Yet one thing more there is remaining which I hope will give you full
satisfaction that these Presages were sent by God.

IV. For in the same year 1623. while the Prince was in Spain (for then he was
but Prince) promising to promote the Roman Catholic Religion, both to the Pope
and likewise to the King of Spain, there was a Buckinghamshire man, a Tailor by
trade, and as he said dwelt in Ailsbury, he was near upon 40. years of age, and
a very sober man, he could not contain himself at his work in his house, but
must of force in the same year while the Prince was in Spain; making those
promises to propagate the Romish Religion in England aforesaid, he did in all
or most part of all the eminent streets in London, in that very year curse the
Romish Religion; pronouncing we to Rome, woe to the Pope, woe to all Papists;
and God confound the Pope and all Papists, and all that did adhere to Popery,
by what name or title so ever they were called, whether Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Lords, Viscounts, or of what degree soever; he did constantly three or
four days in the week all or most part of the time the Prince was in Spain,
come to Whitehall-gate, King James being then at Whitehall for the most part,
he did there make a prayer of three quarters of an hour long, it was as
effectual a prayer as any Divine in England could make, in that prayer he
prayed that the Gospel of Jesus Christ might still continue and flourish in
this Nation, and after praying for the Gospel, he again cried these woes as
formerly, and when he had made his prayer at Whitehall-gate, with his hat under
his arm all the time of his praying and journey (for so he called it his
journey, as you shall see by and by) he then betook himself to march through
the City, praying this prayer, and crying these woes and cursings against
Popery as aforesaid. He began his journey at Whitehall-gate, and marched as far
as there was any house in White-chappell, East-smithfield, Shoreditch,
Islington, St. Giles in the fields, the Barrough of Southwark, and many other
walks, and in this manner he past through all or the most part of all the
streets in London, and although he made the most part of his prayers at
Whitehall-gate King James being then there, yet no man reproved him for it, or
asked why he did so, til one day Sir Harry Spiller saw him crying these woes at
the upper end of Holborn, did send him to the new Bridewell near Clarken-well,
where he remained three weeks (and then being charged as Peter and John were by
the Jewish Rabbis that he should teach no more in that name, he was let go)
but he regarding not their threats did cry these woes a long time after, at
length he went to his house in Buccingamshire, thinking to cry these woes no
more, but went to fall to work at his trade, yet when he was at his work he had
not the power to finish it, but threw it aside and came up to London the second
time to cry these woes which he did a long time after.

I did once meet him near Bishopsgate-street as he was coming back from crying
these woes, where a man of his acquaintance met him, and asked him if he would
drink a cup of beer, he said he would, for said he, I have done my journey,
therefore it is evident he was sent of God to cry these woes against the
Papists, as the Lord sent that man to Jerusalem many years before it was
destroyed, and at last cried, Woe, woe to himself, and immediately was struck
dead by a clap of thunder. It is much about 32. years since this man did cry
these woes in London; and who knows but the Lord may very speeddy purge this
Nation of all those blasphemous opinions which do now swarm in it, and of all
those that do seek to uphold Popery or any other false opinions, which this
Nation is now overrun with; and I beseech you to consider that this man's crying
these woes just in the interim when the Prince was in Spain acting against the
Gospel, it is necessary that we should take notice of it, and of other things
of the like nature, and to the same purpose; for afoer be was King and had
married the Queen out of France, he did entertain Signier Con the Popes Nuncio,
and one Price Superior of the Benedictine Monks, a very great Politician and
Statesman he was, which two men were so great with Laud then Bishop of
Canterburyh, that they had free access to him and Windebanck at all times; and
they were so great with Laud (he being a Jesuiticall Monk) that he gave out
that he should have the Cure of the Church in Cowen Garden. This Signier Con
and this Price had so much power with Laud and Windebanck, that they did brave
the pursevants which had Commissions for the apprehending of Priests and
Jesuns, and did threatten them to cause their Commissions to be taken from
them; and Windebanck himself did revile the Pursevants, calling them Knaves,
and threatening them, that if they did ever meddle with any more Priests and
Jesuits, he would make him smart for it. I my self having seized a great
number of Popish books in English, Bishop Laud would send for them to the
Registers Office, for the high Commission Court, and the same night would
deliver them to the owners of them to be dispersed through the Nation, so that
it is evident that if the King were not Popishly inclined, yet the chief
Bishops, and the chief officers about him, were absolutely Popish. I could name
many more that were in great places about the King that were Papists, and known
to be so, by many that grieved to see it at that time. But let me speak a
little more of this man, in all the time that he was crying these woes, he was
never seen to beg or receive any thing by way of relief of any man, yet he
wanted nothing that ever I could hear of, he always wore one suit of cloth
whole and sound, and there is no question but the Lord did keep him while he
was doing his work. But if there be any that do distrust the truth hereof,
there be many thousands this day living in London, that did both hear him, and
see him as well as my self, while he was doing his work.

V. After this one of the Crowns and Vanes of the tower was turned over the
top of the spindle whereon it was placed, by a very small gale of wind, and so
both Crown and Vane hung at the foot of the spindle three quarters of a year of
more, at which time new ones were set up. The Crown and Vane did weigh 100
weight, at lest and was forelockt one to the top of the spindle with a forelock
of iron; surely if a greater providence then this small gale of wind had not
took it off the spindle, it might have remained there until this time, but the
Lord had ordered it so to be, that some (though not all) might look upon it as
from the hand of God, for many thousands did see it and did take notice of it
as from the hand of God at that time.

VI. There is one thing more to be looked on as from the all seeing eye of
heaven, which fell out very strangely concerning the late King. His hand and
Scepter broke off from his Statue at the Exchange, and fell down to the ground,
even at charge time, to the admiration of all the beholders, the Change being
then full of Merchants and others at the same time, and the next day it was set
up again, it was taken as a sad Presage by all that beheld it; yet I believe
there be many that will make no account of these remarkable passages, but will
slight them as things not worthy to take notice of, but my simple thoughts do
lead me to conceive that the falling down of the hand and Scepter, did presage
the taking of the Government out of his hand, as is seen this day, and I could
wish that all those that do so slight the former passages, to consider better
and not to slight the next that follows, which is very remarkable.

VII. There was an ancient Gentlewoman which came from Bristoll a widow, and
had been the wife of one Mr. Carry a Woollen Drapper on the back of Bristoll,
this woman had seen many strange apparitions of the late King at several
times, as his Crown all bloody, himself in black, and his head off, with many
other such visions she could not be quiet, until she came to London to
acquaint himself with those visions which she had seen of him, and after two
years time spent in soliciting this Noble man, and that Noble man and others to
bring her to the King, at length the Earl of Dorset (after much importunity)
brought her to the King, where she told his Majesty all that she had seen of
him, he gave her the hearing of it, but would give no credit to what she had
said, but bid take her away she was a merry woman; then when she had told him
all that she had seen of him, she returned to Bristoll again thinking there to
rest her sell in peace; she had not been there many days, but those Visions
appeared to her as at the first, whereupon she could not contain herself but
must of force come up to London the second time, to acquaint his Majesty with
what she had seen of him since her last being with him at Whitehall, but before
she could get to London his Majesty was gone to York, yet though she was in
years and a weakly woman, and the journey long and tedious for such a one as
her self to undertake, yet she must of necessity go after him to York, and was
conveyed to York in a Coach by means of a Lady, which at the writing hereof is
living near London who can justify the same if any should scruple the truth
hereof, and being come to York she had admittance to his presence, where she
once again related to him all that she had seen of him since her last being
with him at Whitehall, with much praying and beseeching him to consider what
she had seen and said of him, but he would not harken to her, nor give credit
to what she had said unto him, for certainly the Lord had hid these things from
him, and would not let him understand them because he would destroy him; for to
that purpose the Lord did harden the heart of Pharaob, that he should not
believe the wonders which Moses the servant of the Lord wrought in his fight,
to make his name known to all the world, for says the Lord, Exodus 9.16. For
this cause have happointed thee to show my power in thee, and to declare my
name in all the world; but the more plagues the Lord did send on Pharaob, the
more his heart was hardened by them.

I could wish that all those into whose hands these sad Presages shall come,
that they would consider with themselves that there was more then an ordinary
hand in causing this Gentlewoman being so ancient as she was to take upon her
two so great journeys as these were; first from Bristoll to London, then to
Bristoll again, then to London, and so to York, and all upon her own charge;
surely there must be more then an ordinary hand in it, which did guide this
woman, she being so ancient as she was, and no kind of distemper at all in her,
but in a very good temper both in mind and words, and in her behavior very
civil, as many people in London that did talk with her concerning these
visions can witness.

VIII. I have been credibly informed, that his Highness the Lord Protector
that now is, being in a Gentleman's house at prayer in a room wherein the Kings
Picture did hang, near about the midst of prayer the Picture fell down to the
ground, which was a sad presage to the King, and now seems to be a clear
testimony of Gods purpose to reject him: but how has the Lord Protector been
preserved in so many great dangers as by Gods providence he has gone through,
in his own person, since these troubles began, and that dainger which he
escaped in the Coach was not the least, and questionless the Lord has
appointed him to be the man to Govern the Nation at this time, who can deny
Gods permissive providence.

IX. His Majesty being one day at Causam near Redding playing at Chesse, he
playing with the white men, the head of the white King fell of, which was as
ominous a presage as any of the rest.

X. When the Lord Fairfax was at St. Albons, and the general Counsel of the
Army drawing up the grand Remonstrance, in order to require justice against the
King, the Sign of the King's Head beneath the hill from the Cross, that part of
the board between the head and shoulders, was broken out of the Sign, none
knowing how it came to be so, so that the head and shoulders were separated
from each other. it seemed then to be an ominous thing to what did shortly
befall him in pursuance of that Remonstrance then drawing up against him by the
Army. Wherefore I would wish that althose malignant spirits that are so bitter
against this Government, to consider that there is no power given unto men upon
earth but by God; therefore let them sit still and see the Lords work done in
truth and righteousinesse, for surely the Lord will own him so far as he does
act for the Lord, and no underhand practis shall prevail against him, mauger
all the Devils in hell they shall not touch him to do him harm, for the Lord
will be his Protector so long as he does act for the Lord; but if he act not
of, and for the Lord, then the Lord will bring all his actions to naught, and
it will fall to the ground of it self, as once Gamaliel said to the Jewish
Rabbis, refrain from these men and let them alone, for if this Counsel or
this work be of men, it will come to naught, but if it be of God you cannot
overthrow it, least happily ye be found fighters against God, Act. 5.28, 29.
And as M. Saltmarsh said once in a Sermon before the Lord Fairfax, So long as
you serve the Lord, he will be with you, but if you fall from the Lord, the
Lord will fall from you. Therefore to those turbulent spirits I will use our
Savior Christ's own words to Saul going to Damascus to persecute the people of
God, It is hard for you to kick against prickles. And I do now wish that you
which are such enemies against this Government, to look up to God and lay aside
your own particular interesse, and if there be any thing amiss in your hearts,
cast it out, and leave all unto the Lord for himself to rectify, for your
plots and devises will surely come to naught.

XI. There is one thing more yet as remarkable as the rest, When the King was
at the high Court of Justice on his Trial, the head of his cane fell off, he
stopping to take it up himself, took it as an ominous Presage unto himself, and
so indeed he might have done all the former Presages; the greatest part of them
bending to the head; but as I said before, the Lord did hide them from him. And
with my heart I wish that those ominbus presages, which the Lord did send as
forerunners of his wrath against him in his so great fall and ruin, might deter
all men of what condition soever to leave plotting and contriving any further
tumults or sedicions tending to the shedding of any more innocent blood in this
Nation; but let them plot what they will against this Government, they will
surely be destroyed in all their practices, as it is evidently seen in the two
last plots, for when they thought themselves secure, and the child of the
Devil, as I may truly say, brought to the very birth, see then how the Lord
did frustrate their actions, and with the least breath of his nostrils brake
them to pieces, and that in a moment, as he did all the enemies of that famous
Queen Elizabeth all her life, as well before her coming to the Crown as after.
First by Bishop Bonner and his crew, by setting her sister Queen Mary to take
away her life, and for no other cause, but for professing the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, had not the Lord discovered it (in his due time) to King Philip in a
warrant which the Bishops had shuffled in amongst other warrants to be signed
by him for her death, but the King reading the warrant refused to sign it, and
threw it aside, but before they could bring their purposes to pass, Queen Mary
died, and then their hopes were frustrate, for she was presently Crowned Queen,
to the great terror of all those that did plot her downfall, for her heart was
up right unto the Lord, and the Lord kept her from all their plots and devises,
for after she came to the Crown, what plots, and devises did they not practice
to take her life away, by Pistols, Poysonings, Stabbings, and by many other
hellish practices, how many lowing bulls of Bashan did the Pope send against
her, discharging her Subjects of their alsegiance unto her, animating her
subjects to destroy her by any means whatsoever, as it was plainly seen in the
treasons of those hellish Conspiratos, Lopus, Campion, Parry, Garnat, Banister,
Summervild, Squire, and the rest of that Popish rabble, and then by that never
to be forgotten deliverance of that invincible Navy, as the Spaniards called
that great Armado in 88. when they made themselves sure of all this Nation, and
so to bring it to Idolatry, for they brought with them whips of wire, gagges,
and many other instruments of cruelty to force this whole Land to Popery. But
blessed be God the snare is broke and we are escaped, except our sins which are
innumerable do make us fall into the snare, for surely our sins are even ripe
unto the harvest, and there wants nothing but the Lords putting in his sickle
to reap us, for surely the Lords patience is very much in waiting for our
repentance, therefore let us not defer it any longer, least the Lord cast us
off if we repent not all the sooner; but blessed and praised be the Lord for
it, he brought that invincible Armado to naught, for not one third part of them
ever came home to Spain again, and for all their malice against her, she died
in a good old age full of days, riches and honor, for she left all her
coffers full of riches and treasure, which she got from those that sought her
life, by making wars against them, for the Lord did prosper all her
undertakings, which she took in hand, for her heart was upright unto the Lord
all her days (as the heart of Asa king of Juda was) and the Lord did keep her
in store to settle the Gospel of Jesus Christ in this Nation and has
continewed it here almost 100. years, praised be his holy name for it, and
grant good Lord that it may continue in this Nation so long as the Sun and Moon
endures.

And now let me return unto the King in his project of bringing in of Popery,
he had the least cause of any in the world to have any alliance at all with
Papists, much less to link himself in the affinity of marriage with them, for
look but back upon the Powder Plot and you shall see his Father, himself, and
all their posterity, with all the Nobility and all the chief Gentry of this
Nation, designed to be blown up into the air, (the Lady Elizabeth his sister
only excepted) for they had determined to marry her to some Catholic
Gentleman, and so to have made her Queen, but God did laugh at them, and
brought them to naught, blessed and praised be his holy name for it.

But his Father and himself very well knew that all the considerable Papists in
England did know of it, and were engaged in it, and did contribute to it, and
for him to make a firm league with them, the enemies of Jesus Christ was most
abominable; but as the Lord said unto Ezekiel, Son of man turn thee, and thou
shall see greater abominations then these: so he yet added more to all the
rest, in putting forth that hellish book of sports (as his Father had formerly
done) which book was put forth by the Counsel, and advise of the then Popish
Bishops long after his coming from Spain, wherein he gives free liberty to the
people to commit all licentiousness for profaning the Lords day, by dancing,
revelling, gaming, and all that the Devil could invent, to the great dishonor
of God and his Sabaths, but it was contrived of set purpose to silence all
conscientious Ministers that did seruple the reading of it, as many of them
did) and were put from their preaching for not reading the same, and also to
draw the hearts of the rude multitude to himself, if there should be occasion
offered by any that should oppose the rise of Popery, which the multitude is
apt to do, as the multitude of Asia did against Paul, but knew no cause for
what they did, the whole City being in an uproar, but knew not for what; so
this book was put forth to cause the rude multitude to rise in defense of the
profain liberty which was given them by authority if there should be occasion
as I said before, it was one of the greatest Mr. Pieces that ever the Devil
did put on foot in this Nation (to draw the people to himself) that ever was
hatched in hell, far greater then the Powder plot, for that had destroyed, but
the bodies of a few b^t this would have destroyed the souls of many thousands,
if it had continued longer; It was worse then Balaams counsel for the
Midianitish women to draw the children of Israel to commit folly and Idolatry,
but he had his reward, for he was slain shortly after by the Israelites, and so
will all the enemies of Jesus Christ perish in all their wicked practices, if
they desist not in the pursuance of them.

Here are pregnant examples enough to make men leave their wicked practices, if
they will take notice of them, which God of his mercy give all those hearts to
do, that shall read these Ominous Presages, and the Lord give all men hearts to
understand what it is to strive against God. And my hearts desire is, that the
Lord would stir up the hearts of those that are in authority, to put in
execution that Additionall Act for the better keeping of the Lords day, which
is so much neglected, and the Sabbath abused in the fields and Alehouses where
the people do muster, at play as if it were the week day, yea even in the time
of divine prayer, to the great dishonor of God, and disgrace to this City, and
that it may be carefully looked into and amended, he prays who is a lover of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the peace and welfare of this Nation.

THE END.

