THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT The Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY
Which began on Wednesday the 6th of this Instant July 1681. and ended on Friday
the 8th following.
With an account of what passed in Relation to the Earl of Shaftsbu^y, with the
Lord Howard of Escrick, and J^hn Rouse, etc. and of the Indictment for
High Treason preferred against Stephen College, as also the Names of such as
are concerned to Dye, Burnt in the Hand, to be Transported and whipped.
JOhn H^ll, James Hull, and Hugh Jones, were all three Indicted for stealing 17
Pieces of Broad Gold, which on the Twentieth of June last they picked out of a
Gentlewomans Pocket as she was standing in St. Georges Fields: So that the
Robbery being done in another County, it could be laid as only a Felony in
Middlesex. But the Circumstances as they appeared in Court were these, she
finding her Money gone, went to the Thief takers, and for a promised Reward,
got them to bring several Pick-pockets to see if any of them were those she
suspected, amongst which the two former were brought, whom she presently
remembered to have seen at the time she lost her Gold, and charged them to have
taken it, whereupon one of them conveyed 15 pieces under the Carpet, and then
bid her look, perhaps it might be there, which she did and sound the 15 pieces,
as for the other three they desired her to be silent, and they would make her
satisfaction that night. These their Confessions, and the Evidence of one of
their Gang, with the corroborating Evidence of the Prosecuroy, were such plain
proofs that the Jury found the two former Guilty, but as for the latter he
being only taken in their Company was acquitted.

Elizabeth Wolf, Ann Smith, and Mary Roly, were Arraigned Indicted and Tried,
for stealing about 20 yards of Indian Silk. out of the Shop of one Frantis
Tryerwood a Mercer in Cornhill, under pretense of coming into his Shop to buy 4
or 5 yards; one of the three the mean while standing purdue, received it of the
other two when they came out: but the Silk being missed they were pursued and
all three of them taken. Upon their Trials they strove to shift it off one to
another: she that stood without pretending that the other were strangers to
her, and that they only hired her to carry it for them, but they being
notoriously known to be old Traders, the Jury found them all guilty of the
Felony.

One William Leaner a Tailor living in Whitechappel, was Indicted for Killing
John Churchporch, a young youth, and lately his Apprentice, by excessive
beating. It being Sworn against him that he was used to beat him unmercifully,
and the Neighbors many times heard him cry out, but more especially at this
time when he received the bruses of which it was supposed he dyed. And another
youth that worked in the house attested that he saw the Prisoner fell him to
the ground. and afterward take him by the hands and squlch him against the
ground. The Chyrurgions that opened him, likewise affirmed he had a great deal
of corrupted Blood and water in his body; but it appearing he lived about Nine
weeks after, and was some times pretty well, the Jury brought the Prisoner in
Nor Gulty.

Willam Buckle Servant to Esquire B. took his Trial upon his Indictment for
Murdering one William Chenchit a Marshals Bailiffs Follower. The Circumstances
according as they were Sworn in Court being thus, The Prisoner riding before
his Masters Coach with a pair of Pistols in. his Holsters, seeing a man stop
the Coach-Horses, but as he said he knew not upon what occasion, charged him to
let them go, which he refusing, the Prisoner fired a Pistol, but without doing
Execution, and then Riding up to the Coach found the Bailiff's had Seized his
Master, so enraged him, that Riding back to him that held the Horses Bride, he
delivered another Pistol at him, which forced a Brace of Bullets in at the
right side of his Belly five or six Inches, at which he screamed out he was
killed, but spoke not after, for in less than half an hour he dyed. The
Prisoner pleaded that the Deceased offered to strike him with a gaeat stick he
had in his hand, which he endeavoring to put by with his Pistol, it went off
unawares. But the Evinence being plain and positive he was found guilty of the
Murder.

Samuel Rumny being Indicted for having two Wives, to which he was Lawfully
married, he pleaded Guilty to his Indictment, alleging she that P^hsecuted
him whom he last Married at Boston in New England had been the occasion of his
offending against the Law, by her Lascivious and wicked practices, and that
since his being married to her, she had endeavored to take away his Life by
sundry means.

Thomas Gibson and Robert Hawkson, two notorious Foot-pads were Indicted, For
that they in the Company of one Richardson (who confessed the Robbery) and one
more, about the 19th of May last; set upon one Edward Betts near Newington
Butts, and after they had Barbarously used him, Robbed him of Goods to the
value of 12 pound the proof was plain against against them, nor could they well
deny it, only pleading that they were unadvisedly drawn in, and knew nothing of
any Robbery intended, but after the charge given, the Jury found them Guilty.

The Grand Jury for London being ordered to attend the Court had this day,
being the 8th of July (after some Objection made against Three of them by Mr.
Attorney General) had a Bill delivered to them containing an Indictment for High
Treason against Stephen College, which by order of Court was read, in which
were contained several treasonable practices by him devised and maintained to
destroy the Life of the King, as endeavoring to levy War, and raise rebellious
Arms to seize upon His Majesty's Person, and him to Depose and Murrher, which
being read, Mr. Attorney desired that the Witnesses might be Examined in open
Court, which was granted, and their names as follows, Mr. Stephen Dugdale, Mr.
Bryan Haynes, Mr. John Macknamarow, Mr. Dennis Macknamarow, Sir William
Gennings, and Mr. Smith gave Testimony upon Oath, that being in the company of
the aforesaid Stephen College about the 10th of March last, he declared to him
that there was a Design on foot to seize the King at Oxford, and that himself
was to be one concerned in the enterprise, and for that end he had prepared
himself not only Weapons but Armor, as Back, Breast, Head, etc. Blunderbuss,
Pistols, and the like, which he showed to the Witness, etc. and declared
several other treasonable practices were to be promoted, to which all the
Witnesses accorded in point of Evidence, so that the Indictment being presented
to the Grand Jury of London, They after four hours consult, and Examining the
Witnesses over again in private returned it Ignoramus.

Wednesday being the first day of the Sessions, the Earl of Shaftsbu^y, my Lord
Howard of Eschrick, Stephen College, John Rouse, and William Hetherington, the
first being Committed to the Tower of London, and the last to Newgate, for High
Treason: put up their Petitions to the Court either to be Proceeded against or
Bailed according to the Act, For Securing the Liberty of the Subject. And at
the Closing of the Sessions their Counsel moved it to the Court, but it was all
the Judges Opinion that they could not Bail those in the Tower, that not being
comprehended within the Commission Oyer and Terminer: But as for the last, viz.
Hetherington, he being in Newgate Bail was ordered to be taken for him.

Thomas Cook was Indicted for stealing a Silver Tankard, 1 Coat, 2 Perukes, a
Cloak, and 13 pounds in Money from one Mr. Smith in Broadstreet on the 13th of
December last, one of the Perukes being taken upon his head, and sufficient
proof made against him he was found Guilty.

John King was likewise found Guilty for picking the pocket of one Mr. Prichet
in St. Martins Church, the money being taken upon him ere he could escape.

John Plat was Indicted and Tried for breaking into the House of James Holms
living in the Parish of Hornsey, and taking thence in Plate, Cloths and monys
to the worth of 50 l. the Witness Swore point Blanck against him, and though he
made several slight Excuses he was found Guilty.

At this most remarkable Sessions were 9 persons that received Sentence of
Death* 6 men and 3 Women, viz John King, John Plat, Will* Buckly, Will.
Richardson, Tho. Gibson, and Rebert Hawkson, Mary Roly, Ann Smith, and Eliz
Wolf. 3 to be Transported, 4 burnt in the hand, and 3 to be whipped, and i^
concluded.

LONDON, Printed by D. Mallet.


