A True Relation Of the Birth of a MONSTER Born at EXETER, having two perfect
Heads; one Head standing right as it should, the other being in the right
shoulder just as you see the Figure here Printed, a Draught of it being sent up
in a Letter from a Person of repute and Integrity, who lived not far from the
place where it was Born, and was both an eye and an ear witness to the Truth of
what he writ: It was Born the 5th. of this Instant October, 1682. And lived not
long, but was buried and taken up again the 10th. Instant, and many hundreds
now resort to see it.


THAT Nature is Subject to frequent miscarriages is a thing not to be
questioned. They that converse with History shall find Stories a now to confirm
the truth of several strange and Monstrous. Productions, which make Men gaze
and admire, but for which no certain reason can be given; neither are those
persons who have thought it worth their while to record such things, Men of
little Fame, but Authors of the most solid Judgment and acutest Learning, among
those that have put pen to paper.

True it is, that in regard Women, whose hap it is to be the first Discoverers,
are generally the first Reporters; and such sort of Relations as these, are
looked upon as the stories of Women given to divulge their own misapprehensions
and affrightments; or else the fictions of Malicious Gossips to disgrace their
Neighbors. But no such Falsities as these are here obtruded upon the World,
either for amusement or for gain. However it is in some sort necessary to
satisfy the World in Stories of this Nature, which Fame will oftentimes
advance and multiply, as well to public as to private prejudice. For the
superstitious are apt to believe all Additions of report, and to apply their
Imaginations to public concernment, whereas in truth the Monstrosity it self
may have been occasioned by the-irregular fan^ies of Conceiving and Breeding
Women. It has been a great happiness to this Nation, that accidents of this
Nature rarely fall out among us. But if Heaven at any time permit them, perhaps
to punish the Pride and vanity incident to the Female Sex, and by the
misfortunes of one to admonish Multitudes, it is better to be warned by Truth,
then multiplied falsehood. For it is not to be questioned but this Story has got
into the World; and such is the Nature of report, that when she has got a
Relation by the end, away she flies with it, and at every Stage she gathers new
recruits, till she has swelled a Molehill to a Mountain.

Having therefore a True Relation sent me from the place it self, and by an eye
witness of the thing it self, I though it but reasonable to publish the Truth
it self to prevent fallacious mistakes and abuses of the world. And as for the
descants that others shall make of it, I leave it to themselves. Tho I am apt
to believe that the best use which any persons can make of this Relation, is to
admire the secret Judgments of God, and to thank him that they themselves were
not the dreadful Examples of his Indignation.

I have put down the Letter just as it came to me from a person of Repute and
Integrity, and who as I said before, was an Eye witness of the thing. And the
Reader may well judge by the Style, that it is no Elaborate Fiction or any
thing of framed or meditated invention. I shall say no more but give you the
Letter it self; leaving the more curious to be more amply convinced by
confirmations easy to be obtained from a place so frequently Corresponded
withal as Exeter.

THis with my Love, Yours I have received, and in requital I have here enclosed
sent you, although but a rude Draught, yet, its a perfect Resemblance of a
Monster, born but a few Doors from us; Its a Child with two Heads, with Eyes,
Nose, Ears, Mouth and Tongue to each Head proper; it has but two Arms and
Hands, and two Legs and Feet, all in good and comely shapes: The People which
were with the Woman at her Delivery, say, that they were two as handsome Faces
as ever they saw: You may aver the truth of this, for I my self have been an
Eye Witness and Ear Witness to what I have written: The Child was born the
Fifth of this Month, it was living when born, but soon expired, only giving one
Sigh at its Departure, which I heard the Midwife say. They in a short time
buried it, and it lay under Ground until the Tenth Instant, when it was taken
up again; and its now exposed to veiw, and there is daily resorting Hundreds of
People to see it, which proves very advantageous to the Parents of the Child.
An ingenuous Hand may easily draw a true Representation of this Monster, taking
from this rude and bad Draught, the Places of the Heads and Faces, which is
exact.

A. Brocas.


With this Letter was also sent enclosed the Draught of the Monster, as it is
here printed; to satisfy not only the Ear but the Eye of the Reader, generally
as inquisitive after the Description, as the Ear is after the Relation of a
Novelty.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for W. Davis, 1682.


