A True RELATION At large of the whole PROCEEDINGS During the Imprisonment of
Cornelius de Wit, Old Burgermaster of the City of DORT, Ruwaert of the Country
of Putten, etc. As also the Sentence past upon him.

TOGETHER With a full Account of the Massacre committed upon the said Cornelius
de Wit, and his Brother John de Wit, late Rate Pentionaries of Holland and
West-Friesland, upon the 20th of August, 1672. at the Hague.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor at the Crown in Little Britain, 1672.

A true Relation at large of the whole Proceedings during the Imprisonment of
Cornelius de Wit, old Burgermaster of the City of Dort, Ruwaert of the Country
of Putten, etc.
WIlliam Tichelaur a Surgeon, Inhabitant in Peirshal, informing the Court of
Justice, that the Here Cornelius de Wit old Burghomaster of the City of Dort,
Ruwaert of the County of Putten, had contracted with him for a certain sum of
Money, and other great Promises, to make away the Prince of Orange, which being
taken into deliberation by those of the Court, it was resolved at the House of
the Here President, that Order should be given to the Advocate Fiscal and the
other Officers, to transport themselves to the City of Dort, to apprehend and
bring with them the said Ruwaert van Putten; where they arrived the 24th of
July, whereupon the said Fiscal executed his Order accordingly, and brought the
said Putten to the Hague; where being landed, he desired a Coach, but was
answered that he was to walk on foot: On his way, being guarded by the Fiscal
and another Officer, one stepped in using these words in derision, Where are your
Halberdeers now to secure you? Being secured in the Casteleney on the 25th of
July, he was the same day about noon examined by the full Court, as also the
following days, with confronting the Surgeon, who went free in and out of
the Prison. During this, the Surgeon went home, and fetched further
Certificates; and at his Return, on the sixth of August was lodged in the same
Prison with Ruwaert van Putten; and though it was the vacation time, yet they
were examined the following days by the Council of the Court, face to face.
Mean time the late Rate Pensionary de Wit, his Brother, was very diligent both
day and night, advising with several of the ablest Civilians, to contrive his
Brothers Releasment: Whereupon a Paper of Madam Van Brockel his wife, was
delivered to the Court, to this effect: That the said Surgeon had not seen
her Husband but once for above a years time, which happened on the 8th of July,
at the house of the said Ruwaert at Dort, who was at that time sick in bed;
that he held not a quarter of an hours discourse with him; neither directly nor
indirectly gave him any invitation, but came freely of himself; and that which
was remarkable, was, his desire to speak with the said Ruwaert alone, who
refused it, but at the second or third instance was admitted. Besides, that the
Wife of the said Ruwaert considering the wickedness of the times, was troubled
at his private access to her Husband, whose ill aspect portended him no good,
in regard of the late attempt made upon her Husbands Brother not many days
before, which in all humane probability had been executed, had not the Watchmen
prevented their design; which grounded apprehension through Gods Providence
directed her as a safeguard to place her Son and Servant at the Chamber Door,
that in case the said Surgeon had any evil, design upon her Husband,
assistance should be near at hand, and withal to hear the passages between
them; the Son affirming that he plainly heard their discourse, which the Father
rep^ated after the Surgeon was gone; whereby it did appear there had not
been the least syllable of what the Surgeon laid to his charge. The
discourse being as follows: Having declared to him the dangerousness of the
times, he had somewhat to discover to him, which might retain a secrecy; To
which Ruwaert made answer, That in case it concerned the States, or was of bad
consequence, it ought to be discovered. Upon which, the Surgeon took his
leave, saying, Sir, if you are not willing to know it, I shall be silent, and
so fare you well.

The Humble Petition of the Wife and Friends of Cornelius de Wit, Shows,
THat the Ruwaert van Putten at present Prisoner, your Petitioners did expect
after some days to have seen him as liberty, the Crimes laid to his charge
being altogether groundless, and the malicious invention of his Accuser; and
for this cause we were advised to present the circumstances relating to the
clearing of the said Prisoner, not doubting but that his innocence will appear,
and accordingly have an honorable dismission.

Notwithstanding this the Lords of the said Court continued to examine both
parties: but upon Tuesday the 16th of August, a report was spread as if the
said Ruaert had made his escape, which drew a great concourse of People;
whereupon some of the Lords went to the Prison, and caused Ruwaert van Putten
to show himself to the People, who upon his appearance called to the Rabble,
bid them be gone, the Devil take ye, what do ye do there? This Tumult was
occasioned by a Coach waiting upon a certain Lord near the Prison, which was
supposed by the People to be designed for Ruwaert's Conveyance. The Tumult was
no sooner ended, but the Burgers began to appear in Arms, and his Highness the
Prince of Orange was supplicated that some Companies might be ordered for
preserving the peace. His Highness returned them this answer, That he thanked
the Burgers for their great care, that the said Ruwaert was out of his hands
and committed into the hands of Justice, to whom he fully entrusted the
business: the effects whereof did appear by a strict examination taken at a
full Council. On the 18th of August he was brought to the place of Torture, and
accordingly Racked by the Executioner; there declaring, that if they cut him to
pieces, he would to the last maintain his Innocence.

Upon the 20 of Aug. the following Sentence was pronounced against Cornel. de
Wit in the said Prison.

THe Court of Holland having seen and examined the Papers and Writings
delivered by the Procurator General against Cornelius de Wit old Burgermaster
of the City of Dort, as likewise his examination, and proofs made against him,
etc. and having also considered all what is requisite to the matter in hand;
Does declare the said Prisoner to have forfeited all his Dignities and Offices
belonging unto him, and that with expedition he shall be banished out of the
Countries of Holland and West-Friezland, never to return again upon pain of
severe punishment. And farther condemns him in the Costs and Charges of the
said Court.

Adrian Pauw President, Counselors of Holland and West-Friezland.
Aelbrecht Nierop, Willem Goes, Frederick van Leir, Cornelis Baen, and Mattheus
Gool,


Pronounced in the Prison of the said Court, August 20. 1672. Adrian Pott.

The manner of the Death of John de Wit, and his Brother Cornelius de Wit.
AT the same time, being the 20th of August, John de Wit, late Rate Pentionary
of Holland, understanding his Brother was to be set at liberty in order to his
Banishment, made haste to discharge him from the Prison, where he went in his
Coach, and leaving it some little distance from the Prison-gate, went in to his
Brother, and after two hours stay with him, about eleven of the Clock, the
Prison-gates were set open, and the two Brothers stood at the door in order to
be gone; but before they could take Coach, a great noise was heard, upon which
a Burger said, Away, away, into the Prison. For the Chyrurgion being releast
some time before, Reported that Ruwaert was discharged, and offered to make
good his Accusation against him before God and Men; and told them that Ruwaert
van Putten offered him 30000 Gilders with a considerable Employment, and some
Ducatoons in hand, to kill the Prince of Orange. Upon this discourse the Rabble
flocked together, crying, Arm, Arm; and immediately appeared Six Companies of
Foot who surrounded the Prison, notwithstanding three Troops of Horse were
drawn out to prevent Disorder.

About four of the Clock in the Afternoon some of them demanded to have the
Prison-doors open; which being refused, so many volleys of shot were discharged
against them, that a passage was quickly made to go in; where in a horrible
manner they were both killed in a moment: after which, their Bodies were
stripped, dragged to the common place of Execution, and hung up by Legs upon the
Gallows, where their Fingers, Toes, Ears, Noses, Hearts, and Privy Members were
cut off and mangled in a most barbarous manner, and sold up and down the Town,
a Joint of a Finger for 12 Stivers, a whole one for 15 Stivers, a piece of an
Ear for 25 Stivers, and a Toe for 10 Stivers, and so proportionable. So horrid
and dismal a Spectacle in all its Circumstances was scarce ever seen or heard
of.

FINIS.

