A TRUE NARRATIVE Of The TRIAL Of Titus Oats for Perjury At the KING
S-Bench-Barr at Westminster On Friday the 8th. of May. 1685
PErjury is one of the most detestable Crimes, especially when its complicated
with Murder; for it violates at once all Laws Humane and Divine, unhinging the
whole society of the World. This day being the eighth day of this present month
of May, 1685. was Convicted of this most abominable Crime. Titus Oats formerly
known by the name of the Salamanca Doctor, one who by his Perjury and Lies
inflamed and liked to have overthrown three most flourishing Kingdoms: The
manner thus;

About nine of the Clock in the Forenoon the Court sat, where was the Right
Honorable Sir George Jefferies Knight. and Bar. Lord Chief Justice of England,
Judge Witthins, Judge Holloway, etc. being on the Bench, and the Jury called,
Oats excepted against some of them for being of the Grand Jury, when the
Indictment was found, and it was admitted for a just Bar; then the Indictment
was read in Latin and English; the substance of which was, that whereas Titus
Oats had sworn, and caused to be put to Death several Persons, namely the Five
Jesuits, Pickering, Groves and Ireland, etc.

He swore that he was at a Confult at the White-Horse. Tavern in the Strand,
where he being present, and carrying the Papers i^ which the Death of King
Charles the Second of Blessed Memory, from one Chamber to another, where he
said they all unanimously Signed the Kings Death on the 24th. of April Anno
Dom. 1678. The Falsities of which was proved by these following Evidence, etc.
Were not here named, being all persons of Quality and Estates, who happened to be
Students at St Omers at that time that Oats was there. First Mr. Hillsly
deposed that he came from St. Omers the very day that Mr. Oats pretended that
the Consult was in the Strand, and that he left Mr. Oats there; and whereas
Oats had formerly Sworn that he came over with Hillsly: Hillsly swore he did
not see him all the way: Then Mr. Barnaby swore that he met Mr. Hillsly by the
way and he saw not Oats with him, and that going on to St Omers and arriving
there within two days after he had met Mr. Hillsly in Kent, he found Mr. Oats
at St. Omers, so that he possibly could not be here in London, all the rest of
the Witnesses for the King, swore that Oats coming to St. Omers about December
1677 never was to their knowledge out of the Seminory till the the Mid-Summer
1678, But one night which was at Watton, a place about two Leagues from St.
Omers, and they saw him every day either at Meat or Play, and that he was so
remarkable for his odd Carriage, that they took particular notice of him,
especially he sitting at a particular Table, and not among the Boys by reason
of his Age. This was attested by above 20 Witnesses, viz. Lord Gerrard Bromely,
-- Gerrard Esquire -- Hagerston, Esquire -- Wright Esquire -- Price, Mr. Arundel --
Turbervill Esquire -- Thornton Esquire -- Pool Esquire Mr. Dorrel and one Mr. Morgan, one
that was then a Papist, but is now a Church of England Minister, etc.

Mr Oates's Questions put to them, was, what Religion they were of, and how
long they were there, and what they did there; and offered to ask some things,
which was, my Lord Chief Justice told him, not proper nor fit for them to
answer, because of Penal Statutes against Papists: He behaved himself with his
wonted Confidence, and seemed to have more Brass in his Face than ever; but my
Lord Chief Justice kept him within his bounds, and gave him all the fair Play
imaginable, before he began his particular Defense; he made a long canting
Harangue how he had been believed by Parliaments, and how several Judges had
spoke formerly of him, and particularly my Lord Chief Justice; all which being
not admitted as Evidence, he was directed by the Court, to prove his being here
in April the 24th. 78. he produced one Mrs. Cicely Majo; who swore that about
that time she saw him in a Disguise at Sir Richard Barkers House: He having on
a Gray Hat, no Hair, a pitiful Gray Suit. Sir Robert's Coachman, swore he saw
him there in a black Hat, a long black Perriwig and a Cinnamon Suit; besides
they disagreed in several things, and so they being but otherwise despicable
People, their Evidence was looked upon as nothing worth; and they contradicted
Oates's own Testimony, for he swore he was back at St. Omers in the beginning
of May, and my Lord Chief Justice asked Oats where he Lodged when he pretended
to be here in April and the beginning of May. that he might produce the People
of the House to be Evidence for his being here; but he shuffled and would
assign none, which was looked on by all as a clear Conviction. After this* Mr.
Oats to make a Noise caused to be called a many great Names to show what
Authority his Evidence once had viz. my Lord Devonshire, my Lord Clay, who said
it was so long since, that they could give small account of it; my Lord
Huntingdon said it is true, he once believed something which he swore, but he
did now on his Conscience believe him to be an errant Rogue, and a spiller of
Innocent blood.

My Lord Barron Montague being called by Oats, he gave him a slender
Character, and that formerly he did not hear him.

Mr, Williams, Speaker of the House of Commons, Sir George Treby were called,
but said little or nothing.

After Mr. Oats had done with his Evidence, Mr. Attorney General brought in
more Evidence for the King, some to prove, others to Corroborate. The witness
to prove where first Sir George Wakeman, who was formerly quitted at the
Old-Bayly: After Sir George was sworn, he was asked by the Court with what Mr
Oats, had formerly sworn against him, viz. of taking 500 l. to poison the
King; and he answered by Vittue of the Oath he had taken, it was all false. My
Lord Castlemain attested the same as to the Treason Oats had formerly Charged
him with, then one Mr. Smith, formerly Schoolmaster in Islington was produced,
and it was proved that he confessed himself Perjured in Favor of Oates's
Testimony in the Trial of the Five Jesuits being induced by Fear and Gain.

The same was proved upon Mr: Clay who was induced by threars and promises of
Oats and Sir William Waller, this was proved by one Mr. Davenport a keeper of
the ^^l who heard him threaten Clay, with Death, unless he would second his
Evidence, and he being an Old Weak man, was drawn in. After the Evidence on
both sides had made an end, My Lord Chief Justice told the Prisoner he had free
Liberty to make what Exceptions he pleased, Who then began a long and Malapert
Harangue; the chief drift of which was to prove that the Papists ought not to
be Credited because they were Papists, and for this produced some Records and
Statutes.

And to this he was answered by my Lord Chief Justice, that by the same Reason
all the Dissenters from the Church of England ought to be excepted.

And that it was impossible at that Rate that any man should have Right done
him. Oats was for the most part all along his Speech Impertinent and saucy, so
that my Lord threatened to turn him out of the Court, and after he had spent
something more than half an hours time he withdrew of himself, and went out of
the Hall, with his Guards along with him, as he came toward the middle of the
Hall, the People began to shout, and so shouted him quite out of the Hall.

After a little space of Silence, the Solicitor General began ^o sum up the
whole, and continued for three quarters of an hour, When he had done, my Lord
Chief Justice began a most Eloquent and Emphatical Speech.

Amongst other things, telling the Jury, that this was a cause that the Honor
of the whole Nation was concerned in, not to let a person so publicly
infamous, escape Justice. That he was a person of an hardened impudence and
Conscience, and not worthy of the Name of the Church of England, that he was
Guilty of ipilling Innocent Blood, and had spared no person though never so
nearly related to the Crown. And after he had exactly and particularly Summed
up all the witnesses on both sides* He concluded with these Words, That he was
the blackest Villain upon the Face of the Earth.

As these Prodigious Crimes do plainly manifest to every unprejudiced person

The Speech being e^^ed, the Jury withdrew, and after a certain space of time
returned again, and brought him in Guilty of the Indictment.

And thus, this Fa^^ioso, who sought to get an infamous Fame, by inflaming
these Kingdoms, like him that thought to Eternise his name, by Burning of the
Temple of Diana, he is like to have a never Dying Name, in an Eternal Infamy.

Dublin Reprinted. 1685.


