THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEDINGS AT The Sessions House IN THE OLD-BAYLY.
Which began on Thursday the 26th of this February last past, and Ended on
Monday the 1st of March following 1679.
Giving an Account of most of the Remarkable Trials there, viz for Murder,
Fellonies and Burglaries, etc. with a particular Relation of their Names, and
the places of their Committing their Facts, with the number of those Condemned
to dye, Burnt in the hand, Transported and to be whipped.

And also of the Trial and Condemnation of one of the seven which broke out of
Prison on Sunday Morning the 22th of February last, and one Baker alias Heskins
a Jesuit, which offerred moneys to a Servant Maid to set her Masters houses on
fire, in two several places where she lived, and several other remarkable
Trials.

THe first that was Indicted and Arraigned was on Sarah Good, for that she in
the Company, of two more, both Men, coming as she had often before done, into
the House of one Sammuel Dod a Vintner living in Saint Botolphs without
Bishops-Gate, and there calling for several sorts of Liquors, had brought them
up to them one Silver Tankard, one silver Bole, two silver stand^ng Cups, the
which they watching their opportunity, conveyed away, and sold to several
Goldsmiths in London. The Evidence was plain, that one of the three
unquestionably had the Plate aforesaid, but it could not be charged positively
upon the Prisoner. She was likewise Indicted for stealing one Silver Tankard,
and one Dram Cup, from Roger Reading of the same Parish, the which she
confessed in Court, and therefore was brought in Guilty of that Felony, but
not of the former.

William West was Indicted and Arraigned, for that he in the Parish of Stepney
by force and Arms, did Felloniously take and bear away thirteen Yards of
Chamblet, the Goods and Chattels of Robert Adkins, taking it off from the
Stall-Grate in the Evening, and running away with it, but not long after, was
by one of his Confederates betrayed, and did confess that it was sold, and that
he had half a Crown for his part, and some other of his Gang had the rest, so
that the Case being plain, and he an old Offender, once burnt in the hand, and
turned out of Newgate the last Sessions but one, the Jury found him Guilty of
the Felony.

Dorothy Clark was Indicted, for that she in the Company of a Man her
Confederate going into the Shop of one Henry Beacon in St. Clements Eastcheap,
pretending to buy a Campaign Coat, did Felloniously take and bare away, a large
Coat, vallued at thirty five shillings, the Circumstances sworn to were thus,
that they bidding money for a Coat, after they had privately conveyed the Coat
away for which the Prisoner was Indicted; the Apprentce belonging to the Shop,
understanding that his Master could take the money they had bidden, followed
them to call them back, but they on the contrary, thought they were pursued,
the now Prisoner slipped into an Alehouse, and the Man went back, but the
aforesaid Mr. Beacon no sooner looking over his Coats, but missed one, upon
which, by going to the said Alehouse, found the Coat dropped in the next Room
or Box, where this Prisoner was; the which no sooner being found, and she
changed with it, but she offered twenty shillings in Composition, adding, that
it she were Committed, she was a dead woman, the meaning of which was because
she had lately received her Pardon, but would not take that Mercy for a
warning; upon this Evidence they were found Guilty of the Felony.

Susanna Harding was Indicted for taking away at several times from one Mrs.
Ballard a Sempstress, Goods to the vallue of fourteen pounds, viz. one large
Scarf, three laced Cravats, and several other Linnens, the which she pawned for
an inconsiderable vallue the which upon her being taxed wirhal, she confessed,
as likewise in Court, she was not adjudged to be above twelve years of Age, yet
had followed that Trade of Thieving a considerable time upon the Confession she
was brought in Guilty of the Felony.

Martha Edwards Martha Hair, and Elizabeth Hicks were Indicted for stealing 28
Yards of flowered Silk, vallued at fourteen pounds, from one Edward Rigby, the
former viz. Edwards alleged she bought it of Hair, and Hair affirmed she had
it of Hicks, who likewise confirmed the same, but having a Pardon for
Transportation since the Felony committed, although she was found Guilty, yet
remained upon the former Sentance, to be transported between this and Easter
next.

Charles Marsh was Indicted for felloniously bearing away one pair of Flaxen
Sheets, four Shifts and some other pieces of Linen, the Goods and Chattels of
Thomas Hammond of Cbeswick, the taking of which he confessed before the Justice
of Peace, who attested it, and thereupon he was found Guilty to the value of
ten pence.

Frances Philips, William Harris, John Anderson, and one Benson, were Indicted
for Felony and Robbery, for that setting upon the Coach of Justice Northy, a
little beyond Bow, wherein was his Wife, Son, and another Gentlewoman; and did
use them in a most barbarous manner, and after having forced them to submit to
save their Lives, they took out of the Pocket of Mr North the younger, one
Necklace of Pearl, vallued at one hundred and od pounds as likewise 4 shillings
or thereabouts in moneys, his Cravat, and Handkerchief, and from his Mother,
her Scarf, and Rings to a considerable vallue, but whilst they were ransacking
the Coath, a Servant of the Juststices being sent to meet it, found it standing
in the Road, and five Men upon their Guard, came up close to see what the
matter was, whereupon they endeavored to incompass him the which he being
Aware of, bid them stand off, but they pressing on, he with his stick knocked
one of them down, and was himself knocked down, and disabled by the rest, they
were all on Foot, and about seven in number, but it being very dark their
Phisiogmonies could not be so well discovered, as to charge them positively, so
that Anders^n and Benson could not be sworn to be in the Fact, but the Necklace
of Pearl, Scarf and Rings being offered to pawn and sail, by Phillips and
Harris, as likewise Phillips being flatly charged to be there by the party that
was knocked down, they two were found Guilty, and the other acquitted.

William Banister was brought to his Trial, for Burglary and Felony, for that
he did in the Absence of one Abigal Jenison break into her Lodging Chamber, and
felloniously bear away one Silver Tankard, twelve Gold Rings, two Silver
Porringers, one Silver Salt, six Silver Spoons, and a Silver Inkhorne; the
aforesaid Plate being no sooner missed, but the Prisoner was suspected, and a
warrant being granted to search his Lodging, the Salt was found upon him, and
upon strict Examination did confess where he sold and disposed of the rest,
but in Court he denied that he stole them, but that they were delivered to him
by the woman's Son of the house where the Gentlewoman Lodged, but he not being
able to make it appear, and being found in several stories, the Verdict passed
against him for the Felony and Burglary.

George James was Indicted for breaking open, and entering the dwelling house of
the right worshipful Sir William Turner Knight, and Alderman of the City of
London, situate in the Parish of Christchurch in the Ward of Farringron
within, and conveying thence in moneys six hundred seventy five pounds, after
his being committed to Newgate, he confessed that he had not the moneys
himself, but that by the help of certain false Keys, he had delivered the
greatest part thereof to one Thomas Brown; and did likewise discover where
three hundred and od pounds of the same money was, but as for the rest, it was
conveyed away by a third person; but in Court he denied the taking it away for
a long time, but seeing a positive Proof against him, and his own Confession in
Newgate sworn to, he again confessed the Robbery; and that the parties that
were his Confederates, had gotten false Keys, not only to the outward Door but
also to the Closet where the money lay, by means of an Impression he had gotten
of the true Keys in Clay, and that when his Confederates came to take the
money, he stood at the bottom of the Stairs with a Candle to hearken if any of
the Family were stirring, this was efected about five of the Clock in the
Morning, himself being Footman to Sir William. Upon this plain and positive
proof, he stas found Guilty of Felony and Burglary.

Tobias Buther was Indicted fot Killing Mr. Simonds in Gardeners Lane in
Kingstreet Westminster, on the 17th of February last, it being proved that he
and his Brother had watched for the Party diceased, not only that day, but the
day before was seen to watch up and down the said Lane, and peep into the house
where he Lodged, who no sooner coming out, but the Prisoner Cried Oh! and
thereupon drew, and so likewise did the deceased, and making several Passes,
the Prisoners Brother stood with his Sword drawn, and would not let them be
parted till Simonds being run in four Inches deep, staggering a while, fell
down and died upon the Spot. This Murrher was thought to be done in the
revenging an affront put upon one Mary Talbot a common Strumpet, who was
likewise Indicted as accessory, for that the deceased had taken away a Watch,
and unrig'd her at a certain Tavern where she was heard to swear she would have
his Throat cut in three or four days, if he walked London Streets, and that if
she could not do it, she had them that should do it for her. Upon all these
circumstances Butler was found Guiity of wilful Murder; but by reason it could
not be proved against the said Talbot that she did incence or hire the said
Butler to do the Cruel exploit, she was acquitted.

Robert Gale was Indicted for Felony and Burglary for breaking open the shop
of Frances Pect a Hosier in St. Magnes, and conveying thence Stockens to the
vallue of forty pounds, about thirty pair of them being proved upon him, but
he being a Brother by Profession, his Neighbors giving Testimony for his
Truth, and civil behavior, the Jury brought him in not Guilty.

George Clark and his wife, Richard Pepper and his Wife were Indicted for
Clipping, and diminishing the Current and lawful Coin of England which the Law
makes High Treason, the circumstance of the Evidence thus, Clarks Wife often
coming to one Coniers a Grocers, was wont to bring several pieces of Clipped
moneys, and change them, for buing two penniworth of Wares at the most, which
raised a suspicion in the Apprentice, whereupon he acquainted his Master with
it, who getting a Warrant, searched Clarks house, where they found several
rubbing Stones, Files and Crucibles, and in his Wives purse some clipped
moneys, and Clippings, and then proceeding to search Peppers house, they found
in the bottom of a pot, full of Souse, a Bag of money containing about eleven
pounds, of which, about nine pounds was Clipped money, as likewise several
pieces in the Salt-Box, all which in Court he utterly disowned, so that there
being no positive proof against either of them, as to their Clipping, only
strong presumptions, they were all acquitted.

Randal Russel who in the Company of six more, broke the Goal of Newgate. on
the 22th of February last, being retaken, was Indicted and brought upon his
Trial, where the Keepers swore, that they locked him up with the rest, in the
Masters Chamber on the common side, and that when they left them, they were
safely Fettered, but having two Saw-knives, two Plough-Coulters, conveyed to
them by their Confederates, they on Satturday the 21th of February in the
Evening began to force the stones, which were exceeding large and cramped with
several ponderous Dogs of Iron, yet were so dexterous, as to saw off all their
Irons, and make a large breach in the Wall, and sliding down by a Rope, made
their escapes, leaving two bound behind them, who refused to comply with that
Felony, the Knives, Fetters and Coulters were produced in Court, and the
Escape so undeniable, that the Jury brought him in Guilty of the Felony, his
former commitment was for breaking open the Chamber of Mark Trout Esquire of,
New-Inn, in the Compny of Peter Richardson, and taking thence three hundred
pounds, who was Executed for the same, last Sessions, of which Indictment he
was also found Guilty.

James Baker alias Heskins, and John Nailer, alias Carpenter, were severally
Indicted for Popish Priests or Jesuits, the first that took his Trial was
Baker, alias Heskins, against whom Doctor Oats gave Evidence, that he had heard
him say Mass, and conse, crate the Host at several places in his Priestly
Vestments, the next that gave Evidence, was one Mary Dove, who swore
positively, that she had seen him Confess, heard him say Mass, Christen and the
like, at one Mrs. Statertons in Duke-street, where she lived as a Servant, and
that since, when she removed from thence to one Mr. Edwards his house, he came
and offered her moneys, to set her Masters house on Fire, forcing it into her
Lap, as likewise he repeated the same offer to her when she had left that
Service, and was come to live with Esquire Bradshaw, in Crane-Court in
Fleetstreet, and came to her in several Habits, especially with Cords about him
like a Porter, upon this Evidence he was found Guilty of High Treason.

The other, Nailer, alias Carpenter, wholly submitted to the favor of the
Court, and because there was no possitive proof of his being a Priest he was
acquitted.

Timothy Grady, Edward Grady, and John Richardson were Indicted for Robbing one
Mr. Holder and his Wife upon the Kings Highway between nine or ten of the Clock
in the Evening and taking from them moneys rings and a Campaign Coat, to a
considerable vallue, between Southtown and Hays, near Vxbridg, But about two
days after, they were apprehended it St. Gileses in the Fields; the Campaign
then being on the back of Timothy Greedy, who in Court confessed the Robbery,
excusing the others as not accessory, but the Evidence being somewhat positive
against Edward Greedy, he with his Brother Timothy was found Guilty of the
Felony and Robbery, but the proof being weak against Richardson, he was
acquitted.

Frances Lewis was Indicted for Felloniously taking, and bearing away a silver
Tankard vallued at five pounds, which being fully proved, the Jury found her
Guilty of the felony.

There were in all twenty-five persons condemned to die, viz. eighteen Men and
seven women: viz. William Woodward, William West, Evans Wood, George James,
John Braford, William Harris, John Anderson, Joseph Phillips, Tobias Butler,
James Baker alias Heskins, Timwothy Grady, Edward Grady, Danniel Earnly,
Richard, Hoskins, Rrbert Lewis, William Carter, William Banister, Randal
Russel, Frances Lewis, Susan Morgan, Elizabeth Hicks, Sarah Good, Dorothy
Clark, Dorothy Ha^, Ann Green. There were four burned in the hand, five to be
whipped, and two to be Transported. etc.

LONDON Printed, by D. M. 1679.


