A TRUE NARRATIVE Of the late MUTINY Made by several TROOPERS OF Captain
Savage's Troop in Col: Whaley's Regiment, as the same was proved upon Oath
before the Court Martial, by several Witnesses;

Of the Proceedings of the Court thereupon; Of the Sentence of Death upon
Robert Locker, and others of the Mutiniers; The Generals Pardon to them all but
Locker; The Reason thereof:

And of the Death of Locker, and his carriage at the place of Execution before
his Death.

April 31. 1649.
Imprimatur

Henry Whalley, Advocate.

Numb. 16.11. -- And what is Aaron, that ye murmr against him?

London, Printed for JOHN FIELD, May 1. 1649.

A TRUE NARRATIVE OF The late Mutiny made by several TROOPERS OF Captain
Savage's Troop, in Col: Whaley's Regiment.
A Friend of mine acquainting me, That Mr. Locker at the time of his Death had
taxed the Lord Generals Court Martial with Tyrannical and Unjust Proceedings
against him, pretending he was unjustly condemned, with many expressions to
that purpose, so as diverse godly men there present, who knew nothing of the
business, more then what fell from his mouth, were much grieved and offended at
his death, and proceedings of the Court; and knowing that I was present with
the Court at his Trial, and able to give an Account of the whole Proceedings,
desired me for public Satisfaction, to publish a Narrative thereof: which is
as follows;

UPon the 24 of this instant April, Captain Savage having received Orders to
march with his Troop to the Rendezvous of the Regiment at Mile-end-Green,
commanded his Trumpet to sound to Horse; which accordingly was done: But about
thirty of the Troop, of whom Robert Locker was chief, about two of the clock in
the Afternoon went to the Four Swans Inn in Bishopsgate street, there seized
upon the Colors, and carried them to the Bull Inn in the same street, where
they forcibly detained them: Whereupon their Captain went to them, demanding
the Reasons thereof; and withal commanded them to bring out the Colors and
mount: but they deny both telling him, They were not his Colors carriers, That
they had, as well as he, fought for them. In this manner they kept the Colors
all that day, and the next night, refusing (although often persuaded and
commanded by their Captain) to obey the said Orders.

That evening the Regiment by Order returned to their former quarters, and
their Officers knowing that the day following they were to march into the
country to quarter, lent them for their better accommodation out of their own
purses (having newly received some moneys) a Fortnights pay; but withal
Ordered, That Captain Savage his Troop should have only their pay due to them,
and no more, by reason of their disobedience to Commands, that Troop being also
at that time one months pay before the Regiment, excepting Captain Cannons
Troop, which was equal with them.

The Account standing thus, The 19 of December. last they came to London, and to
the 20 of Apr following, makes nineteen weeks, and upon the 23 of April (upon
which day they afterward Mutinyed) they received one Months pay; which pay
made them twenty three weeks, which to Captain Cannons Troop, and Captain
Savage's Troop, was to each of them one Months pay more then the rest of the
Regiment had: (Good husbands needed not to have wanted money to pay their
quarters, after such Receipts.)

The next morning Orders were given out by the Col: for a Rendezvous of the
Regiment again at Mile-end-Green, in order to their March to Quarter in the
Country; in obedience whereunto their Captain commanded to sound to Horse,
which was done: but most of Captain Savage his Soldiers, in stead of mounting,
put themselves in a posture of defense in the Galleries of the Bull-Inn, with
their Swords and Pistols, standing upon their Guard; their Captain hearing
thereof, went to them, and commanded them to mount: But they answered, The
Soldiers of the other Troops had a fortnights pay more then they, which they
said they would have before they marched. Their Captain perceiving they had
cast off all obedience to Commands, went into the room where they had secured
the Colors, and there lays hold of them to bring them away, but they force
them out of his hands; Locker telling him, The Colors belonged as well to them
as to him, and that they had as well fought for them as he; to which they cried,
All, All. The Captain thereupon made his application to the Colonel; the
Colonel sent the captain with his Quartermaster back to them, strictly
commanding them, as from him, to march to the Rendezvous, where, if they had
any just complaints, he would hear them, and see them righted: But they not
satisfied therewith, returned a peremptory refusal: The Colonel thereupon, with
his Major and others of his Officers, rid to them, where he found Sixty of them
in their former Posture of Defense, standing upon their Guard; he commands them
to Mount, they pretend they had not a fortnights pay, as others of the
Regiment: The Colonel tells them, They could not extort Moneys from their
Officers, where it was not due, nor expect that fortnights pay to be lent them,
in regard of their Disobedience and Mutiny, they being likewise now in pay a
fortnight before the rest of the Regiment since they came to London, except one
Troop as aforesaid; They then replied, They were behind of their pay: Upon
Examination whereof, it appeared to be but Three or Four days; But in regard
some of them said it was Five days, the Colonel commanded the Clerk to give
them Five days pay, they then pretended want of Money to pay their Quarters;
the colonel thereupon engaged, They should not want for discharge of their
Quarters; and being thus satisfied to every of their Demands and Objections,
they then required of the Col: that he should engage to pay them their arrears,
the Col: hereby perceiving they had a further design, intimated so much to
them, and positively again commanded them to come down and mount, but still
they refused: The Colonel upon this spoke to several of them, and Locker
appearing to be one of the chief, called particularly to him to come down and
mount; but he refused, turning himself to the Company, seemingly asked their
consents, to which they cried, No, No. In this manner they mutinied against
their colonel, and the yard and sreet being full of People, they endeavored to
incense them, telling them, They wanted their Pay; the colonel perceiving
neither persuasions nor commands would take place, and foreseeing by the
gathering of much people together, there was like to be an uproar, and having
two Troops of Horse with him, required the people to go out of the yard, and
commanded them to yield themselves, as they would answer for all the blood that
should be spilt, for he would not be longer capitulated with, but would force
their obedience; upon this many of them got away, and fifteen of them were
taken into custody, the General and Leiutenant General, upon notice thereof,
coming at that very instant to suppress the said mutiny.

Upon the 26 of this instant April, a Court Martial was called, consisting of
many Officers both of Horse and Foot, and after every of them so taken into
custody, had particularly answered to his charge, and a full Examination of
several Witnesses upon Oath being taken thereupon, it was unaminously adjudged
one of the highest mutinies, and most dangerous, that has happened since his
Excellency commanded the Army, and therefore thought it not fitting to let it
pass, without exemplary punishment: Upon this the Count considered them (except
one, against whom nothing material was proved) under Three degrees of
Offenders, Six of them who were chief in this Mutiny, to be tried upon the
Sixth Article of Laws and Ordinances of War, of Duties toward Superiors and
Commanders (established by Parliament) which is in these words, No person shall
make any Mutinous Assemblies, or be present or assisting thereunto, or in or by
them demand their pay, upon pain of Death: who were tried and found guilty, and
according to the Article, Sentence of Death was given; Five others, who were
less active in the Mutiny, were tried upon an Article of Misdemeanor, and being
found Guilty, were sentenced to ride the wooden Horse by the space of one hour,
with a carbine at each heel, and cashiered the Army; and the other three, who
were least active, were left to their colonel to cashier at his Discretion.

Judgment being thus given, it was by the Court taken into consideration,
which of them was most highly guilty of the Mutiny, and it was unanimously
resolved, that Locker was most guilty, for that from the first taking the
colors, (wherein he was chief) to the last, he was the principal Mutinier; and
after all Witnesses examined in open court, he confessed he was the first cause
of the Mutiny; upon the consideration of the whole matter, he was set apart for
Justice: and for the other Five, though condemned, it was resolved, That the
General (by Officers for that purpose appointed) should be moved from the
court, That they should cast Lots for Four of them, upon whose Lot it should
fall, to have Mercy; which the General granted, and they were made acquainted
therewith. The next day the said Five, with Locker, exhibited this Petition
following to the General:

To His Excellency THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, Captain General of all the Forces in
England: The humble Petition of George Ash, Robert Osborn, Robert Locker,
Matthew Nepworth, Joseph Hockley, and Thomas Goodwin;
Humbly shows,
THat it may please your Excellency out of your clemency and goodness, in mercy
to pass by this our unwise and unlawful Action, and to give us our lives as a
prey unto us, and we do vow and protest before the Almighty God, That we are
heartily sorry for our faults; and do promise as in his all-seeing eye, never
to do the like action again, nor to suffer the like, if we can hinder it with
our lives; so humbly beseeching you to have mercy upon us in this our sad
condition, we shall remain, as in duty bound, yours to serve you till death,

George Ash. Robert Osborn. Joseph Hockley. Matthew Nepworth. Thomas Goodwin.
Robert Locker.


The Lieutenant General, upon sight of this their Petition, and their seeming
unfeigned Humiliation and Contrition, being much affected therewith, became an
earnest Suitor to the General for their Pardon, which he obtained; and the
other Five sentenced to ride the wooden Horse, the General referred to the
Colonel to remit their punishment, if he saw cause.

But his Excellency not pardoning Locker, the Court Martial issued forth a
Warrant for his Execution.

And although the said Locker seemed very penitent before the Generals Answer
was returned, and expressed much remorse for his offense; yet so soon as the
Generals resolution was known, he immediately fell into as high expressions of
Mutiny as at the first: And Mr. Knight the Generals Chaplain offering some
Spiritual counsel unto him, was rejected with most opprobrious and scornful
language.

And in this distemper and pride of Spirit, going to the place of execution, in
stead of being humbled from a due sense of his condition, he railed at the
Sentence of the Council, calling the Court Tyrannical; falsely denying that he
had at all confessed before the Court Martial, himself to be chief in the
mutiny; upon which Col: Okey wished him to take heed of dying with a lie in his
mouth: notwithstanding the said Locker proceeded on still in his obstinacy,
calling to the Soldiers appointed for his execution, saying, I see you are
drawn out to murder me, God forgive you, I do freely; I wonder you are so
unwise to obey your Officers, for he that sheds man's blood, by man shall his
blood be spilt, and in this mutinous spirit he continued to the last. And now I
have given a true Narrative of the whole business as requested, by which the
impartial Reader may see, with what lenity the Court Martial has proceeded,
and what mercy the General has extended to such high Mutiniers, and had it not
been timously suppressed, the City had been in no small danger of ruin in these
discontented times; but let God have the praise, as well for preventing
Judgments, as for delivering us out of them; and as for Mr. Locker, I leave
him to the Lord, before whom he stands or falls to eternity, but this will be
said of him, That as he lived, so he dyed, A Mutinier.

FINIS.

