A true Relation of His Majesty's private departure from Hampton Court, the
eleventh of November, between four and five of the Clock in the Afternoon.
As it was delivered to the House of Commons this morning, November. 12. by Sir
John Cook, and Master Crew, two of the Commissioners. With the Houses
Resolution thereupon.
November. 12. 1647.
THe Speaker had a Letter from Gen: Cromwell late last night, that His Majesty
was escaped, but no particulars. This morning Sir John Cook and master Crew,
two of the Commissioners, came to the House, and delivered the particulars
thus: Yesterday in the afternoon His Majesty shut himself up in his Chamber,
and commanded that no body should come to him: when it grew dark, he called for
a Candle, and afterward for Snuffers; he came not out to Prayers, as he was
accustomed; which after some time, bred some mistrust: Then one of the
Commissioners knocked at his chamber door, and no body answering, went in, and
found no body there, the back-doore open, and His Majesty's Cloak lay in the
midst of the room on the floor, which for the present caused some fear that
somewhat had been attempted on his person; but looking farther, found three
Letters upon the Table, written with His Majesty's own hand, which argued that
he was well. The first was a kind of Declaration or Remonstrance, which he
desired should be communicated to both his Houses of Parliament, to this
effect, That He had as much as in Him lay, endeavored to give His Houses
satisfaction, and to re-establish a settled Peace; but He saw that nothing
reasonable would give them content, That He had certain information that the
Agitators, or some of that Faction, had an intent speedily to murder Him, and
that Master Peter's had lately expressed so much to an intimate friend of his:
Therefore His Majesty was resolved to retire to some private place for a time,
for His own Preservation, etc.

The second Letter was to my Lord Mountague, and the rest of the Commissioners
to give them thanks for their civilities to him, since his coming to
Hampton Court. The third, to Colonel Whalley of thanks likewise for his
civilities, for he had that morning given charge to the Guards and others to
have a care of his Majesty, having likewise had some intimation of an intended
attempt that day upon his Majesty's Person.

A fourth Letter was found upon his Majesty's Table, subscribed For his
Majesty, without any name to it more then two letters. In this Letter his
Majesty was warned of the said attempt on his Person, and earnestly beseeched
to retire to some place of privacy for a time, and Broad-street in London was
proposed as a place of security.

The Commissioners could make no probable conjecture as then, whether His
Majesty should be gone, That the Scotch Commissioners had been there the day
before, but were yesterday come for London. Hereupon the House ordered a
Committee, to examine the whole business, and the neglect of those that
guarded him, and likewise ordered a stop of all the Ports, and a search to be
made in London for him. Some believe he is gone for Scotland; others, that part
of the Army have conveyed him away: but this day at 12. of the clock there was
no certainty of either, but wheresoever he be, God bless him, and preserve him
out of the hands of his Enemies. And let all good men say, Amen.

Printed for Richard Royston. 1647.


