THE TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT The Sessions House IN THE OLD BAILEY
which began on Thursday the 24th of this Instant May and ended on Thursday the
24th following;
Giving an Account of most of the Remarkable Trials there, viz. For Murder
Fellonies and Burglaries, etc. with a particular Relation of their Names and
the places of their commiting their Facts, and th number of those Condemned to
die, Burned in the Hand, Transported and to be whipped.
Entered according to ORDER

THE Proceedings at the Sessions of Oyet and Terminer, holden at the
Sessions House in the Old-Baly for the City of London and County of Midlesex,
which began on the 24th. of May, and ended the same of the same Instant were
these Peter Anderson, was tried upon two Indictments, for Robing Samuel
Blackburn, and Samuel Newton, on the Highway the 16th of April last, near Bow,
the Circumstances appearing thus. Viz. the Prosecutor traviling late, were in a
lonely place, set upon by the Prisoner, and three more of his accomplices, who
carried them into a Field adjoining to the Road, and there riffled them, taking
from the former, a Coat, a Sword, and a pair of Frienged Gloves, and from the
latter his Coat, Sword, Belt, Rings, Buckles, and twelve Shillings in Money.
This being sworn, the Prisoner utterly denied the Fact, saying that he was at
home in Bed at that time the robery was said to be done, but not being able to
prove it, nor give any good account for himself, he was found Guilty upon both
Indictments.

John Edgerly was tried for killing William Stephenson, on the 12th of May. in
the Pa^ish of St. Paul, Stradwell, the man^er thus, the deceased having a
Pistol laden in his hand; and being about to deliver it to the Prisoner, er'e
he well had it in his hand, the Cock at half bent went down, and the Pistol
thereupon going off, the Bullet struck the deceased on the Head, of which wound
the next day he died, but no malice nor any color of intention in the Prisoner
to discharge the Pistol the Jury found it Chance Medlie.

Christopher Gage, was tried for stealing four Leaden half hundred weights from
Edward Porril in little Alhollows on the 20th of April last who upon his
Examination confessed the stealing of three of them, and that he sold them to a
Puterer near Temple Bar, whereupon he was found Guilty.

John Buttler, was tried for stealing a Beaver-Hat, a Sword, and Belt, etc.
from John Smart, in the Parish of Alhollows Barkin 01 the 4th. of this Instant
May the Sword and Belt he confessed to have taken, but withal aledged that he
was drunk and took them with no ill design the Felony being apparent he was
found Guilty.

Henry Castelport, and Thomas Williamson, were tried for stealing a Coat from
an unknown person, they being prosecuted by a Broker, where they offered it to
Sale, but they bought it, and no Evidence appearing that it was stole, they
were acquitted.

Mary Philips, was Indicted and Tried as Accessory to a Felony committed by
John Parkeson. Viz. the latter having stolen a Suit of Clothes, a Campaign
Coat, Linen and other things of vallue from one Mr. Wood, sold the same or
diners of them to the Prisoner at under rates, which goods so sold were
afterward upon search, found in the Prisoners house, hid amongst several rags
and were at first denied by her, which bred a suspicion, she came not honestly
by them, yet she pleading that she bought them, not knowing they were stole and
endeavored to apprehend the party she bought them off, bring several to
testify that she did not use to purchase stolen goods, she was found not
Guilty.

Isabel Barker, was Indicted, for that she did convert her dwelling house in
More-Lake into a common Baudy house, suffering Lude Licentious people to commit
carnal wickedness in a debauched way to which she pleaded not Guilty, whereupon
the Evidence against her were produced, amongst which was a Woman that gave
Evidence that she caught her husband there with a lude woman just coming out of
the bed from her, and that afterward the Prisoner took a Chamber in a private
place, to prevent discovery, and much to the same Effect swore to which she
pleaded that she new no other than that they were man and wife, and that as to
the Chamber taken in a distant place it was at request of the woman that had
been naught with the woman's husband to prevent his finding her out, she also
brought several to testify her life and conversation, that she used honest
industry for her living, and it being the opinion of the Court that one Act if
it had been with her consent, did not render her liable to to the Statute, made
for the prevention of such lude Coarses, but that she must keep a common baudy
house, to entetain all comers and goers so that in the end she was acquitted,
upon giving suretys for her good behavior for the futer.

William H^dson, of the Parish of St. Botolphs Bishops-gate, and Mary his wife
were indicted for recusants for that they being above the Age of 16 years, hid
not by the space one Month repaired to their Parish Church, or to any other
Church or Chaple; or heard Divine Service according to the form of the Church
of England, and they not appearing Proclamation was made that if by the next
Goal delivery they rendered not up their body to the Sherifs of London, their
Lands, Goods, and Chatles, should be seized to the behoof of the King as the
Statute in that has provided.

William Tindal was Tried for killing Thomas Miller near to the Muse on the 14
of this instant May the manner thus the deceased having information given that
Mr. Tindal had Spoak scurilous words of him be resolved to take Satiffation for
the abuse and thereupon on the day aforesaid Contrary to the persuasions of his
friends he went with a stick and sword to find him which at last he did, and
bid him draw, yet here fused and with his stick defended himself still retiring
till in the end finding himself hard pressed and his Life in danger he drew and
stood upon his guard so that after some passes the deceased received a wound
under the left pap the depth of 4 Jnches of which with in an houer space he
died but no malice appearing on the part of the prisoner and that what he did
he was forced to for the preservation of his one Life the Jury returned their
verdict see defendendo.

Susanna Morgan was tried for Robing the the house of Charles Butler of St.
Giles in the filds with whom she lived in the nature of a servant on the 4. Of
this instant, taking away serveral rings aprons stockings scarfs hods Linen
etc: part of which was upon trial proved to be found in Custody she did not
deny but she had them yet alleged that she stole them not but they were
delivered to her by a nursed that kept the wife of the prosecutor but the
Evidence being plain upon her she was was found Guilty of a pety Larcenary,

James Willson was Tried upon an indictmet, for stealing a Cloak at Hampsted on
the 13 instant from Pbiip Froud Esp. which upon inquiry was found where he had
disposed of it and he not greatly denying the fact was found Guilty,

Charles stockery and Sarah Carier were Tried for stealing a sheet valued at 5.
shillings out of the house of Elizabat shipton of Clarkenwell on the 14th of
May instant but there being no posstiue proof.

Sarah stephens was Tried for picking the Pocket of Nathaniel Berry in the
parish of St. Brides the manner thus the prosecuter finding the prisones
standing at a door she desired him to walk in which he did and called for drink
after which being about to pay his reening found his money gone but she soon
after being apprekhended and now brought up on her Trial he could not swear
positiuely she was the woman whereupon she was aquitted.

There were several presentiments made against dissenting Ministers, and other
dissenter.

At this Session Peter Anderson Received Senrence of Death, for Robing upon the
Highway. And one Samuel Lamber, who was condemned the last Sessions for
Horsestealing, and till this time repreived, ordered to be Execuupon his former
Sentence, for that he attempted to break Goal.

Christopher Gage, was burnt in the hand John Buttler, ordered to be
Transported James Willson, and Susanali Morgan sentenced to be whiped, and so
ended the Sessions.

LONDON Printed for L. Curtis. 1683.


