THE TRUE PETITION OF THE ENTIRE BODY OF THE KINGDOM OF SCOTLAND.
With an Act of the secret Council of Scotland upon the same Petition.
As also the Copy of a Letter sent up with this true and Authenticke Act of
Council from a good Friend.
To the Right Honorable and truly Noble the Lords of his Majesty's privy
Council for Scotland, showing their obedience to his Majesty, and their hearty
affection to his loyal and weldeserving Parliament.
Apud Edenb. ultimo Maii Anno Dom. millessimo, sexcentissimo, quadragessimo
secundo.
THe whilck day in presence of the Lords of secret Council compered personaly,
Thomas Earl of Haddington, David L. Elcho, Arthur Areskine of Scotis-craig,
Sir John Wanshop of Nidrie, John Binny and Thomas Paterson Merchants, Burgesses
of Edinburgh, James Lentron Burgess of Saint Andrews, Mr. Andrew Ramsey
Minister at Edenbourgh, and Mr. John Montereiff Minister at Kingorne, for
themselves, and in the name of the Noblemen, Gentlemen, Burgesses and Ministers
occasionally meeting at Edenbourgh, and gave in to the said Lords the
supplication underwritten, of the whilke the tenor follows: To the Right
Honorable the Lords of his Majesty's privy Council, The humble Petition of
many Noblemen, Gentlemen, Burgesses and Ministers occasionally meeting at
Edenbourgh. Humbly shows. Whereas they upon the report and fight of great
Convocations suddenly endeavored and unexepctedly brought into this great
Counsel day, for the most part by these who have been esteemed by the Country
and challenged by the Parliament, as Incendiares, plotters, and enemies to the
peace of this Kingdom, have occasionally conveened at Edinburgh, And having
heard of Letters from His Majesty, and Declaration from the Parliament of
England anent the present distractions of that Kingdom: They have reason from
bygan experience, and present presumptions to fear the intentions and
endeavors of these evil affected persons and their adherents, lest by their
convocations and solicitations they take occasion of these differences to
raise jealousies and divisions betwixt their Kingdoms. And considering the
common interest of all the Subjects of the Kingdom to preserve the late peace,
so happily concluded betwixt these Nations, by the providence of God, his
Majesty's goodness and wisdom, and the mediation of the Parliament of
England, and so solemnly established by the late treaty, oath of Parliament,
public faith, and the great Seals of these Kingdoms. As in all other
points, so especially in these Articles (whereunto the rest are called but
prefaces) for settling and entertaining a solid peace betwixt their Nations in
time coming; lest upon any pretense they should be dashed one against another.
Wherein it is declared the duty of the Estates yea of every subject for to
conveene and suppress any evil affected persons who would raise Arms against
the Subjects of the ather Kingdom without consent of Parliament as traitors to
the Estate, much more to Petition against it, and wherein there is appointed a
Committee of the Estates for the conservation of the peace in the interim
betwixt Parliaments. All which the Petitioners amongst the rest of the good
Subjects of this Kingdom, did hazard their lives and Estates, to obtain: And
did demand in the Treaty upon their dangerous experience of the Council of
England there meddling in the affairs betwixt His Majesty and this Kingdom; to
the engaging of the Nations in War, which is so often condemned by the Estates
of this Kingdom in their Remonstrances, pressing that common rule of Equity,
To do as you would be done unto: which now is and may be retorted on this
Kingdom. Like as desiring earnestly, that your Lordships in these public
resolutions of so great consequence to their Dominions may carry along with you
the hearts and consciences of the body of this Kingdom, and prevent that the
breach grow not wider by false confidences grounded upon sudden undertakings
of any persons, as also their natural affection and duty to their gracious
Sovereign according to their manifold obligations, and brotherly affection to
the Kingdom of England, forcing them to pray to God, and to desire all men
according to their stations, to use all lawful means, to breed and intertaine
a good understanding betwixt His Majesty and His Parliament, the surest
foundation of greatness to His Majesty, and happiness to their Kingdoms.
Likewise taking to heart the dangerous consequences to His Majesty, and to his
Dominions if your Lordships answer by tendering the offer of your service to
His Majesty against the demands, or upon the differences betwixt His Majesty
and His Parliament of England, or any other manner of way import (which God
forbid) any ingadging of your selves or their Nations in war, or any thing
that may tend thereunto.

Therefore in their own names, and in the name of the rest of the Nobility,
Gentry, Burgesses, and Ministers whose hearts do, and hands would go along
with this petition for preservation of peace betwixt their Kingdoms, they do
in all humility and earnestness, petition your Lordships in the depth of your
wisdoms, seriously to ponder the consequences of your answer to his Majesty
and the Parliament of England at this time, so as thereby neither the
confidence betwixt his Majesty and his good Subjects here, nor amongst
themselves, nor betwixt the Kingdoms (these unious tending ever to his
Majesty's greatness, and these divisions to his prejudice) may be any ways
weakened, or their peace endangered. And to that end, that as your Lordships
would leave no lawful means, according to your vocation and interest,
unassayed for begetting a good understanding betwixt his Majesty and his
Parliament, being his greatest and most unpartiall Council, representing the
Body, whereof his Majesty is the Head, and for removing these distractions,
(the continuance whereof will ever trouble the peace of this Kingdom)
according to your Lordships last answer, so also seeing his Majesty requires
not that your Lordships should, neither can your Lordships judge of the Laws
and proceedings of another independent Kingdom; and the Parliament of England
offers to give all satisfaction concerning any messages or papers sent to your
Lordships anent their proceedings, that your Lordships would be pleased
carefully, to shun all offers of verbal or real ingadgements, either directly
or by way of inference, without consent of the Parliament conform to the
treaty, which either may give any just occasion of offense to their gracious
Sovereign, or of jealously to their brethren in England, or of discourse unto
any, as if your Lordships did not observe that former rule of equity pressed by
themselves during the time of your troubles, To do to others as they will be
done to themselves. But did fall in the same fault, which your Lordships, and
the rest of the Estates of this Kingdom, had condemned in the Council of
England; And for this effect they cannot but remember your Lordships that
according to an Article of the Treaty, there was appointed a Commission als
independent as any other, of so many of every Estate representing the whole
Kingdom, to prevent all occasion of division betwixt their Kingdoms, in the
interim betwixt Parliaments. All which they humbly represent to your Lordships
wise considerations, and expect from your Lordships, so gracious an answer, as
may satisfy their present fears, and secure them from these dangers in this
interim betwixt Parliaments, and thereby prevent all necessity of petitions of
this kind.

Whilke supplication being read, heard and considerd by the said Lords, and
they finding the same to contain matters of public concernment, and of that
importance that requires mature deliberation: Therefore they continue the
answer of this Petition till the morn, and ordains the whole Counselors in
Town to be warned to attend the Council the morn at two hours afternoon.

The act of the secret Council of Scotland upon the above written Petition.
Apud Edenbur primo Iunii anno Dom millessimo sexcentessimo quadragessimo
secundo.
The Lords of secret Counsel having again read the Petition above written,
declare that they will have consideration thereof; and as they are most tender
and sensible of whatsoever may concern his Majesty's Person, Honor and
Authority: So will they have a special care not to do any thing contrary to
the late treaty, or which may infringe the union and peace, or weaken the
confidence betwixt their two Kingdoms, so happily established in his Majesty's
presence, and with his Royal consent in both Parliaments: and are confident
that as from the said Lords the Petitioners neither have nor shall have any
necessity: So they will not trouble thomselves, nor the Council hereafter with
supplications of this kind. Extractum de libris actorum secreti Consilii,
S.D.N. Regis: per me Archibald: Prymrois Cleri^um ejusdem sub meis signo and
sub scriptione manualibus.

Arch. Primr. Cler. Con.

A Copy of a Letter sent up with this true and authenticke Act of Council from
a very good friend.
Sir, This Petition I now send was presented by the persons above writtten in
name of a great many Noblemen, Knights, Burgesses, and Ministers then
assembled, who having received this satisfactorie answer, departed to their
own dwellings in a most peaceable manner: Some days after the Lords of
Counsel being met for domesticke affairs; there was a Petition of another
strain presented only by two Noblemen and two Gentlemen, pretended to be in
the name of the Nobility, Gentry, Ministers and Commons of the Kingdom of
Scotland, wherewith the Lords of his Majesty's privy Council were so highly
offended, that they would neither suffer it to be regestred in their books
(according to the custom) nor would they return any answer thereunto, but
ordered the same to be altogether suppressed; and therefore is not worthy to be
taken notice of, because the Authors thereof can neither produce any answer
given by the Council, nor any public Act to testify the truth thereof.

London, Printed for George Lindesay, and are to be sold by John Giles, at
David's, Inn in Holborne.


