An Answer to a Letter Written by the R. R. The Ld Bp of Rochester. Concerning
The Chapter of Original Sin, In the Vnum Necessarium.

By JER. TAILOR D. D.

London, Printed by E. Cotes for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1656.

An Answer to a Letter Written by the R. R. The L. Bp. of Rochester.
R. R. Father and my good Lord,
YOur Lordships Letter Dated July 28. I received not till September. 11. It seems
R. Royston detained it in his hands, supposing it could not come safely to me
while I remain a prisoner. But I now have that liberty, that I can receive any
Letters, and send any; for the Gentlemen under whose custody I am, as they are
careful of their charges, so they are civil to my person. It was necessary I
should tell this to your Lordship, that I may not be under a suspicion of
neglecting to give accounts in those particulars, which with so much prudence
and charity you were pleased to represent in your Letter concerning my
discourse of Original Sin. My Lord, in all your Exceptions, I cannot but
observe your candor and your paternal care concerning me. For when there was
nothing in the Doctrine, but your greater reason did easily see the justice and
the truth of it, and I am persuaded could have taught me to have said many more
material things in confirmation of what I have taught; yet so careful is your
charity of me, that you would not omit to represent to my consideration what
might be said by captious and weaker persons; or by the more wise and pious who
are of a different judgment.

But my Lord, first you are pleased to note that this discourse runs not the
ordinary channel. True; for if it did, it must nurse the popular error: but
when the disease is epidemical, as it is so much the worse, so the
extraordinary remedy must be acknowledged to be the better. And if there be in
it some things hard to be understood, as it was the fate of S. Paul's Epistles
(as your Lordship notes out of S. Peter) yet this difficulty of understanding
proceeds not from the thing it self, nor from the manner of handling it, but
from the indisposition and prepossession of men's minds to the contrary, who are
angry when they are told that they have been deceived: for it is usual with
men to be more displeased, when they are told they were in error, then to be
pleased with them who offer to lead them out of it.

But your Lordship does with great advantages represent an objection of some
captious persons, which relates not to the material part of the Question, but
to the rules of art. If there be no such thing as Original Sin transmitted from
Adam to his posterity, then all that sixth chapter is a strife about a shadow,
a Non ens. A. It is true my Lord, the Question as it is usually handled, is so.
For when the Franciscan and Dominican do eternally dispute about the conception
of the Blessed Virgin, whether it was with, or without Original Sin, meaning by
way of grace and special exemption, this is de non ente; for there was no need
of any such exemption: and they supposing that commonly it was otherwise,
troubled themselves about the exception of a Rule, which in that sense which
the supposed it, was not true at all: she was born as innocent from any
impurity or formal guilt as Adam was created, and so was her Mother, and so was
all her family. * When the Lutheran and the Roman dispute, whether justice and
original righteousness in Adam was Natural or by Grace, it is de non ente: for
it was positively neither, but negatively only; he had original righteousness
till he sinned, that is, he was righteous. till he became unrighteous. * When
the Calvinist troubles himself and his Parishioners with fierce declamations
against natural inclinations or concupiscence, and disputes whether it remains
in baptized persons, or whether it be taken off by Election, or by the
Sacrament, whether to all Christians or to some few; this is a (...); for it is
no sin at all in persons baptized or unbaptiz'd, till it be consented to.

My Lord, when I was a young man in Cambridge, I knew a learned professor of
Divinity, whose ordinary Lectures in the Lady Margarets Chair for many years
together, nine as I suppose, or thereabouts, were concerning Original Sin, and
the appendant questions: This indeed could not choose but be Andabatarum
conflictus. But then my discourse representing that these disputes are
useless, and as they discourse usually to be de non ente, is not to be
reproved. For I profess to evince that many of those things, of the sense of
which they dispute, are not true at all in any sense, I declare them to be de
non ente, that is, I untie their intricate knots by cutting them in pieces. For
when a false proposition is the ground of disputes, the process must needs be
infinite, unless you discover the first error. He that tells them they both
fight about a shadow, and with many arguments proves the vanity of their whole
process, they (if he says true) not he is the (...). * When S. Austine was
horribly puzzled about the traduction of Original Sin, and thought himself
forced to say that either the Father begat the soul, or that he could not
transmit sin which is subjected in the soul, or at least he could not tell how
it was transmitted: he had no way to be relieved but by being told that
Original Sin was not subjected in the soul, because properly and formally it
was no real sin of ours at all; but that it was only by imputation, and to
certain purposes, not any inherent quality, or corruption: and so in effect all
his trouble was de non ente. * But now some wits have lately risen in the
Church of Rome, and they tell us another story. The soul follows the
temperature of the body, and so Original Sin comes to be transmitted by
contact: because the constitution of the body is the fomes or nest of the sin,
and the souls concupiscence is derived from the bodies lust. But besides that
this fancy disappears at the first handling, and there would be so many
Original Sins as there are several constitutions, and the guilt would not be
equal, and they who are born Eunuchs should be less infected by Adam's
pollution, by having less of concupiscence in the great instance of desires,
[and after all, concupiscence it self could not be a sin in the soul, till the
body was grown up to strength enough to infect it] Besides all this, (I say)
while one does not know how Original Sin can be derived, and another who thinks
he can, names a wrong way, and both the ways infer it to be another kind of
thing then all the Schools of learning teach [and in the whole process it must
be an impossible thing, because the instrument which has all its operations by
the force of the principal agent, cannot of it self produce a great change and
violent effect upon the principal agent] does it not too clearly demonstrate,
that all that infinite variety of fancies agreeing in nothing but in an endless
uncertainty, is nothing else but a being busy about the quiddities of a dream,
and the constituent parts of a shadow? But then, My Lord, my discourse
representing all this to be vanity and uncertainty, ought not to be called or
supposed to be a (...): as he that ends the question between two Schoolmen
disputing about the place of Purgatory, by saying they need not trouble
themselves about the place; for that which is not, has no place at all; ought
not to be told he contends about a shadow, when he proves that to be true,
which he suggested to the two trifling litigants.

But as to the thing it self: I do not say there is no such thing as Original
Sin, but it is not that which it is supposed to be: it is not our sin formally,
but by imputation only; and it is imputed so, as to be an inlet to sickness,
death and disorder: but it does not introduce a necessity of sinning, nor damn
any one to the flames of Hell. So that Original Sin is not a Non ens, unless
that be nothing which infers so many real mischiefs.

The next thing your Lordship is pleased to note to me, is that in your wisdom
you foresee, some will argue against my explication of the word Damnation, in
the ninth Article of our Church, which affirms that Original Sin deserves
damnation. Concerning which, My Lord, I do thus (and I hope fairly) acquit my
self.

1. That it having been affirmed by S. Austin that Infants dying unbaptized are
damned, he is deservedly called Durus pater Infantum, and generally forsaken by
all sober men of the later ages: and it will be an intolerable thing to think
the Church of England guilty of that which all her wiser sons, and all the
Christian Churches generally abhor. I remember that I have heard that King
James reproving a Scottish Minister, who refused to give private Baptism to a
dying Infant, being asked by the Minister, if he thought the child should be
damned for want of Baptism? answered, No, but I think you may be damned for
refusing it: and he said well. But then my Lord, If Original Sin deserves
damnation, then may Infants be damned if they die without Baptism. But if it be
a horrible affirmative, to say that the poor babes shall be made Devils, or
enter into their portion, if they want that ceremony, which is the only gate,
the only way of salvation that stands open; then the word [Damnation] in the 9.
Article must mean something less, then what we usually understand by it: or
else the Article must be salved by expounding some other word to an allay and
lessening of the horrible sentence; and particularly the word [Deserves] of
which I shall afterward give account. Both these ways I follow. The first is
the way of the Schoolmen.

For they suppose the state of unbaptized Infants to be a poena damni; and they
are confident enough to say that this may be well supposed without inferring
their suffering the pains of hell. But this sentence of theirs I admit and
explicate with some little difference of expression. For so far I admit this
pain of loss, or rather a deficiency from going to Heaven, to be the
consequence of Adam's sin, that by it we being left in meris Naturalibus, could
never by these strengths alone have gone to Heaven. Now whereas your Lordship
in behalf of those whom you suppose may be captious, is pleased to argue. That
as loss of sight or eyes infers a state of darkness or blindness: so the loss
of Heaven infers Hell; and if Infants go not to heaven in that state, whither
can they go but to hell? and that is Damnation in the greatest sense. I grant
it, that if in the event of things they do not go to Heaven (as things are now
ordered) it is but too likely that they go to Hell: but I add, that as all
darkness does not infer horror and distraction of mind, or fearful apparitions
and phantasms: so neither does all Hell, or states in Hell infer all those
torments which the Schoolmen signify by a poena sensus (for I speak now in
pursuance of their way). So that there is no necessity of a third place; but it
concludes only that in the state of separation from Gods presence there is a
great variety of degrees and kinds of evil, and every one is not the extreme:
and yet by the way, let me observe, that Gregory Nazianzen and Nicetas taught
that there is a third place for Infants and Heathens: and Irenaeus affirmed
that the evils of Hell were not eternal to all, but to the Devils only and the
greater criminals. But neither they nor we, nor any man else can tell whether
Hell be a place or no. It is a state of evil; but whether all the damned be in
one or in twenty places, we cannot tell.

But I have no need to make use of any of this. For when I affirm that Infants
being by Adam reduced and left to their mere natural state, fall short of
Heaven; I do not say they cannot go to Heaven at all, but they cannot go
thither by their natural powers, they cannot without a new grace and favor go
to heaven. But then it cannot presently be inferred, that therefore they go to
hell; but this ought to be inferred, which indeed was the real consequent of it;
therefore it is necessary that Gods Grace should supply this defect, if God
intends Heaven to them at all; and because Nature cannot, God sent a Savior by
whom it was effected. But if it be asked, what if this grace had not come? and
that it be said, that without Gods grace they must have gone to Hell, because
without it they could not go to Heaven? I answer, That we know how it is, now
that God in his goodness has made provisions for them: but if he had not made
such provisions, what would have been we know not, any more then we know what
would have followed, if Adam had not sinned; where he should have lived, and
how long, and in what circumstances the posterity should have been provided for
in all their possible contingencies. But yet, this I know, that it follows
not, that if without this Grace we could not have gone to Heaven, that
therefore we must have gone to Hell. For although the first was ordinarily
impossible, yet the second was absolutely unjust, and against Gods goodness,
and therefore more impossible. But because the first could not be done by
nature, God was pleased to promise and to give his grace, that he might bring
us to that state whither he had designed. us, that is, to a supernatural
felicity. If Adam had not fallen, yet Heaven had not been a natural consequent
of his obedience, but a Gracious, it had been a gift still: and of Adam though
he had persisted in innocence, it is true to say, that without Gods Grace, that
is, by the mere force of Nature, he could never have arrived to a Supernatural
state, that is, to the joys of Heaven; and yet it does not follow, that if he
had remained in Innocence, he must have gone to Hell. Just so it is in Infants,
Hell was not made for man, but for Devils; and therefore it must be something
besides mere Nature that can bear any man thither: mere Nature goes neither to
Heaven nor Hell. So that when I say Infants naturally cannot go to Heaven, and
that this is a punishment of Adam's sin, he being for it punished with a loss
of his gracious condition, and devolved to the state of Nature, and we by him
left so; my meaning is, that this Damnation which is of our Nature, is but
negative, that is, as a consequent of our Patriarchs sin, our Nature is left
imperfect and deficient in order to a supernatural end, which the Schoolmen
call a poena damni, but improperly: they indeed think it may be a real event,
and final condition of persons as well as things: but I affirm it was an evil
effect of Adam's sin: but in the event of things it became to the persons the
way to a new grace, and has no other event as to Heaven and Hell directly and
immediately. In the same sense and to the same purpose I understand the word
Damnation in the 9. Article.

But the word [Damnation] may very well, truly, and sufficiently signify all
the purposes of the Article, if it be taken only for the effect of that
sentence which was inflicted upon Adam, and descended on his posterity, that
is, for condemnation to Death, and the evils of mortality. So the word is used
by S. Paul 1 Cor. 11.29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks Damnation to himself. (...) is the word, but that it did particularly
signify temporal death and evils, appears by the instances of probation in the
next words, For, for this cause some are weak amongst you, some are sick, and
some are fallen asleep. This also in the Article. Original Sin deserves
damnation, that is, it justly brought in the angry sentence of God upon Man, it
brought him to death, and deserved it: it brought it upon us, and deserved it
too. I do not say that we by that sin deserved that death, neither can death be
properly a punishment of us till we superadde some evil of our own; yet Adam's
sin deserved it so, that it was justly left to fall upon us, we as a consequent
and punishment of his sin being reduced to our natural portion. In odiosis quod
minimum est sequimur. The lesser sense of the word is certainly agreeable to
truth and reason: and it were good we used the word in that sense which may
best warrant her doctrine, especially for that use of the word, having the
precedent of Scripture.

I am confirmed in this interpretation by the 2.. of the Article: viz. of the
remanency of concupiscence or Original Sin in the Regenerate. All the
sinfulness of Original Sin is the lust or concupiscence, that is, the proneness
to sin. Now then I demand, whether Concupiscence before actual consent be a sin
or no? and if it be a sin, whether it deserves damnation? That all sin deserves
damnation, I am sure our Church denies not. If therefore concupiscence before
consent be a sin, then this also deserves damnation where ever it is: and if
so, then a man may be damned for Original Sin even after Baptism. For even
after Baptism, concupiscence (or the sinfulness of Original Sin) remains in the
regenerate: and that which is the same thing, the same vitiousness, the same
enmity to God after Baptism, is as damnable, it deserves damnation as much as
that did that went before. If it be replied, that Baptism takes off the guilt
or formal part of it, but leaves the material part behind, that is, though
concupiscence remains, yet it shall not bring damnation to the regenerate or
Baptized. I answer, that though baptismal regeneration puts a man into a state
of grace and favor, so that what went before shall not be imputed to him
afterward, that is, Adam's sin shall not bring damnation (in any sense) yet it
hinders not, but that what is sinful afterward shall be then imputed to him,
that is, he may be damned for his own concupiscence. He is quitted from it as
it came from Adam; but by Baptism he is not quitted from it, as it is subjected
in himself, if (I say) concupiscence before consent be a sin. If it be no sin,
then for it, Infants unbaptized cannot with justice be damned; it does not
deserve damnation: but if it be a sin, then so long as it is there, so long it
deserves damnation; and Baptism did only quit the relation of it to Adam (for
that was all that went before it) but not the danger of the man. * But because
the Article supposes that it does not damn the regenerate or baptized, and yet
that it has the nature of sin, it follows evidently and undeniably, that both
the phrases are to be diminished and understood in a favorable sense. As the
phrase [the Nature of sin] signifies; so does [Damnation] but [the Nature of
sin] signifies something that brings no guilt, because it is affirmed to be in
the Regenerate, therefore [Damnation] signifies something that brings no Hell:
but [to deserve Damnation] must mean something less then ordinary, that is,
that concupiscence is a thing not morally good, not to be allowed of, not to be
nursed, but mortified, fought against, disapproved, condemned and disallowed of
men as it is of God.

And truly My Lord, to say that for Adam's sin it is just in God to condemn
Infants to the eternal flames of Hell: and to say, that concupiscence or
natural inclinations before they pass into any act, could bring eternal
condemnation from Gods presence into the eternal portion of Devils, are two
such horrid propositions, that if any Church in the world would expressly affirm
them, I for my part should think it unlawful to communicate with her in the
defense or profession of either, and do think it would be the greatest
temptation in the world to make men not to love God, of whom men so easily
speak such horrid things. I would suppose the Article to mean any thing rather
then either of these. But yet one thing more I have to say.

The Article is certainly to be expounded according to the analogy of faith,
and the express words of Scripture, if there be any that speak expressly in this
matter. Now whereas the Article explicating Original Sin affirms it to be that
fault or corruption of man's nature ( vitium Naturae, not peccatum) by which he
is far gone from original righteousness, and is inclined to evil: because this
is not full enough, the Article adds by way of explanation [So that the flesh
lusts against the spirit] that is, it really produces a state of evil
temptations: it lusts, that is, actually and habitually; [it lusts against
the spirit, and therefore deserves Gods wrath and damnation] So the Article:
Therefore; for no other reason but because the flesh lusts against the
spirit; not because it can lust, or is apta nata to lust, but because it
lusts actually, therefore it deserves damnation: and this is Original Sin: or
as the Article expresses it, it has the nature of sin; it is the fomes, or
matter of sin, and is in the original of mankind, and derived from Adam as our
body is, but it deserves not damnation in the highest sense of the word, till
the concupiscence be actual. Till then, the words of [Wrath and Damnation] must
be meant in the less and more easy signification, according to the former
explication: and must only relate to the personal sin of Adam. To this sense of
the Article I heartily subscribe. For besides the reasonableness of the thing,
and the very manner of speaking used in the Article; it is the very same way of
speaking, and exactly the same doctrine which we find in S. James, (Jam.
1.14.) (...): Concupiscence, when it is impregnated, when it has conceived,
then it brings forth sin: and sin when it is in production, and birth, brings
forth death. But in Infants, concupiscence is innocent and a virgin, it
conceives not, and therefore is without sin, and therefore without death or
damnation. * Against these expositions I cannot imagine what can be really and
materially objected.

But my Lord, I perceive the main outcry is like to be upon the authority of
the Harmony of Confessions. Concerning which I shall say this, that in this
Article the Harmony makes as good music as bells ringing backward; and they
agree, especially when they come to be explicated and untwisted into their
minute and explicit meanings, as much as Lutheran and Calvinist, as Papist and
Protestant, as Thomas and Scotus, as Remonstrant and Dordrechtan, that is, as
much as pro and con, or but a very little more. I have not the book with me
here in prison, and this neighborhood cannot supply me, and I dare not trust
my memory to give a scheme of it: but your Lordship knows that in nothing more
do the reformed Churches disagree, then in this and its appendages; and you are
pleased to hint something of it, by saying that some speak more of this then
the Church of England: and Andrew Rivet, though unwillingly, yet confesses, de
Confessionibus nostris and earum syntagmate vel Harmonia, etiamsi in non nullis
capitibus non plane conveniant, dicam tamen, melius in concordiam redigi posse
quam in Ecclesia Romana concordantiam discordantium Canonum, quo titulo
decretum Gratiani, quod Canonistis regulas praefigit, solet infigniri. And what
he affirms of the whole collection, is most notorious in the Article of
Original Sin. For my own part I am ready to subscribe the first Helvetian
confession, but not the second. So much difference there is in the confessions
of the same Church.

Now whereas your Lordship adds, that though they are fallible, yet when they
bring evidence of holy Writ, their assertions are infallible, and not to be
contradicted: I am bound to reply, that when they do so, whether they be
infallible or no, I will believe them, because then though they might, yet they
are not deceived. But as evidence of holy Writ had been sufficient without
their authority: so without such evidence their authority is nothing. But then,
My Lord, their citing and urging the words of S. Paul, Romans 5.12. is so far
from being an evident probation of their Article, that nothing is to me a surer
argument of their fallibility, then the urging of that which evidently makes
nothing for them, but much against them: As 1. Affirming expressly that death
was the event of Adam's sin; the whole event, for it names no other; temporal
death; according to that saying of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 15. In Adam we all die. And
2. Affirming this process of death to be (...), which is and ought to be taken
to be the allay or condition of the condemnation. It became a punishment to
them only who did sin; but upon them also inflicted for Adam 's sake.

A like expression to which is in the Psalms, Psalm. 106.32, 33. They angered him
also at the waters of strife, so that he punished Moses for their sakes. Here
was plainly a traduction of evil from the Nation to Moses their relative: For
their sakes he was punished, but yet (...) for as much as Moses had sinned: for
so it follows, because they provoked his spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly
with his lips. So it is between Adam and us. He sinned and God was highly
displeased. This displeasure went further then upon Adam's sin: for though that
only was threatened with death, yet the sins of his children which were not so
threatened, became so punished, and they were by nature heirs of wrath and
damnation; that is, for his sake our sins inherited his curse. The curse that
was specially and only threatened to him, we when we sinned did inherit for his
sake. So that it is not so properly to be called, Original Sin, as an original
curse upon our sin.

To this purpose we have also another example of God transmitting the curse
from one to another: Both were sinners, but one was the original of the curse
or punishment. So said the Prophet to the wife of Jeroboam, 1 King. 14.16. [ He
shall give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, who did sin, and who made
Israel to sin] Jeroboam was the root of the sin and of the curse. Here it was
also (that I may use the words of the Apostle) that by the sin of one man
[Jeroboam] sin went out into all [Israel] and the curse, captivity, or death by
sin, and so death went upon all men [of Israel] (...) in as much as all men [of
Israel] have sinned. If these men had not sinned, they had not been punished: I
cannot say they had not been afflicted; for David's child was smitten for his
fathers fault: but though they did sin, yet unless their root and principal had
sinned, possibly they should not have so been punished: For his sake the
punishment came. Upon the same account it may be, that we may inherit the
damnation or curse for Adam's sake, though we deserve it; yet it being
transmitted from Adam and not particularly threatened to the first posterity, we
were his heirs, the heirs of death, deriving from him an original curse, but
due also (if God so pleased) to our sins. And this is the full sense of the 12.
verse, and the effect of the phrase (...).

But your Lordship is pleased to object that though (...) does once signify
[For as much as] yet three times it signifies in or by. To this I would be
content to submit, if the observation could be verified, and be material when
it were true. But besides that it is so used in 2 Cor. 5.4. your Lordship may
please to see it used (as not only my self, but indeed most men, and
particularly the Church of England does read it and expound it) in Mat. 26.50.
And yet if (...) were written (...), which is the same with in or by, if it be
rendered word for word, yet (...) twice in the Scripture signifies [for as much
as] as you may read Romans 8.3. and Heb. 2.18. So that here are two places
besides this in question, and two more ex abundanti to show, that if it were
not (...), but said in words expressly as you would have it in the meaning, yet
even so neither the thing, nor any part of the thing could be evicted against
me: and lastly, if it were not only said (...) but that that sense of it were
admitted which is desired, and that it did mean in or by in this very place:
yet the Question were not at all the nearer to be concluded against me. For I
grant that it is true [in him we are all sinners] as it is true that [in him we
all die] that is, for his sake we are used as sinners; being miserable really,
but sinners in account and effect: as I have largely discoursed in my book. But
then for the place here in question, it is so certain that it signifies the
same thing (as our Church reads it) that it is not sense without it, but a
violent breach of the period without precedent or reason. And after all; I have
looked upon those places where (...) is said to signify in or by, and in one
of them I find it so, Mar. 2.4. but in Act. 3.16. and Phil. 1.3. I find it
not at all in any sense: but (...) indeed is used for in or by, in that of the
Acts; and in the other it signifies, at or upon; but if all were granted that
is pretended to, it no way prejudices my cause, as I have already proved.

Next to these your Lordship seems a little more zealous and decretory in the
Question upon the confidence of the 17, 18, and 19. verses of the 5. chapter to
the Romans. The sum of which as your Lordship most ingeniously sums it up, is
this. As by one many were made sinners: so by one many were made righteous,
that by Adam, this by Christ. But by Christ we are made (...) just, not by
imputation only, but effectively and to real purposes; therefore by Adam we are
really made sinners. And this your Lordship confirms by the observation of the
sense of two words here used by the Apostle, The first is (...), which
signifies a sentence of guilt, or punishment for sin, and this sin to be theirs
upon whom the condemnation comes, because God punishes none but for their own
sin, Ezekiel. 18.2. From the word (...) clear from sin, so your Lordship renders
it: and in opposition to this, (...) is to be rendered, that is, guilty,
criminal persons, really and properly. This is all which the wit of man can say
from this place of S. Paul, and if I make it appear that this is invalid, I
hope I am secure.

To this then, I answer: That the Antithesis in these words here urged, (for
there is another in the chapter) and this whole argument of S. Paul is full and
entire without descending to minutes. Death came in by one man, much more shall
life come by one man; if that by Adam, then much more this by Christ: by him to
condemnation, by this man to justification. This is enough to verify the
argument of S. Paul, though life and death did not come in the same manner to
the several relatives; as indeed they did not: of which afterward. But for the
present: It runs thus. By Adam we were made sinners; by Christ we are made
righteous: As certainly one as the other, though not in the same manner of
dispensation. By Adam (...) death reigned; by this man the reign of death shall
be destroyed, and life set up in stead of it; by him we were used as sinners,
for in him we died: but by Christ we are justified, that is, used as just
persons, for by him we live. This is sufficient for the Apostles argument, and
yet no necessity to affirm that we are sinners in Adam any more then by
imputation: for we are by Christ made just no otherwise then by imputation.

In the proof or persuasion I will use no indirect arguments, as to say, that
to deny us to be just by imputation is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome and
of the Socinian Conventicles, but expressly disliked by all the Lutheran,
Calvinist, and Zuinglian Churches, and particularly by the Church of England,
and indeed by the whole Harmony of Confessions: this I say, I will not make use
of; not only because I my self do not love to be pressed by such prejudices
rather then arguments; but because the question of the imputation of
righteousness is very much mistaken and misunderstood on all hands. They that
say that Christ's righteousness is imputed to us for justification, do it upon
this account, because they know all that we do is imperfect, therefore they
think themselves constrained to fly to Christ's righteousness, and think it
must be imputed to us, or we perish. The other side, considering that this way
would destroy the necessity of holy living; and that in order to our
justification, there were conditions required on our parts, think it necessary
to say that we are justified by inherent righteousness. Between these the truth
is plain enough to be read. Thus:

Christ's righteousness is not imputed to us for justification directly and
immediately; neither can we be justified by our own righteousness: but our
Faith and sincere endeavors are through Christ accepted in stead of legal
righteousness: that is; we are justified through Christ, by imputation, not of
Christ's, nor our own righteousness: but of our faith and endeavors of
righteousness as if they were perfect: and we are justified by a
Non-imputation, viz. of our past sins, and present unavoidable imperfections:
that is, we are handled as if we were just persons and no sinners. So faith was
imputed to Abraham for righteousness; not that it made him so, legally, but
Evangelically, that is, by grace and imputation.

And indeed My Lord, that I may speak freely in this great question: when one
man has sinned, his descendents and relatives, cannot possibly by him, or for
him, or in him be made sinners properly and really. For in sin there are but
two things imaginable: the irregular action; and the guilt, or obligation to
punishment. Now we cannot in any sense be said to have done the action which
another did, and not we: the action is as individual as the person; and Titius
may as well be Cajus, and the Son be his own Father, as he can be said to have
done the Fathers action; and therefore we cannot possibly be guilty of it: for
guilt is an obligation to punishment for having done it: the action and the
guilt are relatives; one cannot be without the other: something must be done
inwardly or outwardly, or there can be no guilt. * But then for the evil of
punishment, that may pass further then the action. If it passes upon the
innocent, it is not a punishment to them; but an evil inflicted by right of
Dominion; but yet by reason of the relation of the afflicted to him that sinned,
to him it is a punishment. But if it passes upon others that are not innocent,
then it is a punishment to both; to the first principally; to the Descendents
or Relatives, for the others sake; his sin being imputed so far.

How far that is in the present case, and what it is, the Apostle expresses
thus: It was (...); verse. 18. or (...), verse. 16. a curse unto condemnation, or
a judgment unto condemnation, that is, a curse inherited from the principal;
deserved by him, and yet also actually descending upon us after we had sinned,
(...) or (...); that is the judgment passed upon Adam; the (...), or (...) was
on him; but it proved to be a (...), or a through condemnation when from him it
passed upon all men that sinned. (...) and (...) sometimes differ in degrees: so
the words are used by S. Paul otherwhere (1 Cor. 11.32.) (...); a judgment to
prevent a punishment, or a less to forestal a greater in the same kind: so
here the (...) passed further; the (...) was fulfilled in his posterity passing
on further, viz. that all who sinned should pass under the power of death as
well as he: but this became formally and actually a punishment to them only who
did sin personally: to them it was (...).

This (...) or (...), is the (...), verse. 17. the reign of death; this is
called (...), verse. 21. the reign of sin in death: that is, the effect which
Adam's sin had, was only to bring in the reign of death, which is already
broken by Jesus Christ, and at last shall be quite destroyed. But to say that
sin here is properly transmitted to us from Adam, formally, and so as to be
inherent in us, is to say that we were made to do his action, which is a
perfect contradiction.

Now then your Lordship sees that what you note of the meaning of (...) I
admit, and is indeed true enough, and agreeable to the discourse of the
Apostle, and very much in justification of what I taught. (...) signifies a
punishment for sin, and this sin to be theirs upon whom the condemnation comes.
I easily subscribe to it: but then take in the words of S. Paul, (...), by one
sin, or by the sin of one the curse passed upon all men unto condemnation; that
is, the curse descended from Adam; for his sake it was propagated (...) to a
real condemnation, viz. when they should sin. For though this (...) or the
curse of death was threatened only to Adam, yet upon Gods being angry with him,
God resolved it should descend: and if men did sin as Adam, or if they did sin
at all, though less then Adam, yet the (...) or the curse threatened to him
should pass (...) unto the same actual condemnation which fell upon him, that
is, it should actually bring them under the reign of death.

But then my Lord, I beseech you let it be considered, if this (...) must
suppose a punishment for sin, for the sin of him, his own sin that is so
condemned, as your Lordship proves perfectly out of Ezekiel. 18. how can it be
just that the (...) condemnation should pass upon us for Adam's sin, that is,
not for his own sin who is so condemned, but for the sin of another? S. Paul
easily resolves the doubt, if there had been any. The (...), the reign of death
passed upon all men (...) in as much as all men have sinned. And now why shall
we suppose that we must be guilty of what we did not, when without any such
(...) there is so much guilt of what we did really and personally? why shall it
be that we die only for Adam's sin, and not rather as S. Paul expressly affirms
(...) in as much as all men have sinned, since by your own argument it cannot
be in as much as all men have not sinned; this you say cannot be, and yet you
will not confess this which can be, and which S. Paul affirms to have been
indeed: as if it were not more just and reasonable to say, that from Adam the
curse descended unto the condemnation of the sins of the world, then to say the
curse descended without consideration of their sins; but a sin must be imagined
to make it seem reasonable and just to condemn us. [Now I submit it to the
judgment of all the world, which way of arguing is most reasonable and
concluding: You my Lord in behalf of others argue thus. (...) or condemnation
cannot pass upon a man for any sin but his own: Therefore every man is truly
guilty of Adam's sin, and that becomes his own. Against this I oppose mine.
(...) or condemnation cannot pass upon a man for any sin but his own: therefore
it did not pass upon man for Adam's fin; because Adam's sin, was Adam's, not
our own: But we all have sinned, we have sins of our own, therefore for these
the curse passed from Adam to us. To back mine, besides that common notices of
sense and reason defend it, I have the plain words of S. Paul; Death passed
upon all men, for as much as all men have sinned; all men, that is, the
generality of mankind, all that lived till they could sin, the others that
died before, died in their nature, not in their sin, neither Adam's nor their
own, save only that Adam brought it in upon them, or rather left it to them,
himself being disrobed of all that which could hinder it.

Now for the word (...), which your Lordship renders [clear from sin] I am sure
no man is so justified in this world, as to be clear from sin; and if we all be
sinners, and yet healed as just persons, it is certain we are just by
imputation only, that is, Christ imputing our faith, and sincere, though not
unerring obedience to us for righteousness: And then the Antithesis must hold
thus; By Christ comes justification to life, as by Adam came the curse or the
sin to the condemnation of death: But our justification which comes by Christ
is by imputation and acceptilation, by grace and favor: not that we are made
really, that is, legally and perfectly righteous, but by imputation of faith
and obedience to us, as if it were perfect: And therefore Adam's sin was but by
imputation only to certain purposes; not real, or proper, not formal or
inherent. For the grace by Christ is more then the sin by Adam: if therefore
that was not legal and proper, but Evangelical and gracious, favorable and
imputative, much more is the sin of Adam in us improperly, and by imputation. *
And truly my Lord, I think that no sound Divine of any of our Churches will say
that we are (...) or (...) in any other sense: not that Christ's righteousness
is imputed to us without any inherent graces in us, but that our imperfect
services, our true faith and sincere endeavors of obedience are imputed to us
for righteousness through Jesus Christ: and since it is certainly so, I am sure
the Antithesis between Christ and Adam can never be salved by making us sinners
really by Adam, and yet just or righteous by Christ only in acceptance and
imputation. For then sin should abound more then grace; expressly against the
honor of our blessed Savior, the glory of our redemption, and the words of S.
Paul. But rather on the contrary is it true, That though by Christ we were
really and legally made perfectly righteous, it follows not that we were made
sinners by Adam in the same manner and measure: for this similitude of S. Paul
ought not to extend to an equality in all things; but still the advantage and
prerogative, the abundance and the excess must be on the part of Grace: for if
sin does abound, grace does much more abound; and we do more partake of
righteousness by Christ, then of sin by Adam. Christ and Adam are the several
fountains of emanation, and are compared aeque, but not aequaliter. Therefore
this argument holds redundantly, since by Christ we are not made legally
righteous, but by imputation only; much less are we made sinners by Adam. This
in my sense is so infinitely far from being an objection, that it perfectly
demonstrates the main question; and for my part I mean to rely upon it.

As for that which your Lordship adds out of Romans 5.19. That (...) signifies
sinners, not by imitation, as the Pelagians dream, but sinners really and
effectively; I shall not need to make any other reply; but that 1. I do not
approve of that gloss of the Pelagians, that in Adam we are made sinners by
imitation; and much less of that which affirms, we are made so properly and
formally. But [made sinners] signifies, used like sinners; so as [justified]
signifies healed like just persons: In which interpretation I follow S. Paul,
not the Pelagians; they who are on the other side of the question, follow
neither. And unless men take in their opinion before they read; and resolve not
to understand S. Paul in this Epistle, I wonder why they should fancy that all
that he says sounds that way which they commonly dream of: But as men fancy,
so the Bells will ring. But I know your Lordships grave and wiser judgment,
sees not only this that I have now opened, but much beyond it, and that you
will be a zealous advocate for the truth of God, and for the honor of his
justice, wisdom and mercy.

That which follows, makes me believe your Lordship resolved to try me, by
speaking your own sense in the line, and your temptation in the interline. For
when your Lordship had said that [My arguments for the vindication of Gods
goodness and justice are sound and holy] your hand run it over again and added
[as abstracted from the case of Original Sin.] But why should this be
abstracted from all the whole Economy of God, from all his other
dispensations? Is it in all cases of the world unjust for God, to impute our
fathers fins to us unto eternal condemnation; and is it otherwise in this only?
Certainly a man would think this were the more favorable case; as being a
single act, done but once, repented of after it was done, not consented to by
the parties interested, not stipulated by God that it should be so, and being
against all laws and all the reason of the world: therefore it were but reason
that if any where, here much rather Gods justice and goodness should be relied
upon as the measure of the event. * And if in other cases laws be never given
to Idiots and Infants and persons incapable, why should they be given here? but
if they were not capable of a Law, then neither could they be of Sin; for where
there is no law, there is no transgression. And is it unjust to condemn one man
to hell for all the sin of a thousand of his Ancestors actually done by them?
and shall it be accounted just to damn all the world for one sin of one man?
But if it be said, that it is unjust to damn the innocent for the sin of
another; but the world is not innocent, but really guilty in Adam. Besides that
this is a begging of the question, it is also against common sense, to say that
a man is not innocent of that which was done before he had a being; for if that
be not sufficient, then it is impossible for a man to be innocent. And if this
way of answer be admitted, any man may be damned for the sin of any Father;
because it may be said here as well as there, that although the innocent must
not perish for another fault, yet the son is not innocent as being in his
fathers loins when the fault was committed, and the law calls him and makes him
guilty. And if it were so indeed, this were so far from being an excuse, to say
that the Law makes him guilty, that this were absolute tyranny, and the thing
that were to be complained of.

I hope, by this time your Lordship perceives, that I have no reason to fear
that I praevaricate S. Paul's rule: (...). I only endeavor to understand S.
Paul's words, and I read them (...), in proportion to, and so as they may not
entrench upon the reputation of Gods goodness and justice: that is (...), to be
wise unto sobriety. But they that do so (...) as to resolve it to be so whether
God be honored in it, or dishonored, and to answer all arguments, whether
they can or cannot be answered, and to efform all their Theology to the air of
that one great proposition, and to find out ways for God to proceed in, which
he has never told of, (...) ways that are crooked and not to be insisted in,
ways that are not right, if these men do not (...), then I hope I shall have
less need to fear that I do, who do none of these things.

And in proportion to my security here, I am confident that I am unconcerned in
the consequent threatening. If any man shall Evangelize, (...) any other
doctrine then what ye have received, something for Gospel which is not Gospel,
something that ye have not received, let him be accursed. My Lord, if what I
teach were not that which we have received, that God is just and righteous and
true: that the soul that sins the same shall die: that we shall have no cause
to say, The Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on
edge: that God is a gracious Father, pardoning iniquity, and therefore not
exacting it where it is not: that Infants are from their Mothers wombs beloved
of God their Father: that of such is the Kingdom of God: that he pities those
souls who cannot discern the right hand from the left, as he declared in the
case of the Ninevites: that to Infants there are special Angels appointed who
always behold the face of God: that Christ took them in his arms and blessed
them, and therefore they are not hated by God, and accursed heirs of Hell, and
coheirs with Satan: that the Messiah was promised before any children were
born; as certainly as that Adam sinned before they were born: that if sin
abounds, grace does superabound; and therefore children are with greater effect
involved in the grace then they could be in the sin: and the sin must be gone
before it could do them mischief: if this were not the doctrine of both
Testaments, and if the contrary were, then the threatening of S. Paul might well
be held up against me: but else my Lord, to show such a Scorpion to him that
speaks the truth of God in sincerity and humility, though it cannot make me to
betray the truth and the honor of God, yet the very fear and affrightment
which must needs seize upon every good man that does but behold it, or hear the
words of that angry voice, shall and has made me to pray not only that my self
be preserved in truth, but that it would please God to bring into the way of
truth all such as have erred and are deceived.

My Lord, I humbly thank your Lordship for your grave and pious Council, and
kiss the hand that reaches forth so paternal a rod. I see you are tender both
of truth and me: and though I have not made this tedious reply to cause trouble
to your Lordship, or to steal from you any part of your precious time, yet
because I see your Lordship was persuaded induere personam, to give some little
countenance to a popular error out of jealousy against a less usual truth, I
thought it my duty to represent to your Lordship such things, by which as I
can, so I ought to be defended against captious objectors. It is hard when men
will not be patient of truth, because another man offers it to them, and they
did not first take it in, or if they did, were not pleased to own it.

But from your Lordship I expect, and am sure to find the effects of your
piety, wisdom and learning, and that an error for being popular shall not
prevail against so necessary, though unobserved truth. A necessary truth I call
it; because without this I do not understand how we can declare Gods
righteousness and justify him, with whom unrighteousness cannot dwell: But if
men of a contrary opinion, can reconcile their usual doctrines of Original Sin
with Gods justice, and goodness and truth, I shall be well pleased with it, and
think better of their doctrine then now I can.

But until that be done, it were well (My Lord) if men would not trouble
themselves or the Church with impertinent contradictions; but patiently give
leave to have truth advanced, and God justified in his sayings and in his
judgments, and the Church improved, and all errors confuted, that what did so
prosperously begin the Reformation, may be admitted to bring it to perfection,
that men may no longer go qua itur, but qua eundum est.

The By of Rochester 's Letter to Dr. Tailor, with an account of the
particulars there given in charge.
WORTHY SIR,
-- Let me request you to weigh that of S. Paul, Ephesians. 2.5. which are urged by
some Ancients: and to remember, how often he calls Concupiscence Sin; whereby it
is urged that although Baptism take away the guilt as concretively redounding
to the person, yet the simple abstracted guilt, as to the Nature remains: for
Sacraments are administered to Persons, not to Natures. I confess, I find not
the Fathers so fully, and plainly speaking of Original Sin, till Pelagius had
pudled the stream: but, after this, you may find S. Jerome in Hos. saying, In
paradiso omnes praevaricati sunt in Adamo. And S. Ambrose in Romans 1.5.
Manifestum est omnes peccasse in Adam, quasi in massa, ex eo igitur cuncti
peccatores, quia ex eo sumus omnes; and as Greg. 39 Hom. in Ezekiel. Sine culpa in
mundo esse non potest, qui in mundum cum culpa venit; But S. Austin is so
frequent, so full and clear in his assertions, that his words and reasons will
require your most judicious examinations, and more strict weighing of them; he
says epist. 107. Scimus secundum Adam nos prima nativitate contagium mortis
contrahere; nec liberamur a supplicio mortis aeternae nisi per gratiam
renascamur in Christo; Id. de verb. Apost. Ser. 4. peccatum a primo homine in
omnes homines pertransiit, etenim illud peccatum non in font mansit, sed
pertransiit, and Romans 5. ubi te invenit? venundatum sub peccato, trahentem
peccatum primi hominis, habentem peccatum antequam possis habere arbitrium. Id.
de praedestin. and great. c. 2. Si infans unius diei non sit sine peccato, qui
proprium habere non potuit, conficitur, ut illud traxerit alienum; de quo
Apost. Per unum hominem peccatum intravit in mundum; quod qui negat, negat
profecto nos esse mortales; quoniam mors est poena peccati. Sequitur, necesse
est, poena peccatum. Id. enchir. c. 9.29. Sola gratia redemptos discernit a
perditis, quos in unam perditionis massam concreverat ab origin ducta communis
contagio, Id. de peccator. mer. and remiss. l. 1. c. 3. Concupiscentia carnis
peccatum est, quia inest illi inobedientia contra dominatum mentis, Quid
potest, aut potuit nasci ex servo, nisi servus? ideo sicut omnis homo ab Adamo
est, ita and omnis homo per Adamum servus est peccati. Romans 5. Falluntur ergo
omnino, qui dicunt mortem solam, non and ^peccatum transiisse in genus humanum.
Prosper. resp. ad articulum Augustino falso impositum; Omnes homines
praevaricationis reos, and damnationi obnoxios nasci periturosque nisi in
Christo renascamur, asserimus. Tho. 12. q. 8. Secundum fidem Catholicam
tenendum est, quod primum peccatum primi hominis, originaliter transit in
posteros, propter quod etiam pueri mox nati deferuntur ad baptismum ab
interiore culpa abluendi. Contrarium est haeresis Pelag. unde peccatum quod sic
a primo parente derivatur, dicitur Originale, sicut peccatum, quod ab anima
derivatur ad membra corporis, dicitur actuale. Bonavent. in 2. sent. did. 31.
Sicut peccatum actuale tribuitur alicui ratione singularis personae: ita
peccatum originale tribuitur ratione Naturae; corpus infectum traducitur, quia
persona Adae infecit naturam, and natura infecit personam. Anima enim inficitur
a carne per colligantiam, quum unita carni traxit ad se alterius proprietates.
Lombar. 2. Sent. did. 31. Peccatum originale per corruptionem carnis, in anima
fit: in vase enim dignoscitur vitium esse, quod vinum accescit.

If you take into consideration the Covenant made between Almighty God and Adam
as relating to his posterity, it may conduce to the satisfaction of those who
urge it for a proof of Origial Sin. Now that the work may prosper under your
hands to the manifestation of Gods glory, the edification of the Church, and
the satisfaction of all good Christians, is the hearty prayer of

Your fellow Servant in our most Blessed Lord Christ Jesu. Jo. Roffens.


My Lord,
I Perceive that you have a great Charity to every one of the sons of the
Church, that your Lordship refuses not to solicit their objections, and to
take care that every man be answered that can make objections against my
Doctrine; but as your charity makes you refuse no work or labor of love: so
shall my duty and obedience make me ready to perform any commandment that can
be relative to so excellent a principle.

I am indeed sorry your Lordship is thus haunted with objections about the
Question of Original Sin; but because you are pleased to hand them to me, I
cannot think them so inconsiderable as in themselves they seem; for what your
Lordship thinks worthy the reporting from others, I must think are fit to be
answered and returned by me.

In your Lordships of November, 10. these things I am to reply to:

Let me request you to weigh that of S. Paul Ephesians. 2.5. The words are these [
Even when we were dead in sins, (God) has quickened us together with Christ]
which words I do not at all suppose relate to the matter of Original Sin, but
to the state of Heathen sins, habitual Idolatries and impurities; in which the
world was dead before the great Reformation by Christ. And I do not know any
Expositor of note that suspects any other sense of it; and the second verse of
that chapter makes it so certain and plain, that it is too visible to insist
upon it longer. But your Lordship adds further.

And to remember how often he calls concupiscence Sin] I know S. Paul reckons
Concupiscence to be one of the works of the flesh, and consequently such as
excludes from heaven, Col. 3.5. Evil concupiscence] concupiscence with
something superadded, but certainly that is nothing that is natural; for God
made nothing that is evil, and whatsoever is natural and necessary cannot be
mortified; but this may and must, and the Apostle calls upon us to do it; but
that this is a superinducing, and an actual or habitual lusting appears by the
following words, verse. 7. in which ye also walked sometimes when ye lived in
them, such a concupiscence as that which is the effect of habitual sins or an
estate of sins, of which the Apostle speaks, Romans 7.8. Sin taking occasion by
the commandment wrought in me all manner of concupiscence; that is, so great a
state of evil, such strong inclinations and desires to sin, that I grew as
captive under it; it introduced a necessity like those in S. Peter, who had
eyes (...) full of an Adulteress: the women had possessed their eyes, and
therefore they were (...) they could not cease from sin: because having (...)
all concupiscence, that is the very spirit of sinful desires, they could relish
nothing but the productions of sin, they could fancy nothing but Colloquintida
and Toadstools of the earth. * Once more I find S. Paul speaking of
Concupiscence, 1 Thessalonians. 4.5. Let every man knew to possess his vessel in
holiness and honor, not in the lust of concupiscence, as do the Gentiles which
know not God. In the lust of Concupiscence, that is plainly in lustfulness and
impurity: for it is a Hebraism, where a superlative is usually expressed by the
synonymon: as Lutum coeni; pluvia imbris; so the Gall of bitterness and the
iniquity of sins; Robur virium; the blackness of darkness, that is, (...), the
outer darkness, or the greatest darkness: so here the lust of Concupiscence,
that is, the vilest and basest of it. I know no where else that the Apostle
uses the word in any sense. But the like is to be said of the word lust, which
the Apostle often uses, for the habits produced or the pregnant desires, but
never for the natural principle and affection, when he speaks of sin.

But your Lordship is pleased to add a subtlety in pursuance of your former
advices and notices, which I confess I shall never understand.

Although Baptism take away the guilt as concretively redoundding to the
person, yet the simple abstracted guilt as to the Nature remains; for
Sacraments are administered to persons, not to natures] Thus I suppose those
persons from whom your Lordship reports it, intended as an answer to a secret
objection. For if Concupiscence be a sin, and yet remains after baptism, then
what good does Baptism effect? But if it be no sin after, then it is no sin
before. To this it is answered as you see: there is a double guilt; a guilt of
person, and of nature. That is taken away, this is not: for, Sacraments are
given to Persons, not to Natures.

But first, where is there such a distinction set down in Scripture, or in the
prime antiquity, or in any moral Philosopher? There is no humane nature but
what is in the persons of men; and though our understanding can make a separate
consideration of these, or rather consider a person in a double capacity, in
his personal and in his natural, that is (if I am to speak sense) a person may
be considered in that which is proper to him, and in that which is common to
him and others; yet these two considerations cannot make two distinct subjects
capable of such different events. I will put it to the trial.

This guilt that is in nature, what is it? Is it the same thing that was in the
person? that is, is it an obligation to punishment? If it be not, I know not
the meaning of the word, and therefore I have nothing to do with it. If it be,
then if this guilt or obligation to punishment remains in the nature after it
is taken from the person, then if this concupiscence deserve damnation, this
nature shall be damned, though the person be saved. Let the Objectors, my Lord,
choose which they will. If it does not deserve damnation, why do they say it
does? If it does, then the guilty may suffer what they deserve, but the
innocent or the absolved must not; the person then being acquitted, and the
nature not acquitted, the nature shall be damned and the person be saved.

But if it be said that the guilt remains in the nature to certain purposes,
but not to all; then I reply, so it does in the person; for it is in the person
after Baptism, so as to be a perpetual possibility and proneness to sin, and a
principle of trouble; and if it be no otherwise in the nature, then this
distinction is to no purpose; if it be otherwise in the nature, then it brings
damnation to it, when it brings none to the Man, and then the former argument
must return. But whether it prevail or no, yet I cannot but note, that what is
here affirmed is expressly against the words commonly attributed to S. Cyprian
(De ablutione pedum) Sic abluit quos parentalis labes infecerat, ut nec
actualis nec Originalis macula post ablutionem illam ulla sui vestigia
derelinquat: How this supposing it of Baptism can be reconciled with the guilt
remaining in the nature, I confess I cannot give an account. It is expressly
against S. Austin (Tom. 9. Tract. 41. in Johan. epist. ad Ocean.) saying,
deleta est tota iniquitas! expressly against S. Hierom, Quomodo justificati
sumus and sanctificati, si peccatum aliquid in nobis relinquitur?

But again (My Lord) I did suppose that Concupiscence or Original Sin had been
founded in nature, and had not been a personal but a natural evil. I am sure,
so the Article of our Church affirms; it is the fault and corruption of our
Nature. And so S. Bonaventure affirms in the words cited by your Lordship in
your Letter: Sicut peccatum actuale tribuitur alicui ratione singularis
personae: ita peccatum origiuis tribuitur ratione naturae. Either then the
Sacrament must have effect upon our Nature, to purify that which is vitiated
by Concupiscence, or else it does no good at all. For if the guilt or sin be
founded in the nature, (as the Article affirms) and Baptism does not take off
the guilt from the nature, then it does nothing.

Now since your Lordship is pleased in the behalf of the objectors so warily to
avoid what they thought pressing, I will take leave to use the advantages it
ministers: for so the Serpent teaches us where to strike him, by his so warily
and guiltily defending his head. I therefore argue thus.

Either Baptism does not take off the guilt of Original Sin, or else there may
be punishment where there is no guilt, or else natural death was not it which
God threatened as the punishment of Adam's fact. For it is certain, that all men
die as well after baptism as before; and more after then before. That which
would be properly the consequent of this Dilemma, is this, that when God
threatened death to Adam, saying, On the day thou eatest of the tree thou shall
die the death, he inflicted and intended to inflict the evils of a troublesome
mortal life. For Adam did not die that day, but Adam began to be miserable that
day, to live upon hard labor, to eat fruits from an accursed field, till he
should return to the earth whence he was taken. (Genesis 3.17, 18, 19.) So that
death in the common sense of the word was to be the end of his labor, not so
much the punishment of the sin. For it is probable he should have gone off from
the scene of this world to a better, though he had not sinned; but if he had not
sinned, he should not be so afflicted, and he should not have died daily till he
had died finally, that is, till he had returned to his dust whence he was
taken, and whither he would naturally have gone: and it is no new thing in
Scripture that miseries and infelicities should be called dying or death.
(Exodus 10.17. 1 Cor. 15.31. 2 Cor. 1.10. and 4.10, 11, 12. and 11.23.) But I
only note this as probable; as not being willing to admit what the Socinians
answer in this argument; who affirm that God threatening death to the Sin of
Adam, meant death eternal: which is certainly not true; as we learn from the
words of the Apostle, saying, In Adam we all die; which is not true of death
eternal, but it is true of the miseries and calamities of mankind, and it is
true of temporal death in the sense now explicated, and in that which is
commonly received.

But I add also this problem. That which would have been, had there been no
sin, and that which remains when the sin or guiltiness is gone, is not properly
the punishment of the sin. But dissolution of the soul and body should have
been, if Adam had not sinned, for the world would have been too little to have
entertained those myriads of men which must in all reason have been born from
that blessing of Increase and multiply, which was given at the first Creation;
and to have confined mankind to the pleasures of this world, in case he had
not fallen, would have been a punishment of his innocence; but however, it
might have been, though God had not been angry, and shall still be, even when
the sin is taken off. The proper consequent of this will be, that when the
Apostle says, Death came in by sin, and that Death is the wages of sin, he
primarily and literally means the solemnities, and causes, and infelicities,
and untimeliness of temporal death, and not merely the dissolution, which is
directly no evil, but an inlet to a better state. But I infist not on this, but
offer it to the consideration of inquisitive and modest persons.

And now that I may return thither from whence this objection brought me; I
consider, that if any should urge this argument to me:

Baptism delivers from Original Sin.

Baptism does not deliver from Concupiscence; therefore Concupiscence is not
Original Sin.

I did not know well what to answer; I could possibly say something to satisfy
the boys and young men at a public disputation, but not to satisfy my self
when I am upon my knees and giving an account to God of all my secret and
hearty persuasions. But I consider, that by Concupiscence must be meant either
the first inclinations to their object; or the proper acts of Election which
are the second acts of Concupiscence. If the first inclinations be meant, then
certainly that cannot be a sin which is natural, and which is necessary. For I
consider that Concupiscence and natural desires are like hunger; which while it
is natural and necessary, is not for the destruction but conservation of man;
when it goes beyond the limits of nature, it is violent and a disease: and so
is Concupiscence; But desires or lustings when they are taken for the natural
propensity to their proper object, are so far from being a sin, that they are
the instruments of felicity for this duration, and when they grow toward being
irregular, they may, if we please, grow instruments of felicity in order to the
other duration, because they may serve a virtue by being restrained; And to
desire that to which all men tend naturally, is no more a sin then to desire to
be happy is a sin: desire is no more a sin then joy or sorrow is: neither can
it be fancied why one passion more then another can be in its whole nature
Criminal; either all or none are so; when any of them grows irregular or
inordinate, Joy is as bad as Desire, and Fear as bad as either.

But if by Concupiscence we mean the second acts of it, that is, avoidable
consentings, and deliberate elections, then let it be as much condemned as the
Apostle and all the Church after him has sentenced it; but then it is not
Adam's sin, but our own by which we are condemned; for it is not his fault that
we choose; If we choose, it is our own; if we choose not, it is no fault. For
there is a natural act of the Will as well as of the Understanding, and in the
choice of the supreme Good, and in the first apprehension of its proper object,
the Will is as natural as any other faculty; and the other faculties have
degrees of adherence as well as the Will: so have the potestative and
intellective faculties; they are delighted in their best objects. But because
these only are natural, and the will is natural sometimes, but not always,
there it is that a difference can be.

For I consider, if the first Concupiscence be a sin, Original Sin, (for actual
it is not) and that this is properly, personally, and inherently our sin by
traduction, that is, if our will be necessitated to sin by Adam's fall, as it
must needs be if it can sin when it cannot deliberate, then there can be no
reason told, why it is more a sin to will evil, then to understand it: and how
does that which is moral differ from that which is natural? for the
understanding is first and primely moved by its object, and in that motion by
nothing else but by God, who moves all things: and if that which has nothing
else to move it but the object, yet is not free; it is strange that the will
can in any sense be free, when it is necessitated by wisdom and by power, and
by Adam, that is, from within and from without, besides what God and violence
do and can do.

But in this I have not only Scripture and all the reason of the world on my
side, but the complying sentences of the most eminent writers of the Primitive
Church; I need not trouble my self with citations of many of them, since Calvin
( lib. 3. Instit. c. 3. 10.) confesses that S. Austin has collected their
testimonies and is of their opinion, that Concupiscence is not a sin, but an
infirmity only. But I will here set down the words of S. Chrysostom ( Homil.
13. in epist. Rom.) because they are very clear; Ipsae passiones in se peccatum
non sunt Effraenata vero ipsarum immoderantia peccatum operata est.
Concupiscentia quidem peccatum non est quando vero egressa modum for as
eruperit, tunc demum adulterium sit, non a concupiscentia sed a nimio and
illicito illius luxu.

By the way I cannot but wonder why men are pleased, where ever they find the
word Concupiscence in the New Testament, presently to dream of Original Sin,
and make that to be the sum total of it; whereas Concupiscence if it were the
product of Adam's fall, is but one small part of it; [Et ut exempli gratiae
unam illarum tractem] said S. Chrysostom in the forecited place; Concupiscence
is but one of the passions, and in the utmost extension of the word, it can be
taken but for one half of the passion; for not only all the passions of the
Concupiscible faculty can be a principle of sin, but the Irascible does more
hurt in the world; that is more sensual, this is more devilish. The reason why
I note this, is because upon this account it will seem, that concupiscence is
no more to be called a sin then anger is, and as S. Paul said, Be angry, but
sin not; so he might have said, Desire, or lust, but sin not. For there are
some lustings and desires without sin, as well as some Angers; and that which
is indifferent to virtue and vice, cannot of it self be a vice; To which I add,
that if Concupiscence taken for all desires be a sin, then so are all the
passions of the Irascible faculty. Why one more then the other is not to be
told, but that Anger in the first motions is not a sin, appears, because it is
not always sinful in the second; a man may be actually angry, and yet really
innocent: and so he may be lustful and full of desire, and yet he may be not
only that which is good, or he may overcome his desires to that which is bad. I
have now considered what your Lordship received from others, and gave me in
charge your self, concerning concupiscence.

Your next charge is concerning Antiquity, intimating that although the first
antiquity is not clearly against me, yet the second is. For thus your Lordship
is pleased to write their objection [ I confess I find not the Fathers so
fully and plainly speaking of Original Sin, till Pelagius had pudled the
stream; but after this you may find S. Jerome etc.]

That the Fathers of the first 400 years did speak plainly and fully of it, is
so evident as nothing more, and I appeal to their testimonies as they are set
down in the papers annexed in their proper place; and therefore that must needs
be one of the little arts by which some men use to escape from the pressure of
that authority, by which because they would have other men concluded, sometimes
upon strict inquiry they find themselves entangled. Original Sin as it is at
this day commonly explicated, was not the Doctrine of the primitive Church; but
when Pelagius had pudled the stream, S. Austin was so angry that he stamped and
disturbed it more: and truly my Lord, I do not think that the Gentlemen that
urged against me S. Austin's opinion, do well consider that I profess my self
to follow those fathers who were before him; and whom S. Austin did forsake as
I do him in the question. They may as well press me with his authority in the
Article of the damnation of Infants dying unbaptized, or of absolute
predestination. In which Article, S. Austin's words are equally urged by the
Jansenists and Molinists, by the Remonstrants and Contra-remonstrants, and they
can serve both, and therefore cannot determine me. But then (My Lord) let it be
remembered, that they are as much against S. Chrysostom as I am against S.
Austin, with this only difference; that S. Chrysostom speaks constantly in the
argument, which S. Austin did not, and particularly in that part of it which
concerns Concupiscence. For in the inquiry, whether it be a sin or no; he
speaks so variously, that though Calvin complains of him, that he calls it only
an infirmity, yet he also brings testimonies from him to prove it to be a sin,
and let any man try if he can tie these words together. ( De peccator. mer. et
remission. l. 1. c. 3.) Concupiscentia carnis peccatum est, quia inest illi in
obedientia contra dominatum mentis. Which are the words your Lordship quotes:
Concupiscence is a sin because it is a disobedience to the Empire of the
spirit. But yet in another place; ( lib. 1. de civit. Dei cap. 25.) Illa
Concupiscentialis inobedientia quanto magis absque culpa est in corpore non
consentientis, si absque culpa est in corpore dormientis? It is a sin and it is
no sin, it is criminal, but is without fault; it is culpable because it is a
disobedience, and yet this disobedience without actual consent is not culpable.
If I do believe S. Austin, I must disbeleeve him; and which part soever I take,
I shall be reproved by the same authority. But when the Fathers are divided
from each other, or themselves, it is indifferent to follow either; but when
any of them are divided from reason and Scripture, then it is not indifferent
for us to follow them, and neglect these; and yet if these who object S.
Austin's authority to my Doctrine, will be content to subject to all that he
says, I am content they shall follow him in this too, provided that they will
give me my liberty because I will not be tied to him that speaks contrary
things to himself, and contrary to them that went before him; and though he was
a rare person, yet he was as fallible as any of my brethren at this day. He was
followed by many ignorant ages, and all the world knows by what accidental
advantages he acquired a great reputation: but he who made no scruple of
deserting all his predecessors, must give us leave upon the strength of his own
reasons to quit his authority.

All that I shall observe is this, that the Doctrine of Original Sin as it is
explicated by S. Austin, had two parents; one was the Doctrine of the
Encratites, and some other Heretics, who forbad Marriage, and supposing it to
be evil, thought they were warranted to say, it was the bed of-sin, and
children the spawn of vipers and sinners. And S. Austin himself, and especially
S. Hierom (whom your Lordship cites) speaks some things of marriage, which if
they were true, then marriage were highly to be refused, as being the increaser
of sin rather then of children, and a semination in the flesh, and contrary to
the spirit, and such a thing which being mingled with sin, produces univocal
issues, the mother and the daughter are so like that they are the worse again.
For if a proper inherent sin be effected by chaste marriages, then they are in
this particular equal to adulterous embraces, and rather to be pardoned then
allowed; and if all Concupiscence be vicious, then no marriage can be pure.
These things it may be have not been so much considered, but your Lordship I
know remembers strange sayings in S. Hierom, in Athenagoras, and in S. Austin,
which possibly have been countenanced and maintained at the charge of this
opinion. But the other parent of this is the zeal against the Pelagian Heresy,
which did serve it self by saying too little in this Article, and therefore was
thought fit to be confuted by saying too much; and that I conjecture right in
this affair, I appeal to the words which I cited out of S. Austin in the matter
of Concupiscence; concerning which he speaks the same thing that I do, when he
is disingaged; as in his books De civitate Dei: but in his Tractate de
peccatorum meritis and remissione, which was written in his heat against the
Pelagians he speaks quite contrary. And who ever shall with observation read
his one book of Original Sin against Pelagius, his two books de Nuptiis and
Concupiscentia to Valerius, his three books to Marcellinus, de peccatorum
meritis and remis^ione, his four books to Boniface, contra duas epistolas
Pelagianorum, his six books to Claudius against Julianus, and shall think
himself bound to believe all that this excellent man wrote, will not only find
it impossible he should, but will have reason to say, that zeal against an
error is not always the best instrument to find out truth. The same complaint
has been made of others; and S. Jerome has suffered deeply in the infirmity.
I shall not therefore trouble your Lordship with giving particular answers to
the words of S. Jerome and S. Ambrose, because (besides what I have already
said) I do not think that their words are an argument fit to conclude against
so much evidence, nor against a much less then that which I have every where
brought in this Article, though indeed their words are capable of a fair
interpretation, and besides the words quoted out of S. Ambrose are none of his;
and for Aquinas, Lombard, and Bonaventure, your Lordship might as well press me
with the opinion of Mr. Calvin, Knox and Buchannan, with the Synod of Dort, or
the Scots Presbyteries: I know they are against me, and therefore I reprove
them for it, but it is no disparagement to the truth, that other men are in
error. And yet of all the Schoolmen, Bonaventure should least have been urged
against me, for the proverbs sake: for, Adam non peccavit in Bonaventura;
Alexander of Hales would often say, that Adam never sinned in Bonaventure. But
it may be he was not in earnest: no more am I.

The last thing your Lordship gives to me in charge in the behalf of the
objectors, is that I would take into consideration the Covenant made between
Almighty God and Adam, as relating to his posterity.

To this I answer, that I know of no such thing; God made a covenant with Adam
indeed, and used the right of his dominion over his posterity, and yet did
nothing but what was just; but I find in Scripture no mention made of any such
Covenant as is dreamt of about the matter of original sin: only the Covenant of
works God did make with all men till Christ came; but he did never exact it
after Adam; but for a Covenant that God should make with Adam, that if he
stood, all his posterity should be I know not what; and if he fell, they should
be in a damnable condition, of this (I say) there is nec vola nec vestigium in
holy Scripture, that ever I could meet with: if there had been any such
covenant, it had been but equity that to all the persons interessed it should
have been communicated, and caution given to all who were to suffer, and
abilities given to them to prevent the evil: for else it is not a Covenant with
them, but a decree concerning them; and it is impossible that there should be a
covenant made between two, when one of the parties knows nothing of it.

I will enter no further into this enquiry, but only observe, that though there
was no such covenant, yet the event that happened might without any such covenant
have justly entered in at many doors. It is one thing to say that God by Adam's
sin was moved to a severer intercourse with his posterity, for that is
certainly true; and it is another thing to say that Adam's sin of it self did
deserve all the evil that came actually upon his children; Death is the wages
of sin, one death for one sin; but not 10000 millions for one sin; but
therefore the Apostle affirms it to have descended on all, in as much as all
men have sinned; But if from a sinning Parent a good child descends; the child's
innocence will more prevail with God for kindness, then the fathers sin shall
prevail for trouble. Non omnia parentum peccata dii in liberos convertunt, sed
siquis de malo nascitur bonus, tanquam been affectus, corpore natus de morboso,
is generis poena liberatur, tanquam ex improbitatis domo, in aliam familiam
datus: qui vero morbo in similitudinem generis refertur atque redigitur
vitiosi, ei nimirum convenit tanquam haeredi debitas poenas vitii persolvere,
said Plutarch (De iis qui sero a Numine puniuntur. ex interpr. Cluserii.) God
does not always make the fathers sins descend upon the children. But if a good
child is born of a bad father, like a healthful body from an ill affected one,
he is freed from the punishment of his stock, and passes from the house of
wickedness into another family. But he who inherits the disease, he also must
be heir of the punishment; Quorum natura amplexa est cognatam malitiam, hos
Justitia similitudinem pravitatis persequens supplicio affecit, if they pursue
their kindreds wickedness, they shall be pursued by a cognation of judgment.

Other ways there are by which it may come to pass that the sins of others may
descend upon us. He that is author or the perswader, the minister or the
helper, the approver or the follower, may derive the sins of others to himself,
but then it is not their sins only, but our own too, and it is like a dead
taper put to a burning light and held there, this derives light and flames from
the other, and yet then has it of its own, but they dwell together and make
one body. These are the ways by which punishment can enter, but there are
evils which are no punishments, and they may come upon more accounts, by Gods
Dominion, by natural consequence, by infection, by destitution and dereliction,
for the glory of God, by right of authority, for the institution or exercise of
the sufferers, or for their more immediate good.

But that directly and properly one should be punished for the sins of others
was indeed practiced by some Commonwealths; Utilitatis specie saepissime in
repub. peccari, said Cicero, they do it sometimes for terror, and because their
ways of preventing evil is very imperfect: and when Pedianus secundus the
Praetor was killed by a slave, all the family of them was killed in punishment;
this was secundum veterem morem said Tacit. ( Annal. 14.) for in the slaughter
of Marcellus the slaves fled for fear of such usage; it was thus, I say, among
the Romans, but habuit aliquid iniqui, and God forbid we should say such things
of the fountain of Justice and mercy. But I have done, and will move no more
stones, but hereafter carry them as long as I can, rather then make a noise by
throwing them down; I shall only add this one thing: I was troubled with an
objection lately; for it being propounded to me, why it is to be believed that
the sin of Adam could spoil the nature of man, and yet the nature of Devils
could not be spoiled by their sin which was worse; I could not well tell what
to say, and therefore I held my peace.


THE END.
An Advertisement to the Reader.
Page 8, and 9 there are seven lines misplaced, which are to be read thus: page
8. lin. 16. read, till the body was grown up to strength enough to infect it]
[and in the whole process it must be an impossible thing, because the
instrument which has all its operations by the force of the principal agent,
cannot of it self produce a great change and violent effect upon the principal
agent] Besides all this, (I say) while one does not know how Original Sin can
be derived, and another who thinks he can, names a wrong way, and both the
ways infer it to be another kind of thing then all the Schools of learning
teach: does it not too clearly demonstrate, --

The names of several Treatises and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor D.D.
1. (...), a Course of Sermons for all the Sundaies in the year, together with
a Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity and Separation of the Office
Ministerial, in fol. 2. Episcopacy asserted, in 4. 3. The History of the Life
and Death of the Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, 2. Edit. in fol. 4. The Liberty of
Prophesying, in 4. 5. An Apology for authorized and Set forms of Liturgy, in
4. 6. The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 12. 7. The Rule and Exercises
of holy dying, in 12. 8. The Golden Grove, or, A Manual of daily Prayers fitted
to the days of the week, together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness.
9. The Doctrine an practice of repentance rescued from popular Errors, in a
large 8. Newly published.
Books written by H. Hammond. D. D.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Test. by H. Hammond
D.D. in fol. 2. The Practical Catechism, with all other English Treatises of H.
Hammond, D. D. in two volumes in 4. 3. Dissertiones quatuor, quibus Episcopatus
Jura ex S. Scripturis and primaeva Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra sententiam
D. Blondelli and aliorum. Authore Henrico Hammond, in 4. 4. A Letter of
Resolution of six Queries, in 12. 5. Of Schism. A Defense of the Church of
England, against the Exceptions of the Romanists, in 12. 6. Of Fundamentals in
a notion referring to practice, by H. Hammond D. D. in 12. 7. Six books of late
Controversy in defense of the Church of England, in two volumes in 4. newly
published.
Books newly published.
DOctor Cousins Devotions, in 12. The persecuted Ministry, by William Langley
late of St. Mary's in the City of Liechfield, Minister, in 4. A Discourse of
Auxiliary Beauty, or Artificial Handsomeness. In point of Conscience between
two Ladies, in 8. Lyford's Legacy; or, an help to young People. Preparing them
for the worthy receiving of the Lords Supper, in 12. The Principles of Holy
Christian Religion: or the Catechism of the Church of England paraphrazed. By
R. Sherlock B. D. at Borwick Hall in Lancashire, in 8. A Discourse. 1. Of the
Holy Spirit of God, His Impressions and workings on the Souls of Men. 2. Of
Divine Revelation, Mediate and Immediate. 3. Of Error, Heresy, and Schism: the
Nature, Kinds, Causes, Reasons, and Dangers thereof: with directions for
avoiding the same. By R. Sherlock, B. D. in 4.
THE END.

