A True Relation Of a most Barbarous and Bloody Murder Lately Committed on the
Body of Mr. Tho. Clarke, Minister and Schoolmaster in the Parish of St.
Margarets Westminster.
COuld we defend our selves by the Power of Sin from the Punishment that
attends it, or if the deceitful Pleasures thereof could afford us any Comfort
in our Sufferings, we should have some encouragement to be wicked; But when our
utmost Reward is only to be Eternally Miserable, certainly he that wilfully
transgresses the Laws of God, sins against the Light of his own Reason, and
purchases Damnation at the price of his Immortal Soul: Yet notwithstanding this
great Truth, which is so often published to the World, there still remains too
great a number of Wicked and Impenitent Sinners, who obstinately resisting the
workings of God's Holy Spirit, go on in their Diabolical Practices, of which
Murder is not the least heinous, too sad an Instance whereof the following
Relation does make manifest, which begins thus:

On Tuesday the 23d of October, 1688. The Body of Mr. Thomas Clarke, Minister
and Schoolmaster, was found Murdered in his Bed in the following manner. The
aforesaid Mr. Thomas Clarke having the Charge of a Free School, well known by
the Name of Palmers School, at the Almshouses near the Artillery Ground in the
Parish of St. Margarets-Westminster, the Boys under his Care coming at their
usual hour in the Morning, but not finding their Master, nor the School Doors
open as customary, was the occasion, as we are informed, of a strict search by
the Neighbors after him, his dwelling House being at the lower end of the
Garden belonging to the School and Almshouses, and in his Lodging Chamber up
one pair of Stairs they found him lying Murdered on his Bed, with his right
hand fastened with a piece of Greasy Filliting to the right post of the Beds
Feet, and his Feet lying cross to the left side of the Beds Head, with a piece
of Packthread tied about his right Leg, and a Neckcloth about his Neck of an
inconsiderable value, though it is to be observed that he always wore Bands in
the day time, and a piece of the Sheet, as it is supposed, was cut off and tied
about his Neck; as far as w^ ^an apprehend, by which piece of Sheet, or the
aforementioned Neckcloath it is imagined that he was Strangled, being some Blood
was found upon the knot of the piece of Sheet, for a certain Gentleman that was
one of the Jury, and very curious in searching for private Wounds, found upon
opening the Mouth of the Murdered Person, a great quantity of Coagulated Blood,
which does sufficiently demonstrate that he was Strangled as it is before
mentioned, though there was a Contusion on the left Arm, and another upon his
left Leg, both Arm and Leg not being tied at the view of the Jury.

May the Reading of this Tragical Account learn us to abhor from the bottom of
our Hearts the Bloody and Detestible Sin of Murder, which seldom or never goes
Unpunished, and tho God's Vengeance may seem to sleep for a time, yet let not
those Wretched Villains, whose Hands were imbrued in the Blood of this Innocent
Person deceive themselves, for Heaven still keeps a watchful Eye over such
Profligate Wretches whose Blood-Thirstiness seldom misses of a suitable Reward
even in this Life.

FINIS.
Licensed, November. 1 st. 1688.

LONDON, Printed by John Wallis in White-Fryers near the grear Gate in
Fleetstreet. 1688.


