A True RELATION OF His Majesty's Coming to the Town of Shrewsbury, on the 20
of this instant September, and His passage from thence the 23 day, to the City
of Chester, with the manner of His entetainment there.
Together with the L: Grandisons Surprising NANTWICH, And the plundering of
diverse houses in the Town and Country thereabouts, of such as stood
well-affected to the King and Parliament.

Collected out of several Letters from Men of good credit to their Friends in
London.

London, Printed for R. R. Septem. 29. 1642.

HIs Majesty came to Salop on Tuesday last, with great strength both of men and
Arms, where he stayed till Friday, and then came to Whitchurch, and went to
Chester; I was one that was appointed to attend him thither, which I did, with
diverse more Gentlemen and Freeholders: His Majesty and the Prince dined in
Whitchurch, and so went for Chester: when we came to Miltongreen, there was M.
Richard Edgerton of Ridley, with some 600 Musketriers, and then when we came to
Hetton-heath, there was the Lord Rivers with all his Forces, and my Lord
Chomley with horse and Foot, very complete beyond the other; so they having
displaid their Colors, gave his Majesty a valley of Shot; which being done,
his Majesty having ridden once or twice about the Army, taken notice of the
Sheriff and his Company, with diverse other Gentlemen which were, then came to
Routten-heath, where was Sir T^o. Aston with that Company he had, which did
show themselves as the other had done. Then his Majesty see forwards for
Chester; at Boughton, where the Liberty of the City begins, the two Sheriffs
of Chester, with all their company attended: Then coming to the Bars, there
attended the Mayor and Aldermen, where the Mayor delivered both Mace and Sword
into his Majesty's hand, who received them, and gave them to him again, and so
he marched before the King, with all the Aldermen and Sheriff, with all the
Companies in Town with their Gowns, and all the Trained Bands of the City, with
volunteers set on each side of the Street, who discharged just as his Majesty
passed by. Thus was his Majesty attended to the Court with all the Bells
ringing, Drums and Trumpets sounding.

Thus for His Majesty's going to Chester.

Chester, September. 24. 1642.
YEsternight, about 4 or 5 a clock, the King came into the City, attended with
two Troops of Horse that came with him; and after his Majesty, came Sir Thomas
Aston with his Troop: The Mayor and Aldermen standing on a Scaffold in Eastgate
Street, before Tho Parnels door; Serieant Brerewood the Recorder made a Speech;
but there was such great shouting for joy, that I think his Majesty scarce
heard him: and all the Companies standing with their Arms in the Eastgate
street, to entertain his Majesty; and the Sheriffs, and Sheriff peers are such
as have been Sheriffs.
Sheriffs peers, and such as have been Leave Lookers is an office one degree
under the Sheriff.
Leave-Lookers, rid out of Town in Scarlet (as they use to ride out at
Midsummer) to meet his Majesty, with all our Trained Bands: The Mayor rid
before his Majesty, carrying the Sword, from the Scaffold to the Bishops
Palace, as I am told for truth by them that saw them. The Lord Dillon, and
another Irish Lord* a great Rebel, came with his Majesty into the City: Sir
Richard Wilbraham met his Majesty, and fell down on his knees to him, but his
Majesty would not take notice of him; he and Sir Tho. Delves are committed to
the Sheriff, both those Knights declared themselves for the Ordinance of the
Militia: It is thought there are Warrants out for the apprehending of many
other Gentlemen.

Yesterday, about two hours before his Majesty came, there came about a Troop
of the Lord Strange his horse, and 80 horse loads of Muskets and Bandaliers,
and such like Provision, which were laid in our common Hall; and there are 200
more at the Lord Strange his house, that came from Newcastle. The Lord Strange
has delivered those Arms that were taken from papists in Lancashire, to them
again, and threatened the Mayor of Leverpool to batter down the Town if he
would not deliver them, it is said there are 5000 coming through Lancashire,
which came out of the North for his Majesty. Yesternight, at 9 a clock, the
Lord Strange came into this City with one or two Troops of Horse. This day all
betwixt the age of 16 and 60 years, of the Trained Bands of the County, are
summoned to appear before his Majesty at Hoo-heath, two miles from Chester.

Upon Wednesday last the Town of Nantwich were in some fear lest they should be
disarmed, and stood upon their Guard, and some aid came to help them; but that
night following about 1000 horse came thither; the Lord Cholmley came with
them, with the Commission for the Array; they were to have a parley, the Town
would have been delivered, so that they might have their Arm, and Liberties;
this while the other side got in at back Gardens, and disarmed all, and
plundered some houses: The day following they went to Sir Richard Wilbrahams,
and Sir Tho. Delues, and disarmed them, took their horses, and three Care load
of Armor from them, and do further proceed, doing much harm at many other
places and houses. It is thought our Mayor and Aldermen intend to give the King
a sum of money.

Nantwich, September. 24. 1642. Good Cousin,
I Presume you hear of the passages at Nantwich on Wednesday last: The Town,
after some preparation for resistance, received the Lord Grandison, and 1100
horse, fearing if they had by force of Arms driven them back, his Majesty being
in those parts, would have revenged the same in a severe way: Being suffered to
come in, he presently disarmed the Town, and Contrymen there; I for company
lost my Repier.

The day follwoing, they took Arms from Crew hall for 20 men, but did no other
violence; Sir Thomas Delues left his house empty, and much Arms on the hall
Table for them; They dealt more hardly at M. Vernons, taking many other things
besides Arms; No violence that I could hear of was offered to any man's person
in Nantwich on Wednesday, but to one Radcliff, an honest man, about Wistaston,
who was shot into the hand and shoulder, because he was slow in delivering his
Musket: They have also been in diverse other houses in Bartomley Parish, the
Parsons for one; and what they have done on the other side of the Town I know
not. The Gentlemen and Trained Bands are to attend his Majesty this day at
Hatton heath.

The Earl of Essex is expected in Cheshire to morrow or on Monday: The face of
things in Cheshire is strangely altered; we did not make our due returns when
we had got more quiet times, God in his mercy prevent the effusion of innocent
blood: If you have not already bought that little millitarie provision I
bespake, I think its best to make a stay thereof, for I fear no such thing can
be either safely sent hither or kept here, our Arms must be prayers and tears,
for we have not so much as a sword to defend us, God of his mercy keep you,
pray for us I beseech you good Sir, as he will do for you, who is your most
obliged friend and Cousin,

W: R.

September 23. 1642 Good Sir,
THe latter end of your Letter is somewhat comfortable, in that you write there
are some Dragons coming into Cheshire for our relief, but surely they are not
come, and now will come too late for we are all plundered and undone; Nantwich
is taken by My Lord Grandisons Army, and the Town disarmed, and many houses
plundered who stood for the Parl ament and Militia, the owners of them driven to
run away for safety of their lives, for they have threatened them much, and
after they had disarmed the Town, they came into the Country ^^d disarmed all
the great houses: First Sir Thomas Delves, then my Lord Crews, then Sir Richard
Wilbrahams, and so all the other Gentlemen round about us, and plundered their
houses, they belong forced not only to leave their own houses, but also the
Town of Nantwich, and their poor Tennant^ and Count^y men, to the mercy of
those m^rcilesse Villans who will have what they list, nay they will have wh^t
we have not for them, or else they will set a Pistol to ^ur throats and sw^are
God damn them they will make us swallow a Bullet, some of them are not content
to take what Arms they can find, but also Money, Plate, Linnens, Clothes,
Writings, Meat, D^ink, and not therewith content, but stea^e our horses and
maers, drive our women and children into such fear that they over run their
houses, ly in the fields, ditches and woods, I do not hear of the like cruelty
that has been used any where but in that miserable and bleeding Kingdom of
Ireland, we are like to be worse yet, for this day tho King is at Chester, and
all the whole County from 16 years to 60. is to meet and attend His Majesty,
and the Commissioners of Array within half a mile of Chester with all their
Arms which they have left, none dare refuse to come, the malignant party will
inform against them, and then they are threatened to be all carried away with my
Lord Grandisons Army, the best of it is, if we stay at home we are now their
slaves, being naked they will have of us what they list, and do with us what
they list, however, I believe we shall be made the seat of War, and so be
utterly ruined and undone, for want of help in time and true hearts amongst our
selves, I thank God hitherto I have escaped; yet with much fear and danger, but
I must confess it is more of the goodness and mercy of my good God, then of
any deseart in me, God grant I may make a good use of it and give him the
glory; The secondarie means was, I having acquaintance with some of the
Cavaliers, who formerly were something beholding unto me, I now find it to be
something better with me and some friends of mine then I or they expected, and
yet our fears are great when houses night unto us have bin plundered twice
over, and the owners thereof watched for, as the Cat watches for the Mouse,
what they would do with them, or how they would use them, God knows, I pray
you pardon my errors in writing, for my fears and distractions are great; I
only desire you to pray for us, and let us hear from you; God knows how long
or short a time we shall hear one from another, the Lord fit us for these ill
times, and worser which I much fear. So prays your much obliged friend, etc.

To hear the pittyfull scriking, weeping, and howling of women and children,
did more trouble me then any thing else; God grant I never hear the like.

FINIS.

