A True RELATION Of the late proceedings of the London Dragoneers, sent down to
Oxford, consisting of four Companies under the command of Sir John Seaton.

The Captains of which Companies that were appointed in the said Expedition,
were as follows, Viz. Sergeant Major LEE. Captain STACKHOUSE. Captain
WILSON. Captain MASON.


LONDON, Printed for Henry Overton. 1642.

September 8. 1642. being Thursday.
Captain Lee, Captain Stackhouse, and Captain Mason, toward the evening
marched out of the City of London with 2^ pieces of Ordnance, and Wagons of
Ammunition to Acton, and there took up their quarter that night. Captain
Wilson with his Company marching after them in the night rode to Vxbridge and
quartered his men there, Acton not being able to contain them; and Colonel
Brown with his Dragoneers being to march the same way, wanting lodging there at
Acton, crossed over from Acton-rode to Brainford to quarter there.

September 9. Captain Wilson marched from Vxbridge and quartered at Amersham,
and in that afternoon drew his men into a body, and exercised them, and
Captain Lee, Captain Mason, and the Company of Captain Stackhouse did lodge
at Chalfont S. Peter's, with their Ordnance and Ammunition.

September 10. Captain Wilson marched forward toward Alesbury, and there in
the way met diverse Cavalleers that were conveyed up in Carts toward London,
being taken in the North, and guarded up by the High-sheriffes men of
Buckinghamshire, and Captain Wilson hearing that they were coming drew up his
men into a broad place in the rode that so they might have room to pass by
his Troop; and passing on further he drew up his men in battalia in a great
Corn-field on this side Wendover, and so exercised his men on Horsebacke', to
see how his men could do execution on Horseback if they should be set upon in
a place that might be disadvantagious to them on foot; at last, having
exercised his men, and hearing the other Companies and the Ordnance were
coming he set forward towards' Alesbury, and half a mile on this side the
Town made a stand, that so all four Companies might march into the Town
together, where they were received with much acclamation; Colonel Brownes
Dragoneers coming about two hours after, there being no room in the Town,
they were constrained to go further to lodge themselves.

September 11. Dr. Pink Pro-Vicechancellor of Oxford came to Alesbury, and was
clapped there in hold for being a ringleader to the Scholars of Oxford in their
exercise of Arms, and also entertaining the Cavalleers in Oxford, going about
that night that they were chased into Oxford to get lodging for them* which
Pink^ was sent up to London.

September 12. Captain Lee marched toward Amersham to meet a Wagon of money
coming down toward Alesbury, and to conveigh it safe thither. Also Captain
Masons Company marched to Massenden, and there searched a Delinquents house,
and brought him to Alesbury and committed him to safe custody, which prisoner
was afterward carried to Oxford, and the^e bale taken for his appearance at
London to answer it before the Parliament. Captain Wilson he exercised his men
this day twice, both morning and evening, in Alesbury, and the Countess of
Carnarvan gave a Venison to. Captain Stackhouse his company.

September 13. Sir John Seaton came and commanded the Dragoneers to march
toward Oxford, who was appointed under my Lord Say to lead them, Captain
Wilsons company being first drawn up into a body, Sir John marched away with
them, and a mile or two on this side Oxford Captain Stackhouse his company
overtooke them, and there in a plain field Sir John commanded them to be
drawn up in one body, and gave them some instructions which he would have them
observe, and so marched forward with them, to Oxford. At one a clock at night
an alarm was given, and there came messengers running to one of the Sentinels
set without the Town, telling him he had a discovery to make known, and that
the enemy was coming; upon this, some Horse went out, and before they could
ride a mile and return with their discovery, Captain Wilsons company was
drawn up into a body, and he stood at the head thereof, without the North
gate, expecting to give the enemy a salutation with a volley of Lead, That
night having set his Sentinels, and given the Corporals their charge, he
marched about the City, to see how the Townes-men did their duty in the
managing their watch, at last returning toward his own Court of Guard, the
Sentinels knew their duty so well that they would not let him come within their
Army, but made him stand till the Corporal came with his sword drawn, and
pointed at his breast and took the word from his Captain. And it being then
morning they were all dismissed, and every of his soldiers repaired to his
lodging.

September 14. An order coming to Captain Wilson from Sir John Seaton
concerning meeting of the Lord Say at Them, Captain Wilson summoned his men
together and marched with Sir John to Them, and there met the Lord Say,
accompanying him to Oxford; and that night Cap. Wilson and his Company watched
again, and set Sentinels round about one Napier a Papists house, and also a
Centinell or two at New-colledge door, and kept his Court of Guard in
Hollowell, walking the Rounds himself, to see that his Sentinels did their
duty.

September 15. This thursday in the morning out comes Napeirs son and leapes
over the hedge, and the Sentinels laid hold of him; and that morning the
Captain and his Officers searched the house, in which they found Arms, and
scandalous Pictures, which were brought away to the Lord Says Inn where he did
lodge.

September 16. New informations came that there was a vault in Napiers house,
in the Hall, the entrance into which might be seens under the Table, it being
removed; upon this a re-search was made, and the boards pulled up, but no such
thing found. Also Captain Stackhouse with his Company went to Woodstocke, and
to Chippingnorton; and in that Town some did begin to rise against them; but
others in the Town that were well affected joined with the Captain, and so
stilled the commotion. Captain Wilsons Company also searched Jesus College,
and found Plate, and carried it to the Lord Say; and some Plate carried from
thence, was stayed going out at the Towns end, and sent to the Lord Say by
Captain Wilsons men. Also his men searched a popish house and 4. of them found
money in four several places in the house, and carried it to the Lord Say,
who found so much money delivered to him as the woman did affirm to be in the
bags. Also they brought away a Rhemish-Testament, etc.

September 17. Some of Captain Wilsons soldiers being at breakfast, the
master of the house came up and told them that there was a man below did
declare that Doctor Fruin did hide himself in his Pig-sty, and presently some
went away with a warrant to seize upon him, but his man being in Oxford, rode
home, and as it is thought went to the place where the Doctor was, and so he
made an escape; for when they came to search, he was gone about half an hour
before. At the same time Captain Wilson rode to Abington to search the house of
one M. Dorrell, information being given in of many barrels of Dr. Morris his
goods brought in; which barrels being found, were delivered into the Major of
Abingtons custody, sealed up, and to see them forthcomming, till there should
bea strict scrutiny of them by the Lord Says appointment. Also Captain Wilsons
Company found a load of Dr. Nurse his goods in a house about a mile from
Oxford, which Nurse is gone away with the Cavaleers. And half a mile further
in a barn they found 2 Trunks of Doctor Fruins, in which were found things of
high concernment; and both these guarded to Oxford, to the place of the Lord
Says, residence. Also Captain Mason brought a Minister, delinquent, from
Abington, and carried him before the Lord Say, as also a Constable who opposed
them in their search is to be brought up to London to answer to what shall be
objected against him. Likewise part of a Squadron of Horse with Captain Lees
Company guarded a Wagon of money to Oxford which was brought according to
order to the place where the Lord Say did lodge. Likewise Captain Stackhouse
was shot at by some of the malignant crew, but the parties could not be found.

September 18. All the Dragoneers of Captain Wilsons Company went armed to
Church, because of the enmity that they saw in the Town and Scholars against
the Londoners, and there was two good sermons preached, one by the Chaplain of
the Lord Lovelace, the other by one M. Cornish.

September 19. On monday some raised a report the Lord Say was taken, but about
noone he came into Oxford and many with him: and that day was many popish
pictures burnt in Oxford before the Inne-gate where the Lord Says habitation
was, and many delinquents were brought before him, for some of which bail was
taken, and for others he would take none; and in the afternoon the Lord Say
went to Woodstocke to settle the Militia there, having begun to settle it first
in Oxford, intending to return back again to Oxford; and that day Captain
Masons Company took to Horses at Sir William Walters house.

September 20. Sir John Seaton with Captain Wilson and his Company came from
Oxford to Wickham, and likewise Captain Lee and Captain Stackhouse with their
Companies came in after them, and the Town did entertain them all most
lovingly, and there was the Lord Says Regiment of Foot met by the Dragoneers,
which Foot were going to Oxford to keep the Town in peace.

September 21. The same Sir John with the three Companies (Captain Mason being
left behind in Oxford) came marching up to London, Captain Lee following Sir
John, Captain Stackhouse being in the midst, and Captain Wilson with his
Company, marching in the Rear. A Guard of all the 4. Companies being left to
bring up the Plate, Delinquents and other things that were took, and to be
brought up to London. Captain Mason coming from Oxford, on Tuesday toward
night one of his men shot off his Piece, and the Town came running about them
throwing stones at them, beating one off his horse; but the Major came in and
sent 10 of those mutinous persons to the Jail.

FINIS.

