A True RELATION of the UNJUST, CRUEL and BARBAROUS PROCEEDINGS against the
ENGLISH at AMBOYNA In the East Indies, by the Netherlandish GOVERNOR and
COUNCIL there. Also the Copy of a Pamphlet of the Dutch in Defense of the
Action. With Remarks upon the whole matter.

Published by Authority.



LONDON, Printed by WILL. BENTLEY, for Will. Hope, at the Anchor under S.
Bartholomew Church near the Royal Exchange, Anno Domini 1651.

depiction of scenes of torture and execution: a half-naked man hanging
stretched in an X on a door frame, his face bound, while a man on a stool pours
water over his head and another man tickles him under the arm with feathers; a
second half-naked man kneeling in prayer with his hands bound while another man
stands behind him with a drawn sword raised to strike; a third half-naked man
sitting on the ground

To his EXCELLENCY The LORD GENERAL CROMWELL.
My Lord,
SEe here a piece of Babarism, which has lain so long both as an injury, and
a dishonor to our Nation brought again to light, by which, as we may compare
the difference of these blessed times, from those unhappie ones when this was
acted and passed by; so we must needs remember to bless God for that victorious
hand of yours, which has in so great a manner led us a good part out of the
Wilderness; And therefore I thought it but a piece of public gratitude,
(besides private) to throw it as your Excellencies feet; whose great soul, I
presume, will rather descend to look into this business, wherein your Country
is so highly concerned, that in respect abroad you have been a fiery wall
about her, so at home you are become her great Intelligence, and guide those
great motions of her peace and security: Which great work, as I hope God will
grant you to see finished, so wish I you may live long to enjoy the fruits and
comfort of it.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
IF we consider how loud and pressing the cry of blood is, or with what high
severity God ever proceeds against it, though his wrath for some small time may
seem to be asleep, we have just cause to fear, that there is a heavy account
must be given by the Dutch for that execrable Tyranny of theirs executed upon
the bodies of several English at Amboyna. To take away any man's life without
due course of Justice, though it be with the greatest civility and easiness of
death that could be, is a crime which God has denounced murder, and will visit
accordingly; but to heighten and multiply a death with all the previous
Tortures that a passionate Diabolical malice can invent, cruelty inflict, or
the frame of man's body undergo, is so far from being manly or Christian, that
it is beyond savageness and bestiality, and approches that accursed frame of
spirit that he has plundged himself into, who sits in the seat of darkness.

For my part as I delight not to be curious in these speculations, which
acquaint the mind with extremities and Criticisms of sin, so it is a grief that
the Theory of wickedness should be so much enlarged as it would be by the
treatise which thou have in thy hands; Which, as it has bruitishly outdone
all former records and examples of cruelty, so it may unluckily possibly serve
for instruction to some future inventive and poisoned spirits. And indeed as I
wish the occasion of publishing of it had never been, so do I wish justice once
required and had, that the remembrance of it might have been buried. But the
breach being so national, and to this day unsatisfied, and the blood there
spilt no doubt crying loud, it had been injustice in us to have buried it in
silence, and not displayed it to the sun. For as the beginning of those
Torments were from a causeless and and slight suspicion of an improbable and
ineffective plot, so by that means were we forced from our possessions in those
parts, and the injury became complicated, both as against justice and interest.

True it is that the East India Company made the most diligent addresses to
King James for revenge that could be, but that blazing Star of Fortune, that
was after removed by a stab, prepossessed by a great sum of money, interposed
between the judgment of that King, and overruled his affection, so that he,
who was naturally un-active and drousie enough, being lulled by such a privado,
fell asleep, and snorted out the rest of his idle reign in debauchery and
silence. The East India Company seeing themselves obstructed in the prosecution,
thought fit to preserve the memory of such a butchery, by getting the several
Tortures done at large in Oil, but the Table was scarce sooner hung up, but the
Murderers began to fear it would bleed at the nose; so that Buckingham was
appeased by another sacrifice, and the Picture commanded to be taken down.

In King Charles's time the business was not stirred in, he had too great
designs at home, than to preserve our Honor, or remedy our injuries abroad;
but now since that yoke of Kingship is taken off our necks, me thinks we should
like men, whose shackles are taken off them while they are asleep, leap up
nimbly, and make use of our Liberty. It were the most irrational thing in the
World to think of forgiving of them, who, though they received assistance from
us in their greatest affliction and lowest misery, have refused not only to
assist us now, when their case is ours, but have been more than neutral against
us, jealous, it should seem, that their way of Government, which they have so
grown and thriven under, should have the same effects with us. But I hope God
will give us hearts to make use of the advantages in our hands, and persist in
doing wonderful things for us. And as he has brought us out of the desert in
so high and fearful a manner, so no doubt if we walk answerably, we shall see
his countenance shine upon us, and improve this blessed peace at home, to make
good our peace abroad, and so by his good assistance enjoy such earthly
blessings, as may render us safe, if not terrible to the Nations round about us.

Grayes-Inne. Sept. 10. 1651.
To the READER.
GEntle Reader, thou may (perhaps) wonder why this Relation of the business
of Amboyna, so many Months since taken upon the Oaths and depositions of our
people that came thence, and presented to his Majesty, and the Lords of his
Privy Council, comes now at last to the Press, and was not either sooner
published, or altogether suppressed. The truth is, the English East India
Company have ever been very tender of the ancient amity and good correspondence
held between this Realm and the Neatherlands, and have been very loath, by
divulging of the private injuries done them by the Neatherlands East India
Company, to give the least occasion of any distaste or disaffection, which might
happily grow between these two Nations, for the sake, and on the behalf of the
two Companies respectively. For which cause, although the wrongs and injuries,
or rather contumelies done unto the English by the Dutch in the Indies, have
been as intolerable as manifold; as to say nothing of those great heaps of them
buried in the Amnesty of the Treaty of the year 1619. and only to point at the
general heads of those committed since that Treaty, and grossly contrary to
the main intent, and express words and disposition of the same: first, in the
point of hostility; the invasion of the Islands of Lantore and Polaroone, then
and before in the quiet possession of the English, in the name of the Crown of
England; the taking of the same Islands by force; the razing and demolishing of
the English Forts; the binding of the English (that had not so much as resisted
them) to stakes with ropes about their necks, throttling them with the same,
and flourishing their naked swords about them, as if they would presently have
dispatched them; then taking them so amazed and bound, and tumbling them down
the rocks; and after, carrying their crushed and bruised carcasses away in
irons: secondly, in the point of their usurped sovereignty; their taking upon
them the Conusance of controversies between the English and the Indians, for
matters passed far without the compass of the Neatherlands pretended
jurisdiction, and executing their sentences thereupon by plain force; seizing
of the English Companies goods, fining, imprisoning, stocking, yea, whipping
our people at a post in the open marketplace, and after, washing them with
vinegar and salt: thirdly, in point of partnership with the English, their
putting great sums to the common account; which were disbursed to the private
and sole behoof of the Dutch; giving great presents for the glory of the Dutch,
without consent of the English, and making war for the enlargement of their own
dominion, yet bringing the charge to the common account; together with infinite
other the like, the particulars whereof would arise to a just and ample volume:
Nevertheless, the English Company from time to time contented themselves with
informing his Majesty, and his Honorable Privy Council with their grievances
privately in writing, to the end, that necessary relief and reparation might be
obtained, without publishing any thing to the World in print, thereby to stir
up or breed ill blood between these Nations, which are otherwise tied in so
many reciprocal obligations. And the same course they have hitherto holden also
in this crying business of Amboyna; only offering to the Manes of their
murdered Contrymen, Factors and Kinsfolks, their effectual endeavors in a
dutiful course unto his Majesty for justice for their innocent blood, and
reparation of the honor of the Nation herein interessed. In which their wonted
way they were so constant, that they could not be driven out of the same by the
contrary course of some of the other party; that not glutted nor mollified with
the blood of these innocents, nor with all the other sufferings of the English
in the Indies, published a Pamphlet in print in the Neatherlands Language, not
only in justification of this barbarous butchery, but withal in disgrace of
the English Nation, and the Laws and justice of the same. But behold now
further, the same Pamphlet, being called in by an Edict of the States General,
was yet afterward translated and printed in English, and dispersed even in
this Realm it self, to brave and disgrace us at our own doors, and in our own
language. This, no English patience can bear: the blood of the innocent cries
out against it: the honor of the Nation suffers in it. Wherefore the English
East India Company is hereby enforced, contrary to their desire and custom, to
have recourse also to the Press, to maintain the reputation of those their
Contrymen and servants, that lost their lives unjustly; and to acquaint the
World with the naked truth of this cause, hitherto masked, muffled, and
obscured in a fog of factions, concealments, and crafty conveyances of the
Author of this Pamphlet, and his clients, the Governor and Council (so termed)
of Amboyna.

Having thus acquainted thee, gentle Reader, with the reasons why this business
was no sooner published in print, it remains yet further, that thou be
satisfied in an objection or two more, which common reason will suggest unto
thee. Without doubt, reading this discourse, and being a true Patriot of thine
own Country, and a well-willer of the Neatherlands (as we presume and wish
thee to be,) thou will wonder how it comes to pass, that our Nation, which
has not been wont to receive such disgraces, should now be so weak and
unprovided in the Indies, as to suffer such indignities, and to be so grossly
overtopped, outraged and vilified there? as also thou will no less admire, that
any of the Netherlands Nation, which has received such and so many favors and
supports from hence, and held so good and ancient correspondence with our
Nation, should now offer and commit such odious contumelies on English men,
their partners, and allies by special Treaty. Herein thou will soon answer thy
self, if thou but consider the different end and design of the English and
Dutch Companies trading in the Indies, appearing by their several course and
practice respectively. The English being subjects of a peaceable Prince, that
has enough of his own, and is therewith content, without affecting of new
acquests; have aimed at nothing in their East India Trade, but a Lawful and
competent gain by commerce and Traffic with the people of those parts. And
although they have in some places builded Forts, and settled some strength, yet
that has not been done by force or violence, against the good will of the
Magistrates or people of the Country; but with their desire, consent, and good
liking, for the security only of the Trade, and upon the said Magistrate and
peoples voluntary yielding themselves under the obedience and Sovereignty of
the Crown of England; their own ancient Laws, Customs and Privileges,
nevertheless reserved. Further, the same English had undoubted confidence in
the Neatherlands Nation there also trading, especially being lately conjoined
with them in the strict alliance and social confederacy of the year 1619. and
therefore attended nothing from them, but the offices of good affection and
partnership. Upon these grounds, the English Company made their equipages
answerable only to a course of commerce and peaceable traffic; not expecting
any hostility, neither from the Indians, nor especially from the Dutch. On the
other side, the Neatherlanders, from the beginning of their trade in the
Indies, not contented with the ordinary course of a fair and free commerce,
invaded diverse Islands, took some Forts, built others, and labored nothing
more, than the conquests of Countries, and the acquiring of new dominion. By
which reason, as they were accordingly provided of shipping, soldiers, and all
warlike provision, as also of places of Rendevouz upon the shore, and thereby
enabled to wrong the English as well as others: so the cost and charges of
their shipping, Forts, and Soldiers, employed upon these designs, rose to such
an height, as was not to be maintained by the trade they had in those parts.
Wherefore, for a supply, they were forced (as some of their own Contrymen
and Adventurers in their Company, affirm) to fish with dry nets, that is to
say, to pick quarrels with the Indians, and so to take their ships, and make
prize of their goods. Which yet not answering their charge and adventure, they
proceeded also to quarrel with the English, to debar them of trade to free
places; and for attempting such trade, to take their ships and goods. Touching
which, when a good order was set by the said treaty of the year 1619. yet they
saw, they could not make their reckoning to any purpose, unless they utterly
drove the English out of the trade of those parts; thereby to have the whole
and sole traffic of the commodities of the Indies in these parts of Europe, in
their own hands; and so to make the price at their pleasure, sufficient to
maintain and promote their conquests, and withal to yield them an ample
benefit of their tradeing. Which unless they can, by this and the like worrying
and wearying of the English bring to pass, it is easy to be judged by those
that understand any thing of the course and state of the trade of those parts,
that albeit their returns hereafter should prove as great continually, as of
late extraordinarily they have happened to be, yet the main stock and Estate of
the Company must needs abate and decay by some hundred thousands of pounds
yearly. Thus, Reader, thou see what has made us unprovided against such
accidents, and what now enforces the Dutch East India Company, or their
servants in the Indies, against the common Genius of their Nation, and the
wonted firm affection between these two Nations mutually, thus to degenerate,
and break out into such strange and incredible outrages against their nearest
allies and best deserving friends. Farewell.

A TRUE RELATION Of the late Unjust Cruel, and Barbarous proceedings against
the English at Amboyna in the East Indies, by the Neatherlanders there, upon a
forged pretense of a conspiracy of the said English.
AFter the fruitless issue of two several Treaties: the first Anno 1613. in
London; and the other An. 1615. at the Hague in Holland, touching the
differences between the English and Dutch in the East Indies, at last by a
third Treaty, Anno 1619. in London, there was a full and solemn composition
made of all the said differences, and a fair order set for the future
proceeding of the Supposts of both Companies in the Indies, as well in the
course of their Trade and commerce, as otherwise. Amongst sundry other points,
it was agreed, That in regard of the great bloodshed and cost, pretended to be
bestowed by the Hollanders, in winning of the Trade of the Isles of the
Molluccos, Banda, and Amboyna, from the Spaniards and Portugals, and in
building of Forts for the continual securing of the same, the said Hollanders
therefore should enjoy two third parts of that Trade, and the English the other
third; and the charge of the Forts to be maintained by Taxes and Impositions,
to be levied upon the Merchandise. Wherefore in consequence of this agreement,
the English East India Company planted certain Factories for their share of
this Trade; some at the Molluccos, some at Banda, and some at Amboyna. Of the
two former of these, there will be, at this present small occasion to speak
further; but the last will prove the Scene of a sad Tragedy.

This Amboyna is an Island lying near Seran, of the circuit of forty leagues,
and gives name also to some other small Islands adjacent. It bears Cloves;
for gathering and buying in whereof the English Company for their part had
planted five several Factories: the head and Rendevouz of all, at the Town of
Amboyna; and therein first Master George Muschamp, and afterward Master Gabriel
Towerson, their Agents with directions over the smaller Factories at Hitte and
Larica upon the same Island, and at Loho and Cambello, upon a point of their
neighboring Island of Seran.

Upon these Islands of Amboyna, and the point of Seran, the Hollanders have
four Forts, the chief of all is at the said Town of Amboyna, and is very
strong, having four Points or Bulwarks with their Curtains, and upon each of
these Points six great pieces of Ordinance mounted, most of them of brass. The
one side of this Castle is washed by the Sea, and the other is divided from the
land with a Ditch of four or five fathom broad, very deep, and ever filled with
the Sea The garrison of this Castle consists of about 200 Dutch Soldiers and
a Company of free Burgers. Besides these, there is always a matter of three or
four hundred mardikers (for so they usually call the free Natives) in the Town,
ready to serve the Castle at an hours warning. There lie also in the road (for
the most part) diverse good Ships of the Hollanders, as well for the guard of
the place by Sea, as for the occasions of Traffic: this being the chief
Rendevouz, as well for the Island of Banda, as for the rest of Amboyna. Here
the English lived; not in the Castle, but under protection thereof, in a house
of their own in the Town; holding themselves safe, as well in respect of the
ancient bonds of amity between both Nations, as of the strict conjunction made
by the late Treaty before mentioned.

They continued here some two years, conversing and trading together with the
Hollanders, by virtue of the said Treaty. In which time there fell out sundry
differences and debates between them: The English complaining that the
Hollanders did not only lavish away much money in building, and unnecessary
expenses, upon the Forts and otherwise, and bring large and unreasonable
reckonings thereof to the common account; but also did, for their part, pay the
Garrisons with victuals and cloth of Coromondell, which they put off to the
Soldiers at three or four times the value it cost them, yet would not allow of
the English Companies part of the same charge, but only in ready money; thereby
drawing from the English (which ought to pay but one third part) more than two
thirds of the whole true charge. Hereupon, and upon the like occasions, grew
some discontents and disputes, and the complaints were sent to Jaccatra, in the
Island of Java Major, to the Council of defense of both Nations there residing:
who also, not agreeing upon the points in difference, sent the same hither over
into Europe, to be decided by both Companies here; or, in default of their
agreement, by the Kings Majesty, and the Lords the States General, according to
an Article of the Treaty of the year 1619. on this behalf. In the mean time
the discontent between the English and the Dutch, about these and other
differences, continued, and daily increased, until at last there was a sword
found, to cut in sunder that knot at once, which the tedious disputes of
Amboyna and Jaccatra could not untie. And this was used in manner as follows.

About the eleventh of February 1622. Stilo veteri. a Japoner Soldier of the
Dutch in their Castle of Amboyna, walking in the night upon the wall, came to
the Sentinel (being a Hollander,) and there, amongst other talk, asked him some
questions touching the strength of the Castle, and the people that were
therein. It is here to be noted, that those Japoners (of whom there is not
thirty in all the Island) did, for the most part, serve the Dutch as Soldiers,
yet were not of their trusty bands always lodged in the Castle, but upon
occasion called out of the Town to assist in the watch. This Japoner aforesaid,
was for his said conference with the Sentinel apprehended upon suspicion of
Treason, and put to the Torture. Thereby (as some of the Dutch affirmed) he was
brought to confess himself, and sundry others of his Contrymen there, to
have contrived the taking of the Castle. Hereupon, other Japoners were examined
and Tortured, as also a Portugal, the Guardian of the Slaves under the Dutch.
During this examination, which continued three or four days; some of the
Englishmen went to and from the Castle upon their business, saw the prisoners,
heard of their tortures, and of the crime laid to their charge; But all this
while suspected not, that this matter did any whit concern themselves, having
never had any conversation with the Japoners, nor with the Portugal aforesaid.
At the same time there was one Abel Price, Abel Price examined.
Surgeon of the English, prisoner in the Castle, for offering in his
drunkenness to set a Dutch man's house on fire. This fellow the Dutch took, and
showed him some of the Japoners, whom they had first most grievously tortured,
and told him, they had confessed the English to have been of their confederacy
for the taking of the Castle; and that if he would not confess the same, they
would use him even as they had done these Japoners, and worse also. Having
given him the Torture, they soon made him confess what ever they asked him.
This was the sifteenth of February 1622. Stilo veteri. Forthwith, about nine of
the clock the same morning, they sent for Captain Towerson, and the rest of the
English that were in the Town to come to speak with the Governor in the
Castle: They all went, save one that was left to keep the house. Being come to
the Governor, he told Captain Towerson, that himself and others of his Nation
were accused of a conspiracy to surprise the Castle, and therefore, until
further Trial, were to remain prisoners. Instantly also they attached him that
was left at home in the house, took the Merchandise of the English Company
there into their own custody by Inventorie, and seized all the Chests, Boxes,
Books, Writings, and other things in the English house. Captain Towerson was
committed to his Chamber with a guard of Dutch Soldiers. Emmanuel Tomson was
kept prisoner in the Castle; the rest, viz John Beomont, Edward Collins,
William Webber, Ephraim Ramsey, Timothy Johnson, John Fardo, and Robert Brown
were sent aboard the Hollanders Ships then riding in Harbor, some to one Ship,
and some to another, and all made fast in Irons. The same day also the
Governor sent to the two other Factories in the same Island, to apprehend the
rest of the English there. So that Samuel Colson, John Clark, George Sharrock,
that were found in the Factorie at Hitto, and Edward Collins, William Webber,
and John Sadler at Larica, were all brought prisoners to Amboyna, the sixteenth
of February. Upon which day also John Powl, John Wetheral, and Thomas Ladbrook,
were apprehended at Cambello, and John Beomont, William Grigs, and Ephraim
Ramsey, at Loho, and brought in irons to Amboyna the twentieth of the same
month. In the mean time the Governor and Fiscal went to work with the
prisoners that were already there: And first they sent for John Beomont, and
Timothy Johnson, from aboard the Unicorn; who being come into the Castle,
Beomont was left with a guard in the Hall, and Johnson was taken into another
room. Where, by and by, Beomont heard him cry out very pitifully; then to be
quiet for a little while, and then loud again. After taste of the torture, Abel
Price the Surgeon, that first was examined and tortured (as is above
remembered) was brought in to confront and accuse him: But Johnson not yet
confessing any thing, Price was quickly carried out, and Johnson brought again
to the torture; where Beomont heard him sometime cry aloud, then quiet again,
then roar afresh. At last, after he had been about an hour in this second
examination, he was brought forth wailing and lamenting, all wet, and cruelly
burnt in diverse parts of his body, and so laid aside in a byplace of the Hall,
with a Soldier to watch him that he should speak with no body. Emanuel Tomson
examined.
Then was Emanuel Tomson brought to examination; not in the room where Johnson
had been, but in another, something farther from the Hall. Yet Beomont being in
the Hall, heard him roar most lamentably, and many times. At last, after an
hour and an half spent in torturing him, he was carried away into another room
another way, so that he came not by Beomont through the Hall. Next, was Beomont
called in, and being demanded many things, all which he denied with deep Oaths
and protestations, was made fast to be Tortured, a cloth tied about his neck,
and two men ready with their Jarres of water to be poured on his head. But yet
for this time the Governor bad loose him, he would spare him a day or two,
because he was an old man. This was all Saturdays work, the fifteenth of
February aforesaid.

Upon Sunday the sixteenth of February, William Webber, Edward Collins, Ephraim
Ramsey, and Robert Brown, were fetched from aboard the Rotterdam, to be
examined. At the same time came Samuel Colson, William Grigs, and John Clark,
George Sharrock, and John Sadler, from Hitto and Larica, and were immediately,
upon their arrival, brought into the Castle Hall.

Robert Brown Tailor was first called in; Robert Brown examined.
and being tormented with water, confessed all in order as the Fiscal asked him.

Then was Edward Collins called in, Edward Collins examined.
and told, that those that were formerly examined, had confessed him as
accessarie to the plot of taking the Castle. Which, when he denied with great
Oaths and execrations, they made his hands and feet fast to the Rack, bound a
cloth about his throat, ready to be put to the torture of water. Thus
prepared, he prayed to be respited, and he would confess all. Being let down,
he again vowed and protested his innocence; yet said, that because he knew
that they would by torture make him confess any thing, though never so false,
they should do him a great favor, to tell him what they would have him say,
and he would speak it, to avoid the torture. The Fiscal hereupon said; What, do
you mock us? and bad, Up with him again; and so gave him the torment of water:
which he not able long to endure, prayed to be let down again to his
Confession. Then he devised a little with himself, and told them, That about
two months and a half before, himself, Tomson, Johnson, Brown, and Fardo, had
plotted, with the help of the Japoners, to surprise the Castle. Here he was
interrupted by the Fiscal, and asked whether Captain Towerson were not of that
conspiracy. He answered, No. You lie, said the Fiscal; did not he call you all
to him, and tell you, that those daily abuses of the Dutch had caused him to
think of a Plot, and that he wanted nothing but your consent and secrecy? Then
said a Dutch Merchant, one John Joost that stood by. Did not you all swear upon
a Bible to be secret to him? Collins answered with great Oaths, that he knew
nothing of any such matter. Then they bad make him fast again: whereupon he
then said, All was true that they had spoken. Then the Fiscal asked him,
whether the English in the rest of the Factories, were not consenting to this
Plot. He answered, No. The Fiscal then asked him, whether the President of the
English at Jaccatra, or Master Welden A gent in Banda, were not Plotters or
privy to this business. Again he answered, No. Then the Fiscal asked him, by
what means the Iaponers should have executed their purpose. Whereat, when
Collins stood staggering and devising of some probable fiction, the Fiscal holp
him, and said, Should not two Japoners have gone to each point of the Castle,
and two to the Governors Chamber door; and when the hurly-burly had been
without, and the Governor coming to see what was the matter, the Japoners to
have killed him? Here one that stood by, said to the Fiscal, Do not tell him
what he should say, but let him speak of himself. Whereupon the Fiscal, without
attending the answer to his former question, asked what the Japoners should
have had for their reward. Collins answered, 1000 Ryals apiece. Lastly, he
asked him, when this plot should have been effected. Whereunto, although he
answered him nothing (not knowing what to devise upon the sudden) yet he was
dismissed, and very glad to come clear of the Torture, though with certain
belief that he should die for this his confession.

Next was Samuel Colson brought in, Samuel Colson examined.
being newly arrived from Hitto, as is before touched, and was the same day
brought to the Torture, who, for fear of the pain wherewith he saw Collins come
out, in such a case, that his eyes were almost blown out of his head with the
Torment of water; chose rather to confess all they asked him: and so was
quickly dismissed, coming out weeping, lamenting, and protesting his innocence.

Then was John Clark, John Clark examined.
that came with Colson from Hitto, fetched in, and a little after was heard (by
the rest that were without in the Hall) to cry out amain, They Tortured him
with water and with fire, by the space of two hours. The manner of his Torture
(as also of Johnsons and Tomsons) was as follows: First they hoised him up by
the hands with a cord on a large door, where they made him fast upon two
staples of Iron, fixed on both sides at the top of the door posts, haling his
hands one from the other as wide as they could stretch. Being thus made fast,
his feet hung some two foot from the ground; which also they stretched asunder
as far as they would retch, and so made them fast beneath unto the doretrees on
each side. Then they bound a cloth about his neck and face so close, that
little or no water could go by. That done, they poured the water softly upon
his head until the cloth was full up to the mouth and nostrils, and somewhat
higher; so that he could not draw breath, but he must withal suck in the
water: which being still continued to be poured in softly, forced all his
inward parts, came out of his nose, ears, and eyes, and often, as it were
stifling and choking him, at length took away his breath, and brought him to a
swoun or fainting. Then they took him quickly down, and made him vomit up the
water. Being a little recovered, they triced him up again, and poured in the
water as before, eftsoons taking him down as he seemed to be stifled. In this
manner they handled him three or four several times with water, till his body
was swollen twice or thrice as big as before, his cheeks like great bladders, and
his eyes staring and strutting out beyond his forehead: yet all this he bare,
without confessing any thing; insomuch as the Fiscal and tormentors reviled
him, saying, that he was a Devil, and no man, or surely was a Witch, at least
had some charm about him, or was enchanted, that he could bear so much.
Wherefore they cut off his hair very short, as supposing he had some witchcraft
hidden therein. Afterward they hoised him up again as before, and then burnt
him with lighted candles in the bottom of his feet, until the fat dropped out
the candles; yet then applied they fresh lights unto him. They burnt him also
under the elbows, and in the palms of the hands; likewise under the armpits,
until his inwards might evidently be seen. At last, when they saw he could of
himself make no handsome confession, then they led him along with questions of
particular circumstances, by themselves framed. Being thus wearied and overcome
by the torment, he answered, yea, to whatsoever they asked: whereby they drew
from him a body of a confession to this effect; to wit, That Captain Towerson
had upon New Years day last before, sworn all the English at Amboyna to be
secret and assistant to a plot that he had projected, with the help of the
Japoners, to surprise the Castle, and to put the Governor and the rest of the
Dutch to death.

Having thus martyred this poor man, they sent him out by four Blacks: who
carried him between them to a dungeon, where he lay five or six days, without
any Surgeon to dress him, until (his flesh being putrified) great Maggots
dropped and crept from him in a most loathsome and noisome manner. Thus they
finished their Sabbath days work; and it growing now dark, sent the rest of
the English (that came that day from Hitto, and till the^ attended in the Hall)
first to the Smith's shop, where they were laden with Irons, and then to the
same loathsome dungeon, where Clark and the rest were, accompanied with the
poor Iaponers, lying in the putrefaction of their tortures.

The next morning being Monday the seventeenth of February, old style, William
Griggs and John Fardo, with certain Iaponers, were brought into the place of
examination.

The Iaponers were first cruelly tortured, William Griggs examined
to accuse Griggs, which at last they did: and Griggs, to avoid the like
torture, confessed all that the Fiscal demanded. John Fardo examined.
By and by the like also was done by John Fardo, and other Iaponers: but Fardo
himself endured the torture of water, and at last confessed whatsoever the
Fiscal asked him; and so was sent back to prison.

The same day also John Beomont was brought the second time to the Fiscals
chamber; John Beomont examined.
where one Captain Newport a Dutch man's son (born in England) was used as an
Interpreter. William Griggs was also brought in to accuse him; who said, that
when the consultation for taking of the Castle, was held, then he (the said
Beomont) was present. Beomont denied it with great earnestness and deep Oaths.
At last being triced up, and drenched with water till his inwards were ready to
crack, he answered affirmatively to all the Fiscals interrogatories: yet as
soon as he was let down, he clearly demonstrated to Captain Newport, and
Johnson a Dutch Merchant, then also present, that these things could not be so.
Nevertheless he was forced to put his hand to his confession, or else he must
to the torture again, which to avoid, he subscribed; and so had a great iron
bolt and two shackles riveted to his legs, and then was carried back to prison.

After this, George Sharrock, George Sharrock examined
Assistant at Hitto, was called in question; who, seeing how grievously others
were martyred, made his earnest prayer to God (as since upon his Oath he has
acknowledged) that he would suffer him to make some such probable lies against
himself, as the Dutch might believe, and so he might escape the torment. Being
brought to the Rack, the water provided, and the candles lighted, he was by the
Governor and Fiscal examined, and charged with the conspiracy. He fell upon
his knees, and protested his innocence. Then they commanded him to the Rack,
and told him; Unless he would confess, he should be tormented with fire and
water to death, and then should be drawn by the heels to the gallows, and there
hanged up. He still persisting in this his innocence, the Fiscal bad him be
hoised up. Then he craved respite a while, and told them, that he was at Hitto,
and not in Amboyna, upon New Years day, when the consultation was pretended;
neither had been there since November before, as was well known to sundry of
the Hollanders themselves that resided there also with him. Hereupon, they
commanded him again to the Rack: but he, craving respite as before, now told
them, that he had many times heard John Clark (who was with him at Hitto) say,
That the Dutch had done them many unsufferable wrongs, and that he would be
revenged of them: to which end, he had once broken with Captain Towerson of a
brave Plot. At which word the Fiscal and the rest were attentive, encouraging
him to proceed. So he went on, saying, that John Clark had entreated Captain
Towerson, that he might go to Maccasser, there to consult and advise with the
Spaniards to come with Galleys, and rob the small Factories of Amboyna and
Seran, when no ships were there. Here they asked him, what Captain Towerson
said to this. He answered, that Captain Towerson was very much offended with
Clark for the motion; and from thenceforth could never abide him. Hereupon the
Fiscal called him Rogue, and said he prated all from the matter, and should go
to the torture. He craved favor again, and began another tale; to wit, that
upon Twelf-day then last past, John Clark told him at Hitto, that there was a
practice to take the Castle of Amboyna; and asked him, whether he would consent
thereunto. Whereupon he demanded of Clark, whether Captain Towerson knew of any
such matter. Which, Clark affirming; then he (the said Sharrock) said, that he
would do as the rest did. Then the Fiscal asked him, what time the consultation
was held. He answered, In November last. The Fiscal said, That could not be:
for, the consultation was upon New-yerrs day. The Prisoner said as before in
the beginning; that he had not been in Amboyna since the first of December,
till now that he was brought thither. Why then, quoth the Fiscal, have you
belied your self? whereto the Prisoner resolutely answered, that all that he
had spoken touching any treason, was false and feigned, only to avoid torment.
Then went the Fiscal out into another room to the Governor, and anon returned,
and sent Sharrock unto the Prison again. The next day he was called again, and
a writing presented him, wherein was framed a formal confession of his last
conference with Clark at Hitto, touching the plot to take the Castle of
Amboyna: which being read over to him, the Fiscal asked him, whether it were
true, or no. He answered, No, Why then, said the Fiscal, did you confess it? He
answered, For fear of Torment. The Fiscal and the rest in a great rage told him
he lied; his mouth had spoken it, and it was true, and therefore he should
subscribe it. Which as soon as he had done, he fell presently into a great
passion charging them bitterly to be guilty of the innocent blood of himself
and the rest, which they should look to answer for at the day of Judgment:
withal he grappled with the Fiscal, and would have stopped him from carrying
in the confession to the Governor, with whom he also craved to speak; but was
instantly laid hold on, and carried away to prison.

William Webber, William Webber examined.
being next examined, was told by the Fiscal, that John Clark had confessed him
to have been at Amboyna on New Years day, and sworn to Captain Towerson's plot,
etc. All which he denied, alleging, he was that day at Larica: yet being
brought to the torture, he then confessed, he had been at the consultation at
Amboyna upon New Years day, with all the rest of the circumstances in order as
he was asked. He also further told them, he had received a letter from John
Clark; after which was a Postscript, excusing his brief writing at that time,
for that there was great business in hand. But one Renier a Dutch Merchant,
then standing by, told the Governor, that upon New Years day, the time of this
pretended consultation, Webber and he were merry at Larica. So the Governor
left him, and went out. But the Fiscal held on upon the other point, touching
the Postscript of Clark's Letter, urging him to show the same. Which when he
could not do, though often terrified with the torture, he gave him respite;
promising to save his life, if he would produce that Letter.

Then was Captain Towerson brought to the examination, Gabriel Towerson
examined.
and showed what others had confessed of him. He deeply protesting his
innocence, Samuel Colson was brought to confront him: who being told, that
unless he would now make good his former confession against Captain Towerson,
he should to the torture, coldly re-affirmed the same, and so was sent away.
They also brought William Grigs and John Fardo to justify their former
confessions to his face. Captain Towerson seriously charged them, that as they
would answer it at the dreadful day of Judgment, they should speak nothing
but the truth. Both of them instantly fell down upon their knees before him;
praying him for Gods sake to forgive them, and saying further openly before
them all, that whatsoever they had formerly confessed, was most false, and
spoken only to avoid torment. With that the Fiscal and the rest offered them
again to the torture: which they would not endure, but then affirmed their
former confessions to be true.

When Colson (who had accused Captain Towerson before) was required to set his
hand to his confession, he asked the Fiscal, upon whose head he thought the sin
would lie; whether upon his that was constrained to confess what was false, or
upon the co^strainers. The Fiscal, after a little pause upon this question,
went in to the Governor then in another room; but anon returning, told Colson
he must subscribe it: which he did; yet withal made this protestation: Well,
quoth he, you make me to accuse my self and others of that which is as false,
as God is true: for, God is my witness I am as innocent as the child new born.

Thus have they examined all that belong to the English Company in the several
Factories of the Island of Amboyna.

The one and twentieth of February, John Wetheral examined.
they examined John Wetheral, Factor at Cambello in the Island of Seran. He
confessed, he was at Amboyna upon New Years day: but for the consultation,
whereof he was demanded, he said he knew of no other but touching certain
cloth of the English Company, that lay in the Factories rotting and wormeaten,
which they advised together how to put off to the best avail of their
Imployers. The Governor said, they questioned him not about cloth, but of
treason: whereof when he had protested his innocence, he was for that time
dismissed. But the next day he was sent for again, and Captain Towerson brought
to confront and accuse him, having before (it seems) confessed somewhat against
him. But Mr. Towerson spoke now these words only: Oh, M. Wetheral, M.
Wetheral, speak the truth, and nothing but the truth, as God shall put into
your heart. So Captain Towerson was put out again, and Wetheral brought to the
torture of water with great threats; if water would not make him confess, fire
should. He prayed them to tell him what he should say, or to write down what
they would, he would subscribe it. They said, he needed no Tutor; they would
make him confess of himself. But when they had triced him up four several
times, and saw he knew not what to say, then they read him other men's
confessions, and asked him from point to point, as they had done others: and he
still answered, Yea, to all.

Next was called in John Powl, John Powl examined.
Wetherals assistant at Camhello: but he, proving that he was not at Amboyna
since November (save now when he was brought thither prisoner) and being spoken
for by one John Joost, who had long been well acquainted with him, was
dismissed without torture.

Then was Thomas Ladhrook, Thomas Ladbrook examined.
servant to VVetheral and Powl at Camhello, brought to be examined: but proving
that he was at Cambello at the time of the pretended consultation, and serving
in such quality, as that he was never acquainted with any of the Letters from
the Agent of Amboyna, he was easily and quickly dismissed.

Ephraim Ramsey was also examined upon the whole pretended conspiracy, Ephraim
Ramsey examined.
and particularly questioned concerning Captain VVelden the English Agent in
Banda, but denying all, and proving that he was not at Amboyna at Newyears
tide, being also spoken for by John Ioost; was dismissed, after he had hanged
in the Rack a good while, with irons upon his legs, and the cloth about his
mouth.

Lastly, Iohn-Sadler, John Sadler examined.
servant to William Grigs at Larica, was examined; and being found to have been
absent from Amboyna at New Years tide, when Grigs and others were there, was
dismissed.

Thus have we all their examinations tortures, and confessions, being the work
of 8. days, from the 15. to the 23. of February. After which, was two days
respite before the sentence. John Powl, being himself acquitted as before said,
went to the prison to visit John Fardo, one of those that had accused Captain
Towerson. To him Fardo religiously protested his innocence; but especially his
sorrow for accusing Master Towerson: for, said he, the fear of death does
nothing dismay me; for, God (I trust) will be merciful to my soul, according
to the innocence of my cause. The only matter that troubles me, is, that
through fear of Torment I have accused that honest and godly man Captain
Towerson, who (I think in my conscience) was so upright and honest toward all
men, that he harbored no ill will to any, much less would attempt any such
business as he is accused of. He further said, he would before his death
receive the Sacrament, in acknowledgement that he had accused Captain Towerson
falsely and wrongfully, only through fear of Torment.

The five and twentieth of February, old style, all the prisoners, as well the
English, as the Portugal and the Iaponers, were brought into the great Hall of
the Castle, and there were solemnly condemned, except John Powel, Ephraim
Ramsey, John Sadler, and Thomas Ladbrook, formerly acquitted, as aforesaid.

Captain Towerson having been (during all his imprisonment) kept apart from the
rest, so that none of them could come to speak with him; writ much in his
Chamber (as some of the Dutch report,) but all was suppressed, save only a
Bill of debt, which one Th. Johnson, a free Burgher got of him by favor of his
keepers for acknowledgement, that the English Company owed him a certain sum of
money. In the end of this Bill he writ these words: Firmed by the Firm of me
Gabriel Towerson now appointed to die guiltles of any thing that can be justly
laid to my charge. God forgive them their guilt; and receive me to his mercy.
Amen. This Bill being brought to M. Welden the English Agent at Banda, he paid
the money, and received in the acknowledgement.

William Griggs (who had before accused Captain Towerson) writ these words
following in his Table Book: We, whose names are here specified; John Beomont,
Merchant of Loho, William Griggs Merchant of Larica, Abel Price, Chirurgian of
Amboyna. Robert Brown, Tailor, which do here lie Prisoners in the Ship
Rotterdam, being apprehended for conspiracy, for blowing up the Castle of
Amboyna: we being judged to death this fifth of March. Anno 1622. which we
through torment were constrained to speak, that which we never meant, nor once
imagined; the which we take upon our deaths and salvation: they tortured us
with that extreme torment of fire and water, that flesh and blood could not
endure: and this we take upon our deaths, that they have put us to death
guiltless of our accusation. So therefore we desire, that they that shall
understand this; that our Imployers may understand these wrongs, and that your
selves would have a care to look to your selves: for their intent was to have
brought you in also; they asked concerning you; which if they had tortured us,
we must have confessed you also. And so farewell; written in the dark.

This Table Book was afterward delivered to M. Welden aforementioned by one that
served the Dutch

Samuel Colson also, another that accused Captain Towerson, writ as follows
in the waste leaves of a book, wherein were bound together the Common Prayers,
the Psalms, and the Catechism.

In one page thus;

March 5. Stilo novo, being Sunday, aboard the Rotterdam, lyin Irons:

UNderstand that I Samuel Colson, late Factour of Hitto, was apprehended for
suspicion of conspiracy; and for any thing I know, must die for it: wherefore,
having no better means to make my innocence known, have writ this in this
book, hoping some good English men will see it. I do here upon my salvation, as
I hope by his death and passion to have redemption for my sins, that I am clear
of all such conspiracy; neither do I know any English man guilty thereof; nor
other creature in the World. As this is true: God bless me.

Sam. Colson.

On the other side, upon the first page of the Chatechism, is thus written:

IN another leaf you shall understand more, which I have written in this book.

Sam. Colson.

In the beginning of the Psalms and in the leaf so referred unto, is thus
written, viz.

THe Iapons were taken with some villainy, and brought to examination: being
most tyrannously tortured, were asked if the English had any hand in the^^
^lot. Which torture made them say, Yea. Then was Master Tomson, M. Johnson, M.
Collins, John Clark brought to examination, and were burned under the arms,
armpits, the hands, and soals of the feet, with another most miserable torment
to drink water; some of them almost tortured to death, and were forced to
confess that which they never knew, by reason of the torment which flesh and
blood is not able to endure. Then were the rest of the English men called one
by one (amongst which I was one) being wished to confess, or else I must go to
torment; withal caused M. Johnson, who was before tormented, to witness
against me, or else be should be tormented again; which rather than he would
endure, he said, What they would have, be would speak. Then must I confess
that I never knew, or else to go to torment; which rather than I would suffer,
I did confess that, which (as I shall he saved before God Almighty) is not
true, being forced for fear of torment. Then did they make us witness against
Captain Towerson, and at last made Captain Towerson confess all, being for fear
of most cruel torment; for which we must all die. As I mean and hope to have
pardon for my sins, I know no more than the child unborn of this business.
Written with my own hand the first of March, Stilo novo.

Sam. Colson.

Yet in another page were these words:

I Was born in New Castle upon Tyne, where I desire this book may come, that
my friends may know of my innocence.

Sam. Colson.

This book he delivered to one that served the Hollanders, who sowed it up in
his bed, and afterward, at his opportunity delivered it to M. VVelden before
named

All these said writings are yet extant under the hands of the several parties,
well known to their friends here in England.

The six and twentieth of February, Stilo veteri, the Prisoners were all
brought into the great Hall of the Castle (except Captain Towerson and Emanuel
Tomson) to be prepared for death by the ministers. The Iaponeers now all in
general, as some of them had done before in particular, cried out unto the
English, saying; Oh you English men, where did we ever in our lives eat with
you, talk with you, or (to our remembrance) see you? The English answered, Why
then have you accused us? The poor men, perceiving they were made believe each
had accused others, before they had so done indeed; showed them their tortured
bodies, and said, If a stone were thus burnt, would it not change his nature?
how much more we that are flesh and blood?

Whilst they were all in the Hall, Cap. Towerson was brought up into the place
of examination and two great Jarres of water carried after him. What he there
did or suffered was unknown to the English without: but it seems they made
him then to underwrite his confession. After supper John Powl, Ephraim Ramsey,
Th. Ladbrook, and John Sadler, who were found not guily, as aforesaid, were
taken from the rest, and put into another room. By and by also were Samuel
Colson, and Edward Collins brought from the rest; into the room where Emanuel
Tomson lay: The Fiscal told them, it was the Governors mercy, to save one of
them three: and it being indifferent to him, which of them were the man, it was
his pleasure they should draw lots for it, which they did, and the free lot
fell to Edward Collins; who then was carried away to the Chamber, where John
Powl and the rest that were quit, lodged, and Samuel Colson back into the Hall.
Anon also John Beomont was brought out of the Hall into the Chamber, where John
Powl, and the rest of the acquitted persons were, and was told, that he was
beholding to Peter Johnson the Dutch Merchant of Lobo, and to the Secretary;
for they two had begged his life.

So then there remained in the Hall ten of the English; for Captain Towerson
and Emmanuel Tomson (as is said before) were kept in several rooms apart from
the rest. To these that remained in the Hall, came the Dutch Ministers, who
telling them how short a time they had to live, admonished and exhorted them to
make their true confessions; for it was a dangerous and desperate thing, to
dissemble at such a time. The English still professed their innocence, and
prayed the Ministers that they might all receive the Sacraments, as a seal of
the forgiveness of their sins; and withal, thereby to confirm their last
profession of their innocence. But this would by no means be granted.
Whereupon Samuel Colson said thus unto the Ministers; You manifest unto us the
danger of dissimulation in this case. But tell us, if we suffer guiltless,
being other wise also true believers in Christ Jesus, What shall be our reward?
The Preacher answered, By how much the clearer you are, so much the more
glorious shall be your resurrection. With that word, Colson started up, embraced
the Preacher, and gave him his purse,, with such money as he had in it, saying;
Domine, God bless you: tell the Governor, I freely forgive him; and I entreat
you, to exhort him to repent him of his bloody tragedy, wrought upon us poor
innocent souls. Here all the rest of the English signified their consent to
this Speech. Then spoke John Fardo to the rest, in presence of the Ministers,
as follows: My Contrymen, and Brethren, all that are here with me
condemned to die, I charge you all, as you will answer it at Gods judgment
seat, if any of you be guilty of this matter, whereof we are condemned,
discharge your consciences, and confess the truth for satisfaction of the
World. Hereupon Samuel Colson spoke with a loud voice, saying, According to my
innocence in this treason, so Lord pardon all the rest of my sins: and if I be
guilty thereof more or less, let me never be partaker of thy heavenly joys. At
which words every one of the rest cried out, Amen for me, Amen for me, good
Lord. This done, each of them knowing whom he had accused, went one to another
begging forgivenes for their false accusation, being wrung from them by the
pains or fear of torture. And they all freely forgave one another: for none had
been so falsely accused, but he himself had accused another as falsely. In
particular, George Sharrock (who survived to relate this nights passage)
kneeled down to John Clark, whom he had accused of the tale at Hitto above
mentioned, and craved forgiveness at his hands. Clark freely forgave him,
saying; how should I look to be forgiven of God, if I should not forgive you,
having my self so falsely accused Captain Towerson, and others?

After this, they spent the rest of the doleful night in Prayer, singing of
Psalms, and comforting one another; though the Dutch that guarded them, offered
them wine, bidding them drink Lustick, and drive away the sorrow; according to
the custom of their own Nation in the like case, but contrary to the nature of
the English.

Upon the morrow morning, being the execution day, the 27. of February, Stilo
veteri, John Powl being freed (as is above recited) came into the room where
the condemned persons were, and found them at Prayer. They all requested him to
relate unto their friends in England, the innocence of their cause; taking it
upon their deaths, that what they had confessed against themselves and others
touching this crime, was all false, and forced by fear of torture.

The same morning William Wehber was called again into the Fiscals room, and
there pressed to produce the letter, which he had before confessed to have
received from John Clark, in the Postscript whereof some great business was
intimated. They promised him his life, if he would deliver or produce them that
letter: which although he did not, nor indeed could, yet at last they pardoned
him, and sent him to the rest that were saved, and Sharrock with him.

That morning Emanuel Tomson understanding that John Beomont was pardoned, made
means to have him come and speak with him; which, with much ado, he obtained.
Beomont found him sitting in a Chamber, all alone in a most miserable fashion;
the wounds of his torture bound up, but the matter and gore-bloud issuing
through the Rollers. He took M. Beomont by the hand, and prayed him, when he
came into England, to do his duty to the Honorable Company, his Masters, to M.
Robinson, and to his brother Billingsley, and to certify them of his
innocence, which (said he) you your self know well enough.

All things being prepared for the execution, the condemned were brought forth
of the Hall along by the Chamber where the quit and pardoned were; who stood in
the door, to give and take the farewell of their Contrymen now going to
execution. Staying a little for this purpose, they prayed and charged those,
that were saved, to bear witness to their friends in England of their
innocence, and that they died not Traitors, but so many Innocents, merely
murdered by the Hollanders, whom they prayed God to forgive their
bloud-thirstiness, and to have mercy upon their own souls.

Being brought into the Yard, their sentence was there read unto them from a
Gallery, and then they were thence carried unto the place of execution,
together with nine Japons and a Portugal: not the ordinary and short way, but
round about in a long procession, through the Town; the way guarded with five
Companies of Soldiers, Dutch, and Amboyners, and thronged with the Natives of
the Island, that (upon the summons given the day before by the sound of the
Drum) flocked together to behold this triumph of the Dutch over the English.
Samuel Colson had conceived a Prayer in writing, in the end whereof he
protested his innocence: which Prayer he read to his fellows the night before,
and now also at the place of execution devoutly pronounced the same; then threw
away the paper, which the Governor caused to be brought to him, and kept it,

Emanuel Tomson told the rest, he did not doubt but GOD would show some sign of
their innocence; and every one of the rest took it severally upon their death,
that they were utterly guiltless; and so one by one with great cheerfulness
suffered the fatal stroke.

The Portugal prayed over his Beads very devoutly, and often kissed the Cross;
swearing thereupon, that he was utterly innocent of this treason: yet
confessed, that God had justly brought this punishment upon him, for that
having a wife in his own Country, he had, by the persuasion of the Dutch
Governor, taken another in that Country, his first being yet living.

The Japons likewise (according to their Religion) shut up their last Act with
the like profession of their innocence. So there suffered ten English men,
viz. Captain Gabriel Towerson the Agent of the English at Amboyna, Samuel
Colson Factor at Hitto, Emanuel Tomson Assistant at Amboyna, Timothy Johnson
Assistant there also, John Wetheral Factor at Cambello, John Clark Assistant at
Hitto, William Griggs Factor at Larica, John Fardo Steward of the house, Ahel
Price Chirurgian, and Robert Brown Tailor.

The Portugal also suffered with them. His name was Augustine Perez. He was born
at Bengala.

The names of the Japoneses that suffered (if any be curious to know them) were
as follows: Hititso, all born at Firando. Tsiosa, all born at Firando. Sinsa.
all born at Firando. Sidney Migiel, born at Nagansacque. Pedro Congie, born at
Nagansacque. Thome Corea. born at Nagansacque. Quiandayo native of Coraets.
Tsabinda of Tsoncketgo. Zanchoe of Fisien.


Besides these, there were two other Japoneses; the one named Soysimo, born at
Firando; and the other Sacoube, of the same place: the former of which being
tortured, confessed both to have been privy to this pretended treason, and to
have offered his service unto the English to aid them in taking of the Castle:
and the latter confessed to have had knowledge of the consultation of the other
Japons to this purpose. But neither of them was executed, nor so much as
condemned. The reason whereof was not known to the English that were saved.

They had prepared a cloth of black Velvet, for Captain Towersons's body to
fall upon; which being stained and defaced with his blood, they afterward put
to the account of the English Company.

At the instant of the execution, there arose a great darkness, with a sudden
and violent gust of wind and tempest; whereby two of the Dutch ships, riding in
the harbor, were driven from their Anchors, and with great labor and
defficulty saved from the Rocks. Within a few days after, one William Dunckin,
who had told the Governor. That Robert Brown, the English Tailour, had a few
Months before told him, he hoped, that within six Months the English should
have as much to do in the Castle of Amboyna, as the Dutch: This fellow, coming
upon an evening to the grave where the English were buried, being all (save
Captain Towerson) in one pit, fell down upon the grave; and having lien there a
while, rose up again stark mad, and so continued two or three days together,
and then died. Forthwith also fell a new sickness at Amboyna, which swept away
about a thousand people Dutch and Amboyners: in the space wherein, there
usually died not above thirty at other seasons. These signs were by the
surviuing English, referred to the confident prediction of Emanuel Tomson
aabove-named, and were by the Amboyners interpreted as a token of the wrath of
God for this barbarous Tyranny of the Hollanders.

The next day after the execution, being the eight and twentieth of February,
Stilo veteri, was spent in Triumph for the new General of the Dutch then
proclaimed, and in public rejoicing for the deliverance from this pretended
treason. The day following, being the first of March, John Beomont, George
Sharrock, Edward Collins, and William Webber, were brought to the Governor;
who told Webber Beomont and Sharrock, that they were pardoned in Honor of the
new General; and Collins, that he was to go to Jaccatra, there to stand to the
favor of the General. So the Governor made them drink wine with him, and
courteously dismissed them: willing them to go and consult with the rest that
were saved, who were fit to be placed in the several Factories. Which done, and
their opinions reported to the Governor, he accordingly commanded each to his
place; adding, that he would thenceforth take upon him the patronage and
Government of the English Companies business. To which purpose, he had within a
few days past opened a Letter that came from the English President at
Iaccatra, directed to Captain Towerson; being (as he said) the first English
Letter that ever he intercepted; further, saying, that he was glad that he
sound by that Letter, that the English at Iaccatra were innocent touching this
business.

The Governor and Fiscal having thus made an end at Amboyna, dispatched
themselves for Banda: where they made very diligent enquiry against Captain
Welden, the English Agent there; yet found no color nor shadow of guilt to lay
hold on: but at last entertained him with courteous speeches, professing to be
very glad, that they found him, as well as the English at Iaccatra, to be
without suspicion of this Treason (as they term it.) Captain VVelden,
perceiving the disorder and confusion of the English Companies affairs at
Amboyna, by means of this dealing of the Dutch; forthwith hired a Dutch Pinnace
at Banda, and passed to Amboyna: where, instantly upon his arrival, he
re-called the Companies servants, sent (as before) by the Dutch Governor to
the upper-factories.

Having enquired of them, and the rest that were left at Amboyna, of the whole
proceedings lately passed, he found, by the constant and agreeing relation of
them all, that there was no such Treason of the English as was pretended: as
also understanding what strict command the Governor had given to the surviving
English, not once to talk or confer with the Country people concerning this
bloody business, although the said Country people every day reproched them
with treason, and a bloody intention to have massacred the Natives, and to have
ripped up the bellies of women with child, and such like stuff; wherewith the
Dutch have possessed the poor Vulgar, to make the English odious unto them. The
said M. VVelden therefore finding it to sort neither with the Honor nor profit
of the English Company, his Masters, to hold any longer residence in Amboyna,
he took the poor remnant of the English along with him, in the said hired
Pinnace for Iaccatra; whither the Governor had sent John Beomont and Edward
Collins before, as men condemned, and left to the mercy of the General.

When this heavy news of Amboyna came to Iaccatra and the English there, the
President forthwith sent to the General of the Dutch, to know by what Authority
the Governor of Amboyna had thus proceeded against the English, and how he and
the rest of the Dutch there at Iaccatra, did approve these proceedings. The
Governor returned for answer, that, The Governor of Amboyna's Authority was
derived from that of the Lords States General of the United Neatherlands; under
whom he had lawful Jurisdiction both in Criminal and civil causes, within the
destrict of Amboyna; further, that such proceeding was necessary against
Traitors, such as the English executed at Amboyna, might appear to be by their
own confessions: a Copy whereof he therewith sent to the English President; who
sent the same back to be Authentickly certified, but received it not again.

Hitherto has been recited the bare and naked Narration of the Progress and
passage of this action, as it is taken out of the Depositions of six several
English Factors; whereof four were condemned, and the other two acquitted in
this Process of Amboyna: all, since their return into England, examined upon
their Oaths in the Admiralty Court. The particular of Captain Towerson's, as
also of Emanuel Tomson's examinations and answers, are not yet come to light,
by reason that these two were kept apart from all the rest, and each alone by
himself; nor any other of the English suffered to come to speak with them,
except only that short Farewell, which John Beomont took of Tomson the morning
before the execution before mentioned. The like obscurity is yet touching the
examinations and answers of diverse of the rest that are executed; being,
during their imprisonment, so strictly looked to, and watched by the Dutch, that
they might not talk together, nor mutually relate their miseries.

But because the Hollanders defend their own proceedings by the confessions of
the parties executed, acknowledging severally under their hands, that they were
guilty of the pretended crime; it will not be amiss to recollect and recall
unto this place, as it were unto one sum and total, certain circumstances
dispersed in several parts of this Narration; whereby, as well the innocence
of the English, as the unlawful proceedings against them, may be manifested.

First therefore it is to be remembered, that the Japons were apprehended,
examined, and tortured three or four days, before the English were attached;
and the fame as well of their apprehension, as torture, was rife and notorious
in the Town of Amboyna, and the parts adjoining. Tomson, in this interim, and
the very first day of the examination of the Japon, went to the Castle to ask
leave of the Governor to land some Rice, and brought back the news with him to
the English house of the cruel handling of these poor Iapons. This had been
Item enough to the English, if they had been guilty, to shift for themselves:
whereto also they had ready means by the Curricurries or small Boats of the
Amboyners, which lie along the Strand in great number, wherewith they might
easily have transported themselves to Seran, to Bottoom, or to Maccassar, out
of the reach and Jurisdiction of the Dutch; but in that they fled not in this
case, it is a very strong presumption, that they were as little privy to any
treason of their own, as suspicious of any treachcerous tran laid for their
bloods.

In the next place let it be considered, how impossible it was for the English
to atchieve this pretended enterprise.

The Castle of Amboyna is of a very great strength (as is before declared;) the
Garrison therein two or three hundred men, besides as many more of their free
Burgers in the Town. What their care and circumspection in all their Forts is,
may appear, not only by the quick Alarm they now took at the foolish question
of the poor Japon, made to the Sentinel above-recited; but also by that which a
little before happened at Jaccatra, where one of their Soldiers was shot to
death for sleeping in the watch.

Durst ten English men (whereof not one a Soldier) attempt any thing upon such
a strength and vigilancie? As for the assistance of the Japons, they were but
ten neither, and all un-armed as well as the English: For, as at the seizure of
the English house, all the provision therein found was but three swords, two
Muskets, and half a pound of powder: so the Japons (except when they are in
service of the Castle, and there armed by the Dutch) are allowed to have no
Arms, but only a Catan, a kind of short sword: and it is forbidden to all the
Dutch, upon great penalty, to sell any hand-gun, powder or bullets to the
Japons or Amboyners. But let it be imagined, that these 20 persons English and
Japons, were so desperate as to adventure the exploit; how should they be able
to master the Dutch in the Castle, or to keep possession when they had gotten
it? what second had they? There was neither Ship nor Pinnace of the English in
the harbor. All the rest of the Japons in the Island, were not twenty persons,
and not one English more. The nearest of the rest of the English were at Banda,
forty leagues from Amboyna; and those but nine persons, all afterward cleared
by the Governor and Fiscal themselves from all suspicion of this pretended
crime, as were also the rest of the English at Jaccatra.

On the other side, besides the strength of the Castle and Town of Amboyna, the
Hollanders have three other strong Castles, well furnished with Soldiers in
the same Island, and at Cambello near adjoining. They had then also in the road
of Amboyna eight Ships and Vessels, namely, the Rotterdam of 1200 Tun, the
Unicorn of 300 Tun, the Free-mans Vessel of 100 Tun, the Calck of 60 Tun,
Captain Gamals Junck of 40 Tun, the Flute of 300 Tun, the Amsterdam of 1400
Tun, and a small Pinnace of about 60 Tun; and all these well furnished with men
and Ammunition. It is true, that the Stories do record sundry valiant and hardy
enterprises of the English Nation, and Holland is witness of some of them, yea,
has reaped the fruit of the English resolution; yet no Story, no Legend
scarcely reports any such hardiness, either of the English or others, That so
few persons, so naked of all provisions and supplies, should undertake such an
adventure upon a counter-party, so well and abundantly fitted at all points.

But let it be further granted, that they might possibly have overcome all
these difficulties; yet to what end and purpose should they put themselves into
such a jeopardie? They knew well enough, that it was agreed between both
companies at home, That the Forts in the Indies should remain respectively in
the hands of such, as had possession of them at the date of the Treaty, Anno
1619. and that the same was ratified by the Kings Majesty, and the Lords
States General. They knew likewise, and all the world takes knowledge of his
Majesty's Religious observation of Peace and Treaty with all his neighbors,
yea, with all the world: what reward then could these English hope for, of this
their Valor and danger? Certainly none other than that which is expressly
provided by the Treaty it self, that is, To be punished as the disturbers of
the Common Peace, and Amity of both Nations.

But let these English men have been as foolish in this plot as the Hollanders
will have them; is it also to be imagined, that they were so graceless, as when
they were condemned, and seriously admonished by the Ministers to discharge
their consciences, yet then to persist in their dissimulation, being otherwise
of such godly behavior, as to spend the time in Prayer singing of Psalms; and
spiritual comforting one another, which the Dutch would have had them bestow in
drinking to drive away their sorrow? Let Colsons question to the Minister be
considered: his and the rests offer and desire to receive the Sacrament, in
sign and token of their innocence; their mutual asking forgiveness for their
like false accusations of one another, forced by the Torture; Tomsons last
farewell to Beomont; Colsons prayer, and his writing in his Prayer book;
Fardo's farewell to Powel; also his conjuring exhortation to his fellows, to
discharge their consciences, and all their answers thereunto; craving Gods
mercy or judgment, according to their innocence in this cause; their general
and Religious profession of their innocence, to their Country men, at their
last parting with them, and finally, the sealing of this profession with their
last breath and blood, even in the very Article of death, and in the stroke of
the Executioner. What horrible and unexampled dissimulation were this? If some
one or more of them had been so fearfully desperate, yet would not there one
amongst ten be found to think of the judgment to come; whereunto he was then
instantly summoned without Essoin, Bail, or Mainprise? What? had they hope of
reprieve and life, if they kept their countenance to the last? Yet what hope
had Tomsom and the rest, when Captain Towerson's head was off? Nay, what desire
had Tomson and Clark to live, being so mangled and martyred by the Torture?
They were executed one by one, and every one several took it upon his death,
that he was guiltless.

Now to blanch and smooth over all this rough and Barbarous proceeding; it is
here given out, that the Governor and Fiscal found such evidence of the plot,
and dealt so evenly in the process, that they spared not their own people;
having used some of their Native Hollanders, partakers of this treason, in the
same manner as they did the English. But this, as well by the Relation here
truly and faithfully set down, grounded upon the sworn Testimony of six
credible witnesses, as also by other sufficient reports of diverse (lately come
out of those parts) appears to be a mere tale, not once alleged by any in
the Indies in many months after the execution, but only invented and
dispersed here, for a Fucus and a fair color upon the whole cause, and to make
the world believe, that the ground of this Barbarous and Tyrannous proceeding
was a true crime, and not the unsatiable covetousness of the Hollanders, by
this cruel treachery to gain the sole trade of the Molluccos, Banda and
Amboyna, which is already become the event of this bloody process.

To add hereunto by way of aggravation, will be needless; the fact is so full
of odious and barbarous inhumanity, executed by Hollanders upon the English
Nation, in a place where both lived under Terms of partnership and great amity,
confirmed by a most solemn Treaty.

A TRUE DECLARATION Of the News that came out of the East Indies, with the
Pinnace called the HARE, arrived in Texel in June, 1624. CONCERNING A
Conspiracy discovered in the Island of Amboyna, and the punishment following
thereupon, according to the course of Justice, in March 1624. comprehended in a
Letter Missive; AND SENT From a Friend in the Low Countries, to a Friend of
note in England, for information of him in the Truth of those passages.

Printed, Anno 1651.

Right Worshipful, and Worthy SIR,
THe great outcries which have been made in England, upon the last News which
came out of the East Indies, about a certain execution which was done in the
Island of Amboyna, in March 1623: because we see the great desire that your
Worship has, to keep good correspondence betwixt these two Nations, it has
caused me (beyond my own curiosity) to search, and inquire after the right and
true beginnings, proceedings, and issues of these affairs, upon which this
execution followed. Wherein, I persuade my self, I have attained good success,
by such means as I have used, and by my good acquaintance, so that (at the
last) I am come to the clear light of the matter: partly by the Letters that
have been sent home to the Company here, and declared to the States General, as
also by a particular examination of the process made against them in Amboyna,
before their execution, and sent over hither in writing, which at this present
has caused me to write this unto your Worship, that so, the truth may be made
known concerning this business in all places, where your Worthiness, and
respect, can, or may bring it to pass; that so your Worship, and all true
well-willers (of our Country,) may be no otherwise thought of than we deserve.

A True Declaration of the News that came out of the East Indies, with the
Pinnace called the HARE, which arrived in Texel, in June, 1624.
THe very causes and beginnings through which, the Governor, and Council,
established in the name of the United Neatherlands in Amboyna, came into
suspicion, that some thing was plotted against that Province; did first flow
from the great licentiousness of the Tarnatanes in Moluque, and Amboyna: Who,
contrary to the contract of alliance 1606. Tidore: Spaniards, (their, and our
ancient adversaries) by which, the said Tarnatanes had too much cast off all
respect, which they, both in regard of our confederacy, and manifold
assistance did owe to this State. The Spaniard also was master enough at Sea,
Moloque, because the English Merchants there in the East Indies were unwilling
to furnish us with Ships of War toward the common defense, as they were bound
to do, according to the Treaties 1619. to the number of ten. Through which, the
voyages to Mannila, coming to cease, the Enemy traded there, without any
interruption, and procured power to send Galleys, Ships, and Pinnaces to the
Moloque, with great succors of people, and provision; and that because,
against the same (through the default of the English Merchants) there were no
Ships of War kept, as there should have been.

Tarnata, begun to commit great insolences (otherwise than they were wont)
against our Nation, having outragiously assaulted diverse of us, diverse ways,
and also slain some, and we notwithstanding could not obtain any punishment
upon them. And as one outrage (unpunished) provokes many more, through hope of
the like impunity, or other considerations; so were the said Tarnatanes of
Amboyna, dwelling at Loho, Cambello, and those near adjoining places proceeded
further, and have armed themselves at Sea, and invaded diverse Islands, and
places, standing under the Neatherlands Governor in Amboyna, spoiling them,
and killing our Subjects, and taking others, and carrying them away for Slaves.
And notwithstanding the instant request of the Neatherlands Governor, no
satisfaction, or Justice, has followed; but the said Tarnatanes are yet gone
further, and openly threatened to murder the Dutch Merchants, and to spoil and
to burn the Logie, or Factorie, which our people have many years there enjoyed:
so that our Merchants have taken out the Dutch goods, to avoid damage: And the
Tarnatanes at Loho did actually set on fire, and ruined the said Neatherlands
Factorie. In the Manichels (an Island being under the Province of Amboyna) they
have in like manner shortly after, burned the Neatherlands Logie, with the loss
of all the goods therein. The Neatherlands Governor, that by his presence and
Authority, he might cause such Rebellions to cease, and to give order for time
to come, and also to seek satisfaction, and punishment upon the aforesaid
insolences; went toward Loho, with a small power of Sloops, and coming
thereabout, was met (otherwise than was wont) by a Navy of Sloops of the
Tarnatans of Loho, stronger than his were. These (by their conference) gave him
well to know, how little reverence they gave the Dutch Governor they braved
him, without hope of restitution of any thing to come; so that, (nothing done)
he was fain to return to his Castle of Amboyna. By reason of these things, the
said Tarnatanes became so stout and daring, that they gave out openly, that
they would come, and spoil our Subjects by a general Army, with above an
hundred Friggots: with these, they said they would come against Amboyna, to
make a universal spoil of our people; through which, there came a great fear
upon the Indians, standing under the Subjection of the High and Mighty Lords
the States, as also over the Neatherlanders.

Banda, it was also said, and the News went currantly there, That the
Hollanders were sure enough quit of the Castle of Amboyna; And at that time
there were diverse secret correspondencies between the Indians, and others,
which gave us great suspicion. By this means the Neatherlands Governor, and
Council of Amboyna, were moved to have special regard, and look narrowly unto
all things, seeing that it might be thence clearly gathered, that something
might be plotted against the State in Amboyna, and that the Indians (of
themselves) durst not offer to undertake any such great design, Europe, either
of Spaniarnds, Portugals, or some other; and also, they understood, that they
of Loho, Cambello, English Merchants. When things were in such a state in
Amboyna, there came forth and was wonderfully discovered, in February 1623. a
horrible conspiracy against the Castle, and Person of the Dutch Governor, and
the whole state of Amboyna: and first, by the apprehension of a certain
Iaponian (a complice of the feat) who at an unseasonable time was often seen
upon the wall of the Castle, where he also over-curiously enquired of the most
unskilful and filliest Soldiers, touching the seting, and change of the
Watch, and what number of people might be in the Castle, and many other things.
Whereupon, in the very Act, the said Iaponian was apprehended, and being
examined of many circumstances, he confessed that the Iaponian Soldiers under
our service, had decreed to make themselves Masters of the Castle, and that
they should have set upon this by the help of the English, who had solicited
them unto it; and that he, with all the other Japonians in the English house,
oftentimes within three Months before-going, had conferred with the English
(whom he there named, by their names) touching the manner, whereby they should
bring this treachery to pass, Hereupon it came to pass, that all the Japonian
Soldiers, which were in our service, were disarmed, and imprisoned, and by
examination of them all, it appeared plainly, by an orderly and
joynt-confession, that all the said Japonians, upon the entreaty of Gabriel
Towerson, and other English Merchants and Officers agreed to assist the said
English, to betray the Castle, and to give it over into the English power: and
that Gabriel Towerson, and Abel Price (an English Surgeon) and other English
dealt often with them (whom he named by their names) of the way and means, how
they should work it; the said Abel Price being before imprisoned, for a foul,
and execrable fact, and yet remaining in durance.

And although it appeared sufficiently to the Governor, and Council of
Amboyna, out of the confession of the Japonians, what the said Gabriel Towerson
with his Merchants and other Accomplices, had before resolved to do, and that the
Council had sufficient information to imprison them all; yet the General
Council would not precipitate, but commanded the said Abel Price, (who was in
prison) to come before the Council, and (after the places persons, and time,
nominated to him, where and when he had dealt with the Japonians, and other
English, about the said treachery) it was also from him well understood, how he
(in the name, and by the command of Gabriel Towerson) and another Japonian,
(who was then also in prison) had persuaded all the Iaponians, to consent to
this villainy, and that consequently the said Towerson, as the first Author,
and all the other English Merchants, (being in the Foreign Cantore of the
Province of Amboyna) had also knowledge of the said treachery.

Upon this full and unifom examination, and confession of 12 persons, as well
of the 11 Japonians, as one English, is the said Gabriel Towerson called to the
Council, and there appearing, the said Towerson called together all his people
unto the Castle, upon the request of the General Council, who were there taken,
and imprisoned, except the said Gabriel Towerson himself, to whom (upon his
request) and in regard of his quality, being chief Merchant in Amboyna, in the
name of the English Company; his own house was allotted him for his safe
keeping, and forthcoming, And the said Prisoners were all lawfully and orderly
examined, and it appeared by them jointly, according to their own confession
(every one having underwritten it with his own hand) as follows:

Gabriel Towerson, about New Years day 1623. having with him almost all the
English Merchants of the foreign Cantore in Amboyna, he assembled them in his
Chamber, and propounded to them, that he had something of great moment to
impart unto them, (which he alone could not effect) under the fidelity of an
Oath to be taken before, for the keeping secret thereof, and being trusty
therein; saying, It is necessary so to be: for if the thing should come
abroad, which I shall make known unto you, it will cost all our lives.
Whereupon the holy Gospel was produced, upon which, every one, who was present
did swear secrecy and fidelity, as was required. Then Towerson (after a
Preface) opened to the conspiratours, how he had a way and means to make
himself Master of the Castle of Amboyna. And whereas some present made it
difficult to do, being too weak for it: the said Towerson answered, Iaponian
Soldiers who were in the Castle, and that they should execute his purpose when
the Dutch, who were in the Castle, were in their greatest weakness: and worst
provided, or (unawares) when the Governor should be absent, about some
exploit; and that they should wait till some English Ships, or Ship, were in
Amboyna, whose People he might employ in this attempt; as also, when as all
other the English Merchants, and slaves of the Foreign Cantore in Amboyna,
should be sent for to the Castle. And said further, That he knew how to get men
enough, and they should leave this to his care, and themselves to their best;
and that they of Lobo should also come to help him with certain Corrercorens,
etc. Upon which induceme^ts, all that were present swore to assist Towerson
herein. And concerning the manner of Execution, the said Towerson had
prescribed to the Japonians, which were in the Castle, that they should send to
every point of the Bulwarks two men, and the rest, in the Court attend the
Governor, and to murder him, and that at the sign which should be given to the
English, they should make themselves Masters of every point of the bulwark, and
kill all who should resist, and imprison the rest; and further should take, and
divide between themselves, and the Japonians, the goods of the Dutch East
Indian Company, except a thousand Royals of eights; which every Japonian should
have before, and that they should kill the Citizens, who would not consent with
them, and do them all the mischief they could. Gabriel Towerson would give
order for all things, and give a sign to the Japonians, whereupon, when they
showed it, they should begin the work within.

Gabriel Towerson being asked in particular; what moved him to such a wicked
fact; he answered, the desire of Honor and profit. Being furthere demanded,
who should enjoy that Honor and Profit, and for whom he would have taken the
Castle: he answered, That if he did obtain his desire, he should presently have
advertised those of his Nation being in Batavia, and called for their help, who
if they had sent him succor, he would have kept the Castle for his own
Company, viz. (for the English East-Indian Company) and if not, he would have
held it for himself, and have endeavored a peace with the Indians, that so by
the one means or the other, he might attain his purpose. After the examination
of Towerson was ended, Dutch Governor in Amboyna upbraided Towerson of his
cruel intent, and asked, if this should have been the recompense of the
manifold honors, and kindnesses he had done unto him. Whereto Towerson
answered with a deep sigh, Oh, if it were to be begun, it should not be done.
This voluntary confession, and penitent acknowledgement, with much sorrow, was
made the 9. of March, being the day when the execution should have been done;
but the examination of Towerson was ended the 18. of February, so many days
before. This is the substance of the confessions of 10 Japonians, of 14
English, and of a Neatherlandish Merinho, or Captain of the Slaves; who all
confirmed these their confessions with their own hands.

What crime this intended prodition was, is hence very manifest, and undoubted:
what punishment is due to treachery, according to the Law and Customs of all
Nations, is also well known: no true Christian man will patronage any such
horrible attempt, but will adjudge it worthy of death, as it was determined
upon the accomplices of this conspiracy, according to order of Justice, as there
in Amboyna it is exercised (according to desert) by the Governor and Council,
in the name of the High and Mighty Lords, the States.

Here you have (Sir) the very substance of the Truth, both of the Fact and
punishment; other than which, many things are spread abroad in England, but
upon what pretense, or intendment, I know not; let the matter it self speak for
it self.

The first point, Amboyna, Worship (and each reasonable man) knows, that
every land has their Laws and Ordinances, and their particular manner of
proceedings, as well in Civil as in Criminal causes. England has hers, France,
Spain, Dutchland, Neatherland, and all other Kingdoms and Governments have also
theirs, which are just and lawful to every one in their Dominion; so that,
when any man will judge of the equity or injustice of a proceeding used in any
Land, he must examine the same according to the Laws and customs of that
Kingdom or Dominion, where the Justice and Proceedings were holden. These
Proceedings were holden by the Neatherlandish Governor, in the name of the
Illustrious Lords, the States, having supreme Power, many years since in the
Isles of Amboyna, which were conquered (in the name of the said Lords, the
States) from the Spaniards, or Portugals, who held that Castle in the name of
the King of Spain, our hereditarie enemy; therefore they are now possessed in
the name of the Lords, the States, and are under their Dominion, by a just and
Lawful Title of War, according to the Law of Nations. There (among other
things) Justice is administered according to the Law of the Neatherlands, in
that manner as was used in the proceedings against these conspiratours. I know
that the Laws of England are diverse from ours in Criminal cases, yea, and from
all the Nations in Europe: howbeit therefore, no man has any ground of reason
to say, that the proceedings of the English judges (holden in England) against
Delinquents, are not legitimate, though the said English proceedings do vary
in the manner from the proceedings of France, Spain, etc. where other customs
are: for that is lawful, which agrees with the Laws of that Land where the
fact is committed. Now then the Japonian Souldidiers, being in the service of
the Neatherlands Company in Amboyna, are discovered to have conspired against
the Castle, and the Governor there, under whose Oath and pay they were; they
were apprehended, and examined, and convicted of the said conspiracy. This
proceeding is Lawful, and touches no man, because the said Japonians knew no
other Master than the Neatherlanders, under whose Oath, service, and pay they
stand. All these Japonian conspiratours with the said Merincho, a Captain of
the Neatherlands Slaves, confessed with one mouth, that they were moved and
induced to this conspiracy, by the English Merchants resident in Amboyna,
whose names they named. Now, not only the right of Neatherland, but of
England, and of the whole World requires, that the Authors, abettours and
accomplices of Murder and Treason, should be punished with death; whereto,
according to the common Laws, as also the particular Laws of every Kingdom or
Dominion, the suspected persons first, and before all, should be imprisoned,
not only for preventing the effect of their evil purpose, but that they might
also receive their deserved punishment: which apprehensions, could not (in that
place) be done by any other man, than by the command of the Neatherlands
Governor, to whom it belongs to take care, to see every act concerning
Supreme power to be there observed; English Officers there, could not apprehend
these English Conspiratours, because all the chief of the English Merchants in
Amboyna were themselves of the conspiracy, and accomplices of the fact, upon
which the apprehension was made. Therefore the apprehension of the English
accomplices must be done by the Dutch Governor, who therefore has therein
proceeded according to the custom of all Nations of the world. holden more
Lawful; it appears out of the written process, that the said English
accomplices were not imprisoned upon the first suspicions and gross evidences,
which were had against them, but then at last, when all the Japonian Soldiers
were taken, examined, and convicted, and had discovered by the uniform
confession of all the eleven, the names and surnames of such English as had
persuaded and hired them to this fact; of which English, viz. (one Abel Price,
Barber) was before apprehended (as an Incendiary) for burning and violence done
upon other houses, who also was first examined and first confessed (as the
other 11 Japonians) that he (by name, Gabriel Towerson) and other English
Merchants, whom he named by their names, had suborned the said Japonian
Soldiers, and that all the English Merchants in the Foreign Cantores in
Amboyna, had knowledge of this conspiracy, etc. So that it may be seen, out of
that which went before, that the Dutch Governor dealt no otherwise in the
apprehension, and examination of the English, than according to his place, and
power, and that with great discretion, according to the Laws of these United
Provinces.

England, Neatherlanders in Amboyna to imprison the said English, and to
proceed against them, or to punish them; but that it did belong to the Council
of Defense resident at Jaccatra, consisting half of English, and half of
Neatherlanders, according to the Treaty of the year 1619. made between his
Majesty and the Lords the States, between the two East India Companies. That I
might the better inform my self thereof, I took in hand, and perused the
general Treaty of 1619. with the explication following thereupon; but I
profess, that (as I think) every understanding man, (not loving discord) must
confess, that neither in the said Treaty, nor in the enlargement, any one
Article or word could be perceived, whereby (according to that which is
untruely said in England) either this, or any such thing is ordained, or
decided, by the said Treaty, as it ought to have clearly been in so great and
important a point, as this part of Jurisdiction is. I appeal to all wise men,
who I desire may judge of this, whether this speech of some in England (to wit,
that the said Council of defense should (alone) have judged these
conspiratours) be agreeable to the said Treaty, or contrary to the same. I find
many Arguments for my Negative opinions, to wit, that before the Treaty of
1619. the Duch in Amboyna administered Jurisdiction, and Judicature, upon all
and every one who dwelt in or under the Jurisdiction of the Castle, as well
inhabitants as strangers, without difference; and that in this said Treaty, the
Dutch, with the English Merchants, made only a league in the matter of
commerce and Negotiation of Nutmegs, Mace, Cloves; and Pepper, in some
quarters, without having any further Treaty, or communication in the land; so
that without the bounds of this common Negotiation, every one remained free,
and unhindered in the land by the right and possession which either Company
enjoyed, and exercised severally, according as the same appears out of the 23
Article of the Treaty: where it is expressly said, That castles and Furts shall
remain in their hands who at present do possess them: And out of the 13.14.15.
Articles of the Treaty, all may see, that this common Council of Defense has
no more power, save only over the fellowship of the Treaty, that is, over the
Navy of defense in the Sea, to the defense of the common Merchandise, and
liberty of commerce; and lastly, to tax the charges for the provision of
ammunition in the Forts: neither can any other thing be sincerely collected out
of the said Treaty, so far as I can conceive. Therefore this second point is
found to be untrue and abusive, being not founded upon the said Treaty, which
Treaty (not withstanding) ought to be the only rule, both of the one and the
other Company.

England, that in the examination of the Conspiratours there was excess in the
Neatherlands Judges, in the point of Torture: I acknowledge, that no argument
or pretext against the Justice of this execution, has more moved me in the
beginning, than this pretense of excess aforesaid, because this stirs
Christian compassion; although I also judge, that wise men will not suffer
themselves to be too much transported thereby, before the true reasons do fully
appear, which should move us thereunto. For, I well remember yet, that in the
time of former mistakings in the Indies many things were pretended on both
parts, upon which, there were great outcries one either side, which yet, by due
examination, were found to be (though fair, yet) false pretexts of some
ill-willers, and men desirous to wrangle: which pretenses being thoroughly
sifted by the High and much admired wisdom of his Majesty, and the Lords, the
States, were well discovered to be no such matters as they were made: as it is
also undoubtedly to be believed, that his Majesty, and the States, will yet
further do in this affair: and so the cause of the Dutch Company may be (in the
carriage hereof) rightly justified. Of which I understand that the Lords the
States have special regard, and that they have been thoroughly informed, what is
the very truth of the things there past, and of the Execution in Amboyna upon
the English conspiratours. Unto which end the Lords the States resolved to see
and peruse all the Papers and Letters, touching the said proceedings: And now
thereupon men speak far otherwise than heretofore; for pretenses, and cavils
(being once detected) cannot stand with truth. And it does plainly appear, that
there is little truth in the matter of Torture, reported to be most cruelly
inflicted upon these English conspiratours, as in England it is said. And I
have ever suspected this for a slander: for I know the Dutch Nation does
naturally abhor this kind of cruelty, and are as much moved to commiseration,
as any other people. But whether these evil minded men, who have scattered this
great slander in England, and have so fowly defaced a just cause, have done it
by occasion of our use of Tortures in these Lands, in some weighty causes,
according to the custom of the most Dominions of Europe; I cannot Judge. But is
that to be censured and Judged to be unjust of the whole world, which is
repugnant to the Laws of England, (or any one Nation) where Torture is rarely
used? Nothing so; but the Justice or injustice of a cause must be (as
aforesaid) determined, according to the Laws where it is done, and not of other
Lands. If this were not so, why then should not the whole World much more Judge
that as a hard, and a thing unheard (and therefore condemnable) which in some
causes is used in England, according to the Laws there, when they proceed
against some guilty persons; who being once and again asked of the Judge, and
utterly refusing to be legally tried, is adjudged as dumb, that is, by
contumacie; whose condemnation then accordingly follows, that he is laid upon
a table, or plank, and another plank upon him, and so much weight of stone or
lead laid upon him, that his body is miserably bruised, and so pressed
violently to death. The which, according to the consession of all Nations,
(especially, because this kind of justice is not used in other Lands) and by
the English writers, is judged to be one of the most sharp and severe kinds of
death, that can be invented; yet cannot such an execution be called cruel and
unlawful, when it is done in England, because it is done according to the Laws
of that Land, though strangers shall judge otherwise of it. And in like manner
the English Nation cannot complain of the Torture which evil-willers say, was
used upon these English Conspiratours in Amboyna, because it is done according
to the Laws of this Government, and is not unusual in cases of Treason, neither
with-us, nor (almost) any Nation in Europe. And for England it self, it is well
known (and his most excellent Majesty does acknowledge by his own Princely pen)
that the Rack, and the Manicles, are the only Tortures, that are exercised
upon Traitors, to force them to confess, ( without concealment) what they know
to be dangerous to the State.

And to say the Truth, without taking parts, the English Conspiratours being
affronted with the uniform and written confessions of the 11 Japonians (their
accomplices) which could convince them sufficiently according to the laws, and
find them guilty of the same conspiracy, and consequently of death: if now,
not withstanding this they had persisted in the stout denial of the fact, were
not this, (to (speak according to the manner in England) enough to judge them
dumb by contumacie, and so to esteem them worthy of this sore punishment of
Pressing to death, as is aforesaid? but this torture of ours (if any in
Amboyna were so tortured) is to be judged far less, than that pressing, where
the Malefactor does suffer such extreme misery, as cannot be imagined, and
which is not to be lenified or eased at all, but ended by death. But to the
sufficient fatisfaction of my self, and your Worship, and all men, and not to
speak according to the sentence, and conscience of others; I have used all
diligence to get into my hands the written Process, concerning the
Conspiratours in Amboyna, which I obtained authentically, and read carefully,
and I find, that all, that is by me abovesaid, is confirmed, to wit, That the
Japonian Accomplices were examined, and made their confessions as aforesaid, for
three days, viz. the 23, 24, 25. of February, 1623. and that all this being
done, and consummated before, then at last, is Gabriel Towerson, first with the
rest of the English Accomplices imprisoned, the said 25. of February, when their
examination and confession began, and continued diverse days, without
over-hasting till the third of March. And the said examinations and confessions
being so finished, the Neatherlands Governor and Council, deliberated whether
the punishment might be deferred to any long time, or referred to any other
place; but it was so concluded by joint consent of all, that the said
punishment (there deserved) must be executed in the same place for example, and
that it could not (in any wise) be delayed without extreme danger, for reasons
there related; and among others', because the Tarnatanes, and Indians about
Amboyna, had otherwise than they were wont, rebelled; neither could it be fully
known, what great co^federacie these Conspiratours had made with them, and
others. And touching any extraordinary, and cruel Torture, I have accuratly
over-looked every ones confession, but I find not one word in any one, which
makes any mention of such Torture, as is unjustly spoken of in England; nay,
scarce find any mention of that ordinary Torture, which is in use, save only
these words, in one act of the 25 February 1623. viz. The Council being
gathered together, have thought meet, that all the English should be presently
examined one after another (as accordingly it was instantly done) and some of
them, before any torture, others, after a little (or rather a touch) of it,
confessed as follows. Unto which, follows presently, the particular
confession of each one, subscribed with his own hand, as aforesaid. So that
hence it is manifest, that no extraordinary Torture was used, in such manner
as is given out there, by those that wish us evil; nay, that those few that
felt any, were only touched (not punished) with ordinary Torture.

English were exempted by favor, that the English goods should not be lost,
cording as order has been given to that end: And I find that the sentence was
given the ninth of March 1623. by a competent assembly of 14 Judges; who, (as
it appears in the sentence) in the doing thereof did (before) earnestly call
upon the Name of the Lord, that he would please to be President and Predominant
in every one of their hearts in this their sorrowful assembly; and that he
would inspire them only with that which might be judged to be expedient and
just, etc. So that out of all that is above said, nothing else can appear, but
that this business was managed lawfully, and orderly, by men of honesty and
conscience, against such as had undertaken against the State, against the
wealth and advantage of this East India Company, the lives of their Officers
there placed, against the estate and welfare of many, who had little deserved,
and as little expected such wickedness from their friendly confederates in the
same society of Merchants, there resident with them.

And now (considering the premises) I hope it shall be far from every
Christian in any wise to protect or excuse this wicked Fact, but rather to
mourn and grieve (as we do) for this conspiracy, and for the evil, the
Conspiratours have so deservedly drawn upon their own heads; and to honor
them, who in Justice have punished villainy, according to the due merit thereof;
for we all know, that without JUSTICE, without reward of that which is Good,
and punishment of that which is Evil, no society of mankind can consist.

And of this information, (which I send in love, and honor to your Worship, as
unto a lover of Truth, and a hater of Treachery) you may make such use, as to
you shall seem good, in any place where you come, both for refutation of any
thing already reported contrary thereunto, and for prevention of any further
false rumors, or clamours; and finally, for propagation of that undoubted
truth, which here (to my best) I have endeavored to discover. And if you shall
meet with any thing of worth; which can be truly avowed, to be contradictorie
unto any thing I have written, I desire to understand it from you, and you to
suspend your wise and impartial judgment, till I have cleared it unto you.
TRUTH remains ever the same. So I commend you to the God of Truth, desiring
him to give us minds, Not to judge according to outward appearance, but to
judge with a righteous judgment.

From my Lodging, July 23. 1624.
AN ANSWER To the Dutch Relation, touching the Pretended Conspiracy of the
English at AMBOYNA in the Indies.
THe Compiler of this Relation, perceiving that he had an hard task to make it
probable, that eighteen Englishmen Merchants and their servants, all un-armed,
should, with the help and assistance of ten Japons, likewise un-armed,
undertake the surprise of a Castle, so provided every way, as that of Amboyna,
is before in the Relation of the English truly described to be: as also the
same Author, well weighing, that albeit all that he was to write of this
pretended Conspiracy, should be taken for true, yet the fact would seem very
poor to bear so rigorous a punishment in persons of that quality, and of that
Relation to those that inflicted it; provides more skilfully than fairly, for
both these points in the preamble of this Relation: To this end, he rakes and
heaps together all the jealousies and dangers that the Dutch had in the Indies:
yea, and more than they truly had, at or about the time of the pretended
conspiracy, and applies them all to the suspicion of this business: as if all
their enemies were likely to conspire with the English; and therefore the fact,
under color whereof they were condemned and executed, were possible and
probable; and as if the state of the time had been then so dangerous, that
every shadow of conspiracy was to be exquisitely enquired of, and the least
offense to be severely punished. Wherefore although this be no direct charge of
the English, but used by the Author to supply the want of probabilities in the
process it self, it will not be amiss to examine the several circumstances, and
how far they may yield any suspicion against the said English.

Amboyna, from the unwonted boldness and insolences of the Ternatans; first in
the Molluccos, and then in Amboyna. For those in the Molluccos, he says, they
had lately before the pretended conspiracy of the English, gone about,
contrary to the Treaty, Anno 1606. between them and the Dutch, to make peace
with the King of Tedore, and truce with the Spaniard, without the consent or
knowledge of them, the Dutch: which how honestly and conscionably it is
alleged to this purpose, may appear by the Journals of those parts, which
evidently show, that this Treaty between those of Ternata and Tedore, was in
November 1621. that is to say, fifteen Months before this forged conspiragie;
and that with the knowledge of Houtman, the Governor of the Dutch, who, upon
the 19 of November the year aforesaid, acquainted M. Nichols, the Agent of the
English in those parts, with the preparations of this Treaty, which was
actually holden at Ternata the 24 of the same month. But the matter was so
well handled by the Dutch, to keep those neighbor Islands in perpetual War,
that the Treaty was dissolved re infecta: And the seventh of December
following, an Edict was published by the King of Ternata, commanding all the
Tedorians forth with to depart the Island of Ternata, upon pain to be made
Slaves. After this, the correspondence between the Dutch and Ternatans in the
Molluccoes, returned into as firm state as ever; the Ternatans performing daily
exploits against the Spaniards, and communicating the Triumph with the Dutch:
As the seventeenth of February 1622. being a sull year before the seined
Treason of the English, the King of Ternata, with twenty Curricurries, took a
Spanish Galley, slew forty in fight, and took 150 Prisoners, whom they sold to
the Dutch for Cloth and Rice: and coming by the Hollanders Castle of Maalaio,
the eighteenth of the same Month, with the heads of diverse Spaniards at his
Stern, the Dutch saluted him from their said Castle with nine shot of great
Ordnance. The 25 of April following, the Admiral of the King of Ternata took a
Prow of the Spaniards, slew some, and sold the rest to the Dutch. The 28 of the
same Month, both Dutch and English were feasted by the King of Ternata. The 22
of May next ensuing, the King of Ternata went forth to Machian with six
Curricurries, and at his departure was honored with thirty shot of great
Ordinance from the Dutch Castle. The 15 of June the Admiral of the King of
Ternata made a Voyage toward Mindanow, carrying diverse of the Dutch with him
to assist him. The third of July the Ternatanes took other Prisoners, and sold
them to the Dutch. The 24 of August the King of Ternata made one Vogler a Dutch
Merchant his Treasurer; at whose instalment in his new Office, the Dutch gave
seven great shot from the Castle. And this good correspondence, between the
Ternatans and the Dutch in the Molluccos, continued even until, and after the
execution of the English at Amboyna: which was (as has been showed) in
February, 1623. New style. Upon the 14 of which Month, the Dutch gave the King
of Ternata, and other Blacks, two hundred Bails of Japan Rice, with other
presents: at the delivery whereof, there were shot off from the Castle seven
pieces of Ordnance, and three Vollies of small shot. By all which may appear,
how fmceerly this Author applies the diffidence between the Dutch and the
King of Ternata, which was now none at all, to this business of Amboyna.

Ternatans in the Molluccos went about also to make truce with the Spaniards,
without consent or knowledge of the Dutch; wherein this dealing of the Author
is worse than the former. For this Treaty of truce appears by the Journals,
to have been holden the 19 of July 1623. which was five months after the
execution of the English at Amboyna, and so came too late to move suspicion
against them.

Molluccos is further amplified by the strength of the Spaniard, being then (as
this Author affirms) Master of the Sea there, and that by default of the
English; who, contrary to the Treaty of the year 1619, had deserted the
defense, and sent no more ships, neither to the Molluccos, nor to the
Manilliaes: whence now the Spaniards had means to send Ships, Galleys, and
Pinnaces, to the Molluccos. What the strength of the Spaniard in the Molluccos
(by Sea) was, at the time of this pretended fear, may appear by the exploits
before mentioned, done upon them by the Curricurries of the Ternatans, without
help of the Hollanders. But for the default of the English, which is here
odiously alleged, it will be requisite to set down the true causes, wherefore
the English relinquished the action of defense, as well at the Manilliaes, as
elsewhere; being a matter much aggravated upon all occasions by the Hollanders,
albeit themselves have given the cause thereof. Wherefore shortly, the true
motives of the English, their desisting from the action of defense, were as
follows. The English had by agreement of the Council of defense, two years
together maintained a Fleet of five tall and warlike ships, to join with the
like strength of the Hollanders, for the action of the Manilliaes, and the
profit of the Voyage (as the charge) to be common to both Companies. The Dutch
prepared another Fleet of seven ships, all of their own, for Macao, bordering
upon China, near the Manilliaes, without giving knowledge thereof to the
English at Jaccatra, until their Fleet was ready to depart thence; well
knowing, that upon such warning it would be impossible for the English to
prepare a like force to join with them. To those they appointed also eight
Pinaces that were then abroad, to join; and afterward sent another Ship with
provisions unto them. This Fleet passing by two of the English Ships, which
were appointed for that quarter of the Manilliaes; the English welcomed them,
and offered to join with them in their exploit: which the Dutch refused,
saying, That this being an exploit of their own, the English should neither
participate of the fact, nor of the benefit that might arise thereby. Likewise,
by agreement of the Council of defense of both Nations, there was another Fleet
of ten Ships set forth at the equal charge of the English and Dutch, for the
coast of Mallabar, to secure the Trade in that part. Of the Dutch Ships (about
a month after they set sail) two were found to be so weak and leak, that they
were fain to return to Jaccatra. The rest being come to their quarter, two of
the best of the Dutch Ships were sent away by the Dutch Admiral, for the
Red Sea, contrary to their instructions and Commission at Jaccatra from the
Council of defense, and notwithstanding the protestations, obtestations and
exclamations of the English against this prevarication. So that four Caracks of
the Portugals coming that way, the rest of the Fleet of the English and Dutch
being thus weakened by the default of the four Dutch ships aforesaid; the
fairest opportunity that ever happened either before or since the joining of the
English and Dutch Companies, or is ever likely to offer it self in the future,
was lost and utterly defeated. By this it appears, what cause the Dutch have
to complain of the English for deserting the action of defense, and what reason
and encouragement the English have to continue the joint action and charge with
those that use so little sincerity, ever contriving the common actions and
charge to their private advantage; that when the joint forces are employed to
give the enemy work in one part, they (the Hollanders) might with ease oppress
them in another, and appropriate the whole benefit to themselves.

Ternatans of Amboyna, dwelling at Lobo and Cambello, and thereabouts; who (as
this Author says) presumed now beyond former example, to outrage the Subjects
of the Dutch, slaying them, and carrying them away for slaves, yea, burning two
of their houses, one at Lobo, and another at Manichels: for which, when the
Governor went out with a Fleet to crave justice and reparation, he was braved
by the Ternatans with a stronger Fleet than his own; yea, they threatened to
come with an hundred Curricurries against Amboyna.

This dealing of the Author is like the former about the Treaty of peace with
the Tedorians, and truce with the Spaniards. For when the Governor of Amboyna
set forth the last Fleet of Curricurries before the apprehension of the
English, he stood in good terms with the Ternatans at Lobos neither of the
Factories here mentioned, being then burnt or injured. The Governor then went
only, according to his yearly custom, to visit the skirts and out-parts of
Amboyna, and had no affront offered him. After that, upon occasion of a Slave
of the English that ran away, and being afterward laid hold on, was rescued by
a reputed holy man of or near that part; the English craved assistance of the
Dutch Governor, who did his best, but was therein abused by those of Lobo; and
not only some of his men outraged, but the English Factor M. Beomont (to whom
this Slave belonged) was waylaid by the people of the said holy man: and in
stead of him, one of the servants of the Dutch was slain between Cambello and
Lobo. The next day also, was Beomont himself assailed, and shot in the hand by
the same holy man's people, who also a little before did their best to kill
William Grigs, another of the English Factours, that finding the said Slave at
Lobo, laid hold on him there. Upon this occasion, both the English and Dutch
left their Factorie at Lobo, which was shortly after burnt by those Ternatans.
That other, touching the burning of the Factorie at Manichels, is more grossly
applied than the former; for that Factorie was burnt after the English were
apprehended: besides that, this Author dissembleth that there was a vehement
and common suspicion at Amboyna, that this Factory at Manichels was burnt, not
by the Ternatans, but by the Dutch Factor himself, who, being there alone, was
said to have first conveyed away the goods of the Dutch and the English there
for his own use, and then to have burnt the Factorie; laying the fact upon the
Ternatans.

After this ended, the Governor of Amboyna made out a Fleet of Curricurries,
to procure reparation of those excesses; and therein not going so strong as he
might, was braved by those Ternatanes of Amboyna. But this was after the
apprehension and execution of the English; and so is as honestly applied to
move suspicion in this place, as the joint quarrel of the English and Dutch
with those of Lobo, beginning upon occasion of the English, and as the burning
of the Factorie at Manichels, done after the English were apprehended and
imprisoned. As for the threats of the Ternatans here mentioned, that they would
come with 100. Curricurries against Amboyna, it is (for ought any of the
English ever heard) a mere fiction; at most, it was a vain brag, and such as
could not affright the Governor, that knows well that the Ternatans have no
gunpowder, nor other provisions for such an exploit; and yet are far behind
the Governor of Amboyna for number of Curricurries, besides the Dutch ships
and Caffles.

Banda (uncertain which, or by whom) that the Hollanders were already quit of
their Castle at Amboyna. A poor pretense, and not worthy to be answered; yet
still further discovering what penury of good matter this author had, that he
was fain to borrow such crazie stuff.

English, is, That about this time the Dutch understood, that those of Lobo and
Cambello held great and secret correspondence with the English. How did the
Dutch understand this? or why does not this Author express the particular
proof, in a matter so pertinent? It is true, the English had their Factories at
Lobo and Cambello; but in the same houses with the Dutch; and for their joint
account, and had Traffic with the Countrey-people, as the Dutch had, but what
secret correspondence is this? or what danger to the Dutch? Was the burning of
the Factories, which belonged to the English as well as to the Dutch, a note of
good intelligence between the English and the Imcendiaries? What was that for
correspondencie with those of Lobo, when at one time they way-laied M. Beomont
to kill him, and at another time shot him in the hand with an Arrow, offered to
kill Williams Grigs, and from time to time abused and outraged our People,
equally with, and as the Dutch? further, our People as well as the Dutch, had
now dissolved their Factorie at Lobo, and were come all thence. What Letters or
Messages did they ever send thither afterward? or how, and by what means
maintained they this correspondence? Yet this was understood, says this
Relation. How understood? Perhaps by the Governors dreams: for that (as he
afterward told Mr. Welden, Hill, and Cartwright, that came thither from Banda)
was a motive to him to examine the first Japon, which was the beginning of the
whole process.

Japons and of the English: but he makes no mention of any torture used upon
the Japons that first confessed, nor of any other indicium or presumption to
torture or examine that Japon; but only his curious questioning, touching the
setting and changing of the Watch, and of the number of the Soldiers in the
Castle: which, what sufficient indicium and cause it was to torture a Soldier
of their own, that serving them, had reason to desire to understand the course
of their Watches, and the strength of the aid he might expect, if any sudden
attempt should happen in his quarter; is easily to be judged. And how this poor
man, and the rest of his Contrymen were tortured, appears in the English
relation. Here also is concealed, by what manner and kind of questions, this
and the other Japons were led along in their confessions, to make up the plot
just as the Dutch had devised it: as also, what other answers they made, before
they were thus directed. That they, and the English both, confessed what the
Dutch would have them, is no doubt nor wonder, being so tormented and feared
with torture; etiam innocents cogit mentiri dolor, But what likelihood or
possibility there is of the truth of their confessions (if yet they confessed,
as is here related) may appear by that which has been already discoursed in
this point, toward the end of the English Relation, which for brevities sake
is here forborne to be repeated: yet some circumstances, which the Dutch
Relation has more than the English, deserve here to be examined. And first,
that of Abel Price the English Barber, who is made the messenger and negotiator
of this practice with the Japons. It is true, that he (and he alone of all the
English) had some kind of conversation with some of the Japons, that is, he
would dice and drink with them, as he likewise did with other Blacks, and with
the Dutch also. But is it credible, that Mr. Towerson would commit any thing of
moment, nay, so dangerous a matter as this to a drunken debauched sot, who also
(as the English, that were there, constantly report) threatened to cut his, the
said Towerson's throat, for that he had punished him for his misdemeanors?
Further, this Relation makes this Abel Price confess, that all the English
Merchants in the out-Factories, were privy and accessarie to this pretended
treason: Yet the Governor and Fiscal in in their own process found John Powel,
Ephraim Ramsey, and two other, guiltless.

Price his confession, he sets down the general substance of all the
confessions in one hody; where first having assigned M. Towerson a preface to
the rest, to induce them to the exploit, he tells us; that they made doubt of
the point of possibility, (as well they might) knowing the weakness of their
own part and impregnable strength of the Dutch, in comparison of theirs: for
satisfaction of which their doubt, he says, M. Towerson told him that he had
already won the Japons within the Castle to his purpose, and that he would
attempt this matter; not when the Dutch were at their full strength, and the
English at the weakest, but would expect till the Governor should be somewhere
abroad upon some exploit, and some English Ships, or Ship at least, at Amboyna;
the people whereof he would use in the enterprise: Likewise he would send for
the Factors and slaves of the other Factories, and should have a supply from
the Ternatans of Lobo, of certain Curricurries, etc.

Japons in the Castle, we must believe, if this Author or his voucher say
true, that Master Towerson had acquainted those, and won them to his plot,
before he had imparted it to his own Contrymen the English. And yet in the
acts of the process, Emanuel Tomson is recorded to have confessed, that 8.
days after the consultation, Master Towerson told him, that he had then sent
out Johnson and Price to treat with the Japons, and win their consent to this
enterprise. But what should these (being all but ten) have done? Marry (says
the relation by and by) Mr. Towerson had ordained, that eight of them should
have been bestowed, by two in a company, upon the four points of the Castle, to
kill all those that would resist them, and to take the rest Prisoners. It must
be (therefore) here imagined, that the Dutch and their Mardikers in their
Castle, being three or four hundred, would scorn to take the advantage of
sending forty or fifty; much more of an entire company to any point of the
Castle, but would combat with the Japons at even hand by two at a time, and so
give the Japons leave and respite to kill or take them by two and by two. A
sweet conceit, and such a service as perhaps has been sometimes represented
upon a stage, but never acted in surprise of a Castle in good earnest.

Thus we see how eight of the Japons were to be employed; what should the other
two have done? forsooth they should have waited in the great chamber to murder
the Governor. Yea, but this relation told us yer while, that this plot should
have been executed when the Governor was abroad upon some action. How then
should these two Japons have killed him in the Castle, at the same time? But we
see how all the Japons (that is) all the pretended party of the English within
the Castle, should have been occupied. Who should have opened the gates to the
English, and their other aids? who should have killed the Court of guard at the
Gate? These parts were left for them that were without; therefore let us take a
review of them, what they were. The Relation mustereth them to be fourteen
English, whereof eleven were Merchants; one Steward of the house, one Tailor,
and one Barber, to dress the wounded, besides God knows how many English
shippers, Slaves, and Ternatans: First, for the English Merchants, of what
dexterity they are to take Forts, is easily judged; and in all the English
house, when it was seized by the Dutch, upon this pretended Treason, the whole
Provision was but three Swords, two Hand-guns, and about half a pound of
Powder. Yea, but the English ship or ships would have brought both fitter men
and better provision. But how knew Master Towerson that those of the English
ships, when they came, would join with him in this work, being so contrary to
the Treaty, and it self so dangerous? or why did he not stay the opening of the
Plot till this ship or ships were come, that he might swear the shippers also,
or at least the chief Officers amongst them, and take their advice? Is it
possible that Master Towerson was so slight, as to open his plot to all the
English at Amboyna, yea, to the Tailor and Barber, so long before it was to be
put in execution, and before he knew the minds of his chiefest assistants, of
whose arrival he was so uncertain? Yea, but he was sure of the Slaves of the
English, and of the Ternatans of Lobo, with their Curricurries in quemlibet
eventum. This indeed is the remainder of the Army; let us view them. The Slaves
were, in all the English Factories, just six in number, and all boys: The
Ternatans were Enemies as well to the English as to the Dutch, as is before
showed in answer to the Preface. When were they reconciled? how comes it, that
in all the examinations of the English, this point was not sifted, and somewhat
confessed of it amidst so many Tortures? There is no confession thereof in all
the examinations; and Mr. Towerson in his expressly denied it, and was pressed
no further. The truth is, the Governor and Fiscal of Amboyna knew, that what
ever had been confessed in this point, would not have been believed by their
own People there; who knew well enough, that the first beginning of this breach
between the Dutch and Ternatans of Lobo, was about the Slave of the English:
and the outrages thereupon following, were done upon the English, as well as
upon the Dutch. Yet this Author seems to hope that that may be believed here
in Europe, which had no color at Amboyna.

Gabriel Towerson had prepared all things, etc. Here was certainly a hot
practice of Treason, and worthy to be termed by this Author, An horrible
conspiracy. They met together on New years day, and plotted as is before
related: and now it was the five, and twentieth of February, and not only
nothing done all this Interim, but not so much as a new consultation. But this
(forsooth) is the body and substance of the unanimous confession of all the
English, by themselves severally subscribed. Towerson's confession; as that he
said, he was moved to this fact by hope and desire of honor and profit: and
being demanded from whom he attended this honor, and for whom he meant to hold
the Castle, his answer was, That if he could have compassed his project, he
would forthwith have given advertisement thereof to the rest of his Nation at
Jaccatra (which now they have christened Batavia,) and have craved their aid:
which if they had yielded to him, then he would have held the Castle for the
English Company; and if not, then he would have kept it for himself, and have
used means to have agreed with the Indians; and so, by one means or other,
would have compassed the enterprise.

Here first is to be observed, that he would not (as this Author makes him
speak) have sent for aid to Jaccatra, until he were first Master of the Castle;
and yet in the general confession before, it is said, he would attend the
coming of some English ships or ship, before he would adventure upon the
Castle. Next, let the ambiguous and alternative resolution, here said to be
confessed by Master Towerson, be considered in both the parts thereof, and it
will appear, that no man in his wits would have any such conceit as is here
pretended. What hope could Master Towerson have, that the President and English
Council at Jaccatra, living under command of the Dutch Fort there, and
altogether Subject to the Hollanders, durst join in any such action, thereby to
give occasion to the Hollanders to arrest, torture and condemn them of Treason?
Master Towerson knew well enough, that about six Months before, the General of
the Dutch at Jaccatra, had caught at a very slight occasion to entrap the
English President there: who having sent out two of his people in the night to
the English Cow-house, to see what watch the Blacks in their service kept over
their Cattle; the said two English were apprehended by the Dutch Soldiers,
kept in prison seven days, and charged, that they had said, that they went the
Round: and one of them, being last examined, was told by the Balieu (the
Officer of the Dutch in Criminal causes) that his fellow had confessed, that
they had said they went the Round, and that by the English Presidents
Commission; and if he would not confess the same, he should be tortured: but
the fellow, being constant in the truth, came off at last without torture, yet
this was Item enough to the English President and Council, how the intent of
the Dutch was to entrap them upon the least occasion: and this, and other daily
captious dealings of the Dutch at Jaccatra, which were too long here to recite,
were all advertised from time to time to M. Towerson, who therefore was sure he
could expect no assistance from them, that were themselves in in such a
predicament. The other part of Mr Towerson's resolution is said to have been,
To keep the Castle for himself, and to agree with the Indians, in default of
help from the English. This is yet more improbable than the former. Were the
Portugals and Indians not able to keep out the Dutch from Amboyna, when they
had no footing there; and shall Captain Towerson, with twenty or thirty English
and Japons, without ship or Pinnace, be able, with the help only of the poor
naked Indians, to drive them out, having already three Castles in the Islands
of Amboyna, and at Cambello hard by, all well furnished with men and provision,
besides their power of shipping, which makes them style themselves Lords of the
Sea? And yet how could Master Towerson hope to win the Amboynezes (the
Hollanders sworn Subjects) to his side? He might rather assure himself, that
after he had mastered the Hollanders (if yet that must be believed to be
possible) the Amboynezes would have surprised him, and cast him out (being so
weakly provided to stand of himself,) that so they might utterly free themselve
from their servitude. Here also must be remembered, that this Authori himself in
his preamble says, that the Indians themselves durst not undertake any such
great design (as he there feineth) against the State of Amboyna, without some
great aid of some Nation of Europe, either of Spaniards, Portugals, or some
other. Whereby is not only confessed, how weak the Indians of themselves are;
but withal it follows, how small hope Mr. Towerson might have, being
deserted of his own Nation (as here the case is put,) to hold the Castle for
himself by the help of those Indians, if yet he could once have won it. In a
word; they that know the power of the Hollanders in Amboyna and thereabouts,
and the weakenss of the poor Indians there, will judge this conceit of Master
Towerson's (to keep the Castle for himself) to be a mad plot; and for which,
Master Towerson should rather have been sent to Bedlam, or the Dullen Kissed (as
the Dutch call it,) than to the Gallows.

that Master Towerson, after his examination was finished, being expostulated
withal by the Dutch Governor, and demanded whether this should have been the
recompense of his (the Governors) manifold courtesies toward him; answered
with a deep sigh, Oh! were this matter now to do, it should never be done. This
voluntary confession and penitent acknowledgement, says this Author, was
made the ninth of March, being the day when the execution was to be done: but
the examination of Towerson was ended the eight and twentieth of February, so
many days before. But how shall we believe this? Forsooth, he has it out of
the Acts of the Process of Amboyna. Yea, but in these Acts are omitted many
material passages of these examinations, as is already showed: why may they not
then be guilty of addition, as well as of such mutilation and omission? But
let us peruse the words of the Act it self, which are these:

WE whose names are hereunto subscribed, to declare upon our troth, in stead of
an oath, that Gabriel Towerson, after that he had been already examined
touching his said offense, and that the Worshipful Governor Van Speult had
expostulated with him thereupon, asking him whether this should have been the
recompense of his courtesies from time to time showed unto him, the said
Towerson: thereupon he, the said Towerson, with a deep sigh answered him, and
said, Oh! if this were to be begun again, it should never be done. Actum this
ninth of March, in the Castle of Amboyna, and subsigned.

Harman van Speult. Haurence de Maerschalck. Clement Kersse boom. Harman
Cray-vanger. Peter van Zanten. Leonart Clock.
Thus we see the Act it self, and this pretended voluntary confession of Mr.
Towerson; which is not delivered upon the credit of the Court or Council at
Amboyna (and yet how small that is, is before showed) but upon the Attestation
or Affidavit of the Governor and five others, the principal actors in this
bloody Tragedy: And this not upon their Oath, but upon their troth, or honest
word (forsooth) in stead of an Oath. The time when these words were uttered by
Mr. Towerson, is not described by the day when he spoke them, but only by the
precedent Act of his examination. And yet the circumstance of time is not only
an usual and customrie solemnity, and requisite in all such Attestations; but
also in a business of this nature altogether necessary: as likewise in this
case, that of the place was. For if these words were spoken in the place of
Torture, or incontinently after the examination ended, they are by their own
Law, esteemed no more voluntary, than the confession upon the Rack it self.
Neither yet does this Attestation affirm, that this confession was voluntary.
But this Author, unconscionably reporting the date of the Attestation, for the
time of the confession, collects it to be voluntary, because (as he says) it
was made the ninth of March, being so many days after his examination, which
was taken the 28. of February. Can a man attest nothing but what was done upon
the very day when he makes Affidavit? The Attestation says, that these words
were spoken by M. Towerson, after he had been already examined. Why may not
that have been rather upon the very day of his examination, than upon the day
when this Act was entered; if yet he ever spoke any such words, or meant them,
as he is here interpreted? the contrary whereof is the more probable by all
the circumstances of this business, truly set down in the Relation of the
English.

But in that this Author makes so much of this poor circumstance, of M.
Towersons profession of sorrow for what was done, naming it a voluntary
confession; it is plain how destitute he was of voluntary confessions, and of
all true and concluding circumstances. What? was there not a Letter or other
Paper, to be found in all the Chests and Boxes of the English, so suddenly
seized at Amboyna, Larica, Hitto, and Cambello, to discover this treason? nor
amongst so many accomplices of diverse Nations, a false brother to betray the
rest, and to accuse them voluntarily; but the process must begin with the
Torture, Prive was) to draw torture upon the sober, orderly, and unstained? And
yet this Relation it self confesses, that Price's confession was drawn from
him by the Examiners specifying of place, person and time unto him. Certainly
one of their own Nation had reason to advice, that more Advocates might be sent
over to the Indies, Demonstration to the Lords States, t^u^hing the government
of the Majores.
to aid the accused, to make a legal answer: For, says he, they go to work
there so villanously and murtherously, that the blood of the poor people cries
to heaven for vengeance.

But why have we no particular of any man's confession, but this of Price, and
Mr. Towerson, and all the rest blended together in one body? Did none of all
the rest go farther than his fellows, or confess more than they? Where is
Sharrocks confession, that he was at Amboyna upon New Years day, when ten or
twelve of the Dutch themselves witnessed he was at Hitto? Where is his
confession of Clarks plot to go to Maccassar, to deal with the Spaniards there,
to come and rob the samll Factories? Where is Collins confession of another
plot, about two Months and a half before his examination, undertaken by
Tomson, Johnson, Price, Brown, Fardo, and himself? Where be the leading
Interrogatories, that directed them to the accusation framed by the Dutch, lest
otherwise there had been as many several Treasons confessed, as persons
examined? Not a word of all this, nor of a great deal more of this kind, which
is here in England proved by the oath of six credible persons, to have pased in
the examinations. Whereby appears, how faithfully the Dutch at Amboyna have
entered the Acts of this process. Well, at last he concludes the Narration of
the confessions, with the summing up of the number and Nations of the parties,
that had thus confessed; which, he says, were ten Japons fourteen English, and
the Neatherlandish Marnicho, or Captain of the Slaves By which last words, he
would give the Reader occasion to think, that the fact was so clear, and their
own proceeding so even and just, that they had executed one of their own
Neatherlanders for it. Which how true it is, is already declared in the
conclusion of the English Relation. The truth is, this Captain of the Slaves
was of the Portugal race, and born in Bengala. His very name, Augustine Perez,
shows, he was no Neatherlander.

Having thus finished this Relation, this Author proceeds to a disputation:
and taking notice of some aspersions in England cast upon these proceedings at
Amboyna, he divides them into two heads; the one, that the process was without
its due formalitie; the other, that there was excess and extremity used
against the Conspiratours. For the point of formalitie, he first takes great
pains to prove, that the formalities of process in Amboyna, are not therefore
unlawful, because they agree not with our form in England. Which labor he
might have spared: for no wise man will deny him this point. And such as shall
be so ignorant as to blame the Dutch for varying from us herein, were not
worthy the answering. Herewithall also he deduceth the Title of the Lords
States General to the Sovereignty of Amboyna; and so the Governor of
Amboyna'es Jurisdiction, in causes as well Criminal as Civil, to be rightly
grounded. Thence he concludes, that the Japons being sworn servants to the
Dutch, and in their pay, were Subject to the Jurisdiction of the Dutch
Governor. Then he tells us, that the Author, and accomplices of murder and
treason, are by the Laws of all Nations to be punished with death; all which
points may be granted him without any prejudice to the cause of the English in
this question.

English accomplices of this conspiracy, because themselves were accomplices of
the fact. All which also may be granted in this point of apprehension, and safe
custody: but how it may proceed also in the point of cognizance, shall be anon
in due place examined.

English were not apprehended upon the first suspicion, when yet there was
evidence, and indicia sufficient to it; but after the examination of all the
Japons and their joint confession, that the English, whom they specified by
name and surname, had moved and hired them to this treason: yea, not until Abel
Price had also confessed as much, and that all the English in the out-Factories
were privy thereunto. For answer hereof, that must be repeated which has been
upon other occasions before alleged; that the first beginning of the process,
was by the Torture, there being no sufficient evidence or indicium to Torture
the Japon, that only sought to enform himself of the course of the Watch, and
of the strength of the Castle, wherein himself was a Soldier: and so the whole
Series of the examination proceeding from the confession of one Tortured
person, to apprehend and Torture another, without other evidence; though it
brought forth more confessions, and those with name and surname, and other
circumstances, according as the Interrogatories (or rather directories) of the
Governor and Fiscal led the prisoners, was wholly against the form and rule of
all Laws of Tortures.

Scilicet in fabrica si pravae est regula prima,
Caetera mendose fieri, atque obstipa necesse est.
But here must be answered an objection that may be made against this, from
another part of this relation, that is, that some of the English confessed
without or before Torture; yea, this Price here mentioned, was either not
Tortured at all, or very lightly. Yea, but he was showed the Tortured bodies of
the poor Japons, martyred with fire and water, and told, that unless he would
confess that, which they told him they had first confessed, he should be
Tortured as ill, or worse than they. This fear of Torture is by their own Law,
equalled to the Torture it self, and consequently, the confession thereupon
made no better indicium or evidence to bring another man to the Torture, than
the confession made upon the Rack it self. Again, it must be here remembered,
that the very matter of Price his confession here mentioned, to wit, that all
the English Merchants of the out-Factories, were privy to the pretended
treason; was resuted by the process of the Dutch themselves, that found Powel,
Ramsey, and two others of those Factories guiltless.

England against the Jurisdiction of the Dutch Governor, and his Council at
Amboyna, over the English there; because this power is, by the Treaty of the
year 1619. disposed of, and agreed to consist in the Council of defense of both
Nations at Jaccatra. For information in which point this Author says, he has
perused over all the several Articles of the said Treaty, and finds in the
23. Article, that the Fortresses were to remain in the hands of them that then
possessed them; and in the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth, that the
Council of defense has no other power, but only over the Fleet of defense,
over the commerce, and finally, to tax the charges of maintenance of the Forts:
But he could not see the thirtieth Article; which orders, that all disputes
that cannot be decided by the Council of defense, should be remitted into
Europe; first, to the two companies there, and in default of their agreement,
to the King and States. Why then was not this dispute so proceeded in? There is
nothing in the former Articles, to limit the Council of defense; and this
general Article appears to be added by way of ampliation, to provide for that
which was not particularly and expressly cared for in the former. Which is most
plain by the words of the explanation upon this thirtieth Article, agreed upon
at the first, and subscribed by the Commissioners on both sides, Anno 1619.
where this course of proceeding is expressly directed, not only in disputes
about the meaning of the Articles, but also about any other matter happening in
their common abode. Since which also the Kings Majesty has, upon a smaller
occasion, than the life of his Subjects, clearly declared himself in the point
of Sovereignrie; That both Nations in the Indies should wholly lay aside all
pretense thereof. Which Declaration was sent to the Lords States General, and
by them accepted before this bloody butcherie was executed. But if it were
granted, that the Hollanders are absolute Lords of their partners, the English,
in those parts, without respect to the Treaty, yet at least the Hollanders in
Amboyna are bound to observe the Laws of the united Provinces; for so says
this Author himself. Do these allow to begin the process at the torture, and
to bring persons of honest fame to the rack, upon others confession made in the
torture? Do their Laws allow of the leading interrogatories above mentioned to
direct the prisoner what to say, to avoid the torture? Where, in the United
Provinces, is that drowning with water in use? or the torture with fire, used
to Johnson, Tompsan, and Clark? or especially the splitting of their toes, and
launcing of the breast, and putting in Gun-pouder, and then firing the same,
whereby the body is not left entire, neither for innocence, nor execution?
Clark and Tomson were both fain to be carried to their execution, though they
were tortured many days before.

Lastly, their confessions were contradictorie, apparently false. and of things
impossible to be done, much less practiced before by the said parties; and
therefore ought not by their law to have been believed, nor the prisoners to
have been condemned thereupon, without other sufficient indicia or evidence
besides.

In the last place, this Author handles the excess of torture whereof (he
takes notice) there is much complaint in England; and says, That the Lords
States General take great care to inform themselves of all the passages of this
business, and to that end have desired to see all the Letters, Pieces, and
Papers that concern this process: by which it appears not, that there was
any cruel torture used. But suppose the Acts make no mention of them; is it any
marvel that the Authors of this murtherous and tyrannous process, being
themselves the persons that also formed the Acts, would omit those things that
made against them? It is to be presumed also, that the Acts kept by their
people at Poloway in Banda, have omitted many things of their process, against
the poor Polaroons, whom in August 1622, being about 6 months before this
execution of the English, their Governor there used in like sort, as the
Governor of Amboyna did the English, and gave him a Model and precedent of
this process; which it will not be amiss to relate briefly, because this
Author, in the next place alleges the merciful disposition of the
Netherlands Nation in general; to infer thence, that it is therefore unlikely,
that their Governor at Amboyna was so cruel as is reported in England.

Polaroon, one of the Islands of Banda, was in possession of the English at the
time of the Treaty, Anno 1619, and by the agreement was to remain theirs.
After the Treaty came to the Indies, the Hollanders forbear the publishing
thereof in the Islands of Banda; until they had taken Polaroon. But, knowing
that it must be restored again, according to the Treaty, they first take all
courses to make the Island little or nothing worth: they demolish and deface
the Building, transplant the Nutmeg-trees plucking them up by the roots, and
carrying them into their own Islands of Nera and of Poloway, there to be
planted for themselves; and at last find a means to dispeople the Island, and
to leave it so, as the English might make no use of it, worth their charge of
keeping; and that upon this occasion: There was a young man, the son of an
Orankey, or a Gentleman in Polaroon, that had committed Felony; for which by
the Laws of his Country, he was to die. This fellow, to save his life, fled to
another Island of Banda, called Rofinging, and there turned Christian: but
quickly understanding, that that would not make him safe from punishment, he
went back secretly to his own country of Polaroon; and, having lurked there a
few days, took his passage for Nera, another Island, where the Dutch have a
Fort; and told the Dutch Governor, that the Orankeys of Polaroon had conspired
to Massacre the Dutch, as well at Polaroon, as at Poloway, with help of the
people of Seran, that should send over thirty Curricurries for that purpose.
Immediately upon this indicium of this Malefactor, certain Prows, or
Fisher-boats of the Polaroons, that were fishing at Poloway, were seized, and
the people made prisoners. Command was sent by the Dutch Governor to Polaroon;
that the Orankeys should come over to him, that there might be further
inquisition made of this matter. The Priest of the Polaroons and seventie
Orankes instantly took a Prow or small vessel of their own, and embarked
themselves for Poloway. As they were at sea, and yet out of the sight of the
Dutch Castle, they were met by a Fisher-boat of Bandanezes, and told, how all
the rest were apprehended; and that, if they went to Poloway, they were all but
dead men. Nevertheless, the Priest and the rest, although they had space and
means to have escaped to Seran and other places safe enough from the
Hollanders, yet were so confident of their innocence, that they would needs to
Poloway to purge themselves. Where, as soon as they were arrived, they were
instantly carried prisoners to the Castle: and withal the Governor, with a
force of two hundred men, went presently for Polaroon; whence he fetched all
the rest of the Orankeys, and brought them prisoners to the same Castle. As
soon as they were come, they were presently brought to the torture of water and
fire, even in the same sort as our people were afterward at Amboyna; only
herein differing, that of those at Poloway, two were so tortured, that they
died in their Tortures, the rest, being one hundred and sixty two persons,
were all, upon their own forced confessions, condemned and executed. The
Priest, when he came to the place of execution, spoke these words in the
Maliaian tongue: All ye, great and small, rich and poor, black and white, look
to it: we have committed no fault. And when he would have spoken more, he was
taken by the hands and feet, laid along, and cut in two by the middle with a
sword. Forthwith, the Governor caused the Wives, Children, and Slaves of those
of Polaroon, to be all carried out of the Island, and distributed in other
Islands subject to the Dutch; and so have made a clear Country for the
English, where they may both plant and gather themselves, destitute of the help
of any of the Country people; without whom, neither the English nor Hollanders
can maintain their Trade in the Indies. And yet this is not here recited, to
the end thereby to charge the Neatherlands Nation with those cruel proceedings,
but the persons themselves that have committed those Barbarous Tyrannies: Who,
Nootwendich discourse, printed An. 1622. under the name of Ymant van Waer mond.
if we shall believe an Author of their own, are not of the best of that
Nation. For the Majors (as this Author says) use the Indies as a Tucht-house
or Bride-well, to manage their unruly and unthrifty children and kindred; whom,
when they cannot rule and order at home, they send to the Indies, where they
are preferred to Offices and places of Government. Yea, says he, they prefer
such to be Fiscals there, as never saw Study nor Law. So that it is no marvel,
that such persons proceed not with that justice and moderation as is used
generally in the Low Countries, by the choice of the Nation there. And this
agrees well with the report of our Merchants of credit, that came lately from
Amboyna; who aver, that, excepting the Governor himself, who is well stepped in
years, of the rest of the Council there, as well the Fiscal as others, there
was scarce any that had hair on their faces, yea, that most of them are lewd
drunken debauched persons; and yet must be Judges as well of our English, as
the poor Indians there.

Now to return to this Authors proofs, that there was no excess used in the
proceedings; at the last he takes one Argument by way of comparison, from the
Law of England, to press men to death: which he says, has much more cruelty
than their course of Torture, used by the Dutch in Amboyna, and is holden, as
well by some Authors of our own Nation as others, for damnable. How
pertinently is this matter of pressing alleged, for justifying of their
Tortures, since no man in England is pressed for not confessing, which is the
cause of Torture in Dutchland? But the cause why any is pressed, is, for that
he obstinately refuses the Trial of his Country, and challenges the Judges
as incompetent, which the Law appoints him: which he does (for the most part)
to save his goods, which, but by that ordinary course of Trial, cannot be
confiscate. What is this to the point of confession, for refusal whereof, the
Dutch use the Torture? And yet no man blames them for proceeding according to
the Law of their Country herein; nor yet in their execution, when they break
the legs, arms and thighs of the Malefactors, and then fet them upon a wheel
on the end of a great pole, there to languish to death: an execution far more
direful than the English pressing, which is so suddenly done, and so seldom
used. But why does he not name the Author of our own or foreign writers,
which condemn this kind of execution? Let him do it yet, and he shall have more
Authors of his own Country that condemn their course of Tortures: and yet the
English complain not of the course in general, but of the unlawful use of it;
contrary to the rules of the Laws even of the United Provinces. Lastly, in
this point the Author pretends, that little or no Torture was used in this
process. What the Torture was, and in what degree, appears in the English
Relation: but he can find little or none mentioned in the Acts. What if he will
not find it? or what if their Officers of Amboyna have concealed it? shall we
not believe those that suffered it themselves? shall we not believe those, that
being themselves acquitted, yet heard the cries, and saw the bodies of Johnson,
Clark, and Tomson, and have confirmed their Relation by their corporal Oaths?
As for the Act of the five and twentieth of February, which this Author has
here transcribed; it cannot be a true Act: for therein it is said, that that
day all the English were examined one by one, and some before Torture, and some
after confessed the Fact. Whereas it appears not only by the English
Relation, but by this very Author in the precedent page, that they were not
all examined the same five and twentieth day of February; but that the
examination continued six days together, even to the third of March inclusive.
How then could the Act of the five and twentieth of February have all their
confessions? By this may appear, what credit may be given to these Acts, or
else to this Author. Here also by the way he tells us of the deliberation of
their Council; whether the punishment of the Fact might be respited, or the
cause removed: wherein it was resolved, that execution must needs be done in
the place of the delict, for example sake; and might not be respited, for fear
lest the Conspiratours (as he terms them) might have more Dependances than yet
were known; and in particular, the Ternatans and other Indians about Amboyna. A
poor pretext: as if, having all the English in Irons aboard their several
ships, they should need to fear their joining with the Ternatans. But it may
be, they feared some English ships also to come thither: for so they had made
their own people believe. And therefore, two ships being descried at Sea, the
Dutch and their free Burghers cried out, That there were the English that
should have helped to take the Castle: but when they arrived, they proved to be
two ships of the Hollanders come from Jaccatra; wherein was a Letter from the
President of the English there, to call away Captain Towerson and all the
English from Amboyna to Jaccatra. Which Letter was opened and read by the Dutch
Governor, while our people were yet in prison, and not executed; and might
well have secured him, that there was no further danger to be feared of the
English aids of shipping, whatever the English prisoners had through Torture
confessed.

At last the Author comes to the sentence it self, transcribing out of the
Acts of the ninth of March, That the College of Judges being then competent,
and calling upon the name of the Lord to assist them in this mournful
assembly, to preside in their hearts, and inspire them with equity and Justice;
proceeded to sentence, etc. Who knows not, but the Act may be thus formed,
and yet no prayer at all made? or if there were any such prayer, yet the
proceedings well weighed, will show it to be but like Jezabels Fast, the
preparative to the false judgment against Naboth. Neither will the wise and
indifferent Judges of this whole matter, conceive the better of the cause, for
the Hypocritical formalities therein observed.

Last of all, he concludes his treatise with a justification, yea, an Elogie
and commendation of the whole proceedings of the Dutch at Amboyna against the
English; not finding the least to be blamed to the Dutch, but aggravating the
crime of the English very ridiculously, because (forsooth) that this plot
amongst other things, was against the great means of the Neatherlands
East India Company: as if a conspiracy to rob them, (if any such had been)
must needs be Treason, or as if the intent only in any Crime but treason, were
Capital.

Thus have we examined this strained justification of that most Barbarous and
execrable process of Amboyna; consisting of a preamble, full of false and
forged suspicions; a Narration of the Fact, fraught with ridiculous
absurdities, contrarieties, and impossibilities, and of a dispute of
impertinences, with concealment of the main grounds of the English griefs. All
which verifieth that of Papinian. That Parricides are more easily committed
than defended.

FINIS.
REMARKS upon the foregoing HISTORY.
TO husband the Remainder of these Sheets the best that I can, to avoid
impertinence, which is certainly the speaking of few things in many words
(though grave men use it) and withal to clear up, or to say better, exaggerate
one of the most criminal Stories that ever was, I presume to affix what
considerations of mine I can set down; not out of any enmity to the Nation,
nor to rip up old soars, nor in order to provoke a National jealousy, but upon
a clear Intention, to let this Nation see, that as by Gods immediate hand, they
are rescued out of the bondage of a Monarchy, so in requital of that mercy,
they ought to look to be thankful for it. And as he has provided for them
beyond means and hopes, so they ought not to be wanting in any thing that may
make appear their detestation of those offenses that are in his eyes of anger,
but seek by all their power and might, to acquit themselves.

For the nature of the plot; you have seen what it is, a design of a few
Japonnesses to surprise a Castle, whereas in it self, both as they stood
unfurnished with arms, and unseconded with ships, while their enemy was
strongly Garrifoned, little better than a simple impossibility, besides that,
there wanted an end to encourage and recompense such an attempt; and it is
withal to be supposed, that the English, in a matter of that importance and
danger, would have chosen other Confidents than a number of Japonesses, a
people that any reasonable man might from their barbaritie suspect; and we are
to note, that in the examination of the first Japonness, (which was the
beginning of the whole process, there were no legal indicia found from him, the
behavior that he used, being no other than what may be used by any Soldier in
the place where he serves, other indicia there were none in the least, neither
of provisions of the English for such an attempt, nor of correspondencies to
that purpose, nor any other agreeing with the rules and examples given by the
law or its expounders. Besides, it is not enough for to take a confession upon
the Rack, God having not sent all men courage of bodies to endure high tortures
(as Collins, Beamont, Sherrock
some in this tragedy, wearied with suffering, bade them propose what they
would have them confess) but it is by Law required, that they should be
iterated and confirmed some days after, when the pain of the party is over,
and no further torment offered unto him. Now in this case, there is never a
confession entered in the Acts of the Council of Amboyna, but it is forced from
the parties themselves by unsupportable tortures, not one witness being either
examined or deposed. Withal, if there had been as much guilt among the English
as is suspected, why did none of them attempt, either to transport themselves
in the Curricurries, and other vessels, that then departed as freely from
Amboyna as at other times, as it was no hard matter, or seek to hide
themselves? a guilty conscience being the insecurest thing in the world, and
the Japonnesses being at that time at the torture.

Thus much for the probability of this dangerous machination; now for the
legallitie of the proceeding of the Dutch thereupon, we will sit down and
consider. The English that were tortured, were subject to an absolute Prince,
independent of the Hollander, but in league with them: so they were friends and
companions to the Hollanders, and not subjects, and were to be governed by
their own Laws, or in case an offense given to the Dutch, by a joint Company
of both Nations. But the Governor of Amboyna, took jurisdiction over them, and
therefore the whole proceeding had been illegal, had it been as gentle as it
was cruel. Nor is it enough to say, that the subjects of another Country,
offending against a Foreign jurisdiction (under which they are at present)
ought to be punished by those Laws, for the English had an interest and share
in the place, and there were, as I said before, as socii, not as subditi: not
to say that there was no offense at all, so that the ground of the Objection is
taken away. Nay, suppose that we had been under their jurisdiction, yet were
the proceedings absolutely illegal: For they should have been agreeable to the
custom of the Low Countries, which those were not, and therefore it was an
offense in the Governor, and a high one against the laws of his own Country.
For all penal Laws, strictly circumstantiate, as well for executing just
rigor, as for preventing of cruelty; and every Minister of Justice that
transgresses herein, as if he behead a man that is adjudged to be hanged, he
renders himself little better than in the same capacity. Yet notwithstanding,
there was no just indicium for the torturing of the first Japan, nor any proofs
against the English, but forced confessions of those tortured wretches, which
for the most part were directed by the Dutch, in his verbis: which ground of
Torture is prohibited by their own Law.

For matter of Torture, if you have had the heart to survay it, I suppose you
will think it needs neither heightning, nor shadowing, it is so foul of it
self. For my part all the debauched cruelties of the first Roman Emperors,
when the invention of a good exquisite Torment was a good way for advancement,
though savage devices inflicted upon the Martyrs, when the continuance of
persecution hardened and instructed cruelty; all those sanguinarie Barbarisms
of the most unciviliz'd Nations have not appeared to me so foul and exquisite
as this single process; and that by a people in league with us, of opinion with
us in Religion, and obliged to us in effect for their being, purchased by us
with the loss of so many brave lives, and the profusion of so much treasure,
even in our own most dangerous times, when they were like to be swallowed up by
a ravenous invader, and stood deserted by all their other neighbors; yet these
men for the engrossing of that Trade, wherein they have been unhappily
fortunate, could cancel all these obligations, and break the Laws of nature,
nations, and hospitality to bring it about.

And truly me thinks upon this occasion, I cannot but look back on the felicity
of those times, the excellency of the Government, and the Honor of that
Prince that could sleep so soundly, when such cries were so loud in his ears.
This it is to be under the Government of one, who notwithstanding is governed
by a Pimp or a Parasite, who though he have such a sacred trust as the safety
and the righting of the people, yet to please his Catemit,e and the better to
sacrifice to his lust and luxury, would be blind to such a violation of his
own Honor, and the safety of his people, while the blood cries in vain behind
the Altar, and so becomes entayl'd on his own head, and for ought we know, may
still lie upon ours. But the Dutch knew well enough what an easy and secure
Prince they had to deal with, and therefore like crafty Foxes adventured to
play tricks with the old drowsy Lion; they knew well enough that the
exorbitancies, prodigalities, and ill provisions of that Court would ever keep
it beggarly and needy, and that there wanted not instruments in it that Gold
would work upon: and therefore they had old Jammy fast enough besieged (though
he were a place easy enough to take in of himself) so that this business was
hushed up in silence for a little money, and the cautionarie Towns were sold
for nine pence, which had cost us a Noble, they themselves laughing at the
credulity of that stupid Prince, that would give up so considerable places
(which held them in aw, and preserved us ever a good means to right our selves)
and thinking so great a masterpiece, that their engine, the then Secretary,
had a present of no less than 30. or 40000. l. for that one service. But the
best of it is, the enchantment is now broke up, and we begin to rouse our
selves again, and with the blessing of God upon our Liberty, may arrive at a
higher pitch of glory and happiness than any of our Ancestors? if they, that
have overcome, sheath their swords (as God be thanked they do) and they that
are overcome lay aside their hates, as I wish they may. For so we shall grow up
to be one body, and shall be formidable to all round about us, and be able
rather to right our distressed Neighbors, than be in a capacity to receive
injuries of the least, much less of the most horrid nature.

FINIS.

