A True RELATION OF The Rising of the CLVB-MEN IN SUSSEX. As it was Related to
William Lenthall Esquire Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons, by an
eyewitness of the same.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for John Field, Sept. 23. 1645.

A Third party, generally of a contemptible and base condition, without and
contrary to all Authority, have lately audaciously adventured to rise in great
numbers to the disturbance of the public peace and tranquillity of this
formerly one of the happiest Kingdoms in Europe, if not in the whole world,
until their elder Brethren became evil Counselors unto His Majesty, and
placed many thousands of their kind to join with them; and being arrayed and
armed in a most hostile manner, have invaded, and endeavored to spoil and
destroy the Subjects, together with their Rights, Liberties and Religion, which
to every honest man is far more precious then any, nay all other earthly
things; they having procured a pretended Authority from His Majesty, to
accomplish their inordinate and most hideous desires.

But this third party, not having the least show or pretense of any Authority,
and contrary to the chiefest power of this Kingdom the Parliament, called by
His Majesty at Westminster, have tumultuously assembled themselves together,
not only in the West, but also through their instigations have caused many
thousands of the ignorant in the adjacent counties to rise up together with
them as far as Hampshire, diverse of which said county, not contented with their
own preposterous courses, have proceeded to inveagle diverse people of the (...)
adjacent county of Sussex to follow their evil courses, amongst which they have
prevailed with one Aylen, son to one Mr. Aylen formerly Captain of a Trained
Band, also one Mr. Peckham, besides some of the Fords, and some others Yeomen
of the said county, to join together as Ring leaders (...) confederacy with the
Vulgar multitude, who being ignorant of manners, much more of such things as
concerns their Liberty and (...), Did accordingly proceed to send forth diverse
Warrants unto the several Towns and Hamlets next adjoining to Hampshire, as
also (...) and about Midhurst, to join with them in keeping of a general
Rendezvous upon Ronckon hill, which is betwixt Midhurst and Chichester in the
said county, which was done accordingly upon last Wednesday: Since which time,
they have further proceeded to call in the rest of the country betwixt
Chichester and Arundel to join with them in a general Rendezvous, to be held
at Berry hill within one mile of Arundel upon Monday the two and twentieth of
this present, many people of the said places, especially about Ister gate and
Wabberton; and so down to the seaside, and upon the Western side of the River
of Arundell toward Petworth have joined with them, and drawing themselves into
great numbers upon Saturday the twentieth of this present, they kept their
quarters at Mabberton and diverse other places thereabouts, their number being
greatly increased, and they rendering no account of their said tumultuous
proceedings; the Honorable Col: Morley, Capt: Morley Governor of Arundel
castle, and Major Young, upon consultation thought fit to fall on them in their
quarters at Mabberton, as being the next place to them, and within five miles
of Arundel, hoping thereby to dishearten and disappoint them in continuing
their tumultuous proceedings; and accordingly upon Sunday morning about three
hours before day, Major Young with about ten horsemen and forty Footmen fell upon
them in their quarters at Mabberton, killed him who went to ring the Bells as
the most dangerous man, by his doings, to call in the rest of their adherents
to their aid, which by his death was prevented; whereupon the rest of them so
far lost their courage, that every one shifted for themselves, and fled all,
saving two Malignant Ministers, and some other strangers to that place, who
were taken prisoners, and are committed in safe custody unto Arundel castle,
where it is believed they shall receive according to their demerits, such
exemplary punishment as will give good warning to the rest of their Tribe to
beware how they follow them, and proceed in the like preposterous courses.

But if they be so foolhardy as not to take warning, they will be sure to feel
the force of public Justice very shortly, which will be a sure way to reduce
them to a more civil condition at a dearer rate then any wise man will be
willing to partake of; And doubtless the said proceedings of the Governor of
Arundel (if it prevail not to do good on them as I hope it will) will prove but
a Molehill to that mountain of sorrows which they are like to suffer; but I
wish they may consider in time to reclaim themselves and return to their
callings, and not let Gods special providence and goodness, in sending them an
early Harvest, produce so great an evil, as spending the remainder of their
precious Autumn, in sowing such Seditious seed as can produce nothing but a
further crop of Judgment, into which this Nation is so far plunged, which
God for his great names sake vvithhold and remove.

FJNJS.

