A true Relation of the TRANSACTIONS BETWEEN Sir Charles Coot Knight.

Lord President of Connaught in Ireland, AND Owen-Roe-O-Neal; As it was
Reported to the Parliament FROM THE Council of State. Together with The VOTES
of the House thereupon.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these several Letters and
Articles, together with the Votes of the House thereupon, be forthwith printed
and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliment of England,
August 28. 1649.

Die Veneris, 24 Augusti, 1649.
Mr. Robinson Reports from the Council of State, a Letter from Sir Charles Coot
from Londonderry, of the fifteenth of August, 1649. and another of the
fourteenth instant, with Articles of Agreement between General Owen O Neal, and
Colonel Richard Coot, in the behalf of Sir Charles Coot, Lord President of
Connaught, dated 22 May, 1649. which were all this day read.

Resolved, etc. Monk, be communicated to Sir Charles Coot, as the Resolution of
this House, and a direction for him how to behave himself in the Transaction
between him and Owen Roe O Neal.

Resolved, etc. faithfulness and integrity of Sir Charles Coot, in preserving
the Garrison of Londonderry for the Interest of the Commonwealth of England;
and that it be specially recommended to the Council of State, to take care for
Provisions for him for the future, to prevent the like straits, and
encouragement of him and his Officers and Soldiers under his Command.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these several Letters and
Articles, together with the Votes of the House thereupon, be forthwith printed
and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

A Copy of a Letter sent from Sir Charles Coot, Lord President of Cannaught,
unto the Council of State.
Right Honorable,
I Have already given your Lordships an account of our condition till the one
and twentieth of June last* since which I have labored under so many
difficulties of all kinds, that I dare say never man comported with a more
vexatious miserable life then I have done; and truly, had not the wonderful
providence of God gone along with me, and the Forces under my command, in all
undertakings, we had long since been ruined and destroyed, and the Interest of
the Parliament of England in these parts wholly lost, but by his providence
both our selves and this place have hitherunto been preserved, which has given
me this opportunity both to pour forth my complaints, and to give your
Lordships an account of our present condition; in doing whereof, that I may not
be over tedious, be pleased to understand, That immediately after sending away
of my last Letters, our Enemies began much to increase both in number and
activity, insomuch that they presently blockt up the passage by Sea as well as
by Land, intrenching themselves upon the Crook of Ember in a Fort, wherein they
planted thirteen pieces of Ordnance, with about Two hundred Soldiers, close by
the Channel, through which all Ships and Boats bound for this place must
necessarily pass, so that no relief, without great hazard of being sunk, could
possibly come unto us: The next day after they begun to build thou-Fort, I sent
down Captain Keysars Friggot, by his own opportunity, with about One hundred
Musketeers, to see whether he could prevent their design, by battering down
their Fort, and taking their Ordnance, which he was very confident he could
perform; but it seems they were so well provided, that Captain Keisar durst not
abide their shot, so that after a short dispute, he carried down both Ship and
men to Culmore, having first received some shot through his Ship; so soon as he
came to Culmore, he put the men into Boats, and made them believe that he would
go down with them into Enishowen, and and help them to get victuals for their
subsistence, during their stay from Derry, but he was no sooner rid of them,
but he presently forsook both them and this place, for what end, or whether he
is gone, I know not; but your Lordships may easily imagine, that it added much
to our other many discouragements, to find our selves deprived of the
assistance of the only Man of War then left in this place, and no question
added as much encouragement to our Enemits; so that I shall humbly desire, that
your Lordships would be pleased to call him to a strict account for this
unworthy carriage therein: Seven days after this discouragement, it pleased God
Four hundred of the Cannaght Horse, and One hundred and fifty Dragoons, made a
shift, through exceeding difficulties, to come hither to our relief, by which
means, notwitstanding the Fort at Sligo, was well provided both with Victual
and Ammunition when they left it was afterward treacherously betrayed by Major
He^derson to the Earl of Clanrickard, and that by the corruption of Sir Robert
Stuart and his party: About four days after the Lord of Ar^es (who styles
himself Commander in chief of His Majesty's Forces for the Province of Ulster)
with about Seven hundred Horse and Dragoons, came hither to the assistance of
our Besiegers, who being joined, were so exceeding numerous, that our Horse
began rather to be a burden to us, then a benefit, being no ways able to fetch
in provisions for themselves or us; in the mean while no means were left
unassayed for the taking or surprising of this Garrison, both by continually
falling upon our horse, whilst they were grasing without the walls, by sending
in threatening Summons, and by scattering up and down most malicious Libels,
both against my own person, and the late proceedings of the Parliament of
England, with large promises and proffers of reward to all Officers and
Soldiers that would desert the Service, and come in unto them: During these
straits from without, we wanted not our discouragements within, for our
ammunition and provisions were much wasted, so that we had not above six weeks
provisions left; some of our Soldiers likewise, especially of the new Supply,
through disaffection to the Parliaments Interest, daily deserting us, to the
great discouragement of our old Soldiers, and most of the rest, so impatient of
our present condition, by reason of our wants and hard duty, together with the
great disadvantages we have continually fought upon, that they have rather
begot Murmurings and Mutinies in our old Soldiers, then any ways helped to
allay them. Amidst these great Difficulties aad Distractions, we endeavored to
support our languishing Spirits, by an expectation of speedy and effectual
Relief out of England; but finding that also has so far failed us
(notwithstanding the wind has several times favored us) that we have not so
much as heard out of England since the 14 of June last, we began to despair as
to outward means, and had nothing left to rely upon, but that Providence of
the Almighty, which has hitherunto watched over us for our preservation:
whilst we remained in this posture, Owen O Neal (who with about Three thousand
Foot and Four hundred Horse, was not above Fifty miles distant from us) freely
made offer of his assistance for our Relief, professing much affection to the
Parliament of England, and an earnest desire to use the utmost of his endeavors
for the maintenance of their Interest in this Country; and to induce me to a
belief that his expressions were real and hearry, he enclosed in his Express,
some Letters that he had received from Colonel Monk, whereby it appeared, that
Colonel Monk had not only accepted of his assistance for the diversion of the
Enemy, but had also furnished him with Twenty Barrels of Powder for that
purpose; and further assured him, That he should neither want Powder, nor any
thing else which he had in store: And in Colonel Monk's Letter in answer to the
Lord Inchiquin, who charged him with joining with Owen O Neal and his party (a
Copy whereof was likewise enclosed) it was insinuated, as if Owen O Neal's
submission to use the Parliaments power, were ready accepted by them. Now
calling to mind that it is no new thing, for the most wise God to make use of
wicked Instruments, to bring about a good Design for the advancement of his
Glory; and finding our selves involved in this great Extremity, that we must
either resolve to be ruined and destroyed, and with us the Parliaments Interest
in these parts, or else make use of this desperate Remedy: for prevention
thereof, I called together a Council of War, and advised with them, what was
fit to be done; all things being duly considered, the result whereof was, That
it was better to accept of the assistance of those who proclaimed themselves
friends both to us, and the Interest we fight for, rather then to fall into the
hands of those that have both by word and deed declared themselves malicious,
bloody and enraged Enemies against both us, and those we serve under; but yet
with this wary proviso, That we would use their assistance no longer then the
approbation of the State of England should go along with us therein, as your
Lordships well perceive by the Articles at large, which I have herein enclosed:
After this Agreement (viz.) upon the eight of this instant, Owen O Neal with
Three thousand Foot and Four thousand Horse, having marched through O Cahans
Country, came in to our assistance, and encamped themselves before this City,
on the other side of the water; the terror whereof (together with the activity
of the Forces under my command, in falling upon the Rear of the Enemy, whilst
they marched toward Owen O Neal) had such great influence upon our Enemies in
Arnes, and the whole Country, that the next day Sir Robert Steuart and the Lord
of Ardes, drew off as many men as they were able, and stole away privately
toward Clareboyes: That day and the next I summoned several Garrisons, to wit,
The New buildings, the New Fort, Elagh Castle, and Mongevalny, all which,
together with their Artillery, Arms and Provisions, are since delivered up unto
me: I have since summoned the rest of the Holds which (I make no question will
be gained with much ease in a short time (Colonel Mervyn before Owen O Neals
falling down, was gone to the Omigh, whether through discontent, or what other
reason, I know not, but about three or four days before he went thither, he led
on the Enemies Horse, and gave a desperate charge upon our Horse, not far from
our walls, but (I thank God) we lost none but six men, but killed at least
twenty of theirs: And yet for all that, Owen O Neal marching with his Army near
to the Omigh* which he might easily have taken and plundered, Colonel Mervyn was
so impudent as to assure him, he was a friend, and told him, He had already
agreed with me upon thirteen Articles, forged by himself. The tenth of this
instant I received several Letters out of the Country from all parties, to
entreat me to accept of their Submission, and to give them protections, some
professing their readiness to obey my Authority without conditioning; others
upon Condition that they may not be forced to any thing against the ends of the
Covenant; or otherwise, That they may have liberty to depart this Country with
Bag and Baggage; to all which I returned Answers suitable to the Contents of
the said Letters. The thirteenth of this instant, five of the Country upon my
protection, came hither to Treat with me for the whole; the issue whereof was,
That all, excepting Commission. Officers, as well Soldiers as Countrymen,
submitting themselves to the Authority of the Parliament and State of ENGLAND,
and delivering up their Arms and Ammunition, should be suffered to remain
quietly and peaceably in this Country, they paying such Contributions toward
the maintenance of the Army, as was formerly laid upon them; as also such
Arrears as are due from them since their last payment: To which though they
have through fear seemingly submitted, yet I must acquaint your Lordships, That
the Country is so exceedingly wasted of late, First, by the party under George
Monro; Secondly, by the party under the Lord of Ardes; and lastly, by the party
under O Neal, as also by our burning and destroying the Country round about
this City, and so many Inhabitants have with their stocks and families deserted
this Country, that truly unless we should utterly undo those that remain here,
we must for present expect but small Contribution from them, toward the
maintenance of the Army. And now, My Lords, having taken a view of our present
condition, I need not tell your Lordships what an easy matter it were to setle
this part of the Country in such a posture, as that we shall not need to fear
the like Rebellions against the Parliament of England, as we have hitherto been
subject unto, to wit, by sending over immediately the Regiment of men so long
since promised, and Recruits for the three Regiments of Foot, and two of Horse
already in these parts; as also such Forces into the Clareboyes, as may divert
their Forces there for falling upon us: And that I may not forget the Officers
that have faithfully stuck to me in this last Defection (from whom I lately
received a Letter by way of Remonstrance, which I have here enclosed,
expressing their hard Condition, and Remedies for the bettering thereof, which
they entreated me to represent effectually to your Lordships) which I humbly
desire that their Requests, which I conceive to be modest and reasonable, may
be taken into speedy consideration, in such sort that they may at length enjoy
the fruits of their Faithfulness and Long-sufferings, and that they may with
the more vigor and cheerfulness hazard their lives, and all that is near and
dear unto them, for the preservation of the Parliaments Interest in these parts.

To their Desires I shall only humbly add, That a considerable proportion of
Ammunition of all sorts may be speedily sent hither, as also Two hundred Case
of Pistols and Saddles, our Stores having been much wasted since these last
Troubles.

Secondly, That for the better Reducing of the strong Holds in this Country, a
Morter-piece of fourteen Inches high, and about Three hundred Shells fitting
for it, may be sent hither with the first opportunity.

Thirdly, That a Magazine of Bread-corn may be forthwith provided and sent
hither, so that this City may not always be in like hazard of starving, as it
lately was.

Fourthly, That two Frigots may be appointed constantly to attend this Coast,
and that they may be so furnished with Provisions and Ammunition, as that they
may not be a burden to this Garrison, as those formerly appointed for that
Service have been.

Fifthly, That Chyrurgions Chests may be forthwith sent hither, we having no
Medicaments left in these parts; as also Colors for the Foot Regiments.

My Lords, I am sorry that I have been forced to be so over-tedious to your
Lordships; but truly I have been so long deprived of an opportunity to express
my self, and such great alterations have so lately happened in these parts,
that I thought it my duty rather to be thus troublesome, then to neglect the
through-acquainting your Lordships with all the material passages that this
part affords. And because I could not give your Lordships in writing such an
exact account as I could wish, I have therefore once more desired this
Gentleman Mr. King, who is fully acquainted with all passages of public
concernment, and who I am confident will give your Lordships a faithful account
thereof, to wait upon your Lordships. And in regard I have not wherewithal to
support him in this Journey, I must humbly desire, That your Lordships will be
pleased to take him into consideration, and to give him such a Reward for his
constant readiness to serve the Parliaments Interest, as may encourage him
therein; as also to return him back as soon as possibly may be with the
Supplies abovementioned. And here (my Lords) I could willingly end, but that I
cannot forbear to complain of the hard usage I have met with continually, since
I have been employed in the Parliaments Service: And now having been twenty
weeks besieged by a numerous and enraged Enemy, have had no Relief sent unto
us, except about Two hundred n^ked men, and ill armed; many whereof being
disaffected to your Service, have since deserted us; and Six hundred quarters
of Wheat, which certainly cannot be thought competent for such a considerable
place: which neglect of us, I would not willingly impute to your Lordships, but
rather to some secret Enemies to the Parliaments Interest and my own person,
who by secret underminings, and misrepresentations of our Condition, divert the
Relief intended for us: But I hope your Lordships having had such constant
experience of our faithfulness in your Service, will at length think us worthy
of better encouragements, or otherwise that I may be discharged from my
Employment in your Lordships Service. In confidence whereof, I remain,

Londonderry, Aug. 15. 1649. My Lords, Your Lordships most humble Servant,
CHA: COOT.

A Copy of another Letter from Sir Charles Coot to the Council of State.
Right Honorable,
BE pleased to understand, That General Owen O Neal being sensible, that the
Parliaments Interest in these parts was in danger to be wholly lost, and the
Forces under my command likely to be ruined and destroyed in defense thereof,
by a numerous party of English and Scots, under the conduct of the Lord of
Ardes, and other desperate Enemies against the Parliament, was pleased freely
to offer his assistance for our relief, which was accordingly accepted by me,
upon the Articles or Conditions herein enclosed, which I purpose (God willing)
inviolably to observe, till your Lordships pleasure be known therein: And
truly, I must ingenuously acknowledge, That I have hitherto found General O
Neal, and the Army under his command, very punctual and faithful in all their
promises and engagements that they have made unto me; and I make no question,
but they will continue so unto the end: In the mean while the General has been
pleased to communicate unto me certain Proposals, which he says were long
since transmitted into England to the Parliament by Col: Munk; and though for
his own part, and the prime Officers with him, they do not doubt but that the
Proposals are already yielded unto by the State; yet in regard their Army and
party in all other parts of the Kingdom, cannot be satisfied therewith, until
the Parliament be pleased to declare themselves more publicly therein; He
has therefore desired me humbly to entreat your Lordships to declare your
Resolution therein, and that with as much speed as may be; to the end that he
and his party might with the more vigor and cheerfulness, endeavor the
preservation of the Parliaments Interest in this Country, which I humbly
desire may be accordingly performed, as that which I humbly conceive (with
submission to your Lordships greater judgments) may much conduce to the
advancement of the Parliaments Interest in this County: And so I remain, My
Lords,

Your Lordships most humble and faithful Servant.
Londonderry, Aug. 14. 1649.
For the Right Honorable the Council of State, sitting at Whitehal Westminster.
Articles condescended unto and agreed upon, by and between General Owen O
Neal, Commander in chief of the Confederate Catholics, of the one part; And
Colonel Richard Coot, in the behalf of Sir Charles Coot, Lord President of
Connaught, of the other part: dated the Two and twentieth of May, 1649.
1. IT is Agreed and Concluded, That there be a Cessation of Arms, and all acts
of Hostility between the Parties and Forces under the Command of General Owen O
Neal, and the Forces and Parties under the Command of Sir Charles Coot, Lord
President of Connaught, Colonel Richard Coot and their party, until the
Parliament of Englands pleasure be known unto him, to the Propositions
presented them by the said General O Neal.

II. It is Concluded and Agreed, That both parties be mutually engaged in War
Offensive and Defensive, against the Enemies of both or either, during the
aforesaid time; and that upon all occasions in the interim, they be in a
readiness to aid, assist and relieve one another, until a more absolute
Agreement be made and condescended unto by the Parliament of England; and that
the Forces and Creaghts of either side, shall have free leave, permittance and
liberty of access, recourse and retiration, in case of necessity, to the
quarters of each other; and that the said General O Neal shall be furnished
from time to time with Ammunition, according to the best ability of the said
Lord President and his party, to be employed only against the Enemies of the
Parliament of England, and shall have at present twenty Barrels of Powder, with
Match and Ball proportionable thereunto.

III. It is concluded and agreed, If General O Neils answer from the Parliament
should prove a deny^l, tha^ a receipt of such an answer, both parties (...) to
their former quarters, without any prejudice from the one to the other, a^^
^ourteen days t^^e limited for the ^iration.

IV. It is concluded and agreed ^etwee^ the said par^ies, That the Creaghts o^
Ul^^^^ or C^nnaught, who are or will be resident in the q^^^^ers belonging to
the Lord President, Colonel Richard Coot, or their p^rty shall be admitted
according to their accustomed (...) to contribute toward the maintenance of
Gen^ral O Neals Army; and that likewise it shall be lawful to the said Lord
President and Colonel Richard Coot, to receive Contribution from such of the
said Creaght as w^ll voluntarily ag^^^ with them to that ^^^^ct.

V. It is ag^^ed between both parties, That the aforesaid Lord P^esident,
Colonel Richard Coot, and their party, will assord and give (...) leave and
liberty to any Ship or Shipping that with Coin, Provision, Arms, Ammunition, or
any other kin^^ of Commodities, may at any time during this Cessation, arrive
at any H^rbor, Port, Town or H^ve^, within their Liberty, to the use of General
Owen O Neal, and his Forces, and ^h^t admittance be given him, or such ^s he
will appoint to ^^^ch away the same, with seecurity and safety, and that the
said Shipping have leave ^o put at pleasure without any pr^judice.

By virtue (...) a Commission to us directed from General O N^^^ (...) ^^clude
a Ces^^tion of Arms with (...) or (...) and his party dated 22 May. 1649.
WE have concluded and agreed in the behalf of the said General O Neal, That in
case the S^ ^ b^^^ the La^e, lately under the Lord P^, shall on the approach of
the Army (...) during this Cessation, submit to the L^^^ Presidents Command,
that then the said Ge^^^^^ O Neal before such submission be admitted shall
receive for the pains taken by him, his Officers and Soldiers. Two thousand
pounds in moneys, and Three thousand (...) more then which be is not to demand,
whereof nothi^^ ^ined from the Scots before the submis^ion i^ to be ^^^koned;
or any quarters taken up w^^lest the Army stays for the said Moneys and Cattle.

It is furth^r agreed and concluded, That what Holds or Castles shall be taken
from the Scots aforesaid, during this Cessation, in the Laggane or thereabouts,
shall be disposed of as the Lord President shall think fi^; and if any Garrisons
shall be taken in Connaught o^ elsewhere, by the a^^istance of General O Neal,
that then (...) ^ed of as General O Neal shall t^^nk ^i^.

FINIS.

