A TRUE RELATION OF THE GREAT Thunder, Lightning, Rain, GREAT VVIND, AND
Prodigious HAIL, That Happened at ALVANLEY In the Parish of Frodsham in
CHESHIRE. On Sunday the 19th day of June. 1687. As it was sent to a Merchant in
London.
Alvandley this 18th of July 1687. Loving Cousin,
I Have not received one Line from thee, since thy list going to London: But
Cousin Elizabeth Birdsey told me of thy dangerous Sickness, for which I am much
troubled, but shall be glad to hear of thy perfect Recovery to Health again.
God grant that all Afflictions we meet with in this vale of Tears or Transitory
Life, may be a means to draw us nearer himself, who only can help, support, and
strengthen our Infirmities. I hope these Lines will find thee better Recovered.

I was desired by our Neighbor Jeremiah Leech, (whose kind Love is herein
remembered to thee) to send thee a Copy of the Relation of that remarkable
Accident, which by the disposing hand of God, happened with us at Alvandley the
19th of June last past, to the great damage of our Corn, Houses, Cattle,
Meadowing and Fruits, which was occasioned by the Wind and Prodigious Hail,
which may appear by the following Relation, which be the said J. Leech is very
desirous may be committed to the Press, that all might have a true account of
it, and desired me, to request thee to do it, that for time to come it may be
known and kept in mind how the Lord has dealt with us in his Judgments in this
kind, which were wonderfully mixed with Mercy to us, in preserving our Lives,
when much Cattle hardly escaped, being bruised, and hurt, and cut, till blood
ran down them, as appears by the Relation following, which is a true Account
how it was; I being an Eyewitness, and had a share of it. So with mine, and
Brothers kind Love to thee, wishing thy good health, and to hear from thee, I
rest

Thy assured Loving Kinsman, Nathaniel Bushel.

The Copy as it was Directed to Sir John Arderne, take as follows.
Right Worshipful,
WE your distressed Tenants in Alvandley, do Certify unto you, how it has
pleased Almighty God to show his great Power, in that terrible storm of
Thunder, Lightning, Rain, great Wind and Hail, that lighted on us, your
Worships distressed Tennants in Alvandley the 19th of June 1687. But we are not
able to express the terribleness of it in full, being too apt to forget, like
Pharaoh of Old; but seeing it has left such memorable Monuments of the
destructiveness of it, all the beholders have stood amazed at it, fetching
Tears from the Eyes of the Tenderhearted, many having come far to see it; and
said, if it had been attested to them upon Oath how destructive it was, they
could not have believed it had been so, till they came to see it.

May it please you, That after great Lightning, Thunder and Rain, there arose a
great terrible Wind, which brought with it the great Hail in abundance, which
at the first dash broke all our Glass Windows that were on the South-West sides
of our Houses, the Wind at that instant coming from thence upon us; and issued
a flashing Fire, that accompanied with great Thunder, the Hail came with great
vioience, and had sharp Ends and Edges like broken Ice, Cutting, Smiting, and
driving down all tops of Trees and young Plants, and cut the Backs of our Kine,
till Blood issued therefrom, and bruised the Elders and Paps, and wonderfully
affrighted them, that they ran as if they had been Mad, leaping out of their
Pastures, some into Pits and were almost drowned; some people that were out of
Doors were ill beaten and bruised ere they could get to shelter themselves,
that to our knowledge their flesh was as black as pots, and scarce able to go.
Although praised be God, he in his infinite Mercy spared both Man and Beast
alive, which is no small wonder, for it killed flying Fowl, both Crows and
Pyes, and other Fowl. Several of our Buildings were Shattered and Battered by
it; and the Roofs of both Thatch and Slate torn and uncovered: some Walls both
Timber and Stone driven down; the Windmill was blown and driven down; nay,
which is most remarkable, it broke strong sound Trees of a great substance off
in the middle, and blew down very many fruit Trees, and destroyed all the
Fruits, the which were abundance before the Storm was; and did so cut and
bruise all sorts of Fruit Trees and other Trees, that we think they will hardly
get recovery, the Hailstones being many of them sharp, that they slit the Bark
of Trees as if done with a Knife: if any Apple be left, it seems as if it were
cut with a Knife. All our Gardens, Plants, and Flowers are destroyed but what
were within Ground; our Hedges and Quicksets are pill'd, so as the Leaf and
Bark is not left.

But we may say this is little in Comparison of the loss of our Corn in every
sort of Grain, which was Smitten very terrible, viz. Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats,
Pease, Beans, French-Wheat, with our Flax and Hemp; in a Word, all was by the
said Storm of Hail destroyed, so that some have Plowed it up where their Corn
was, and Sowed it again; some have Plowed it for Summer work, and some have
turned their Cattle into their Corn Fields, and some others let it lie, to see
what the Lord will be pleased to do with it.

The Tythe-Corn of the Town, that usually has been Let from 25 to 26 l. and
sometimes at 30 l. the Morning after the Storm, none would have given 1 l. for
it: The loss of our Meadowing is not a whit behind the rest: To the great
Damage of the Town; most of the Town Folk being Daries; the Grass was Beaten
and Battered as if pounded in a Mortar, so that there is little left, and what
between, the Sap of Trees, Corn and Grass. Our Pits and Ditches are Dyed like
Tanners Bark-Pits. We heard that our Neighboring Townsmen were so sorry for
us, that one said he would (if the rest would do likewise) give us a Load of
Hay for relief of our Cattle.

The Hail and Wind continued about half an hour; the Hailstones were of diverse
shapes, some with sharp Ends and Edges, and like your Smiths Cynders, some say
there were of 8 or 9 Inches about; but we were so affrighted that Night we did
not regard to measure them, but next day there was measured that were 5 Inches
about, and on the Friday following which was 5 days after, there was found in
old Thatch, Hail that was 5 Inches about, we cannot express our loss, sustained
by the said Wind and Hail; there was such abundance of it, and it beat mightily
into our Houses, that our Old Corn, Cheese, Meat, Bedding, and other household
Goods received great Damage by it, all the substance of the Storm lighted on
our Village, as it afterward appeared, for that way the Storm drove it passed
by the Neighboring Towns, the Hill being betwixt them and us, so they
sustained very little loss by it.

Truly since the great Hail in the Land of Egypt, we do not hear that the like
has been seen for Thunder, Hail, and Fire mingled with it, flashing upon the
Ground, as it appeared to many that beheld it, and came with such a heideous
Noise, that cannot be expressed, betwixt the Hail and Wind, its violence was
great, being in such abundance, that it lay in some places three quarters of a
Yard deep, and beat up the Ground, and drove it on heaps in some places, and
after it, followed a great Damp or Mist, with a very offensive smell; but we
desire to give Glory and Thanks to Almighty God, that spared our Lives and the
Lives of our Cattle, when it had been so easy a thing to destroy us, when
stronger things were destroyed, but that he pleased to give a Commission to its
strong Force, and no further to proceed.

And we humbly pray God, that we who have seen and felt his mighty Power, and
all others, who only hear of this Relation, may make a right improvemen of it,
to the Glory of Almighty God and our own souls good.

And we whose Names are hereunto subscribed do humbly conclude, that all our
losses in the aforementioned particulars, within the Precincts of Alvanley,
will amount unto the Sum of several 1000 l. and upwards, unless God in his
infinite Mercy find out a way for our Relief; but it pittys our hearts most of
all, for our poor Widows and Fatherless, whose whole years profits are
destroyed.

We whose Names are hereunto subscribed, shall be ready to attest what is here
Written for certain Truths and no feigned things. John Turner, Minister at
Alvandley John Clarke, Schoolmaster Richard Walker, Clerk at the Chapel
Samuel Gerrard Jeremiah Leech George Whitley Richard Simcock John Bassnet. John
Ashbrooke Samuel Leech Robert Simcock John Hayes

John Bushel, of the Parish of Allhallows the Wall, London, knows very well
the persons who sent this Letter, as likewise some of the persons abovenamed,
and do believe this Relation to be very true, having received a Letter from
another person to the same Effect.

John Bushel.


I William Watts of the said Parish of Allhallows in the Wall, do know very
well, the person that sent the above-written Letter, and does really believe
the above-written Relation to be true.

William Watts


I William Johnson of London, Notary Public, do Certify that I do know, not
only the said person that sent the said Letter, but also several other of the
persons Inhabitants there, and that I believe the above Relation to be
assuredly true, and no false thing, I having seen a Letter sometime since to
that Effect.

William Johnson.



This may be Printed,

R P.
July the 28th 1687.
LONDON, Printed by D. Mallet, for G.P. 1687.


