Licensed according to Order.

A True Relation or Journal OF THE Siege and Taking by Storm, The Famous CITY
of Belgrade, BY THE Christian Army, Under the Conduct of the Victorious Elector
of BAVARIA.

On the 6th. day of September. 1688.

With an Account of its Situation, Fortifications, etc. And also of the great
Victory gained by Prince Lovis of Baden, over the Turkish Army, Commanded by
the Bassa of Bosnia.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin; And are to be Sold by most Booksellers.
1688.

A True Relation Of the Siege of BELGRADE, With the Taking it by Storm, etc.
BElgrade is a City of Ancient standing and great Fame, Situate on the
Confluence of the Rivers Saw or Save, and the Danube, and has gone under
diverse Names; being at first, as far as can be gathered from History, called,
Taururum, or Tauranum; after that, Alba Graeca; by the Dutch accordingly,
Greichs-Wessemburg; but by the French and Modern Latinists, Belgrade, and
Belgradum; a Name given to this Important place for its Beautiful Situation, as
being Hemmed in upon the North with the Danube, on the East with the Saw or
Save, and on the other parts strongly secured with Walls, Bulwarks, Ramports,
and deep Ditches, anciently belonging to the Despots or Princes of Servia, tho
lying on the very Frontiers of Hungary, and by many Attributed a City of that
Kingdom, and may properly be divided into City and Suburbs; the Former having
standing in it a very high and strong Castle, encompassed with double Walls,
and what other Fortifications may contribute to its Defense. The Latter
Replenished with many goodly Fabrics, and curious Buildings, intermixed with
pleasant Gardens, and has a prospect of the Countries round it, almost from
Buda to Adrianople; and of such Importance was it in times past, That in Anno
1440. Amurath the Second Emperor of the Turks, after he had wasted Hungary, and
seized upon Servia (during the Discontents and Intestine Broils of those
Countries) found nevertheless a check or stop to the progress of his Arms
before this City; for having layn before it Seven Months, and lost in the
several Attacques and Sallies of the Besieged 30000 Men; finding all hopes of
taking it vain, he in a great Rage raised the Siege, and returned to
Adrianople; so that the place had rest till Anno 1456, at what time Mahomet the
Great being Emperor of the Turks, he upon the Death of George the Despot or
Prince, seized upon Servia, which Amurath had permitted to be held by that
Prince as Tributary to the Ottoman Emperor; and passing on with a powerful
Army, all the Cities and Towns but this opening their Gates, he laid Siege to
it by Land and Water, and brought down a great many Vessels and Galleys of War
upon the Danube; though at that time the great Hunniades having been Elected
King of Hungary, and not well brooking to have so powerful a Neighbor, set out
from Buda with many armed Vessels, and falling suddenly upon the Turks Naval
Forces, Burned, Sunk, and took most of them; upon notice whereof, Mahomet in a
great Rage gave order for a general Assault, Vowing not to spare, nor give
Quarter to any, if the City of Belgrade fell into his Hands; and after Six
hours obstinate Attempts, in which were lost 4000. Men, one whereof was
Curaizis Bassa his Lieutenant in Europe, who was slain with a great Shot, he
found himself constrained to sound the Retreat; and in the End, after many
unsuccessful Assaults, finding his Army weakened by the loss of 40000 Men, he
raised the Siege. From which time we find nothing Memorable relating to this
City, till the Year 1520, at which time Solomon the Magnificent succeeding
Solomon his Father in the Ottoman Throne, quarreling with the Hungarians, (into
whose Protection Belgrade was taken, consigned by the Despot of Servia to King
Sigismund, as best able to Maintain it, in consideration of Lands and
Territories more remote) he laid Siege to it, being but weakly Garrisoned, and
worse provided with Stores and Ammunition; and the King of Hungary, by reason
of Intestine Divisions, being in no Capacity to raise an Army sufficient to
Relieve it, the Besieged found themselves (after a short Resistance)
constrained to deliver up the place that had so long stood the Bulwark of
Christendom, and has ever since been very advantageous to the Turks, by being
made their chiefest Magazine or Store in the Western parts of their Empire; and
although the Christians had many Consultations about Recovering it, yet soon
after Buda being seized by the same Solomon, and other places of strong
Importance, the Turks possessed it quietly till this present year 1688, when on
the Sixth of September after, having sustained a Siege very Bloody and
Resolute, it was taken by Storm by the Imperial Forces, under the Command of
the Victorious Elector of Bavaria. A True and Impartial Account of which take
as follows.

The Duke of Lorain, by reason of his Indisposition, not being capable to take
the Field so early as the occasion of business required, his Electoral Highness
of Bavaria, offered his Service to the Emperor to lead the Army, which being
accepted and approved, after the Forces were drawn out of their Winter Quarters
and united, the Elector Arrived at Vienna; and there making a short stay,
proceeded to his Command, when in a Council of War it was resolved, That seeing
Buda was already reduced, and Heaven signally favored the Christian Arms, it
was not convenient to omit the opportunity of Besieging so Important a place
the Infidels held, viz. Belgrade; whereupon the Army had order to March toward
the Saw or Save; so that on the Fourth of August New Style, they set forward
from Salankamen to Zemon, where they stayed the next day; and the Sixth
Encamped at Semlyn; on the Seventh they came within Sight of the River, where
it makes the considerable Islands of Zingari; when coming to the hither Bank,
they perceived by reason of the Works the Turks had cast up in the Islands,
where Teckely was said to be in Person, and on the further Shore, it was a
matter of great difficulty, if not impossible, to pass there, as had been
before designed, being much broader than it had been Represented; so that some
time being spent about viewing, and further consulting what was to be done,
another place was fixed upon, and accordingly (the next day) a great number of
Boats that had been brought thither upon Wheels, were put into the Water, and
the Regiment of Staremberg, the Electors Guards, and four Thousand Men,
Detached out of other Bodies, were ordered to Waft over, under the Command of
the Valiant, and truly Heroic, Count Serini, General of the Bavarian Forces;
when about Nine at Night, the Drums and Hautboys of the Janissaries were heard
in the Camp, as seeming to approach the place of passage; but it so little
discouraged the Imperialists, that about Eleven at Night, the Foot were
Embarked, and the Elector directed that 500 Men, under the Command of a
Lieutenant Colonel, should Land first to observe the place; but scarce were
they in the Middle of the River, but about 300 Turks appeared on the further
Shore, and discharged a Volley of Shot, but without doing any damage to the
Christians; who, after this discharge, hastened to Land under the favor of the
Cannon Planted to Annoy the Enemy; so that thereupon the Turks quitted their
Post; where the Landing place and ground was found as well as could reasonably
be wished, being very Commodious, by reason about four paces from the Bank of
the River were almost Inaccessible, by reason of the Bushes and Woody places;
so that the Boats left those they carried over in Security, and returned; when
about Four in the Morning, 3000 were got over, covering and Intrenching
themselves, to prevent any Attempt or Surprise the Evening might make upon
them, who now approached in considerable Numbers; and whilst the Foot thus
continued to pass over in Boats, the Bridge was laid for the Horse; however,
before it could be Finished, 6000 of the Enemies Foot, and some Horse,
Attacqued the Christians on the further Shore, on the Right and the Left; but,
after several Assaults, were Repulsed with a considerable Loss; the Christians
losing a Major of the Regiment of Staremberg, with diverse Granadeers that were
too far advanced; when about Eleven of the Clock, 10000 Men had effectually
passed the River; and then the Enemy appeared again with a greater force,
within Musket Shot, but made no farther attempt; and soon after, a Hungarian
Dissenter, Informed the General, That the Enemy the Night following, intended
to make an Attacque with their whole Power; but about Five in the Evening (the
Bridge being entirely finished) a Regiment of Dragoons passed it, and after
them, the Foot that remained, and about Midnight, the rest of the Horse, etc.
so that on the Ninth of August, the whole Army, with the Artillery and Baggage,
Encamped on the further Shore, within four Leagues of Belgrade; where his
Electoral Highness was Informed, That there was a Garrison of 12000 Turks, and
3000 Tartars in the City, but without any certainty; and that Yeghen Bassa lay
Entrenched with the rest of the Ottoman Forces, between the Save and the
Danube, to cover the place; but being nothing dismayed at this Report, his
Electoral Highness Commanded the Army on the Tenth to March toward the City,
in order to Battle, resolving to Attacque the Enemy in their Camp; when,
contrary to expectation, they found it abandoned, and the Suburbs or lower Town
on Fire, the Turks that Inhabited it, having saved themselves in the Boats
belonging to the City; yet four of them were taken with a considerable Booty,
and the Hussars being sent out in a flying Party after the Retreating Enemy,
took much of their Baggage, and some Thousands of great and small Cattle; when
upon the near approach of the Army, 4000 Greeks and Rascians, with their Wives
and Children, came to meet them, and to Implore his Electoral Highnesses
Protection, which they obtained; strict Orders being given throughout the Camp,
that none under great Penalties and Punishment, should presume to disturb or
molest them; however, the Soldiers having quenched the Fire, after it had Burnt
several hundred Houses, found a considerable Booty the Turks in their have and
confusion had left behind them.

The Imperialists thus uncontrouled approaching the Walls of Belgrade, Scouts
were sent out to learn the Motion and Intent of the Enemy, who returned with an
Account, That Yeghen Bassa, the Serasquier of Hungary, together with Yeckley,
was retired to Sendrovia, about Eight Leagues further, with 20000 Men under his
Command: And upon further Inquiry, it was confidently reported, That no more
than 4000 Men were left in the Castle or upper Fortress, under the Command of a
Governor, who had lately been a common Soldier: And further, That Yeghen would
have Fought the Army, but was dissuaded from it by the Bassa of Erla or Agria,
and some other Principal Officers; Three of which (in a great Fury) he cut in
pieces with his own hand, and caused the Bassa of Agria to be Strangled in his
presence; the former Bassa, Governor of Belgrade, making his Escape, to avoid
his Fury; as also did Hassan Bassa, his Competitor.

Upon the day of Arrival before the place, the Elector of Bavaria caused the
Trenches to be opened against the Upper Town and Castle, and dispatched the
Sieur Dietrick, Captain of Horse, and Adjutant to General Caprara, with Letters
to Vienna, giving the Emperor an account of the Success, and lodged himself in
the Pleasure-House, built without the Town, for the Reception of the Deposed
Sultan Mahomet, when he came to View the Muster of his Army that (under the
Leading of Cara Mustapha the Grand Vizier) Besieged Vienna, Anno 1683. where he
had News, that the Prince of Baden, after Three hours obstinate Fight, had
overthrown the Bassa of Bosna's Army, composed of between 12 and 14000 Men,
posted to hinder his Passage over the River Vna, Killing Four Thousand on the
Place; upon which, Constantowitza had Surrendered, a Place of considerable
Importance on that side.

Things being at this pass, Preparations were made (with much caution and
diligence) to Attack the Castle; the Management or Conduct of which, was left
to Count Serini, Lieutenant General to His Electoral Highness, the Walls
whereof the Elector had Viewed, and given Orders, where he perceived it most
advantageous for the Attacks, etc. And although the Turks Sallyed at the same
time, yet were they beaten back, with the loss of but One Man on the part of
the Christians.

The next day, being the Twelfth, in the Evening the Troops' began to Approach
the Castle, and to take their Posts; to hinder which, the Enemy made a Vigorous
Sally, so that the Skirmish continued Three or Four hours, but at last they
were Repulsed; and in this Action Eighty of the Christians were Killed and
Wounded, the Turks losing a greater Number: And so successful it proved, that
the former secured, under the favor of this Action, their Posts, and opened
the Frenches within Musket Shot of the Walls, and began to work on Two
Batteries.

The Thirteenth in the Morning, the Besieged made another Sally in a greater
Body than the former, breaking on upon the Besiegers, and came to Handy-blows,
in which Dispute Count Rabntine, General of the Battalia, was shot in the Arm,
Count Tassis, Sergeant Major of the Regiment of Bavaria, in the Body, and
several other private Soldiers were Killed and Wounded; but the Besiegers being
presently reinforced, the Besieged were beaten back, many of them being Slain
and Wounded, of which 500 were left behind Dead, and two taken Prisoners; who
Reported, That there were Ten Thousand Persons in the Garrison, but many of
them Women and Children, which was confirmed by a Christian Slave, who had been
there since the Siege of Vienna, and now made his escape to the Army; when the
same day, News came, That Yeghen Bassa had set the Famous City of Semandra on
Fire, which was about seven Leagues from the Camp, and carried the Inhabitants
to Nissa, continuing his Retreat in great disorder toward Sofia.

The Fourteenth of August the Enemies Cannon Played suriously, and they threw a
great many Granado's and Bombs, but did no considerable Execution; and after
that, made another Sally, though with no better success than the former; and
the same day a Detachment of the Garrison of Temesware got by the help of Boats
into the Castle, on that part that stands to the River Danube, though the
number was not considerable.

The Fifteenth of August, the Besieged had finished a Battery of three Mortars,
and shot a great many Carcasses and Bombs into the place, doing considerable
Execution; and the Elector ordered, that a Lieutenant General, a
Serjeant-Major, and Two Colonels, with 800 Horse, and 3000 Foot should Nightly
Guard the Trenches; where, the better to Encourage the Workmen, His Electoral
Highness continued frequently till One or Two in the Morning.

On the Sixteenth, the Duke of Mantua arrived, and made his Entrance into the
Camp with a numerous Train, and splendid Equipage, having with him above 500
Men on Horseback, including his Guards, 40 lead Horses, 24 Mules, and 25
Wagons with Baggage, and a Coach of State drawn by Six Horses, and followed by
many other Coaches, and a great many Servants in Liveries; and upon his
approach, was met by the Elector of Bavaria, accompanied by the Chief Officers,
about a Mile from the Camp, and thence conducted to the Head Quarters, where
they Dined together, and afterward went to visit the Trenches, when in the mean
time, his Tents to the number of 104, some of them very Rich, were pitched
between the Electors Quarters, and that of General Caprara; and in the Evening
the Besieged made a Sally with a greater Body than formerly, but found the
Trenches so strongly Guarded, that they were obliged to Retreat with a
considerable loss.

On the Seventeenth, by break of day, the Besiegers began to Batter the Walls
of the Castle with Six Pieces of Canon, and understood by a Deserter, that the
Enemy were hard at work in their Mines; and in the Evening, General Caprara,
being with his Electoral Highness in the Trenches, to give necessary
directions, and encourage those that were working, a Musket Shot passed
through his Hat and Peruke, without doing him any further damage.

On the Eighteenth the Enemies Cannon and Small-shot played very smartly, so
that Count Gallenfells, a Colonel of Bavaria, being in the Trenches, received a
Wound in the Body with a Musket Shot, and Lieutenant Colonel Count Lambert,
another in the Head, and the young Count De Traun had his Arm shot off, and
under the favor of their Canon the Enemy Sallyed, but were soon beaten back.

On the Nineteenth, the Trenches were carried on with great diligence, insomuch
that the Workmen run them within ten paces of the Ditch, though not without
some considerable opposition, and great loss of Men, but not any of Note; so
that now they began to raise two new Batteries, and the Elector of Bavaria,
Count Serini, and General Caprara, continuing all Night in the Trenches, the
better to encourage so important a Work.

On the Twentieth, the Besiegers possessed themselves of a Mosque or Turkish
Church, on the brink of the Ditch, which the Besieged upon their approach
abandoned, and hastened to the Castle with great precipitation; however, one
less nimble than the rest was taken, who declared upon Examination, there were
5000 Janissaries in the Town and Castle, and that the Commanding Bassa
encouraged the Garrison with assurance of Relief, promising at the same time,
not to suffer things to come to Extremity, though no great stress was laid upon
this Report; so that the Canon and Bombs continued to play furiously on both
sides, where by one of the Shells the Prince D'Comercy received a Contusion or
Bruise on the Arm, and the Sieur Claudio Martelli, Adjutant General to the
Army, a Wound in the Head; and although many others of lesser Note were
Wounded, yet but one Man was killed.

On the One and Twentieth, two Parallel Lines were drawn on the Right and the
Left, to compass a greater space of Ground, as well on the side of the Castle,
as the Town, and two Redoubts made to support the Heads of them, which were
performed in spite of the opposition the Enemy made, doing all they could with
their Canon and Bombs, to endamage the Workmen, and hinder the Proceedings.

On the Twenty Second, the Besiegers having perfected the Works, the great
Canon and Mortars Arrived from Buda; upon which, Orders were given to Batter
the Castle from Two Batteries, one of Fourteen Pieces, and the other of Twelve:
And a Deserter that came into the Camp, reported, That the Bassa had caused a
considerable Officer to be Hanged, on the Fifteenth, for offering to speak of a
Surrender: And that he gave, for their better Encouragement, a Duccate to every
Man that would venture to make a Sally: And about this Time other Scouts that
had been sent out to observe the Motion of Yeghen Bassa, returned, having been
as far as Sendrovia, and made their Report, that the Castle and Town were quite
destroyed by Fire, but the Walls are standing; and that the Turks left Twenty
Pieces of Canon behind them for have, or want of convenience to carry them off.
They likewise brought with them a Christian, who had made his Escape out of the
Ottoman Army, confirming, That Yeghen Bassa was retired to Nissa, about Twenty
Leagues from Belgrade, burning the Country, and carrying the People along with
him; so that care was taken to fetch off the Canon left at Seudrovia; And then
it was Rumoured, that a great many Families of Rascians had offered to
Re-edifie and Inhabit that Ancient City, if they might be Protected by an
Imperial Garrison.

On the Twenty Third, the Besiegers battered the Castle very suriously, which
is Built after the Ancient way of Fortifying, with Towers, Battlements,
Double-Walls, and considerable Ditches; however, the Canon made diverse
Breaches, and beat down part of the Fortifications; and although the Besieged
Sallyed, with an Intent to Attack the Redoubts, they were beaten in again,
leaving a considerable number of their Party dead behind them. And about this
Time it was further confirmed, that the Prince of Baden had routed the Bassa of
Bosna, and Killed 3000 Men. Moreover, Debitza, Jessuewitz, and Gradiska being
first set on Fire, were Abandoned by the Turks, who were retired toward
Banyalucca, whither the Imperialists followed them: As also that General
Veterani had Taken Carausebes, and the strong Castle of Salancar: And now the
Canon Playing suriously from the Batteries; the Engineers (though they were
raised as high as they could bare) found some Obstruction, by reason of the
Ruinous Houses that had been consumed by the Fire, or shattered by the force of
the Bombs and Canon; whereupon the Miners received Orders to Overthrow them: in
which they were so Expeditious and successful, that the Besieged were laid more
open to the force of Twenty Six Pieces of Canon, though the Besieged were not
Idle but made very Vigorous Sallies, as long as they could, Playing their
Canon, Bombs, and small Shot without Intermission; so that many were Killed on
both sides, and some Wounded; amongst the latter was Count D' Ligneville,
Colonel of Foot, and Adjutant General, wounded by a Shot in the Trenches,
whither he was come to give necessary Orders; and although he was carried off,
yet soon after he Died of the Wound.

These being the Actions passing the Twenty Third and Twenty Fourth, and the
heavy Canon being all mounted on the Batteries; whilst they were Thundering
against the Walls, a Letter was brought and Presented to the Duke of Bavaria,
from Osman Bassa of Aleppo; the Tenure of which, together with His Electoral
Highnesses Answer, take as follows:

The Letter.
Honor of Princes, Believing in Jesus, Chosen among the most Noble of the
Christian Nation, Pattern of Magnificence, Possessor of all Splendour, Duke of
Bavaria, and Chief General of the Roman Empire, Maximilian, whose ways be
Prosperous; after Salutation, Be it Known unto You, That the most Serene, Great
and Mighty Ottoman Emperor, Monarch of the World, Our Lord, having sent with
His Serene Letter, to the greatest of the Christian Kings, the most Serene
Emperor, One of His Well-deserving Servants Sulficar Effendi, Adorned with
several High Degrees of Honor, whose Praise be Increased, and the Present
Drugerman of the Renowned Port, a Mirror of the Nobles of the Christian
Worship, Alexander, whose ways end Happy. They are Arrived here, and because
they are going to You, and according to Ancient and Laudable Custom, have need
for Themselves, and a Hundred Persons, of Pass-ports and Safe-guards to be sent
from your Army, this Our present Letter is Written and Dispatched to You. After
the Receipt whereof, We hope that Pass-ports, and some People for a Safeguard;
will be sent hither, that the abovementioned may, as They are Commanded,
Repair to You. They will, upon Their coming near, (God willing) send again to
You, to the End a Convoy may come from your Army to Meet and Receive Them from
the Bassa, sent with some Troops from hence, that so the Respect and Safety of
Ambassadors, observed by all Nations, as is fit and necessary, may remain in
its Ancient Luster; therefore You know how careful both Sides ought to be of
their safe Passage: For the rest, Prosperity be to those that shall follow the
True Direction.

Given in Our Army near Nissa. Signed, Osman Bassa of Aleppo.


To this Letter, the Elector of Bavaria, after some consulting the Matter in
Council, with the Chief Officers of the Army, returned the following Answer:

Maximilian Emanuel, etc. To Osman, Bassa, Greeting, etc.
WE have Received the Letter You sent Us from the Camp near Nissa, wherein You
give Us to understand, That an Ambassador, by Name Sulsicar Effendi, and the
first Drugger-man, have Orders from your Emperor to come to Our Army; Now,
although we being Inclined to Military Actions, might well refuse their coming
hither; or which, none could take amiss, in the present Juncture of Affairs,
might put it off till another time, since We do judge their Proposals will
little agree with Our present Intentions; yet, being moved by a Christian
Compassion, We do grant that They may come to Our Army, and We will favorably
Hear what Your Emperor has Commanded them to Propose unto Us; for which
purpose, We have Commanded that a Passport be prepared for Their security, and
delivered to the Person that brought Us your Letter: We have likewise given
Order to the Commandant of Semendria, that in the manner directed him, and with
a sufficient number of Troops, he Conduct them safely to Our Army, upon which
they may firmly Rely.

Given in our Camp before Belgrade, etc.

Upon the return of this Answer to the Bassa of Aleppo's Letter, General
Caraffa received Orders to go to Titul, to meet the Turkish Ambassadors, and to
hear what they had to Propose; and in the mean while the Elector of Bavaria
sent to Vienna, to acquaint the Emperor that a Chiaux was Arrived in the Camp,
and what he had done in Answer to the Letter received, desiring further Advice
on this occasion; upon which, he received Directions to suffer the Ambassadors
to pass on with their Train: So that the Chiaux was sent back with a Passport
for the Ambassadors, under the Convoy of Twenty Horse: And thereupon the Count
de Lodron Marched with a Regiment of Croats, to strengthen the Garrison a
little before put into Semandria, least the Turks should return, upon second
Thoughts, and Repossess it.

On the Twenty Fifth, the great Canon being Arrived, and the Batteries were
Entirely fixed, the Besiegers possessed themselves under the favor of them of
another Mosque, very advantageously Situate, to shelter them in the advancing
their Works, whilst the Miners Lodged themselves at the Foot of the Wall, and
made Lodgments for their Powder.

On the Twenty Sixth, the Batteries against the Castle Playing furiously, beat
down the Top of the Round-Tower, which fell into the Ditch, doing damage to the
Battlements, and other Works in its Fall; and the better to forward this good
Success, Fifteen Mortars were placed most advantageously on the sides of the
Ba^^^ries that were the most advanced, in order to cast Bomb^ unto the Castle
and Town.

On the Twenty Seventh the Canon and Mortars Played very furiously, by whose
continual Thundering, a considerable Breach was made in the Wall, at what Time
the Besieged sprung a Mine near the Mosque, of which the Besiegers made
themselves the last Masters; which, though it did not Blow up, yet rendered it
useless, and Wounded diverse Men that were in and near it.

On the Twenty Eighth, The Besieged sprung another Mine, designing thereby to
Ruin the main Advance Battery of the Besiegers; but Blowing up short, it only
shook it, without any Demolishment; yet the Thunder-crack was so great, that it
occasioned a considerable Disorder, and was Increased by one of the Besieged's
Bombs, setting Fire to several Quintals of Powder, which blew up Seven or Eight
Men that were on the Battery; which the Besieged perceiving, made a Sally with
about an Hundred Men, coming on the Right and Left of the Head of the Trenches,
but found the Guards there in so good a Posture, that being warmly received
(after some Dispute) they were beaten back, with the loss of Twelve of their
Men, who were Killed at the first Volley of Shot discharged upon them: And this
day Two Christians made their Escape out of the Place, to the Camp; and
declared, That the Garrison was between Three and Four Thousand strong, that
they were very diligent in Mining, to meet the Approaches of the Besiegers; and
that the Governor, whose Name was Ibraim, assured them there was a Powerful
Army coming to their Relief; Encouraging them, in the Expectation thereof, to
make a resolute Defense.

On the Twenty Ninth, His Electoral Highness sent a Captain, with an
Interpreter, to Summon the Besieged to a Surrender of the Town and Castle,
seeing they could have no hopes, or the least expectation of Succor; which the
Governor so highly resent^^ that (contrary to the Rules or Articles of War) he
caused the Interpreter, who was a Grecian, to be Hanged, and Imprisoned the
Captain. The Night following, the Besiegers Engineers set Fire to the
Besieged's Palisado's, and thereupon a Detachment of not Men were ordered to
advance, and make a Lodgment in the Ditch; but the Besieged, by the light of
this Fire, so well directed and levelled their Shot, that 100 of the Party were
Killed, a great many Wounded, and the rest obliged to retire, notwithstanding
the Fire so ruined the Palisado's, that being within the reach of the Shot from
the Trenches, the Besieged could not Repair them.

On the Thirtieth, The Fury of the Canon had very much enlarged the Breach; but
however, it was not judged open enough for an Assault, and the Miners having
run a Mine to the Corner of one of the largest Towers on the Wall, and
heightning Themselves in expectation of the great use they might make of it,
found themselves disappointed by a Countermine made against them by the
Besieged, into which they unadvisedly fell, and were so annoyed with Granado's
and combustible Matter that was Fired, to put a stop to their Progress, that to
avoid the danger and the stench, they found themselves constrained to retire
toward the opening of their own Mine, with some Loss: And the same day the
Prince of Savoy was Wounded in the Thigh with a Musquetshot; and some time
before, Major General Aspremont, with the fall of an Old Wall, and several
others of lesser Note.

On the Thirty First, The Canon continued to Play on both Sides very furiously,
with very good Effect on the part of the Besiegers; nor were the Besieged Idle,
but proceeded with great Endeavors, and indefatigable Industry, with Earth,
Faggots, and other Materials to make up the Breaches, and to Entrench
themselves within them; however, the Besiegers so far Advanced, that they, in a
manner, formed their Gallery, and appeared every where desirous to give the
Assault, though about this time (without any just Ground) the Camp was Alarumed
by the Country People, through a Report spread abroad, that there were Powerful
Armies of Turks approaching; but whilst every Body was wondering from whence
they should come, all that could be gathered was, that Teckley, who with small
Parties was wandering about the Neighborhood of Semendria, had bribed some, and
deceived others into this Opinion; whereupon a Body of Horse was sent out in
search of him; and the Scouts that came in brought a certain account, that
Osman Teghen remained at Nissa with his Horse, most of his Infantry having,
upon Discontents, want of Pay, and for other Reasons, deserted him; however, he
continued to destroy all the Forage, and Burn the Towns for above Forty Miles
in circumference; yet, so great was the Plenty in the Imperial Camp, that a
Fat-Oxe might be bought for a Duccate; and even at Vienna it self Provisions
could not be Purchased at so cheap a Rate; one main Reason for it being the
Three Bridges, that gave free Forage and Communication on all sides, viz. One
over the Save, Another over the Thysse, and a Third over the Danube, a little
above Belgrade: And now, upon the News of the Duke of Lorain's Arrival at Peter
Waradine, His Electoral Highness sent thither to Complement him upon His coming
into Hungary, since the Recovery of His late Indisposition.

On the First of September, the Canon from Six Batteries and Thirty Two
Mortars, Played upon the Castle, widening the Breach, and doing considerable
Execution; under the favor of which, the Besiegers began to fill up the Ditch,
preparing several Mines to be useful toward a general Assault: And Major
General Dunwalt Marched out with Twelve Regiments of Horse toward Semendria,
to seize upon, and secure such part of the Country as remained Unharrased, or
not Destroyed by the Turks.

On the Second, the Canon ruined the Besieged's Batteries, and the Defenses
they had made within the Breaches, by way of Reintrenchments, so that the
Breach was conceived wide enough to Enter; yet the Besieged continued
Obstinate, refusing to return any Answer to the Summons sent them, on the
Twenty Ninth of August; and seemed rather to expect the last Extremity, than
think of terms of Agreement by way of Capitulation, and timely Surrender;
whereupon it was concluded, that the Town and Castle being made Saultable, no
time should be lost in carrying it on with the utmost Courage and Vigor; so
that the Third, Fourth, and Fifth days being spent in Battering the yet
remaining Works, Springing some Mines, and filling the Ditch to facilitate the
Ascent, and giving necessary Orders as to what was intended in the Execution,
without any great disturbance from the Besieged, though several were Killed and
Wounded.

On the Sixth, the day appointed for the General Assault, (encouraged by their
Commanders) after some Dispute, in which many were Killed and Wounded, the
Soldiers mounted the Breach, where the Besieged, with great Resolution, made an
Obstinate Resistance, and defended it with so much Vigor, (Fighting like Men
in Despair, for the last Refuge and defense of their Lives) that the Besiegers
were twice beaten off: But the Elector himself, not sparing his Person in
places of Eminent danger, being at hand, and animating the Officers and
Soldiers upon the Third Assault, the Besieged finding all their Effort and
Opposition vain, began to lose Courage, and, by degrees, to Retire; so that
perceiving the Breach, and all their Retrenchments, on that part, entirely won,
they abandoned the Fight, and fled to the Castle, as the place of their last
Retreat; but the Besiegers now entering like a Torrent, pressing on with great
Fury, entered pell-mell with them, putting all (in the first heat, without
distinction of Age and Sex) to the Sword, nor could the Riches they offered
prevail to the saving their Lives; which the Bassa perceiving, and finding no
hopes of making any long Resistance, he caused Three Hundred Christian Slaves
to be brought, Chained together, which he placed before the retiring Turks, in
such manner as they must have received the Shot made at the Enemy; in
compassion to whom, the Soldiers stopped in the heat of Blood, and the Elector
Commanded that Quarter should be given; whereupon, about Five Hundred Turks,
that (under the favor of this Stratagem) had saved themselves, together with
the Bassa Governor, and Two other Bassa's, submitted, and were made Prisoners
of War, with many that were not in Arms; when as the Bassa Governor being
brought to the Presence of the Elector of Bavaria, he fell prostrate before
him, and made it his earnest Request, that he might not be made a Prisoner;
(the Hungarians, and Rascians, returning him extraordinary Thanks for saving
their Lives); to which humble Request, His Electoral Highness, replied, That he
should experience, the Christians use their Prisoners better than the Turks do;
adding withal, That he should be immediately sent to the Emperor, at which he
seemed extremely pleased; and thereupon General Carraffa, who had it in charge
to carry the Proposals made by the Turks, was Commanded to take charge of him,
and Guard him to Newstadt.

The greatest Prizes that were gained in the Sack of this Important Place, fell
to the share of the Christian Slaves, who knew where their Masters had hid
their Treasure, during the Siege; of which, there were found about Six Hundred,
the greater part of them Austrians, who had at sumdry times been taken by
Turkish Parties, and brought or Sold to the Turks, Inhabitants of the City, and
now found their delivery from a long and cruel Bondage, by the prevailing Arms
of their fellow Christians: here were found likewise Seventy Pieces of Canon,
great and small; and although the Town and Castle was extremely defaced by
Fire, yet the Houses being many of them ruinous before, and the greater part
built with Timber, will, upon their Rebuilding, render them more Famous; which
will not long be wanting, by reason of its Commodious Situation for Trade, and
confluence of People that are soon expected thither from their Neighboring
Parts.

This Action lasted Four hours, with much Bloodshed and Slaughter on both
Sides, most of the Turkish Garrison Soldiers being Killed, a Thousand dead
Bodies being afterward found, and thrown into the River, and Three Thousand
made Prisoners; nor was the number of the Christians slain in the Assault,
inconsiderable, among whom, of more particular Note (in relation to their
Characters and Quality) fell Lieutenant General Count D' Schariffenburg; the
Count Emanuel d' Frustemburg, Colonel of Foot; and the Young Count
d'Staremberg; so unto the Governor of Vienna, many likewise of Note were
Wounded, amongst whom, the Elector of Bavaria himself slightly in the Cheek, as
he exposed his Person in places of danger, to Encourage the Assailants, and
give necessary Orders.

And thus in the space of Twenty Two days the Famous City of Belgrade, fell
into the Hands of the Christians, and by its Reduction, opened them a way into
all the Turkish Dominions that are considerable in Europe; there being no Place
of great Importance between it and Constantinople, the Metropolis of the
Ottoman Empire, which (if the Intestine Commotions of the Christian Princes
hinder not) may undoubtedly, in a short time, follow the Fortune of this strong
City; as also their other places got, and unjustly detained from the European
Christians, to the shaking, if not the Overthrow of that Bloody Empire, which
(for upward of Two Hundred Years) has been so terrible to Christendom.

Three B 's, of which Two are already won,
Will Crown the Glory of the Work begun.
Buda, Belgrade, Bizantum once obtained,
The rest will be but sport, and quickly gained.
POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the Rendition of this Important Place, more particular News came of the
Defeat of the Bassa of Bosnia, which, for the extraordinary and unexpected
success of the Christians, I conceived might be acceptable, and not improper to
be added: Prince Lovis of Baden on the Fourth of September. having notice that
four or five Thousand Turks were Encamped about Six Miles from Brod, he Marched
to Encounter them with 3000 Horse and Dragoons, Marching with great diligence
all Night, but in the Morning (to his no small Surprise) he found himself
greatly mis-inform'das to the Number, which amounted to Fifteen Thousand Horse
and Foot; under the Command of the Bassa: however, calling the Officers about
him, he told them, it was to no purpose to think of Retreating, as being too
late, by reason of their too far Engagement amongst the Enemy, but that they
must now fight for their Lives and Victory, which was cheerfully consented to;
but before they had well put themselves into a Posture to Fight, the Turks had
surrounded them, and vigorously charged four or five times, which was sustained
with so much Bravery, and such vigorous Returns, that the Enemies Horse
perceiving themselves over-set, fell first into Disorder, and then to open
Flight, leaving the Foot to shift for themselves, whose Ranks being forced (by
the Imperial Horse breaking in upon them) they were miserably Beaten down and
Slain, those that Fled, crying out for Quarter; so the Prince becoming entirely
Master of the Field, 5000 of the Turks were found killed, 2000 taken Prisoners,
36 Colors taken, and all the Baggage; for which extraordinary Success, (in
which the hand of God so signally appeared) Thanks were sent up to Heaven in
most of the Capital Cities of the Empire. We are further assured, that of the
1000 Boats that fled from Belgrade, before and after it was Invested, not above
200 of them Arrived in places of Safety, the rest being either Stranded, bedded
in the Mudd for want of Water, or Deserted by such as were in them, out of a
fear they were Pursued, and by that means most of the Deserters with their
Baggage fell into the hands of the Country people, or such parties as were
abroad to scowre the Coast, and gather the Spoil,

FINIS.

