A True Relation OR ACCOUNT OF The whole PROCEDURE BETWEEN The Corporation at
CANTERBURY, AND Mr. John Somner, Concerning the NEW-MARKET-HOUSE there.

Nihil charius aestimamus, quam beneficium,

Seneca. LONDON, Printed. 1666.

The PREFACE.
THAT the public and common good and benefit of any place or Society is of
every individual Member in particular; but more especially, of the
Representatives of that Society in general, rather to be studied, than their
own private or particular ends or interests; none (doubtless) will offer to
deny. And yet by sad experience what more frequently found true, than the quite
contrary? As Well whole Societies, as particular members too too often casting
off all care of the Public, and abandoning themselves to selfishness, and the
study only of their own private commodity.

How happy then (because so rare) is the condition of that Society, where such
a Genius, such a general concent in promoting the common good of the place
universally obtains, and is diffused throughout the whole body! Where this
fails, as most where it does) the next happiness to it of this kind, is to find
such a public spiritedness in single and particular persons, (whether members
of, or friends to such a Society) as makes them to become examples to others of
piety and bounty, by acts of public and common benefit to the place: And
consequently, to what a kind and welcome entertainment, to what a return of
gratitude, is that Society obliged, who are made the objects of such public
piety and beneficence!

If so; how much then is that Society to blame, which is not only slack and
backward to such acts of public good themselves; but also to encourage and
return thanks to those particular persons, to whom God has given, together
with ability, such a public spirit and mind, as (in any eminent degree, at
least) to become their benefactors! Whether there be such a Society, or not, at
this day, let who so will he judge that shall consult the following Mirror,
representing not the ill requital and unworthy usage of Archbishop Abbot, the
Founder of their noble Conduit, by a prevailing faction, (headed by a
Peterling) among their praedecessors; but (that which cannot but revive the
memory of it) the unworthy Entertainment of a new piece of beneficence by a
like faction in the present Corporation: notwithstanding that foundation of
gratitude, and better usage from them, but newly laid by the Benefactor, as
being chiefly active and instrumental in procuring new Gates for the City;
impiously robbed of their old by the Rebels, from the late Archbishop Juxon.

A true Relation or Account of the whole Proceedure between the Corporation at
Canterbury and Mr. John Somner.
THAT useful and ancient Structure of Stone, of a circular form, graced with an
ascent of several steps, for peoples accommodation to sit upon, and expose
their wares, and (for their better shelter from foul weather) covered over head
with a platform of Lead; the Market-Cross at Canterbury, built by the bounty
and piety of a quondam wealthy Alderman, of grateful memory, being in the late
times of mis-rule and confusion, beaten down and swept away by the avarice and
impiety of a beggarly factious Alderman, of hateful memory, to the dishonor of
the City, and detriment of Town and Country: and the Citizens (sensible of the
want of such a piece, both of ornament and use) being, as I was, full of their
wishes and longings for the day, when the generous and public spirit of some
good Benefactor, would provoke and engage their gratitude by adorning and
accommodating their City with a new piece, another pile of that nature: and
after a long and tedious time of expectation, none offering at the undertaking,
I, though one of the meanest among the many naives of the place, yet impatient
of the Cities want of an accommodation, so useful as well as ornamental; and
finding others more able than willing, gave leave and way to my will to out-vy
my ability, rather than the place of my Nativity should any longer suffer under
the reproach of such a great defect: not doubting of the encouragement of the
virtuous undertaking by the courteous acceptance of it from my fellow-Citizens:
and the rather because of the public good which from the beginning I
propounded to my self, and made known to some of them in this affair. But it
falling out otherwise; insomuch as my real intentions for resigning all up to
public and pious uses, are now quite altered, I thought it not amiss (for
their satisfaction who may inquire into the cause) to give them an account of
the whole transaction, leaving it to them freely to judge at whose Door the
blame lies.

Having therefore, by the Cities free permission, and with the expense of Four
hunded pounds and upwards, erected and completed a Market-house, (a piece of
such Elegancy as much commends the Architect) consisting of a double Story,
divided into two fair rooms a piece, with a Pavement of Stone underneath, very
useful for walking, out of Market time; and all this (in my intentions)
dedicated to public and pious uses, without any jot of profit or advantage
reserved either to me or mine: and thinking it now a convenient time to broach
my design, and make it openly known to the Corporation, I drew a prospect of
it in writing, and by the mediation of a very worthy Mr. L. B.
friend, (one of themselves) communicated it unto them under the term and title
of Propositions of this tenor.

Certain Proposals, concerning the Market-House at the Bulstake in Canterbury,
by me John Somner, the Sole Founder and Builder thereof, made to the right
worshipful the Mayor and the Court of Burgmote, October 24. 1665. upon their
Sealing of my Lease.
ALL things, according to mutual agreement between us, being accomplished, to
the good content and satisfaction (I hope) of both parties; that is to say, on
my part, the Market-house being erected, and nothing wanting to the completing
of it, according to my covenant, but what is now in hand, and with all
convenient speed shall (God willing) be punctually perfected: and on your part,
the Lease of the Superstructure, according to your Covenant being made and
delivered me, whereby I am become the true and sole Owner thereof, and the
thing in my free power to dispose of, during my Lease: To let you, and
posterity after you, know and see, how in this work I have studied the public
good, honor and benefit of the City and Country, and the the encouragement of
other persons of ability, by my example, to do the like in some kind or other,
much and far more than my own private profit, or advantage, which the Searcher
of hearts knows to be spoken without the least ostentation or desire of
vainglory or popular applause: and admit you to a participation with me in the
use and accommodation of the Chamber there, at all times when you shall have
occasion of meeting there together, or any Six or more of you, upon any public
account concerning the City; and that during my life time, and the life time of
my Brother Mr. William Somner, if he survive me.

viz. the Drapers, Tailors, Mercers, Grocers, Carpenters, Smiths, and Shoo
makers, for their and every of their meeting there together, upon any occasion
concerning their Companies Affairs, during the term aforefaid. And after mine
and my said Brothers Decease, I absolutely give, resign up, and relinquish the
said room to you and them in perpetuity, for the uses and purposes abovesaid.

Westgate, St. Dunstan, Northgate, St. Paul's, St. Mildredt, St. Georges, and of
one of the In-Parishes (because I was born there) St. Alphage. And to handsell
the place, and become (as I hope) as a leading, so a lucky example of Charity
in this kind to others, I do engage at my own charge, to lay in there, for that
use, Twenty Seams or Quarters of Wheat as soon as the room can be made ready,
and fitting to receive it: intending it shall lie and be kept there (as in a
Storehouse) against a Time, or Year, of Dearth or Scarcety, and then be
delivered out at such rates and prizes as the Stock may thereby be renewed with
such advantage as the Mayor and Aldermen for the time being shall think fit.
And if, by Gods goodness and mercy, no such dearth shall happen in the mean
time, it shall be in the power of the then Mayor and Court of Aldermen, at 3,
4, or 5. years end, and so from time to time for ever, to sell and put off the
said 20. Seams of Wheat; provided that within 12. months time next following,
they shall be bound to renew and recruit the Stock with as much new Wheat, and,
if it may be, with advantage. And I hope, the room being of a capacity to
receive twice as much Corn, this example of mine will (which God grant) invite
and encourage those of more ability to add unto the Stock. And should it please
God to stir up such a number of charitable Benefactours as that the Room will
not be able to bear so great a Stock of Corn, (for I would have care taken it
be not over-burthened:) I shall freely part with the other Storehouse also,
that I mean opposite unto it, at the West end of the said Market-house, for the
same use; so as the Corn be sent in within 12. months next ensuing the Date
hereof.



This and all the rest, I freely confer and bestow as aforesaid, yet with and
under these limitations and conditions here ensuing, and not otherwise, viz.













All which Conditions and Limitations I conceive to be so reasonable, and (if
well looked after and observed) so honorable and advantageous to the City, (as
tending only to the public good, and no more to my own private benefit than in
common with others) as that I cannot doubt of your readiness, in all
particulars here propounded, to close with

(Right Worshipful) Your humble Servant JOHN SOMNER.
Upon further consideration, That I may clear my self to all the world of
self ends, or designing any private advantage to me or mine by this Work,
wherewith many malevolent and unthankful persons have been apt and forward to
blast, and (if they could) to discourage, my public undertaking; I do now
further declare my self, that I am also willing to forgo the whole benefit
(before reserved to my self) of that other part of the first Story, the Eastern
Chamber of the Market-house aforesaid: offering and leavihg it to the choice of
the present Mayor and Aldermen and their Successors, whether I shall employ and
hire it out to the best and most advantage my self, or leave it to them so to
do: but so as in either case the whole yearly Rent and Revenue thereof, which I
cannot reckon at less than 5. l. per annum, shall go to the relief of the ten
Inbrothers and Insisters of East-bridge Hospital for ever, as an augmentation
to their poor and beggarly maintenance. And so Gods blessing be upon the Work,
and those that shall take example by it; whilst, with sincerity of heart, I
shall take up that of the Prophet David: Not unto us, O Lord, etc.



Upon the communication of this Paper, the whole House of Burgmote (who till
then had me in some suspicion for aiming at matter of private advantage to my
self, so far at least as until I were reimbursed) was so exceedingly, not only
satisfied, but taken with my Proposals, as after an unanimous approbation and
applause, they voted and gave out in writing under their Town-Clerks hand, an
Order for a Committee to give me a meeting in the new Market-house, for
considering, consulting, and concluding a way for settling the whole affair
according to my own desire, as by this following Copy will appear.

Civitas Cantuar.
Cur' Burgomati tenta ibidem die Martis, scilicet, septimo die Novembris, anno
Regni Domini nostri Caroli Secundi nunc Regis Angliae, etc. Decimo septimo.
Whereas John Somner Gent. out of a further desire and intention of the public
good, honor, and benefit of this City and Country, has been pleased to
present unto this Court certain good proposals concerning the Market-house at
the Bulstack; thereby declaring his mind and good intent touching the same: It
is ordered by this Court, that the said proposals and every of them shall and
are hereby accepted and approved of. And to the end that the said Marketplace,
and other the Superstructures and things in the said Proposals mentioned, may
be the better settled and established by this Court, according to the desire,
mind, and intent of the said John Somner; and for the better satisfaction of
the said John Somner, It is though fit, and ordered by this Court, That the
Mayor of the said City, or any five or six of the Aldermen, whereof the Mayor
to be one, or any Ten of the Common Counsel, whereof the Recorder to be one,
shall meet together on Friday next at Two of the Clock in the Afternoon, at the
said Marketplace called the Bulstack-Market, and shall confer with the said
John Somner about the same: and what shall by them be thought requisite and
necessary for the ordering, serling, and establishing of the said Marketplace,
and other things in the said Proposals mentioned, shall certify at the next
Burghmote.

Lovelace.

One thing which I principally designed and expected to be gratified in by the
Town (although of no particular advantage to my self) was, a Free-Market. By
long observation and experience I had found the want of it, and the dishonor
and damage both^ redounding to the City by the contrary. For, through the
over-rigorous exacting of Tole by the Clerk of the Market, (who gave the City
but a short account of it, and is besides, a person who stands branded by
themselves upon Record, for several miscarriages in his place) the Sellers were
and are wont to hide up a good part of their wares, and not bring them forth
into the Market, but by parcels, whereby the Buyer can not have his choice, but
must take what he finds at the Sellers price, or be gone. Hereof a multitude
both in Town and Country daily complaining, I could not but study the remedying
of it.

This (the Free-Market) went down with the Corporation very well at first, and
because their Cl^rk (if the Market were infranchised and set free) might suffer
somewhat in the matter of his livelihood, they were very forward to declare
themselves contented (for the Publicks sake) to be put upon the seeking out
some expedient (at their own charge). for making him a compensation, and (by
some overtures from me) soon found that a small matter would do it. But not
long after, by his endeavors with the Chamberlain, (than whom none more
forward for a Free-Market, when the house was setting up) and some other of the
Leading party in the House, (a sort of private vulgar spirited men, whereof no
Society was ever yet free) this Trifle, this inconsiderable retrenching of
their present Market-Clerks income, must carry the name of a just occasion for
altering their minds, and putting a stop (as it did) to the business; so that
at the time and place appointed, I giving them a meeting to treat of a way of
Settlement, such doubts were cast, and objections made, (in that particular
especially) that I plainly perceiving they were quite and clean gon^ off from
their former votes, and intended nothing less than a settlement of the business
according to my Proposals and their own Votes, could not but show my self
sensible of the disappointment; and thereupon in some discontent, desired a
dissolving of their Meeting, and went my way.

They perceiving it, and thinking it somewhat too early to break off with me so
soon, (as the malevolent party more than seemed willing enough to do) consulted
and found an expedient for removing this impediment, and mastering this
difficulty; but not until by my profers and condescentions I had yielded to
them so far in the qualifying and regulating that matter of a Free-Market, as
fully to satisfy all opposers, by my consenting to the tolling of all things
in a manner, excepting only that which is not the third part of what things are
tollable, Piggs and Poultry.

And now the matter (of Settlement) was afresh propounded in Burgmote, where
(after thanks returned me for my condescensions) it was then agreed to proceed,
and writings voted to be drawn up between us, to settle it accordingly. And
drawn they were, whereat upon perusal I taking some exceptions, as finding them
not according to my propositions, in several particulars, I made the Burgmote
acquainted with them; who by Mr. Recorder satisfying me, as to the main of my
exceptions, so as we were arrived at a right understanding of each others
meaning, I was now ready for a close with them upon their own terms; and by the
mediation of the same hand that before, signifying so much unto them at the
next Burgmote after, they once more resumed the business, and entered into a
fresh debate about it.

By this time (by the means of a pragmatical menber of the House, who looking
AWRY both on the Founder and his Work, and from the first taken all occasions
to evidence his dis-affection and dissant) the opposite party was grown so
strong, that the result of this debate was not only a dissent and protest
against their proceeding with me, but a casting off the business with a plain
and uncivil jeer. For in regard the repairs were to be cast on the Corporation
(a burden nevertheless so inconsiderable as cannot amount to 20 s. per annum,
for an age; or rather no burden at all, in regard the benefit of a room under
the Stair case, which was offered them, would more then recompense it:) they
would none of it, they would not (forsooth) take a house to keep it in repair,
for me and my brother to walk in.

Truth is (by the Propositions) a reservation there is of mine and my brothers
interest in one of the rooms during our lives, in common with the Corporation,
and yet (as they were assured) but at spare times only when the Corporation had
no occasion to use it themselves. And besides, we are (they know) persons well
in years, and (unless they fear our Ghosts may haunt the place after we are
dead) cannot probably trouble them long with our walking there; our walk being
now down the hill, and by course of nature near an end. See by the way
(courteous Reader) how studious these men are to find and cast obstructions in
the way of their own advantage, and to ward and stave off an intended boon! And
on the contrary, how willing I have been to remove their obstructions, and how
loath to be put upon turning that to my private emolument, which I intended for
a public good!

To sum up their objections: 1. They must abridge their Clerk of the Market
of some inconsiderable part of his profit, which he may very well spare: how
un-advised else was that Townsman, whose offer, though refused, was, if he
might have the place, to do all the duties of it; to admit of a Free-Market,
and yet to pay the City 5 l. per annum? 2. They must be at perhaps 20 s. charge
per annum in repaires; and have more than recompense for it by that room under,
the Stairs. 3. They must permit the Founder and his Brother (ancient men both)
to inter-common with them in the use of one of the rooms, at spare times.

How trivial, how ridiculous, how insignificant, and empty are these
exceptions, shall I call them, or these cavils! What little or no detriment or
discommodity does or can attend them, compared with the great commodity and
advantage which by the Proposals, if embraced, would redound (in point sof
accommodation) to the Magistrates and the Companies, for Meetings and
Treatments; and (in point of Charity) to the Poor, by a constant stock and
provision of Corn there to be stored up for them, toward which and for
seconding me in my intended handsell, diverse Gentlemen and others (who now will
do nothing) had declared their forwardness in such a bountiful way of
contribution, as probably both the Storehouses, (the two upper rooms) capable
of Fourscore quarters of Corn, would shortly have been full? What a shame must
it needs be the whilst to the City, and how can they answer it to posterity
especially, to suffer so public, so pregnant and permanent a boon and benefit
to their Corporation and the Poor, not easily to be matched in a case of this
nature, all the Kingdom over, for ever to miscarry and be lost, rather than
accept it upon conditions so east of porformance; so very easy, I say, as
being now refused, they can never, whilst the memory of this ingratitude does
last, reasonably expect to be tried with the same, or the like again?

Yet refused them they have. And since they have had no more reason, I am
resolved (without harkening to any further treaty with them, after so much
baffling) to show that I have not so little, as to obtrude, squander, and cast
away all my cost, my kindness, and my charity (wherein I had it in my mind to
have proceeded, by doing somewhat toward the Cities accommodation and supply
with, what is much wanting to it, more Water,) upon such unworthy, ungrateful
objects: or to woo them to accept of that, which, if they had any courtship,
they had reason to employ it in persuading me to part with. But since what,
like a good Citizen, I once intended for the Cities public commodity, is
rejected, I shall, like a good husband, take it home and convert it to my own
private advantage, all but the Corn, which I shall bestow where it may be
better accepted.

And in so doing, whether I be to blame or not, I am willing to refer to the
judgment of any but such thankless persons as those (the malevolent vulgar
party among them, I mean; for them only I brand, which, yet, it seems, are the
more prevalent party) I have had to deal withal: a sort of men that have no
sense of the Cities either ornament or honor; no regard to the Poors, either
relief or prayers; studying only matter of present profit to themselves, and
thinking that cannot be a good work or thank-worthy, which requires any whit at
all of contribution from themselves, to complete or maintain it: but are ready,
with Judas, to reckon all as wast, that goes beside the bag: nothing to be
acceptable, but what is profitable: All but trash that brings no cash to the
Chamber. But having appealed unto others for their judgment, I may perhaps be
blamed for anticipating it with mine. If so, I crave pardon, and, with full
submission, cast my self upon the verdict of any but those who have dealt so
unthankfully and unworthily with

The humble Appellant John Somner.

FINIS.

