A TRUE RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE English Army NOW IN SCOTLAND, From
the Two and twentieth day of July, to the First of August.

Contained in, and Extracted out of the Several LETTERS Sent from the Army and
Read in Parliament, the Sixth of August, 1650.

ORdered by the Parliament, That these Letters, with the several Extracts, be
forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England.

To the Right Honorable, The Lord President of the Council of State.
My Lord,
WE marched from Berwick upon Monday, being the Two and twentieth day of July,
and lay at my Lord Mordingtons House, Monday night, Tuesday and Wednesday; on
Thursday we marched to Copperspeth, on Friday to Dunbar, where we got some
small pittance from our Ships; from thence we marched to Haddington: On the
Lord's Day, hearing that the Scottish Army meant to meet us at Gladsmore, we
labored to possess the Moor before them, and beat our Drums very early in the
Morning, but when we came there, no considerable Body of the Army appeared,
whereupon 1400 Horse under the Command of Major General Lambert, and Colonel
Whalley, were sent as a Vanguard to Muscleborough, to see likewise if they
could find out and attempt any thing upon the Enemy; I marching in the heel of
them with the residue of the Army; our Party encountered with some of their
Horse, but they could not abide us: We lay at Muscleborough encamped close that
Night, the Enemies Army lying between Edinburgh and Leith, about four Miles
from us, entrenched by a Line Flankered from Edinburgh to Leith; the Guns also
from Leith scouring most parts of the Line, so that they lay very strong Upon
Monday the 29th instant, we were resolved to draw up to them, to see if they
would fight with us, and when we came upon the place, we resolved to get our
Canons as near them as we could, hoping thereby to annoy them; we likewise
perceived that they had some force upon a Hill that overlooks Edinburgh, from
whence we might be annoyed, did resolve to send up a Party to possess the said
Hill, which prevailed; but upon the whole, we did find that their Army were
not easily to be attempted, whereupon we lay still all the said day, which
proved to be so sore a day and night of Rain, as I have seldom seen, and
greatly to our disadvantage, the Enemy having enough to cover them, and we
nothing at all considerable: Our Soldiers did abide this difficulty with great
courage and resolution, hoping they should speedily come to fight; in the
morning the ground being very wet, our Provisions searce, we resolved to draw
back to our Quarters at Muscleborough, there to refresh and revictual: The
Enemy when we drew off, fell upon our Rear, and put them into some little
disorder, but our Bodies of Horse being in some readiness, came to a grable
with them, where indeed there was a gallant and hot dispute; the Major General
and and Colonel Whalley, being in the Rear, and the Enemy drawing out great
Bodies to second their first affront; our men charged them up to the very
Trenches, and beat them in, the Major General his Horse was shot in the neck
and head, himself run through the Arm with a Lance, and run into another place
of his Body, was taken Prisoner by the Enemy, but rescued immediately by
Lieutenant Empson of my Regiment; Colonel Whalley who was then nearest to the
Major General, did charge very resolutely, and repulsed the Enemy, and killed
diverse of them upon the place, and took some prisoners without any considerable
loss, which indeed did so amaze and quiet them, that we marched off to
Muscleborough, but they dared not send out a man to trouble us; we hear their
young King looked on upon all this, but was very ill satisfied to see their men
do no better; we came to Muscleborough that night, so tired and wearied for
want of sleep, and so dirty by reason of the wetness of the weather, that we
expected the Enemy would make an infal upon us, which accordingly they did,
between three and four of the clock this morning with fifteen of their most
select Troops, under the command of Major General Montgomery and Straughan, two
Champions of the Church, upon which business there was great hope and
expectation laid, the Enemy came on with a great deal of Resolution, beat in
our Guards, and put a Regiment of Horse in some disorder, but our men speedily
taking the Alarm, charged the Enemy, routed them, took many Prisoners, killed
a great many of them, did Execution within a quarter of a Mile of Edinburgh,
and as I am informed, Straughan was killed there, besides diverse other Officers
of Quality; we took the Major to Straughans Regiment, Major Humilton; a
Lieurenant Colonel, and diverse other Officers and persons of Quality, whom yet
we know not. Indeed this is a sweet beginning of your business, or rather the
Lords, and I believe is not very satisfactory to the Enemy, espeically to the
Kirk party, we did not lose any in this business so far as I hear, but a
Corner, I do not hear of four men more; the Major General will, I believe,
within few days be well to take the Field, and I trust this work which is the
Lords, will prosper in the hands of his Servants. I did not think it advisable
to attempt upon the Enemy lying as he does, but surely it would sufficiently
provoke him to fight if he had a mind to it; I do not think he is less then
Six or seven thousand Horse, and Fourteen or fifteen thousand Foot; The reason
I hear that they give out to their People why they do not fight us, is because
they expect many Bodies of men more out of the North of Scotland, which when
they come, they give out they will then engage; But I believe, they would
rather tempt us to attempt them in their fast Nets, within which they are
entrenched, or else hoping we shall famish for want of provisions, which is
very likely to be, if we be not timely and fully supplied. I remain,

Muscleborough, Julii 30. 1650. My Lord, Your most humble Servant, O. CROMWELL.
I understand since the writing of this Letter, That Major General Montgomery
is slain.



SIR,
MY last acquainted you with our Advance into Scotland, you may expect to hear
of some Action. The people had generally deserted their Habitations, some few
women only were left behind; yet we had this mercy, That their house thus
forsaken, were indifferently well furnished with Beer, Wine, and Corn, which
was a very good supply to us: Our Soldiers were civil and orderly, which gains
much upon the Country.

On the 26 of this instant we came to Haddington, where we received
intelligence, That the Scots Army had Rendezvouzed that day, and purposed to
march all that night to meet us on a Moor, betwixt Muscleburgh and Haddington,
called Gladsmoor; we drew out our Army early in the morning expecting an
Engagement; but missing thereof, and meeting with no certain intelligence where
their Army was, we drew out a party of Fifteen hundred Horse, commanded by
Major General Lambert, which had a Forlorn of Two hundred Horse led by Major
Heyne. These advanced before the Body of our Army to give some notice where
their Army lay; our Forlorn had some light skirmishes with theirs, we still
pressed on till we had discovered some Bodies of their Horse drawn up about a
mile and an half on this side Leith: Upon the appearing of our Party, they
retreated; our Forlorn advanced after them, but they quickly got under the
shelter of their Works; so that nothing considerable was done that day.

We quartered that night at Muscleborough, within four Miles of their Camp; we
then found that they encamped between Leith and Edinburgh, and had entrenched
themselves very strongly, drawing their Trench from the Leith to the foot of
Cannygate street in Edinburgh; and all along the Line they had mounted very
many pieces of Ordnance. The next morning being the 28 of July Instant, we drew
out our Army, supposing that they would have given us battle, and a plain field
for the deciding of our Work. Our Forlorn of Horse was commanded by Major
Brown; a Party of Two hundred Foot led by Major Cobbet, with an Hundred Horse,
were to possess the Mickle Hill on this side Edinburgh, where some of their
Muskertiers lay popping at us; They quickly made themselves Masters of that
Hill; which if their Army had maintained, and planted great Guns upon it, they
might have very much galled the left wing of our Army: They had no such
intentions as to come to us, only some small Bodies of their Horse appeared,
but they were suddenly beaten back again; we quartered that night within less
then Musket shot of their intrenchments. It began to Rain about five of the
clock in the Evening, and it proved as sad and wet a night, as ever was
endured: The next morning perceiving they would not fight, and viewing the
strength of their intrenchments, the Soldiers having endured so bitter a night,
we drew-off to quarters, for the refreshment of our men and horses. They have
made themselves so strong lying under the command of Edinburgh Castle, and of
Leith, that we could not come near them, without the apparent hazard of the
lose of our Army: Upon our drawing off, they endeavored to fall on our Rear,
which was done with as great advantage on their part, as might be; and yet
(through the goodness of God) it proved to their loss: They had kept our
Rear-guard too long pickering, till great Bodies of Horse, which we could not
judge to be less then a thousand, appeared near them both on their Rear, and on
their Flanck: and indeed, before they could reach the Rear of our Army, they
were forced into some disorder; but one of our Rear Troops received ours, and
put theirs to a stand. At length we rallied up, and dividing into two parts, we
charged both their Bodies of Horse home, pursuing them to their very Works. It Is
supposed we killed Fifty or Sixty of theirs, wounding more, and taking some
prisoners: This gave an Alarm to the Van of our Army, who were all drawn off;
but they would not come out to give us battle, though we drew up in their view.
We lost some few, Captain Gladman, with some others being wounded; the Major
General himself received two wounds in his Arm and Thigh, by their Lances; he
was taken prisoner, but rescued by Lieutenant Empson. They refusing to fight,
we drew off to Muscleborough to quarters; the enemy taking advantage at our
weariness, about the break of the day, this morning, being the 30 of this
instant July, attempted to make a desperate Charge upon our quarters with Eight
hundred of their choice Horse. This they did very resolutely; and our Guard of
Horse being somewhat negligent, they routed them, and came to our very Town
Gate, till our Musquettiers, and a piece of Ordnance had discharged, and done
execution upon them, they were put to a stand, and received by two Troops of
Colonel Lilburns Horse very gallantly: falling upon us suddenly, before we
could well receive the Alarm, they mightily disordered our Horse, and wounded
many of our men: At length our men rallied and charged them home, and pursued
them to their very works, which was 4 miles; and in their pursuit, they killed
and wounded many of them, taking diverse prisoners. Sir Robert Montgomery their
Major General, commanded their Party, with whom Colonel Straughan (once our
Friend) was, it is thought he is killed: We have taken a Lieutenant Colonel, a
Major, some Captains, and other Officers prisoners: The number we have slain is
not yet known; prisoners are still brought in, we may conjecture they will
return back above One hundred less then they came forth. This was a very great
Mercy to us, and a check to them. We have one Captain of theirs prisoner, and
he is much wounded, whom they value and account of very high for their Kirk: We
had a Cornet killed whose Colors were also taken; it was but in part a
requital of what we did to them yesterday, for we took two of their Colors.
Their King came to them on Monday, and viewed their Army; His Coronation day is
shortly to be solemnized. We much wonder that none of the honest Party amongst
them do fall off yet to us; if they would appear, our work might receive a more
speedy result: They expect more Forces out of the North, they report to the
number of about Five or Six thousand. I have no more at this present, but to
desire you to accept of the service of

Muscleborough. 30. July. 1650. Your humble Servant R. H.

SIR,
WE are now come near Edinburgh, before which the Army, Horse and Foot, were
drawn upon Monday last: The Enemy had lined the Park Wall with Musketeers about
a mile from the Town: A party of our Musketeers were sent to beat them from it,
especially in regard it gave them a view of the Army; this they did, and the
Enemy fled to their Body, who lay encamped upon a Hill near the City. Order was
given for the drawing up a piece of Ordnance upon Arthurs-Hill, which played
upon the Enemy, and made them give back to their Trenches, which they had made
between Edinburgh and Leith, to secure themselves. The Army stood in Battalia
all the night, but the Enemy not willing to leave their advantages; and it not
being advisable to fall upon our Enemy, far above our number, who had two
Garrisons, and a Line to defend themselves, besides the extraordinary wet that
fell that night and the next morning. The Army had Order to march back to
Muscleborough, which they did: The Enemy perceiving it, a great party of their
Horse issued forth to fall upon our Rere, which received their Charge, and
after an hot Dispute, forced them Retreat into the Town. In this Skirmish Major
General Lambert received a slight hurt, Captain Gladman, Captain Fenis, and
some others of ours wounded; diverse of theirs killed, and some taken: A party
of the country of above Five hundred were gathered together on the Hill near
this Town, but Routed by Major Haynes. This morning about four of the clock,
Fifteen hundred of the Enemies best Horse, commanded by Major jor General
Montgomery (being many of them drunk, had engaged to the Prince (who came to
Edinburgh the other night) That they would bring him the Lord General Cromwell
alive or dead) gave an Alarm to the Army, and came up to Muscleborough, under
the notion of Friends; but being discovered, they were encountered with, and
Routed, so that not One hundred of them got back to Edinburgh. There was above
Forty slain; Colonel Straughan, a Lieutenant Colonel, a Mayor, a Captain, a
Lieutanant, and diverse other Officers, and many Soldiers slain, whose bodies
lay scattered all the way between this and Edinburgh. Major General Montgomery
was slain in the pursuit.

Muscleborough, 31 July, 1650.
Besides what is contained in the Lord Generals Letter to the Council of State,
and those other herewith Printed, there are several other material
Circumstances in other Letters, which were also Read in the Parliament, for
brevities sake Extracted, and are as follows:
A Letter from Sir Arthur Hesilrige from Newcastle the Third of August, assures
us,
THe Ships with provision from London went by Tinmouth-Castle for Leith, upon
Friday the second of August, about five of the clock in the morning, having a
very good wind.

In a Letter from Muscleborough of the 30 of July from a Colonel of the Army,
as follows:
THe Lord has been pleased to manifest his presence, and owning of us, and
witnessed, That we are not a people forsaken; but he does declare, That our
Cause is that wherein his Name and Glory is concerned; and that the Lord does
own us, is matter to me of the greatest rejoicing.

Monday the Nineteenth of July we drew near to the Enemy, and possessed our
selves of a convenient Hill, where the Enemy lay, on that side of Edinburgh
that goes to Leith, having drawn a Line from that city to Leith strongly
fortified. Our design in marching so near, was to provoke the Enemy to fight;
but God took away their courage, and they suffered us to take our ground
without opposition, where we intended to fight, in case they durst draw forth,
which they did not, though both Armies faced each other. We lay all night in
the field (which proved extreme wet) yet the Lord gave our men great courage,
and contentedness with their hardship, which indeed was a choice Mercy,
considering what want of provision our men had, the country not affording
relief, and the Ships from London not come to us: But God supplied all, by
giving the Army quietness under all their straits.

The two Blows given by our Army to the Enemy on Tuesday and Wednesday, has
struck so much terror into them, that I do not think they will be able to keep
together.

In a Letter from Mr. Owen to the Lord Commissioner Lisle.
I Dare not write the particulars of the fight, being assured that you have it
from better hands: The issue, That they were repulsed by an handful, and a
hundred and eighty taken prisoners; amongst them Straughans Major, himself
reported to be slain, the whole party pursued to their Works: Four Ministers
came out with them, but being not known, received the lot of War, three of them
killed, and one taken.

This was the party they most relied upon, as being especially consecrated by
the Kirk to this Service.

Their Ministers told the people before our Army came, That they should not
need to strike one stroke, but stand still, and they should see the Sectaries
destroyed.

In another Letter from Mr. Downing of the First of August.
SOme of the prisoners told me, That Warriston, Sir John Chiesley, Broudy and
Jeoffryes, two of their Ministers, and late Commissioners to their King in
Holland, were to charge in the head of the Kirk Regiment.

Straughan by all probability is killed, not only by the description of his
person which they give that killed him, but also of his clothes, and by his
Pistol and Sword which are taken; by all which, both we and our prisoners do
conclude him to be Straughan: after he was dismounted, he refused quarter,
struck at one with his Sword, and discharged his Pistol; whereupon they killed
him: but he being one of the last men that was killed, and close by their Line,
they recovered his body. Lieutenant Giffith was upon the Charge, and made a
Speech at the head of his Troop, to encourage them before they fell on; his
horse that he charged upon is taken, and he thought to be killed.

Dated, Muscleborough August 1. 1650.
THat the fifteen Troops which came out of Edinburgh, were the choycest of the
Enemies Horse, and picked Troops, whereon was most dependence; amongst which
were many English Cavaliers; That these and Major Straughan (as the prisoners
say) had engaged to the Prince, to bring the Lord General Cromwell to him dead
or alive. The Prince gave to each of the Troopers two shillings to drink: That
Major Straughan desired the command of this party, but that being not thought
fit, Major General Montgomery was appointed to it, and Straughan to bring up
the Rere.

That this party went near sixteen miles about, to get their best opportunity
for falling on, and after some of Colonel Lilburns men had first taken the
Alarm, two of the Enemies came up as friends (being English) and said it was
false: whereupon our dismounted, and so the Enemy came on immediately, yet did
little prejudice, only Colonel Lilburns Cornet killed, and two or three others
hurt.

That the Enemy being Routed (and coming by Colonel Brights Regiment of Foot)
had so great a Volley from them, that many fell from their Horses, one
Corporals Leg taken off, and three Horses killed with one of the great Guns of
that Regiment: Our men so scattered the Enemy, that some of them were taken
that night in Musclehorough Town (being our head Quarters) besides the pursuit
of them for four miles. Our Dragoons quartering that night within a mile of
Edinburgh met, and killed diverse of them at their return: One of them who was
killed, was heard by our men upon his last gasp to say, Damme, I Will go to my
King.

FINIS.

