A True RELATION Of the Extraordinary Thunder and Lightning Which lately
happened in the NORTH As it was sent to Dublin in several Letters to Persons of
Quality With the sad Effects of the Fall of a CLOVD.

Printed in the Year 1680.

Newtown Stewart the 29 th of June 1680.
THere has happened near this place so strange and sad an accident, that I
think the like has been seldom known; On Saturday last about 10 of the Clock in
the day, we heard much 1 hunder, which 15 miles from hence made many great
breaches in a Mountain, and such pours of water tell upon the places so broaken
up, That the Flood hurried the loosened earth with it to the bottom, and
swelled a brook which ran there (and which comes into the River by this place)
so sudenly and so high, that it carried away all that stood before it; people
who lived near the bank had not time to get out of their houses, but with
Goods, Houses and all were swept along with it and perished, the beasts that
fed near it were lost, the very fish were stisted by the earth which the
current brought with it great quantities of Salmon, of Trouts, Lampreys (which
I never saw here before) even the Eeles that live in mud were choked and thrown
dead upon the shore. And I do not believe there is one fish alive in the River,
from the Mountains to the Sea. My curiosity took me yesterday to the place
where this new kind of Deluge began, and truly I was amazed to see a Mountain
torn in above 10 several places, and all the low ground by the River for 10
miles together covered with the Ruins, the Corn fields buried, and the people
proking in the mud and earth for the bodies of their Friends, and of their
Cattle: I cannot yet learn exactly how many have perished, but by the accounts
that are given, there are lost in several places 50 Souls and abundance of
Cattle.

SIR, Monter lony on Saturday the 26th of this Instant June, a Thunderclap
forced the bowels of a great mountain belonging to one Gloud Hamilton, after
which ensued the fall of a prodigious Cloud, which entering the Cavities of the
said mountain made by the Thun der, Its weight bore the greatest part of the
mountain before it, which made such a deluge of puddle, that that part of it
which fell into Glenally-water that runs toward Newtown-stewart, drowned 19
persons in their houses, turned the who'e valleys for 8 or 9 miles in length
that were meadows and Corn into a D^sert of Dirt a foot thick, and has killed
all the fish in the River for 20 miles in length, the other hall of this Cloud
sell into the Row-water that runs through the County of Londonderry has drowned
31 persons and forced away the Stonebridg at Limavady.


Londonderry the 30th of June 1680.
I Presume you will have the following news more at large than here I give
you. On Saturday last happened a very great Thunder with Hail and Rain in these
parts but especial about 16 or 20 miles from hence, insomuch that it has not
only tore up a Mountain of near 200 Acts but the Cloud breaking thereon, has
carried all the suriace of the Earth in that compass into all the Rivers round
about; but withal has carried away several houses and Families, insomuch that
of Men, Women and children already above thirty corpse sound, and many more is
believed to be lost, Of a sudden the waters rose between the Mountains 14
fathom high. In that part where the Mountain was, one Woman was lest alive, who
gave an account of the Dreadfulness thereof, which she says was as well by
Hailstones of an incredible bigness as by the Vast Cloud coming down at once,
that she by a wonderful providence escaped, and had it been in the night many
hundred persons more had been destroyed as well as their houses and great
numbers of Cattle drowned. All fish for several miles up the River are
destroyed by the blackness and muddyness, of the water which the surface of
that mountain made, of Salmon above 7 or 8 hundred sound already dead on the
shore, of Ecles and all other small fresh water fish is finite numbers
destroyed, that it is nor cannot be believed in th^se Rivers one fish is lest
alive, It Is too tedious to relate the whole matter, But he is as dreadful to
this Country as you can Imagine, by being much worse than I here give you.


New-Hall the 28 of June 1680
ON Saturday last about 12 at noon, it began here to Thunder and Rain, which
continued for 3 hours incessantly, the River swelled suddenly and I did so
overflow all the banks, and coming down so impetuously it brought with it an
infinite deal of Timber, Sticks, Straw, and Rubbish, which gathering together
at the side of our New Bridge, and having no vent, it overthrew, and there is
not one stick lest. I understand since that the Thunder began above Doagiven,
and there a Thunder bole fell upon a hill and tore it down, which mingling with
th Rain, it rather fell like a great spout, and came tumbling upon a house
belonging to Aveny O Cahan the Father of Shane O Cahan the Tory, and in a
moment overthrew it, and carried all away with it, and Aveny with his wise and
five Children and sour Friends were drowned, with all their Cow, sheep, and
Horses, and among them a Child in Cradle, which Cradle, with many other
household goods and Timber of houses did help to choke and overthrow the Bridge.
A boy told me that he saw the thunder bolt tall, which with great flames and
flashes tore the ground, and all the day after none could go near the place for
the smell of Brimstone; he says there fell also hairstones of a strange size
and shape, some like pieces of Candles, some like great buttons with sharp
points; within a sew miles of that place 18 persons were found drowned in one
heap, and several about Newtown-stewart, But the mischief is not yet all known.
After this it is a small thing to tell you all the meadows about this town are
spoiled, and all the Corn from hence to the River mouth, and which is
wonderful about Derry and Colraine was nothing, but an ordinary shower at
Maherae, and there abouts clear weather.


FINIS.

