To the Supreme Authority of England, The High Court of Parliament assembled at
Westminster; The humble Petition of Richard True Love and Henry True Love, of the
Town of Ipswich, on the behalfs of themselves and others, Heirs at Law to
Thomas Causton, late of Thundersley in the County of Essex, Gent. a Martyr:
In all humility showing,
THat the said Thomas Causton was in his life time scised in Fee of diverse
Freehold and Copyhold Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, in Essex and
elsewhere.

That the said Thomas Causton, 7o Novembr. 1o and 2o Phil. and Mar. surrendered
all his Copyhold Lands in Tillingham, to the use of William his Son, which
Lands have ever since been enjoyed by the said William, his Heirs and Assigns.

That afterward the said Thomas Causton, in those times of Persecution in the
days of Queen Mary, was burnt as an Heretic, for his faithful adhering to the
Protestant Religion, as is Recorded in the Book of Martyrs, fol. 194. and
thereupon all other his Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, were seized into
the then Crown, and have been, and to this day are held and enjoyed, either by
Leassees from the late Kings and Queens, or by such who without any Title enjoy
them, to the great prejudice of your Petitioners.

That William the Son of Thomas Causton, dyed without Issue, and the said
Copyhold Lands surrendered after his decease, desended on Elizabeth his only
Sister, who then was the only Heir of the said William, and of the said Thomas
their Father.

That the said Elizabeth married William True Love your Petitioners Grandfather,
who enjoyed the said Copyhold Lands, and ought likewise to have enjoyed all
other the Lands and Tenements, Freehold and Copyhold of the said Thomas
Causton, which ought to descend on your Petitioners.

That your Petitioners have faithfully served and adhered to this Parliament,
ever since the beginning of these Troubles, both in their Persons and Estates.

And now they are humble Suitors unto your Honors, That for the glory of God,
the honor of the Parliament, and encouragement to true Professors of Religion,
your honors will please to restore to them the lawful and rightful Inheritance
of their Ancestors, so wrongfully detained from them; and that to this purpose,
your Honors will refer the examination of the Premises, to the Right Honorable,
The Council of State, or such other Committee as your Honors shall please, and
that in the mean time none of the said Lands may be sold.

And your Petioners shall daily Pray for your Honors, etc

