THeroboi THeriloi: GODS FEARERS ARE GODS FAVORITES.

OR, AN Encouragement To fear GOD IN The worst TIMES.

Delivered in several Sermons, by that eminent Servant of Christ, Nath. Tucker,
late Preacher of the Gospel in Portsmouth.

Eccles. 8.12. Surely, I know it shall be well with them that fear God, that
fear before him. Timor praesens securitatem generat sempiternam, August. in
Psalm. Timenti Dominum been erit in extremis, Bern. de Tim. Dei. London, Printed
by J.C. for Dorman Newman, at the Kings Arms in the Poultry, next to
Grocers-Ally. 1662.

To the Christian READER.
IT was the saying of Abraham to Abimelech, Genesis 20.11. Because I thought
surely the fear of God is not in this place, they will slay me for my wifes
sake. Where the Fear of GOD is wanting, what Evil will not Men commit? Where
this Bank is broken down, the Floods of all manner of Wickedness will flow
over. Hence it is, That in our Age, many turn Atheists, run to all manner of
Excess of Riot, play the Apostates, grow faint-hearted in the Cause of God, are
afraid of Men: and as the Burgundians once were afraid all the Reeds they saw,
had been Lances; so these fear every thing they see, yea, their own shadows:
and all this is for want of the Fear of God. Merito omnia timet, qui illum non
timet. It is therefore very proper Work for us to press after this Fear. It is
called, Janitor Animae, The Porter to keep out the Soul's Foes, and to let in
the Soul's Friends. It is Principium and Praecipuum Sapientiae, The Beginning
and Perfection of Wisdom; therefore fit to be pursued after. Remember that
speech of the Lord concerning Israel, Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were such an
heart in them, that they would fear me. Shall God wish it, and shall not men
press after it? yet such is our averseness to that which is good, that Precept
upon Precept, and Line upon Line will scarce persuade us.

The Reverend Author of this ensuing Tract, has taken great pains to promote
that which the Lord does so pathetically wish for. Read diligently therefore
what is here written, and thou may gain much by it. Here thou will find some
Discoveries of this Fear, some Motives to press after it, and some Helps to
obtain it; all handled in a most affectionate and melting manner: and that a
Blessing may go along with this Discourse, in order to thy eternal Benefit, is
the desire of

Thy souls well-wisher, Richard Kentish.
April 13. 1658.
AN EPISTLE To the READER
Christian Reader*
ALthough my Approbation can add little weight to the worth of this ensuing
Treatise; yet being desired to show kindness to the Dead, in giving a true
Testimony to this Posthumous Piece, I could not refuse to perform such an
Office of Love, as by the Rule of Love we are all obliged unto. This therefore
I may truly say, That having overviewed it, I find nothing in it but that
which is sound, holy and wholesome, fit to inform the Judgment, and to raise
holy Resolutions and Affections in the Hearts of the Readers, fweetly breathing
forth Piety in every Passage of it: so that whosoever will give it the reading
over, (which will quickly be done) shall have cause not to think his Time
misspent: But (if his Heart be in a right Disposition) he shall find it hereby
more stirred with desire to get to be amongst the number of those true Fearers
of God, for whom, a loving Record and a Book of Merciful Remembrance shall be
written for their shelter in evil Times, that they may find Mercy in the evil
day; for which times, our good God fit and prepare us all. Farewell.

Tho. Whitfeld.

MAL. 3.16, 17, 18. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another;
and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written
before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name.

And they shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my
jewels; and I will spare him, as a man spares his own son that serves him.

Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.


I Must first give you some light into the context, and then come unto the
words of the text: Then they that feared the Lord.

The particle az, Then, in the front of the text, carries us back to the
consideration of the coherence.

The godly here, having this character given them, They that feared the Lord,
were (as it seems) reserved to those last and loosest times of the Jewish
Church, after the return from Babylon; where the seventy years captivity had
not much reformed or amended the major part of the Jews. Gods correcting hand
had lain a long time sore heavy upon them; but God had not his end upon this
untoward generation: these unsanctified persons grew worse and worse with
afflictions; witness their blasphemous words before my text, where they stand
stouting it out with the Lord of hosts, verse. 13. Your words have been stout
against me, says the Lord: yet ye say, What have we spoken so much against
thee? They stick not to charge God with deep oscitancy and neglect of his best
servants, (verse. 14.) as if they should reap no fruit from the service of God;
as if all their labor were in vain: yea indeed, they tax God of flat iniquity,
and most unequal administrations, verse. 15. And now we call the proud happy:
yea, they that work wickedness are set up; yea, they that tempt God are even
delivered. As if they had said, Surely there is no reward for the righteous,
verily there is not a God that does judge in the earth: the proud, who tempt
God, and trample upon his people, they are not only not punished, but even
preferred and advanced for their labor: either things are not ordered by a
divine providence, but left at random, let run at sixes and sevens; or else
there is not an even or equal hand held over the sons of men, but partiality
and unrighteousness found in God. Thus these miscreants in their madness set
their mouths against heaven, and spared not despitefully to spit their venom
in the face of God himself. At the hearing of which horrid and abhorred
blasphemies, the godly of these times are much affected; they met often about
it, and not without a great deal of good conference: Then they that feared the
Lord spoke often one to another. Then? when? Why whiles the wicked did
blaspheme, and belch out their impieties against God; even at that instant and
juncture of time, they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another. Thus
briefly of the Coherence.

The whole text may be divided into these two main or general branches: 1. A
duty performed. 2. A mercy returned upon the performance of it.


The duty performed lies in the beginning of the text, even in these words:
Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another. Which duty is
illustrated or set forth two ways: 1. In the circumstances of it. 2. In the
matter and substance of it.


In the circumstances; and they are two: 1. Of Time. 2. Of Persons.


Of time: Then: Then they, etc.

Of persons: They were such as feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name; as
you see in the beginning and conclusion of verse. 16.

And then the duty is illustrated in the matter and substance of it; and that
was frequent mutual conference; they spoke often one to another: Then they that
feared the Lord, spoke often one to another.

So much of the first general branch: the second is a mercy returned; and that
is twofold:

First, Gods gracious acceptance; 1. In that for the present he regarded and
respected what they did: The Lord hearkened, and heard it. 2. In that for the
future he registered or recorded it: And a book of remembrance was written
before him.


Secondly, His righteous remuneration or retribution, 1. Of mercy to his
people: which reflects 1. Upon their persons. 2. Upon their performances.
Upon their persons, which he will 1. Own: They shall be mine, says the Lord.
2. Honor: In that day when I make up my jewels.



Secondly, This mercy respects their performances, in passing by the
weaknesses, defects, and failings of them: I will spare them as a man, etc.

And then lastly, you have Gods just and righteous retribution of judgment
unto his enemies, verse. 18. Then shall ye return, and discern between the
righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves
him not.

And thus you have likewise briefly heard both the Division and Subdivision of
the Text.

There is yet one thing more which I must wade through, before I proceed on to
the Doctrine, and that is Explication.

Now that I may make way unto the Doctrine the sooner, I shall open the 16
verse only, and the two other verses when I come to the handling of them.

Well then, first of the 16 verse: Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often
one to another: and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance
was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon
his Name.

In the Hebrew we read it thus: Az nidhbaru jirra Jehovah ish El raganaha: Then
they fearing God, spoke often man (or every man) to his neighbor (or
companion.) For though the Hebrew word for spoke, in the conjugation Kal notes
a bare speaking; yet in the conjugation Niphal, sermonis continuationem seu
frequentationem significat; it signifies the continuation or frequencie of
their speaking one to another: they did not do it only once or twice, but they
did it often: Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another. Those
few names that had not defiled their garments in so foul a season, but had kept
themselves unspo^ted of the world, they spoke often, etc.

Some render the text, Tunc vastati sunt timentes Domini, sc. ab impiis and
atheis impune eos invadentibus: i. e. Then were those that feared the Lord
wasted and destroyed, viz. by those atheists, who fell from fierce words to
bloody blows. And the reason of this version or reading is, because the word
dibhi in the text, in the conjugation Pihel, is rendered to kill, or to
destroy. But I conceive that this is far fet, and nothing so agreeable unto the
mind of the holy Ghost, as our Translation is. For, 1. It Is not dibberu in
Pihel, but nidhberu in Niphal. Besides, this reading is not so answerable to
the following words.

I, but you will ask me, What did these men fearing the Lord speak, when they
spoke so often one to another?

Stock in his Exposition upon Malachi, and some others, think the words
following to be theirs, and not God's words; who, they say, speaking not until
the 17 verse, in comforting one another, they said, The Lord hearkened and
heard, etc. But for my part, I rather incline to those who tell us, that the
Prophet has not in express words declared what these men fearing the Lord
spoke one to another; only in telling us that they spoke one to another, and
by opposing them to the ungodly of that time, it must be supposed that they
spoke good and gracious things: they stood up to stickle for God, to stop the
mouth of Blasphemy, and to establish one another in the persuasion of Gods holy
Truth, and constant care of his own children. Those wicked ones did not speak
so much against God, against his providence and government, as they did for
God, in defense of his providence and government. And this they did for mutual
strengthening and confirmation, that that which was happily halting might not be
turned out of the way, but healed rather; that they might confirm each other
against those great and grievous temptations which lay in their way.

It follows: And the Lord hearkened, and heard it. Did they whisper so in one
another ear, that no ear else heard them? No: the Lord hearkened, and heard it;
the Lord listened, as it were, at the keyhole; he was under the window. The
word jachebil in the Original, he hearkened, comes from a root which signifies
to attend and lift up the ear: Gestus est diligenter auscultantis; it is the
gesture of one that hearkneth diligently: and so the word is taken, Isai. 52.3.
the later part of the verse: i. e. They shall diligently hearken Nay, the word
imports not only attention of body, but attention of mind; as when a man
listeneth as for life, and makes hard shift to hear all: thus the Lord
hearkened, and heard; the Lord did diligently observe what they said, and what
they did: nothing drops from them, but the Lord attentively regards it. Then
they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another: and the Lord hearkened
and heard it.

And a book of remembrance was written before him. In the Hebrew we read it
thus: And there was written a book of memory before his face. We read in
Scripture of a threefold book of God. The first is a book of his resolved
Decree: of this we read, Exodus 32.32. Says Moses there, Yet now, if thou will,
forgive their sin; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book, which
thou have written. So Psalm. 69.28. So in many other texts, where by book we are
to understand the book of Gods Decree, or Pre-ordination. Secondly, there is a
book of Gods acted Providence: Psalm. 139.16. Thine eyes did see my substance
yet being unperfect, and in thy book all my members were written, etc. i. e. in
thy book of providence. Now this later is but a transcript or copy of the
former. Those huge original volumes of love and blessings which he has laid up
in his heart for his own people; those also of wrath and judgment which he has
laid up there against his enemies from all eternity: those volumes (I say) of
love or wrath are writing out every day, by the hand and pen of Providence. But
then thirdly, there is a book of love, and of remembrance: Psalm. 56.8. Thou
tellest my wanderings: put thou my tears into thy bottle; are they not in thy
book? i. e. in thy book of remembrance. And this latter (Beloved) is the book
spoken of here in my text. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to
another; and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was
written before him: Liber monumenti, A Book of Acts and Monuments; so some
render it, in allusion unto the custom of Kings, Esth. 2.23. latter part: And
it was written in the book of the chronicles before the king. Tamerlain, that
warlike Scythian, of whom you read in the Turkish History, had always by him a
catalogue of the names and good deserts of his servants, which he daily
perused, and whom he duly rewarded; not needing by them, or by any others in
their behalf, to be put in remembrance. Thus (Beloved) God (if I may so speak)
files up the prayers of his servants, puts all their speeches as well as
practices upon record, that he may make all honorable mention of them at the
last day, in the General Assembly of heaven. Liber Commentarii, a book of
Commentaries, so Junius renders it, where God does as it were descant and
comment upon all the holy and gracious speeches and practices of his people.
You must not understand it so, as if God had any such Memorial-book, as if he
stood in need of it, or were subject to forgetfulness; no, but it is spoken
(...), after the manner of men, who have books to help their memories. God will
no more forget the savoury religious discourses of his people, then a man does
that which he has recorded in his book lying before him: A book of remembrance
was written before him; before his face. If we speak but a word for God, we
shall hear of it again: God takes it and pens it down: he sets it down
presently; all was kept upon record. As when they who do not fear the Lord
speak one to another, when wicked men plot against the righteous, or conspire
against the holy ways of God, God hearkneth and hears, and there is a book of
remembrance kept of it; let them whisper as softly as they can, God can hear,
and will record all their malicious speeches, all their evil devices and
contrivements, whether against himself, or against his servants: so on the
other side, when they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, in the
justification of his ways, in the vindication of his providence, the Lord
hearkened and heard; and a book of remembrance was written before him. Of the
two, it is better expressed by a book, then by words: for that which is written,
is more durable and permanent; whereas things spoken many times vanish, and are
blown away in the air, and come to nothing.

Well then, in the last place, we will consider in whose behalf this book of
remembrance was written: it was, you see, for them that feared the Lord, and
thought upon his Name. For them that feared the Lord; of that character of the
godly spoke something but even now: and that though upon his Name; a word or
two only of this epithet or character. The word in the Origina^ here used, is
derived from a word which signifies not simply or barely to think, but to set
the head and heart on work about that which we think upon. It carries the
intention of the mind with it. And that thought upon his Name: i. e. that had
God before their eyes, that minded his glory, that thought upon his
Commandments to do them; those are the persons for whom a book of remembrance
was written before the Lord.

And thus have I at length finished the Coherence, the Division and Explication
of the text. Before I proceed to open the subsequent verses, I shall enquire
what Observations may be made upon, and Deductions gathered from this 16 verse
which I have already opened.

And here first of all, I shall take into consideration the connexive or
copulative particle Then in the beginning of the verse: THEN they that foared
the Lord, etc. Then? When? Why in those looser and more degenerated times, when
men were arrived to that height of impudency and profaness, as to say, it was
to no purpose to serve God: then when their black mouths were swollen big with
their blasphemies; THEN they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another:
they spoke of God, and for God; they then stood up in the vindication of his
ways and administrations. So that (Beloved) from hence I shall note this Point;
namely,

That the servants of God must labor to show themselves best in the worst
times. When others were most against God, and contrary unto him, then must they
be most stirring and active for God, most diligent and careful in his business.
Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another.

In the prosecution of which Point, I shall order my Method in this fashion.

1. I shall confirm the Point by precept.

2. Commend this duty, from the constant practice of the people of God in all
Ages.

3. Clear it up, upon some grounds and rational considerations.

And then lastly, make some improvement of it unto our selves.

I shall proceed upon these several Heads, so far as the ordinary time will
permit; beginning with those express precepts which are scattered up and down
in the Scriptures to this very purpose. We will content our selves with three
or four. The one is Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil.
Some whereof are set down by way of negation, some by way of affirmation. The
way to hell is broad, and much beaten. Per viam publicam non ingredere, was one
of Pythagoras his precepts: Do not do as the most do, lest thou be undone for
ever. Argumentum turpissimum turba, says Seneca: An Argument from the
multitude, is not argumentative. Nay, you see there is here in this text a
special restraint put upon it: Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil.
And the Reason is, because man is so apt to be led by many: the heart is ready
to flatter it self into an opinion, that God will not be very angry when a
practice is grown common: this is the course of the world, this is the way of
most men; surely there is no great danger in it. Well now, says God, Thou
shall not follow a multitude to do evil. A second text to this purpose, you
have, Prove. 1.10, 11, and following verses: My son, if sinners entice thee,
consent thou not, etc. q.d. Do not close in, or comply with them. And again,
Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to this world. He does not say, Live not in the
world; we must live here, until God call us hence: neither does he say, Use not
the world; for it is impossible but that whiles we live here, we must use the
world; though we are cautioned to use the world as though we used it not: but,
Be not conformed unto this world. The word in the Greek is (...). Accommodate
not your selves to the world: so Erasmus reads it. Fashion not your selves to
the world: so Beza. But in ours, and some other Translations, Conform not, etc.
As a Player is fashioned to the gesture and words, either of drunkenness or
adultery, when he acts them on the scaffold; that is the true notation of the
word. Be not conformed to this world, i.e. Do not make the manners of the world
the rule of your life: let not your corrupt minds, which will carry you after
a corrupt world, prevail with you. Now these are the precepts which are laid
down by way of Negation. I shall give you two that are set down by way of
Affirmation. Acts 2.43. says Peter there, Save your selves from this untoward
generation; i.e. from the corrupt society of unbelievers. And again, 2 Cor.
6.17. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord: q.d. Do not
comply with the corruptions of the world; let all these go, whatever you lose
or suffer for it. Thus much for the precepts.

In the second place, I shall commend this duty unto you from the constant
practice of the people of God, even in all ages. See an instance of it, 1. in
Noah: when the whole earth was corrupt before God, he walked perfectly and
uprightly with God in his generation, Genesis 7.1. Noah walked alone, in a way
different from a world of wicked people; he was most sincere in the service of
God, in the darkest midnight of damned impiety. 2. Abraham, pulled as a brand
out of Ur of the Caldees, wherever he came, he set up altars to God in the
midst of Idolaters, and makes open profession of his worship before the people
of the land, Genesis 12.6, 7, 8 So Joshua after him, Josh 24.15. Do you what you
will; though you do generally and universally serve other gods, I and my house
will serve the Lord. See this in Elijah, who was zealous for the Lord God of
hosts, though alone and singular, 1 King. 19.10. I might tell you of Obadiah,
who seared the Lord greatly, in a common defection, 1 King. 18. But come we
unto the New Testament, and let us see what practice of this duty we find
there. I shall begin with Christ, who is the original copy, an infallible
unerring example: he was eaten up with the zeal of his Fathers house, when it
was polluted and profaned by all sorts, Joh. 2.14, 15, 16, 17. The Apostles
after his departure resolved to obey God, notwithstanding the menaces of the
Council, Acts 4.19, 20. Paul openly contesteth with the Gentiles at Athens
about their fensless superstition, Acts 17.22. Antipas held forth the Word of
life even unto the death, where Satan's throne was, Rev. 2.13. Polycarp, that
blessed Martyr of Jesus Christ, who being commanded by the Tyrant to do
sacrifice to the Idol, returns this answer: Eighty and odd years have I served
my master Christ, and he never deceived me; and shall I now desert him? God
forbid me any such wickedness. Octoginta sex annos ills servui, etc. It were
easy to come lower, and nearer our own times, and to produce a whole cloud of
such who held forth the Word of life by a bold and wise profession in the
darkness of Popery. But I will give you one only instance more, and then
conclude: it was Athanastus, that notable champion of Christ, who stood stoutly
to the defense of the Truth, when all the Christian world beside was turned
Arrian: Ille v^r totius orbis impetum sustinuit: the whole world was set
against Athanasius, and Athanasius against the whole world. And thus you have
heard how the force-mentioned duty has been practiced by the servants of God.

I come to the Grounds of the Point. If you look either upward or downward,
either to God or men, you will find Reason sufficient for the practice of this
duty; all which Reasons are grounded upon the text, and shall be thence
gathered.

I shall begin with the first, The Reasons taken from God; and they shall be
these two.

1. God does exactly observe, and graciously accept of such his servants as
continue constant with him in corrupt and depraved times, in a general
defection or declension: when sin is grown usual, and almost epidemical, then
to adhere to the Truths, Ways, and Ordinances of God, Oh how pleasing and
acceptable is this unto God! The Lord hearkened and heard, (says my Text) God
was much taken and affected with those sweet conferences, those godly dialogues
and discourses which dropped from the mouths of the godly of those times: he
hearkened and heard, it was melodious and delightful music to his heavenly
ears, and he does as it were apply his ears close, he lays them near to their
lips, as loath to lose any part of their holy language: The lord hearkened and
heard. 1 Pet. 3.12, says the Apostle there, The eyes of the Lord are over the
righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers: or, as it is in the
Original, His ears are unto, or rather into their prayers: (...). Now what the
Apostle there speaks of that individual or particular duty of Prayer, is as
true of their whole Christian practice: not a prayer which the godly put up,
not a good work they do, not a good word which they utter, no not a good
thought which they conceive, but the Lords eyes are upon it, and his ears open
unto it; he sets it all down in his Register or Note-book: A book of
remembrance was written.

But then, 2. As the Lord does graciously accept of this practice, so will he
plentifully reward it: this labor of faith and love shall never be forgotten;
it shall not only be entered or engrossed in a book of remembrance, but they
they shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts. 1. They shall be mine: i.e. I will
not only own them by a general right, as my creatures; but by a special,
peculiar, and distinguishing title, as my children, my Saints and Servants,
such as have made a covenant with me by sacrifice; I will be their God, and
they shall be my people: I will look upon them as the top of my wealth, and my
most esteemed treasure, as my Jewels, whom I will keep safe in the golden
Cabinet of my special providence, and fatherly protection. But this is not all:
I will spare them too, as a man spares his only son that serves him: i.e. I
will not cast them out, or reject them, for every small fault, for every flaw
or defect in their services, I shall give them their allowance, pass by and
overlook their weaknesses. How effectual (me thinks) might these
Considerations be, to provoke us to a holy contention in godliness, when the
times are never so bad and boisterous! Hereby we shall please God, hereby we
shall procure good unto our selves. And thus in brief of the first sort of
Reasons, taken from God.

The second sort respect Men: And that 1. Our selves: and then 2. Others. 1.
Our selves. And this I shall branch forth into two particulars.

1. By cleaving or sticking close unto God in corrupt times, we shall approve
our selves, 1. to be holy Christians: 2. to be zealous Christians. First, we
shall make it appear that we are holy Christians, that we are men and women
fearing God. Jam. 1.27. says the Apostle there, Pure religion, and undefiled
before God, and the Father, is this, -- To keep himself unspotted from the
world. When we keep our selves unspotted of the world, and escape untainted of
it, it is an argument that our Religion is a pure Religion: a pure life,
especially in impure times, argues a holy faith; it signifies, that the
mystery of faith is held in a pure conscience. We never answer Religion better,
then when we keep our way undefiled. 1 Cor. 11.19. There must (says the
Apostle) be errors also among you: there must be errors in doctrine, and
errors in practice; corruption in judgment, and corruption in life: but why?
it is because they which are approved may be made manifest: (...) The word (...)
in the Greek is metaphorical, a Metaphor borrowed from allowance of Coin:
Silver which by the Goldsmiths trial is found good, is called (...), i.e.
allowed, good and current, Evil and corrupt times are discriminating and
distinguishing times; then men and women show themselves what they are, whether
counterfeit or current professors: It Is then easy for men to judge of
themselves, and for others to judge of them. Read Phil. 2.15. That ye may be
blameless, and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world. There
must be a perverse and graceless generation, a viperous brood, in the midst of
whom Gods Saints must shine as lamps in the world, that so they may approve
themselves blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, holding
forth the Word of life, when it is most opposed and oppressed by the sons of
Belial. This now, I say, is the property of a man that truly fears God; he
cannot blow hot and cold, as we use to say; he dares not swear by God and
Malchom; he will not hide the Truth in indifferency: he knows that God must be
worshipped truly, without halting; and totally, without halving. That is the
first thing.

But then, 2. As by cleaving unto God, his Truth and Service, in the worst
times, we shall approve our selves to be holy Christians; so likewise shall we
make it appear that we are zealous Christians, sollicitously minding that high
and holy Name of God, whereby we are called. Thus the holy Apostles standing
before the Council, manifested themselves to be men enflamed with fervent zeal
toward the honor of God, Acts 4.20. (...). We cannot but speak the things
which we have seen and heard; we cannot do otherwise, we are necessitated unto
it; being like vessels, that when they are filled and stopped up, must either
vent or break, without remedy. We may see this likewise in Paul, that precious
man; when once he become a chosen vessel to the Lord Christ, to bear his Name,
never was he so mad before, in havocking those that called upon that Name in
all places, as he was now fierce and fiery against all that did any thing
contrary to the Name of Jesus. Paul declares himself to be a zealous Christian:
and so shall we, if we hold fast and close to God, in loose and licentious
times. Thus much likewise of the second sort of Reasons, taken from our selves.

The last sort of Reasons respect others; and they shall be likewise two: the
first concern the Godly; the second, the Wicked.

1. Hereby good men shall be much confirmed and comforted, I mean, by our
holding out in bad times: this is very effectual for the settling, strengthening,
and establishing of the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees, which it
may be otherwise would warp, and turn out of the way. Whiles we cease not to
speak (with these in my text) often one to another, we build up one another in
our most holy faith. Phil. 1.14. says the Apostle there, And many of the
brethren in the Lord waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak
the word without fear. Pray mark it, they waxed confident by my bonds. By the
Apostles constancy to, and perseverance in the Truth, in evil and persecuting
times, the Gospel took deeper rooting and impression in the hearts of many of
the Pastors of the Church: they were so far from being discouraged by the
Apostles bonds, as that they grew bolder then they were before, and durst more
freely to preach and to profess the Gospel. If you look into the Acts and
Monuments, you shall find what abundance of confirmation the godly of those
times received, by their fellow-brethrens constancy in the Truth. Well might
Tertullian say, Constantiae Martyrum irrigatur and augetur Ecclesia: i.e. The
Church was enlarged through the constancy of the Martyrs. Many instances of it
might be given, were it necessary so to do.

But in the last place, Gods servants must be best in worst times, because
hereby, as good men shall be confirmed, so wicked men shall be convinced, and
even confounded; and that not only in the last great and general Judgment, but
in this present world also. A full proof whereof you have in those two mighty,
yet wicked Monarchs, in Daniel, Nebuchadnezzar and Darius. How was
Nebuchadnezzar appaled, and even confounded, when he saw the high resolution
and courage of those three Worthies, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, in
changing the Kings word, and yielding their bodies to be burnt, rather then
worship a strange god, Dan. 3 28. there you may find it. How was Darius amuzed
and amazed, when Daniel by the strength of his faith had stopped the mouths of
the lions, after he had stood it out stoutly to the face of his adversaries!
How did the innocence and piety of these godly men, triumph in the consciences
of those two Tyrants, making them afraid, and compelling them to vote the same
way that they had before persecuted, yea and to proclaim that God for the only
true God, whom yet they had no mind to set up for their own God. Dan. 3.29.
says N. buchadnezzar there, I make a decree, that every people, nation, and
language, which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill,
because there is no other god that can deliver after this sort. And Dan. 6.25,
26. says Darius, I make a decree, that in every dominion of my kingdom, men
tremble and fear before the God of Daniel: for he is the living God, and
steadfast for ever, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, and his
dominion shall be even unto the end. It Is said of Dioclesian, that bloody
persecutor, Imperium deposuit quodam mentis stupore and consternatione, post
quam singularem Christianorum in morte constantiam perspexisset: i. e. That he
laid down his Empire with terror and consternation of mind, after he had
observed that height of spirit, resolution and constancy which was in the
Christians. How did Steven, being full of faith and courage, astonish his
adversaries! The text says, Acts 6.15. All that sat in the council, looking
steadfastly on him, saw his face, as it had been the face of an angel. So true
is that of Solomon, Prove. 28.4. They that forsake the law, praise the wicked:
but such as keep the law, contend with them. A godly man, I say, that is
unmovable, not like a troubled fountain, or a corrupt spring, though he may
for a time receive evil words from the wicked, yet their hearts are afraid of
him, and their consciences do admire him.

And thus (Beloved) you have heard the several Grounds and Reasons of the
Point, as far forth as time will permit. I shall make some Improvement of it
unto our selves.

This Point I shall apply two ways: 1. for Increpation; and then 2. for
Exhortation.

1. For Increpation, or Reproof. This Doctrine casts a severe aspect upon two
sorts: 1. Upon all formal and lukewarm Laodiceans, upon all temporizing and
corrupt time-serving Gospellers. 2. Upon all timorous, fearful, and
fainthearted Christians.


For the first of these: Is it so, That the servants of God must labor to show
themselves best in the worst times, that they should shine most in the greatest
darkness, and then with those fearers of God here in my text, show themselves
most zealous for the Lord, when others are most audacious in sinning against
the Lord? Tuis then does most sharply reprehend all formal and temporizing
professors, who, contrary to the rules of Gods most holy Word, contrary to the
practice of so many of his renowned servants in former ages, and contrary to
the irrefragable truth of the point in hand, hold it best and safest to swim
with the common current, to keep themselves on the warm side of the hedge, as
we use to say; to do as the most do, though in and by so doing, they be utterly
undone for ever: nay, and that they may not seem sine ratione insanire, to be
mad without reason, they plead Scripture, or rather wrest and pervert
Scripture, for the defense of their wicked purpose; as, that of the Preacher,
Eccles. 4.10. Woe to him that is alone when he falls: for he has not another
to help him up. That, Eccles. 7.16. Be not righteous overmuch, neither make
thy self over-wise: why should thou destroy thy self? I, and that of the
Apostle Paul too, 1 Cor. 9.22. where he says, To the weak I became as weak,
that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by
all means save some. Hence it is, that they think themselves secuted and
shrouded from the dint of any such reproof as this is; pleasing themselves in a
cold and careless mediocrity in spiritual matters. How many have taken up that
cursed Maxim, which was all the Latin that Lewis 11. King of France would
have his son to learn, Qui nescit aissimulare, nescit vivere; he that cannot
sycophantize and dissemble, is not in case to live in a Commonwealth! They can,
Camelconlike, turn themselves into any colonr, accommodate themselves to any
man's humor: they can, as the Planet Mercury, be good, when in conjunction with
good; and bad, when in the company of bad: Weathercock like, comply with the
times, let them be what they will; and shift sail to the setting of every
wind: like the Ebionites, of whom Eusebius tells us, that they would keep the
Sabbath with the Jews, and the Lords day with the Christians: like men that
would seem to be of all Religions, when in truth they were of none: like those
Israelites, Neh. 13. that spoke both Hebrew and Ashdod; or to Balaam, that
could both bless and curse: those double-minded men, of whom the Apostle James
speaks, who are instable in all their ways; imprisoning the truth in
unrighteousness. These are the men who come under this first Reprehension.

Beloved, all that I shall say concerning these profligate professors, that can
tune their Fiddles to the Base of the times, resolving to play nothing but what
the company calls for: The Lord will spue such Parasites out of his mouth, as
too loathsome a morsel for his stomach to brook or bear. Rev. 3.16 says Jesus
Christ there, called the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, the beginning of
the creation of God: Because thou a^t lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I
will spue thee out of my mouth. When a man rids his stomach, he gets him into a
corner: so will Almighty God rid his stomach of such, in the dark corner of
hell. To the same purpose I may apply that, Isai. 1.24. Ah, I will ease me of
mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies: q. d. I will cast up this
loathsome stuff, that lies so hard upon, and is so offensive to my stomach.
Which done, the devil, as a dog, stands ready waiting, to lick up Gods vomit.
Everlasting woe will be the portion of all those who are neither hot nor cold;
in nothing so constant, as in their Unconstancie.

And thus briefly of the first sort, that come under the lash of this Reproof.

The second sort to be here reproved, are timorous and faint-hearted
Christians, who, with the Snail, pull in their horns for every pile of grass;
who are ashamed of Jesus Christ their Masters Cognizance, for every light
counterblast, either of disgrace, or danger. I am to tell you, that the Lord
holds all such white-liver'd soldiers in such special detestation, that he
will not employ them so far as to break a pitcher or to bear a torch in his
service, Judge. 7.3. There are three texts, amongst others, which I thought good
to commend unto the consideration of such. The one is Mark 8.38 Whosoever
therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and
sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes
in the glory of his Father, with the holy angels. Christ our Lord foresaw,
that, as many would take up the profession of the Gospel for their credit,
advantage, and other sinister and collateral respects; so, many would withdraw
from it, for fear of shame. I, but says he, Those who are now so shie of me,
so shie to own me, my Truths, my Service, before men, I will one day be every
whit as shie of them, and ashamed to own or acknowledge them before my Father
and the blessed angels, at that day, when I shall make most ample relation,
before God, angels and men, yea, all honorable mention of such as were not
ashamed of me in this world; then will I be ashamed of them, who are loath to be
seen forward in my service. The second text that I shall press upon such as
these, is that of the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. For if after they have
escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the later
end is worse with them then the beginning. For it had been better for them not
to have known the way of righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn
from the holy commandment delivered unto them. It Is better that a man never put
his hand to the Plough, then after he has done it, with Lot's wife, to look
back, through fear and dastardliness. It were more safe, yea more tolerable and
excusable, and that not upon a few Considerations. But I shall stand no longer
upon this first Use; only give you the third text, and so proceed unto a
second Use of the Point. Rev. 21.8. But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the
abominable, and murderers, add whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and
all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone: which is the second death. Why are the fearful first named, before
unbelievers, murderers, whoremongers? The reason is, because the Spirit of God
held them worthy to be set in the front, and to lead the Ring-dance, as it
were, of such wicked ones as should be hurried into hell. By fearful, says Mr.
Diodate in his Annotations, he intends such as through carnal and base fear
dare not to own, or at least to profess the Truth of God, in corrupt and loose
times.

And thus far of the first Corollary or Deduction from this Point. I come now
to the second.

2. Is it so, That the servants of God must labor to show themselves best in
worst times? Be we then all provoked to set upon the practice of this most
necessary, and yet much-neglected duty, laboring to shine forth in evil times,
like that lamp, Genesis 15.17. that shined out in the smoakie furnace; or like
that bright star, that showed it self in the midst of darkness, Matthew. 2. Oh
let our piety and patience appear then most, when impiety and violence do most
prevail. As the colder the air, and the harder the weather, the more the fire
scorcheth: so let our zeal, by an holy Antiperistasis, then flame out, and
break through all impediments, when most oppugned and opposed. Beloved, what
though we should find few or none that will set in, or side with us in this
important work, in this One thing necessary? yea, what though all men should
forsake us? yet the Lord will stand by us, and strengthen us, as he did those
sweet souls here in my text, who feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name.
Lift up therefore the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees: let us even
in the loosest and prefanest times, advance with a holy undauntedness of spirit
toward that incorruptible and neversading crown that is reserved for us in
heaven; like fishes retaining their natural sweetness in the salt sea; like
Salamanders, which live unscorcht in the fire; like Oil, that will overtop all
other liquors, but not commingle with them. If we profess our selves to be such
as fear the Lord, let us ever hold a constant counter-motion to the course of
the world, and the corruptions of the times: let us keep our consciences good
and unspotted, as our best and chiefest treasure.

Now because this is a duty of great difficulty, and very uncouth to flesh and
blood, take along with you these following Rules or Directions, for your
assistance. I shall run them over briefly, and so conclude.

First: Reinforce upon your Consciences those precepts which were recited in
the confirmation of this Point; and withal, consider the equity and
reasonableness of those commands. Know, that there is not any one command of
God, but is holy, just, and good; had we but eyes to see it, and to take notice
of it. Romans 7.12. says the Apostle in that place, The law is holy, and the
commandment holy, and just and good. Whatsoever contrariety or antipathy there
is between the commands of God and the hearts of men and women, it proceeds not
from any injustice or unreasonableness in the commands, but from the corruption
and depraved disposition of men and women's own hearts. Who will not say and
acknowledge, that the most are ever the worst? why then should we go against
common sense, and universal experience? nay, the Scripture, which is the Word
of truth and verity, tells us plainly, that the way to hell is broad, and most
beaten: the gate that leads to destruction is wide, and many enter in at it:
but the way that leads unto life is straight and narrow, and few find it.
Now who does not judge it better, with a few, to go to heaven, then with a
multitude to pass down to hell? Christ's flock has been ever found to be a
little flock, Luke 12.32. when the wicked on the other side fill the country.
This the purblinde Philosophers saw; and therefore they say, Sapiendum cum
paucis; we should be wise, though with a few. Diogenes thought he should do
best, when he did least what the most did. Vive ut pauci, says another; Live
as the fewest live. It was a brave answer of Liberius in the Primitive times,
who, when he was urged by Constantius to forsake the Truth of God, and to vote
for Arrianism, by this Argument, Art thou wiser then all the world? he very
honestly and discreetly replied, The Truth is no whit prejudiced by my
singularity and aloneness in standing out. In a word, it matters not how small
the number be, if godly; nor how great, if ungodly. Multitude is not much to be
stood upon. So then, this is the first Direction, Lay to heart the commands of
God, and the holiness and reasonableness of the commands; and hereby, through
mercy, you may in the first place be assisted in the performance of this great
incumbent duty. I come to a second.

Secondarily: If you would stand up for God and his Truth, in evil, corrupt,
and degenerating times; then study the great Art or Lesson of Self-denial;
learn to say Nay to all those persons or things (though never so dear or
delightful) that would cool thy courage for Christ, or take thee off from this
godly practice. Mark 8.34. says our Savior there, Whosoever will come after
me, let him deny himself. Now there are three or four particulars which we
ought to deny our selves in, in this case. The first, is carnal and fleshly
Reason; if that should persuade us (as it is apt to do) to a forbearance of our
holy resolution, by the fear of what may follow: if that should dictate or
suggest unto us, as it is Eccles. 7.16. the place before mentioned; Be not
righteous overmuch, neither make thy self overwise: why should thou destroy
thy self? i.e. Be discreet and wary, and stand not so strictly upon terms of
Conscience: why should thou incur needless danger? Stop thine ears unto this
subtle Enchantress, and rather hearken to the voice of Gods Spirit in the verse
immediately following, verse. 17. Be not over much wicked, neither be thou
foolish: why should thou die before thy time? Pray observe the Antithesis or
opposition: Be not wicked overmuch, says he, in opposition to the former, Be
not righteous overmuch; neither be foolish, in opposition to neither make thy
self over-wise: for why should thou die before thy time? in opposition to why
should thou destroy thy self? This is the voice of heaven, wherewith we are
to stop the mouth of that wisdom which descends not from above, but is
earthly, sensual, devilish. 2. If you intend to keep in with Christ, then deny
your selves in your carnal friends and relations, who will be ready enough to
prompt you, as Peter did once Christ, Matthew. 16.22. they will be ready to bid
you to be good to your selves, and not to run the hazard of disgrace or
disadvantage. Now for a counter-poyson, let us consider, that there is no
friend like God, and there is no foe like unto him. Eli, you know, paid dear
for displeasing the Lord, to please his children, 1 Samuel 2.29, 30, and
following verses. And it was like to have cost Moses his life, for forbearing
to circumcise his child, lest he should anger his wife, Exodus 4.24.

Thirdly, Deny your selves in your Liberties. Micaiah though he were sure to
kiss the Stocks, and there to be fed with the bread and water of affliction,
until Ahab returned in peace, yet would he not be biased for any man's
pleasure, nor vote with the rest of Ahab's Parasitical Prophets, 1 King. 22.26,
27, 28. And

Then last of all, deny your selves in your lives, (if called unto it.) What
cared the three children for Nebuchadnezzar's wrath, though it burned seven
times hotter then his furnace? Kill them he might possibly, but hurt them he
could not. He that truly sears God, and thinks upon his Name, dreads no
danger, fears no colors: he will take Christ's cross upon his shoulders, a
faggot in his arms, and his life in his hand, and so follow Christ through thick
and thin, through fire and water, or any thing else that stands in his way. And
this is the second assistant Direction.

The third and last is this: Let us think sadly and seriously upon our high and
heavenly calling, and labor to walk worthy of it, as the Apostle often exhorts
us to do. Every calling has a decorum, a seemliness or comeliness appertaining
unto it. A Gentleman has another manner of behavior then a Scullion; a
Prince, then a Peasant: so should a Christian too: a man that fears God, should
not behave himself like other men; he should demean himself nobly, bravely,
gallantly, worthy of God, and as becomes a Saint, a Citizen of heaven, and a
Burgess of the new Jerusalem; not clownishly, basely, or cowardly. It Is some
singular thing that God looks for from his people, and that which is above
vulgar and common achievement. And therefore, to wind up all in a word, you
that fear God, and think upon his Name, look to your selves, that you lose not
those things which you have wrought, but that you receive a full reward. The
ends of the world (you see) are come upon us; we are cast upon the last and
worst times of all, even those perilous times, which the Apostle long since
prophesied of; wherein iniquity abounds, and the love of many is waxen cold.
How many amongst us are fallen from the love of the Gospel? How is Religion
turned with many into mere formality, and matter of discourse; our ancient heat
and forwardness, to a general coldness in profession, lukewarmness in Religion,
denying the power of it in our lives and conversations!

Well, I shall say but little more unto you then this: That which you have
already, hold fast until Christ comes; and seeing you know these things
beforehand, take heed lest you also be plucked away with the error of the
wicked, and fall from your own stedfastness. Beware of turbulencie of spirit,
of despising dignities and dominion; of resisting lawful Authority: live
peaceably in the State, and in your several places: but take heed that you
prove not men and women of polluted lips, by living among a people of polluted
lips: learn not to swear, with Joseph, by conversing with Swearers; or to
curse, with Peter, by being a while among the ruffianly companions. The worse,
the more corrupt or erroneous, yea, the less comfortable that any times are,
the better should we be, and the oftener in Gods presence; the more religiously
should we contend for that faith which was once delivered unto the Saints; even
then, with those fearers of God here in my Text, should we speak often one to
another. And thus much of this Point, taken from the copulative or connexive
particle, Then, in the front of the Text. Then they that feared the Lord spoke
often one to another, etc.

And thus far of the duty here performed, in reference to the first
circumstance of it, the circumstance of Time, included in the connexive
particle Then.

I shall now handle it in relation to its second circumstance, the circumstance
of Persons, who they were, or what they were, that spoke thus often one to
another in those corrupted and depraved times: and they are described by a
double property, or periphrasis: 1. They were such as feared the Lord. 2. They
were such as thought upon his Name.


This day I shall speak only of the first of them, the fearers of the Lord:
Then they that feared the Lord, etc. The fearers of the Lord, or, which is all
one, Then they that feared the Lord, spoke, etc.

Now whereas the Spirit of God by our Prophet makes this the mark, note, or
distinguishing character between the righteous and the wicked, between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not; I observe this Doctrine for our
instruction, namely,

That every true and faithful servant of God is a fearer of God. Every such a
one has his heart seasoned and possessed with the fear of God.

And here I shall 1. Open the Point. 2. Confirm it. And Last of all, apply it.


For the better understanding of the Doctrine, I must distinguish of fear.
There is a threefold fear spoken of in Scripture: 1. Natural. 2. Carnal. 3.
Holy and spiritual.


I shall show you the nature of each of these, and then tell you which of them
is to be understood in the Doctrine.

Natural fear is caused by the apprehension of some evil imminent or at hand:
it is such an affection as whereby men are stricken, by reason of some dangerous
and hurtful evil, either real, or only imagined: that is the definition of
natural fear. In it self it is neither good nor evil; it was in the man Christ,
Heb. 5.7. Christ's fear was only a natural passion, which he assumed and took
upon him, when he took upon him our nature. Now there are four special effects
which this fear works upon the body.

The first, is the quaking of the members of the body.

The second, is the shaking of the bones.

The third, is the standing up of the hair.

The fourth, is the paleness or wanness of the countenance.

The three first of these appeared upon Eliphaz, at the appearance of his
vision, Job 4.14, 15. He trembled, his bones shook, and the hair of his flesh
stood up. This natural fear we cannot justly blame, because every thing by the
instinct of Nature endeavors the preservation of it self, and fears the
contrary: provided it do not degenerate into the second, which is carnal fear.

Carnal fear now is that which is carried after the creature more then after
the Creator. We read of it, Isai. 51.12, 13. Or else it is the dread of the
Creator as a Judge, the apprehension of his severe wrath and punishment; and
not from a true hatred of sin: and this we may call, A servile or slavish fear.
Thus Felix feared, Acts 24.25. he feared that judgment to come, which Paul
reasoned of. This fear arises partly from a defect of faith in the power and
providence of God; and partly, from want of holy and spiritual fear, which I am
to speak of in the third place.

Spiritual fear is a holy affection, awing the whole man to obey the whole will
of God: it makes us loath to displease God by sin, by reason of his great
goodness and mercy, and for the great love which we bear unto righteousness. Of
this we read, Psalm. 130.4. where it is said, But there is forgiveness with thee,
that thou may be feared. And again, Hos. 3.5. -- and shall fear the Lord and
his goodness in the later days. This holy and filial fear is called spiritual,
in three respects, amongst other.

1. In regard of its object, which is God, who is a spirit, and the Father of
spirits. And hence it is that God is sometimes expressly called fear, Genesis 31.53.
later part of the verse: And Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac: i.e.
by that God whom his father Isaac feared: And Psalm. 76.11. Vow and pay unto the
Lord your God; let all that be round about him bring presents unto him that
ought to be feared. In the Original, it runs thus: Bring presents unto fear.

Then 2. This holy fear is called spiritual, from the principal efficient
author of it, which is the holy Spirit of God, who is sometimes called a spirit
of fear, Isa. 11.2.

And then 3. Spiritual, in respect of those spiritual effects which it
produces or works in the heart of man. I shall name three of them very
briefly.

First of all, it does spiritually enlarge the heart toward God. Fear, under a
natural consideration, shuts and straitens the heart, and makes a man less then
he was in all his abilities; but spiritual fear, or fear spiritualized, makes a
man more then he was, and better then he was; it does exceedingly enlarge the
heart toward God: and therefore you shall find fear and enlargement put
together, Isai. 60.5. where the Prophet speaking of the holy fear which should
follow that glory of the Church, in the abundant access of the Gentiles to the
Gospel, he says, Then thoushalt see, and flow together, and thine heart shall
sear, and be enlarged, because the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto
thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee.

Secondly, this spiritual fear is a bridle to restrain us from sin. An example
of it you have in Joseph, Genesis 39.9.

And then thirdly, as it is a bridle to restrain us from sin; so it is a bond to
hold us to duty: it will constrain us unto well-doing: Jer. 32.40. I will put
my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me: q. d. The more you
fear me, the closer will you keep to me. None live so near God, none obey God
so much, as they who fear him in this manner.

And thus have I given you the sorts and kinds of fear. Now the question will
be, Which of these three fears we are to understand in the Doctrine: when we
say, That every true and faithful servant of God is a fearer of God; why
(Beloved) we are to understand, the later has his heart seasoned and possessed
with the holy, spiritual, filial and reverential fear of God.

And thus much for the Explication of the Point. I come in the next place to
the Confirmation of it.

This Point shall be made good unto you three ways.

1. In that the Scripture does decipher or characterize the true servants of
God under the notion of the fearers of God; and that not only here in my text,
( Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, etc.) but
elsewhere. Take two or three texts more. Prove. 4.2. He that walks in his
uprightness, fears the Lord: but he that is perverse in his ways, despises
him: i.e. He that is sincere and upright in the service of God, he that serves
him truly, and with a perfect heart, is such a one as fears the Lord; the
fear of the Lord is upon him, nay, he is in the fear of the Lord all the day
long. So again, Mal. 4.2. But unto you that fear my Name, shall the Sun of
righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth, and grow
up as calves of the stall. You that fear my Name, is opposed to the proud and
wicked in the first verse of the chapter: For behold, the day comes that shall
burn as an oven, and the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be
stubble: and the day that comes shall burn them up, that it shall leave them
neither root nor branch. Unto you, i. e. who are my servants. And, Acts 13.16.
Then Paul stood up, and beckening with his hand, said, Men of Israel, and ye
that fear God, give audience. Many other Scriptures might be alleged unto the
same purpose, where to fear God, is set down as a circumlocution or periphrasis
of them that truly serve God. When the holy Ghost would express a true servant
of God, he expresses him in this variation; He is one that fears God.

But then secondly, That every true and faithful servant of God, is a fearer of
God, may be proved thus; in that the service of God, and the fear of God, are
in Scripture conjoined, as two inseparable or individual companions: the Spirit
of God does often make them go hand in hand together. Josh. 24.14. Now
therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity, and in truth, and put away
the gods which your fathers served on the other side of the flood, and in
Egypt: serve ye the Lord. Mark it well: fear the Lord, and serve him:
intimating, that where there is not the fear of God, there is, there can be, no
true service performed unto God. Read Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord with fear,
and rejoice with trembling. Fear and service are here coupled together. A
fearless heart, is always a graceless heart. Fear is that affection with which
we must worship and serve God: Heb. 12.28 Let us have grace, whereby we may
serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear. Fear, you must know, is a
comprehensive word; it is more then a particular grace; it contains Faith and
Love too: though perfect love casts out tormenting fear, 1 John 4.18. yet
perfect love casts in obeying fear. When Abraham had offered up his son Isaac,
that was a work of mighty faith: but yet when God commends him for it, he does
not say, Now I know thou have a great faith; but, Now I know thou fear God,
Genesis 22.12. Fear is all duty; it is every grace: it carries every particular
duty and grace in the womb of it. Eccles. 12.13. Let us hear the conclusion of
the whole matter; fear God, and keep his commandments, for this is the whole
duty of man; or, a^ is in the Hebrew, This is the whole man: this is that which
makes a perfect and a complear Christian, a Christian indeed.

But then thirdly and lastly, as the true fear and service of God are in
Scripture sometime conjoined, so are they likewise confounded, and taken
promiscuously the one for the other, as reciprocal and convertible terms;
fearing of God, is worshipping or serving of God. You may see this clearly by
two texts of Scripture, conferred or compared together. Matthew. 4.10. says
Christ there to the devil, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve. Compare this now with Deuteronomy. 6.13. and there you shall have it
thus expressed: Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall swear
by his Name. That which in the one place is worship, in the other is fear. So
again, Matthew. 15.9. says Christ there, In vain do they worship me, teaching
for doctrines, the commandments of men. Now the Prophet Isaiah, from whence
that Scripture is taken, expresses it thus, Isa. 29.13. at. part: Their fear
toward me is taught by the precept of men. They worship me according to the
precepts of men, says Christ; Their fear is taught by the precepts of men,
says the Prophet. So that fear and worship, or fear and service, are
identical, one and the same thing. And thus have you here the Point confirmed
by Scripture, That every true and faithful servant of God, is a fearer of God.
I shall now answer an Objection, and so proceed unto Application.

The Objection is this, briefly:

How do you say, That the true and faithful servants of God, are fearers of
God; or that the service of God and the fear of God are coupled together; yea,
that they are one and the same thing? whenas in Scripture we are required to
serve God without fear, as namely, Luke 1.74. by this text it appears, that the
service of God and the fear of God do not commingle, much less are one and the
same thing. If our service must be done without fear, how then do fear and
service go together? This is the Objection.

Beloved, by way of answer, we must learn to distinguish of Fear: Qui been
distinguit, we say, been docet: he that distinguishes well, teaches well.
There is a hellish fear, and there is a holy fear; a slavish fear, and a
son-like fear. The hellish or slavish fear, is such as slaves have of those, or
toward those to whom they are in bondage: it is a respect they carry to those
in whose power, and under whose command they are: they do indeed that which is
enjoined them; but they neither love their commanders, nor take any
complacencie or delight in that which is commanded them: what they do, they do
by coaction and enforcement, and in fear of the whip. Such is the fear of God
in reprobates and in wicked men: they are stricken with a kind of awe of Gods
great and terrible majesty; they do even tremble at his judgments: they do,
it may be, what is required, but their obedience proceeds not out of any love
to God, or out of any true affection to the service. Thus Cain, Esau, Pharaoh,
Ahab, Judas, and others, feared: they had some apprehensions of the terror of
the Lord, and that wrung something from them, in which otherwise of themselves
they took no manner of delight: Cain cast down his countenance, Esau wept,
Pharaoh let the children of Israel go, Ahab humbled himself, Judas repented, as
I could show you from several Scriptures.

But then secondly, there is a holy, filial, and childlike fear; and it is a
fear to offend, arising out of the sense and feeling of the love of God; as,
when the experience I have had in mine own soul, of Gods merciful and gracious
dealing with me, makes me to entertain a fear lest I should abuse his love, and
turn his grace into wantonness, and do ought that might displease his Majesty;
as I showed you before, in the opening of the Doctrine. And this kind of fear
may be, where is the greatest and firmest, yea, the most respective love; as
betwixt the father and the son, the husband and the wife.

This distinction of Fear being thus premised, it will be easy to untie the
knot, or to solve the Querie. When we are required to serve God without fear,
we are to understand the foresaid hellish, servile, or slavish fear. When
Zacharies meaning, in that Luke 1. is this: whereas the face of God is
naturally a terror to us, even as the face of a Judge is to a malefactor: and
whereas our services are so full of defects and blemishes, as that we can have
no courage to present them unto God, nor hope that he will accept them. This is
the end of our Redemption, that being certainly persuaded of the favor of God
in Christ, and of remission of sins by him, this servile and slavish fear must
be laid aside, and we may come boldly unto the throne of grace, and comfortably
assure our selves that God for Christ's sake will accept even our imperfect and
scant measure of obedience. This servile fear now, and the true service of God,
cannot stand together; yea, they are opposite and contrary one to another. But
now when I say in the Doctrine, That the true and faithful servants of God are
fearers of God; and that the fear and service of God are joined together: I
intend, as I told you before, a holy, filial, child-like, and reverential fear;
and with such a fear every true servant of God fears God. The fear and the
service of God are put together, and must ever go together; nay, without it we
can never serve God truly, and as we ought to do.

And thus having answered the Objection, I should in the next place proceed
unto Application.

The Uses of the Point shall be three. 1. For Information. 2. Of Examination.
3. Of Exhortation.


But the ordinary time being spent, I shall adjourn the prosecution of them
unto the afternoon. Let this suffice for the present.

The first Use shall be for Information.

Is it so, That the true and faithful servants of God are fearers of God? Why
then it will in the first place follow, by way of Consectary, That all such as
are void of the holy, spiritual, and reverential fear of God, are no better
then graceless and irreligious persons. And hence it is, that in Scripture you
find this often made the Note or Character of a child of Belial, That there
is no fear of God before his eyes. Abraham looks upon Gerar, as a place or
people that was destitute of all goodness, as a place wherein he could not be
safe, upon this account, because the fear of God was not amongst them, Genesis
20.11. where he says, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God is not in this
place: and they will slay me for my wifes sake. Thus David describes the whole
man, Psalm. 36.1. There is no fear of God before his eyes. They have no
impediment in the way of their lust, who have once cast off the fear of God. As
they are unready to do or say any thing that is good; so are they ready to do
or say any thing that is evil. As they can easily restrain themselves from
duty, so have they no restraint upon them from iniquity. This Abraham knew, and
so he could not think himself secure there. The profession (I confess) of some
wicked men, may say that they fear God: but their transgressions, or trade of
sin, says that there is no such matter. We may interpret this text of the
wicked man's saying thus, three ways. Some say it with their mouths, and are
not ashamed to utter their defiance against the fear of God. 2. All wicked men,
yea, the most modest of them, say it in their hearts; they are inwardly enemies
to the fear of God. And very many (in the third place) say it in their lives.
Now all these, says David, are wicked men: if once the fear of God be cast
off, all wickedness is let in: at the same door at which the fear of the Lord
goes out, any sin or abomination may enter. Nay, you shall find yet further,
that after a large enumeration of other abominations found in men's hearts and
lives, the Spirit of God names the want of this holy fear of God, as the mother
and cursed root of them all. You may see this in Mal. 3.5. What are not men,
yea what wo^nt they be, when once they are destitute of the fear of God?
Sorcerers, Adulterers, Swearers, Oppressors, and what not? The judge spoken of,
Luke 18.2. is therefore termed unjust, because he feared not God: There was in
a city a judge, which feared not God: Wanting the fear of God, what should keep
him from injustice? So again, Romans 3.11, 12, 13, and the following verses:
There is none that understands, there is none that seeks after God: they
are all gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable; there is
none that does good, no not one. Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their
tongues they have used deceit, etc. Now mark the conclusion in the 18 verse:
There is no fear of God before their eyes. This brings up the rere, as it were;
as to entertain the fear of God, is the beginning of wisdom, Prove. 1.7. The
word here used for beginning, signifies not only the beginning, but the top,
the chief, the head and highest perfection of a thing: now as the fear of God
is both first and last, the beginning and end of holiness; so to cast off the
fear of God, is the beginning and ending of all wickedness, the upshot of all
wickedness: a man that has cast off the fear of God, is desperately wicked.

But you will say, Are there any people so barbarous, is there any person so
brutish, that fears not God?

Beloved, I confess there is nothing more natural, then to stand in awe of a
Deity. Hence it is, that (...), God, in the Greek tongue, has his name from
(...), fear, as some derive it: and sometime the Scripture uses the word fear,
or terror, for God, as you heard in the morning: and the reason is, because of
the fear that is confessedly due unto him. But that all fear not the true God,
or that they do not fear him with a holy, spiritual, and filial fear, and so
consequently are none of his, is more then evident. I shall clear these things
unto you distinctly.

1. All men fear not the true God, but something else, which they substitute
and set up in the room, place, and stead of God. Some fear idols, and devils, 1
Cor. 10.20. some, the Queen of heaven, Jer. 44.17. Some fear disgrace; so Saul,
1 Samuel 15.30. some, danger, and displeasure of great ones; as Pilate, who
feared, if he released Christ according to his conscience, Caesar would pull his
Purple over the ears, and kick him off the bench. Some fear the loss of goods;
as the rich young man, who went away sorrowful, when he was required to sell
all that he had. Some fear the loss of their liberty; as those who forsook Paul
the prisoner, and were ashamed of his chain, 2 Timothy 4.16. where Paul says, At
my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me. And then, some
again fear the loss of life, shrinking in the shoulder when called to bear the
cross of Christ. Thus, I say, men fear any thing besides what they should fear,
I mean God, the proper object of this, and of our other affections. Well then,
it is clear, you see, that all men fear not the true God, that God who is alone
to be feared.

And the second is as evident. Those that profess to fear the true God, how few
of them are there to be found, who fear him in truth, who fear him with this
noly, filial, and spiritual fear, which is the fear I now speak of? If so, what
means the bleating of the sheep, and the lowing of the oxen which we hear? what
mean the Oaths, Drunkenness, the Sabbath-breaking, the Uncleanness, the Pride,
that we see and hear to be amongst us? Beloved, if the true fear of God were
amongst us all, do you think that these vices could rule and reign amongst us
as they do? Doubtless they could not: these sins are inconsistent and
incompatible with a true and holy fear. Alas, how little of this reverential
fear of God is there in the hearts of most men? The Psalmist, in the
forementioned 36 Psalm, in the beginning of it, makes this good, both in
respect of evil to be avoided, and of good to be performed: My mind gives me,
says he, and I am verily persuaded, having taken some observation of the
wicked man's way, that there is no fear of God in his heart: The transgression
of the wicked says within my heart, that there is no fear of God before his
eyes. But what is the ground of this persuasion? may it not be a rash and
uncharitable censure that David passes upon him? No, says he, I will prove
what I say, both from his thoughts, words and actions.

1. From his Thoughts. He makes no scruple or conscience at all of evil
thoughts: he thinks that thoughts are free, and therefore suffers them to rove
and wander any way: He devises mischief upon his bed* he forms, frames, and
contriveth it inwardly in his heart.

2. I prove it from his words: says David, They are stout against God, as the
words of those wicked ones before my text were: Your words have been stout
against me, says the Lord.

And then 3. From his deeds, in the later part of the fourth verse: He sets
himself in a way that is not good: he abhors not evil. Leave some sin
perhaps he may, out of some politic ends and respects: but loath and abhor it,
that he does not.

This now is the disposition of all wicked men in reference to that which is
evil: their very thoughts, words and actions are grossly and abominably wicked;
and this sufficiently shows that they have no fear of God before their eyes.
And as this is true in reference to Evil, so likewise in respect of that which
is Good. I shall show you this in a word, and so conclude this first Use.

A wicked person, says the Prophet, has no fear of God before his eyes,
because he has left off to do good, verse. 3. later part of it. With these
miscreants before my text, he accounts it a course of no benefit or profit, to
be religious: he sees it not needful to seek to the Lord: he restrains
prayer, says Eliphaz, Job 15.4. What Eliphaz here speaks, is true of a wicked
man in thesi, a wicked man restrains or lessens prayer; but not true in
hypothesi, as referred to Job: this was true in the Doctrine, but not in the
Application. Now, Beloved, to cast off Prayer, is to cast off God: he that
lives without prayer in the world, lives without the fear of God in the world:
and hence you find the heathen that know not God, and the families that call
not upon his Name, joined together, or indeed rather the same, Jer. 10.25. Much
more might be said in this partilar: but what is already spoken, is enough to
make this manifest, namely, That all men do not fear God in a holy and
spiritual manner; and so by direct consequence, are no true servants of God,
but graceless and irreligious persons.

And this shall serve for the first Use, the Use of Information. I now proceed
unto the second.

And that shall be an Use of Examination.

Is it so, as you have heard in the Doctrine, That every true and faithful
servant of God, is a fearer of God? Let us then call our selves to an account,
and so learn to settle the soundness of our gracious estate, by securing this
unto our own souls, That we are men and women truly fearing God. Without this,
we can never ascertain our own hearts that we are the true and faithful
servants of God: unless we be fearers of God, we cannot say that we are the
servants of God.

But then you will say, How may I come to know whether or no, with those sweet
and gracious souls in the text, I am a man or a woman truly fearing God?

Now to the end that I may give you satisfaction in this Querie, I shall lay
down some Notes of Trial, whereby I desire all that hear me this evening to
prove their present estate and condition, whether they have this holy fear of
God implanted in their hearts yea or not.

The way that I shall prescribe for Trial, shall be taken from the
concomitants, or, if you will, from the effects, or that lovely train of
heavenly graces that guard and attend the true fear of God.

In the first place then, where there is the holy fear of God, there is purity
and holiness: Psalm. 19.9. says David there, The fear of the Lord is clean:
clean, nor only formally, and in it self; but effectively; i.e. it makes the
man clean, and keeps him clean: it stands as a Porter at the door of the soul.
If you should come to a Princes Court, and see a great crowd about the door,
you would say, The Porter is there, he stops and examines them: if at another
time you see all going in as fast as they please, you will say, The Porter is
out of the way. Thus where the true fear of the Lord is, all is kept within
compass: we examine what goes into our hearts, and what comes out: it is as it
were an armed man, or Sentinel, at the gate, which questions all, and stops
every one from entering, that is unfit: it stands as a watchman on the tower,
and looks every way, to see what is coming unto the soul. But more
particularly, this holy and reverential fear of God cleanses 1. The Head. 2.
The Heart. 3. The Life or Conversation.


A word or two of each of these. I shall not hold you longer then the ordinary
time.

1. It cleanses the Head, the Judgment, the Understanding, and intellectual
part of man; and therefore says the Psalmist, Psalm. 111.10. The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisd^m: of true, spiritual, and saving wisdom: it
will, according to the measure of it, dispel the mists and fogs of Error that
cloud the Understanding. And what is the reason of it? the Reason is, because
it is the property of this fear to make men humble: the true fear of God is an
humbling grace. Now an humble man can never be an Heretic. It Is true, he may
err in his judgment; but it is but showing him his Error, and he will quickly
yield, and subscribe to Truth: This heart-humbling Fear will not suffer him to be
contumacious or obstinate. Rev. 14.7. says the Angel there, that had the
everlasting Gospel to preach to them that dwell on the earth, Fear God, and
give glory to him. Give glory to him, i.e. as some expound the place, Give
glory to him, by abdicating and abjuring your heretical conceits, and
erroneous opinions. A man that has his heart possessed with the lively fear of
God, will not, cannot stubbornly persist in any Error: such a man will be
convinced and taken off, when other men are wedded unto their own opinions. The
fear of God has an excellent influence this way.

2. It cleanses the heart too: it preserves the soul in general, and keeps it
holy. O Beloved, this true and holy fear of God, is a golden bridle to the
soul, when it would run out unto any evil: it is like the banks to the sea,
which keeps in the raging waves of corruption, when they would overflow all.
Prove. 14.27. The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, to depart from the
snares of death: i.e. either from sin, which is spiritual death; or from
damnation, which is perpetual and eternal death: the fear of the Lord is a
fountain of life, to depart from both these snares of death. Where this fear is
not, there the heart is ready to join with every evil, and so to fall into the
jaws of every death. Satan, that mighty hunter, has laid snares for our poor
souls in all places. The way of this world is like the vale of Siddim, slimy
and slippery, full of Lime-pits and pitfals, snares and stumbling blocks, laid
on purpose to maim and to mischief our souls: But now he that truly fears God,
comes off without great hurt; he keeps his heart with all diligence; he
watches the very thoughts and motions of his heart: he will not suffer vain
thoughts to lodge there, but labors to wash it from all filthiness, that so he
may perfect holiness in the fear of God. This fear of God weeds hypocrisy out
of the heart; pride, arrogancy, and every secret way of iniquity. Job was a
man fearing God, and therefore he durst not once to think lustfully upon a
maid: this was that which made him to refrain contemplative wickedness: Job
31.1.

And then 3. As this holy fear of God cleanses the Head and the Heart, so it
cleanses the Hands too: it keeps the Life and Conversation pure. Prove. 3.7.
says Solomon there, Fear the Lord, and depart from evil. The fear of the Lord
is to depart from evil: that, Beloved, is the definition of the fear of God.
Eschewing of evil is not only put as an effect of the fear of God, as when
it is said of Job, Chap. 1.1. that man was perfect and upright, and one that
feared God, and eschewed evil; but it is put, I say, in the very definition it
self of the fear of God: it is the nature of this fear of God, to depart from
evil; not only from habitual and inward, but likewise from outward and
practical evil; from public, as well as from private and secret evil. See what
Jehoshaphat says in his charge unto his Judges, when they were going their
Circuit, 2 Chronicles. 19.7. Wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be upon you:
take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor
respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. q. d. This fear of God, if it be upon
you, if it be radicated and rooted in your hearts, will teach you to forbear
Bribery and iniquity with your hands. It was the fear of God, Beloved, that
reined in Joseph from condescending to the wicked motion of his wanton
Mistress; though he might have committed that folly, and the world have been
never the wiser.

I can proceed no further at present, in the trial of this holy fear of God.
Examine your selves by what has been said. If, with those godly ones here in
my Text, you are men and women truly fearing the Lord; then this fear of God
has had this cleansing influence upon you, and has cleansed your Heads,
Hearts, and Hands.

Secondly: As this holy fear of God cleanses the Head, Heart and Hand from
sin: so does it no less frame the heart to the doing of duty; and that, 1.
toward God; 2. toward men. For as you heard before, the fear of God is a very
extensive and comprehensive grace; it includes the whole duty of man: not only
his Negative duty, what he ought not to do; but his Positive duty too, what he
ought to do.

In the first place then, this holy fear of God frames the heart to the
performance of its duty toward God. And here I shall instance only in two
duties.

1. It persuades the heart to believe God and his Word. The Scripture notes
this expressly of the Patriarch Noah, Heb. 11.7. By faith Noah being warned of
God, of things not seen as yet, moved with fear prepared an ark, etc. Moved
with fear: what is that? i. e. with a reverent fear of that God that spoke unto
him: Noah's heart being touched with the true fear of God, believed God, even
in those things which were not as yet seen: he believed those forewarnings of
God concerning the judgment he purposed to bring upon the world; and
accordingly prepared an Ark, whereby he saved his household, and condemned the
wicked world. Thus the Israclites, possessed with this filial fear, believed God
and his servant Moses. You may see this clearly, Ezod. 14.31. And the people
feared the Lord, and believed the Lord, and his servant Moses. Pray observe it
well: the people feared the Lord, etc. As Faith may be and is the ground of
holy Fear: so holy Fear may sometimes draw forth acts of Faith; it will make a
man tremble as much at the Threats of his Word, as at the Strokes of his Hand.

And then 2. As it frames the heart to a believing of God and his Word: so
likewise to an obeying of God and his Word; the holy obedience of his revealed
will. Psalm. 103.17, 18. says David there, But the mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him; and his righteousness unto
childrens children: to such as keep his covenant, and to those that remember
his commandments to do them. He describes, you see, them that fear God, to be
such as keep his Covenant, and remember his Commandments to do them. A soul
truly fearing God, is afraid to disobey God: his heart, with David's, will
stand in awe of Gods Word. And hence it is, that in Scripture sometimes you
find the fearing of God, and keeping of his Commandments; sometimes, fearing
God, and working righteousness, joined together. The former you may see, Psalm.
119.63 I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy
precepts. Of them that fear thee, and keep thy precepts: a man cannot fear God,
but he must observe his precepts. So again, Eccles. 12.13. Let us hear the
conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this
is the whole duty of man. The connection of these two* shows us, that the fear
of God is a principle of obedience; they that fear him, will keep his
commandments: yea, they do so in an Evangelical way: though they cannot attain
unto, yet they wish well to exact and accurate obedience. The later you shall
find, Acts 10.35. But in every nation, he that fears him, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him. A man fearing God, will be active and
doing; he will be working righteousness, and that which is good.

And thus have you briefly heard, to what particular duties this Fear frames
the heart toward God. I am to show you, in the next place, how and in what
duties it draws the heart in reference to Man. The Fear of God has a double
bond in it: a bond of Obedience to God, and a bond of Love to Men.

Well then, in the first place, the true fear of God is ever joined with love
unto our brethren. The Apostle puts so much of Religion, or of the fear of God
(for they are both one) in the love to our brethren, as that in one place he
makes it all Religion, yea, the very definition of the fear of God. Jam. 1.27.
Pure religion, and undefiled before God, and the Father, is this, To visit the
fatherless in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world.
This is Religion, and pure Religion: i.e. This is a great branch and part of
Religion; it is a special fruit which springs from that goodly tree, The Fear of
God. Now to visit the fatherless, Beloved, is more then to look upon them, and
to ask them how they do: to visit them, is to help and succor them: it is like
that visit, in its proportion, which Christ made unto the distressed world,
Luke 1 68. where it is said, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel: for he has
visited and redeemed his people: or, he visited his people, to redeem them. And
then the fatherless to whose visit Religion and the fear of God leads us, are
not only poor children and orphans, whose parents are lately dead, and they
not able to shift for themselves; but the fatherless are all the afflicted who
want our help or patronage: every helpless and comfortless soul is an orphan
without parents, and as a widow without a husband: and to relieve such, is pure
Religion: herein stands much of the fear of God. Job 6.14. To him that is
afflicted, pity should be showed from his friend; but he forsakes the fear of
the Almighty. I find a variety of reading upon these words: but this one
reading, to my mind, gives the sense most fair and easy: To him that is
afflicted, etc. otherwise he forsakes the fear of the Almighty: whereas our
Translation says, But he forsakes; this says, Otherwise he forsakes the
fear of the Almighty. i.e. If a man do not show love and pity to his afflicted
brother, that man shows that he has forsaken the fear of the Almighty. As
love to God, so the fear of God is made exceeding visible in love to men. As he
that says he loves God, and hates his brother, is a liar, according to that,
1 John 4.20. so, he that says he fears God, and hates his brother, is a
liar also. What cares Nabal the churl, though David die at his door, as long as
he may sit warm within, eating the fat, and drinking the sweet? Nabal has
Logic to conclude for himself, 1 Samuel 25.11. Shall I then take my bread, and
my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men
whom I know not whence they be? But the fear of God would have taught the fool
more wit.

2. The true fear of God, as it will teach a man to love his brother; so it
will teach him not to vex, oppress, or brew beat his brother. An instance of
this you have in God-searing Joseph: see what he tells his bre^hren, Genesis
42.18. This do, and live: for I fea God: q. d. I intend you to hurt, although
you are fallen into my hands: I fear God, and that is your security: it stands
not with the fear of God, which has taken up my heart, to oppress or wrong
you: I fear God, and therefore dare not to do you any hurt: I fear the true
God, the proper object of fear; and therefore you need not to doubt of fair
dealing. To the same purpose, see what Nehemiah says to those merciless
Usurious Israelites, that had exacted upon their brethren, Neh. 5.9, 10. Also I
said, It is not good that ye do: ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God,
because of the reproach of the heathen our enemies? I likewise, and my
brethren, and my servants, might exact of them money, and corn: I pray let us
leave off this usury. q. d. Oppression and the fear of God will not stand
together: it is an argument that there is little or no fear of God in their
hearts, who do oppress others. Levit. 25.17. Ye shall not therefore oppress one
another; but thou shall fear thy God: for I am the Lord your God. Whereby is
fully intimated, that if they oppress^d, they did not fear God. And when Amalek
f^ll upon the Jews, and smote some of them passing through his Country, it is
said, He feared not God, Deuteronomy. 25.17, 18. This evil is an unnatural evil; and
so can never consist with the true fear of God.

And then 3. This fear of God will teach men to honor and obey lawful
Authority: and therefore you shall find them both joined together, 1 Pet.
2.17. later part of the verse: Fear God. Honor the king. q d. Where there is
not due honor and obedience yielded to lawful Authority, there is no true fear
of God. Nay, Beloved, I may add, that this fear of God will teach a man how to
carry and behave himself in every estate and condition whatsoever. Nay, it will
teach all estates and degrees whatsoever: it will teach the Poor how to carry
themselves in adversity, and the Rich how to carry themselves in prosperity:
the Poor it will teach to be contented with their estate and condition, as
knowing that of Solomon, Pr. 15.16. Better is little with the fear of the Lord,
then great treasure, and trouble therewith: it will teach him to know, that
contented godliness is great riches. It is not the great Cage that makes the
bird sing: it is not the great estate that always brings inward joy, or cordial
contentment. And then as it will teach the Poor contentment; so it will teach
them not to envy the Rich, seeing God in his providence has meted out unto
every one the portion of his allowance; and with this condition too, that where
much is given, much shall be required. Hence is that, Prove. 23.17. Let not
thine heart envy sinners, but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day
long. Solomon, you see, describes this fear of the Lord, as an antidote or
preservative against that evil disease.

And then in the last place, this fear of God will likewise teach the Rich how
to carry themselves in prosperity: it will teach them to behave themselves
humbly, according to that of the Wise man, Prove. 22.4. By humility, and the
fear of the Lord, are riches, and honor, and life. By humility, the fear of
the Lord; so the Original runs, without the Grammatical copulative and; to note
unto us, that there is such a near affinity between humility and the fear of
God, as if they were one and the very same thing: they seem to be predicated
one of the other, as if they were convertible terms. The Rich, if they fear
God, will not be proud, or disdain their brethren because poor. And then as
this grace will teach them to walk humbly, so will it teach them to walk
thankfully too. You may observe this, Jer. 5.24. Neither say they in their
heart, Let us now fear the Lord our God, that gives rain, both the former and
the later in his season: he reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of the
harvest. One would think that the Lord should rather have blamed them for not
saying, Let us praise the Lord our God, etc. but Beloved, the former includes
the later: he that truly fears God, will not fail to be thankful.

And thus you have heard several Notes whereby you may come to know whether or
no, with these godly ones here in my text, you are men and women truly fearing
God. I desire now, that when you come home, you would commune with your own
hearts; and compare your selves with, and apply your selves to these sundry
probational Notes. And this shall suffice to be spoken of the second Use, the
Use of Examination. I shall enter upon the third, and proceed as far in it as
the ordinary time will permit.

And that shall be a Use of Exhortation.

Is it so, That every true and faithful servant of God is a fearer of God?
Learn we then hence these two duties: First, to get the true fear of God; and
then secondly, to grow up in this grace more and more.

I begin with the first of these.

Let every one of us labor to have our hearts seasoned and possessed with this
grace, in the words of Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19.7 Wherefore now let the fear of
the Lord be upon you, take heed, and do it: for there is no iniquity with the
Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. Give we all
diligence for the attainment of this grace. Now for the better performance of
this duty, I shall first lay down some Motives for your encouragement;
secondly, prescribe some Means for your assistance.

The Motives shall be five or six; all which I shall run over with as much
convenient brevity as may be.

1. It Is but just, equal, and reasonable, that we should fear the Lord our God;
seeing he has so frequently commanded it, and so often in his Word called upon
us for it. Besides what texts have formerly in this discourse been alleged to
this purpose, let me at present, for your encouragement, commend unto you two
or three more. Psalm. 22.23. Psalm. 33.8. Psalm. 34.59. Luke 12.5. Observe well
what Christ says there: But I will forewarn you whom you shall fear: Fear him,
which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you,
Fear him. He commands this fear twice, you see, in one verse. Nay, as this fear
is enjoined, so does it of right appertain to God; it is his due, as he is the
proper, the sole and only object of it. Job 25.2. Dominion and fear are with
him: i.e. they are with the Lord; or, they are the Lord. Psalm. 76.11. Jer.
10.7. So that you see it is an act of justice to fear God. When we have done the
utmost that we can this way, we have done but our duty.

2. As this duty is just and reasonable in respect of God, so it is a grace
needful and necessary for us. This is that grace which enableth us unto all
Christian duties: it frames the heart, as you heard before, both to the
shunning of vice, as also to the embracing of virtue. It Is the beginning of
wisdom, and the instruction of wisdom: it is a fountain of life: without it, we
can neither begin or end any spiritual work: it is the beginning of all, and the
end of all: it is totus homo, all of man: without it, there can be no
compleatness in Christianity; and therefore says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.1. that
we must perfect holiness in the fear of God. The heathen Sages, as Seneca,
Socrates, and others, they were wise men in their generation, they had many
excellent and lovely gifts: but failing of this, coming short of the true fear
of God, all the other did them no good: they found out indeed many excellent
things, but they missed of this Pearl of great price. That wish of the Lord is
very observable, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh that there were such an heart in them, that
they would fear me, and keep my commandments always, that it might be well with
them, and with their children for ever. Intimating thus much, that if their
hearts were once seasoned with this holy fear, then they would be able to do
his will, and to observe his commandments. Without this fear of God, we shall
never be able to keep one of the commands of God. So that, you see, it is
needful to the Inchoation, Continuation, and Consummation of of grace: it is the
beginning, middle, and end of true spiritual wisdom.

3. As this holy fear of God is needful for us, so it is gainful to us, and
profitable for us too. It Is true, the profane miscreants above my text,
blasphemed to the contrary, verse. 14. Ye have said, It is vain to serve God;
and what profit is it, that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked
mournfully before the Lord of hosts? I, but the godly in my text were of
another mind. What the Apostle speaks of godliness, is as true of this holy
fear of God; for why? they are the same indistinct thing: now, says he, 1 Timothy
4.8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come. This we may verify and truly say of the
fear of God, It has the promise of this life, etc. 1. Of this life, Prove.
19.23. The fear of the Lord tends to life; and he that has it, shall abide
satisfied: he shall not be visited with evil. Security from evil in general, is
promised to them that fear God: they shall be delivered from the hurt of it,
though not always, I confess, from the smart of it. They shall be delivered
from the evil of sin; for why? as Solomon speaks, Prove. 8.13. the former part
of the verse: The fear of the Lord is to hate evil. They shall be delivered
from the evil of pain and sorrow too: to which purpose tends such texts as
this; Psalm. 91.5, 6, 7. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night: nor
for the arrow that flies by day: nor for the pestilence that walks in
darkness; nor for the destruction that wastes at noonday. A thousand shall
fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but it shall not come
night thee. So again, verse. 10, 11, 12, 13. Nay, they that fear the Lord shall
not only be delivered out of all evil; but they, I, and theirs too, shall be
made partakers of all good: Eccles. 8.12. says the Preacher there, Though a
sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged; yet surely I know
that it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear before him. God will
be good to his Israel, even to them that are of a pure heart. Prove. 22.4. By
humility, and the fear of the Lord, are riches, and honor, and life. The fear
of the Lord, you see, does not want its present reward of riches, honor, and
life. One would think this were enough to provoke any man to turn spiritual
purchaser. I, but the Scripture expresses this reward yet further, Psalm. 34.9,
10. Oh fear the Lord, ye his saints: for there is no want to them that fear
him. The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord,
shall not want any good thing. I, but what shall our poor children do when we
are gone? may some say well enough: Psalm. 37.25. says David there, I have been
young, and now am old: yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed
begging their bread. Such a thing may fall out; but it is rarely seen: David in
all his experience never observed it. Psalm. 112.1, 2. Blessed is the man that
fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his commandments: his seed shall
be mighty upon earth; the generation of the upright shall be blessed. Many
texts we have to this very purpose. And then as the fear of God has the
promise of temporal, so has it also the promise of spiritual and eternal good
things: The Lord himself will undertake to teach such a man, Psalm. 25.12. He
reveals his secrets to him, verse. 14. He will guide them with his counsel
here, and afterward receive them to glory, as it is, Psalm. 73.24. Surely Gods
salvation is nigh them that fear him, elsewhere in the Psalm. Read Mal. 2.5. My
covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave them to him, for the fear
wherewith he seared me, and was afraid before my Name: i. e. with Levi, as
appears in the former verse. Thus, Beloved, shall the man be blessed that
fears the Lord. So that look which way you will, upward or downward, you
shall find, that this holy fear of God is every way profitable.

4. This grace is exceeding acceptable and pleasing unto God: it is delightful
unto his soul; it is very contentful unto him. Psalm. 147.11. The Lord takes
pleasure in them that fear him; in them that hope in his mercy. Pray mark it,
the word ratsah in the Hebrew, is rendered vehementer realiqua delectari, to be
vehemently delighted in a thing. God is vehemently pleased or delighted in them
that fear him. Let a man's services and duties be outwardly never so specious or
costly, without this they are unacceptable to God. Isa. 66.2. To this man will
I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and tremble^h at my
word: q. d. To him that fears my Name, to him will I have a gracious aspect;
and as to him, so to his services too: but now in verse. 3. because his fear was
not in their hearts, therefore he accepts none of their works. And so again,
Isai. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices
to me, says the Lord? I am full of burnt offerings, etc. Why, what is the
matter? Why, my fear is not in your hearts; and hence it is that there is so
much cruelty in your hands; your hands are full of blood. Oh Beloved, this holy
fear of God is that which gives grace and virtue to all other duties and graces
whatsoever: to walk in the fear of God, is to walk before the Lord in all well
pleasing. I might enlarge very far upon every one of these particulars; but
then, having many other things to speak, I should hold you too long.

Well then, in the fifth place, this grace, as it is profitable to us, so it is
honorable unto us too: you may see this in the text; these fearers of the Lord
shall be mine, says the Lord, in the day that I make up my jewels: q. d. I
will treasure and cabinet them up among my chiefest jewels: I will honor them,
and preciously esteem and account of them, in die quo confecturus sum peculium,
in the day that I make up my peculiar treasure, my most precious substance; my
silver, and my gold, and my gems; so some read it. The people which avouch God
for their God, to fear him, to walk in his ways, and to keep his statutes; he
avoucheth them for his people, high above all nations, in praise, in name, and
in honor. You may see this, Deuteronomy. 26.18, 19. See yet further, what God tells
his Church, Isai. 43.4. So again, Prove. 31.30. To fear God, is the crown of a
woman; this is that which makes her beautiful indeed, all glorious within: I,
and it makes her honorable too; she shall be praised; she shall live and die
with honor. God has left this upon record, to the everlasting honor of
Abraham, Job and others of his servants, that they were men fearing God. How
did God even boast himself of Job, I, and that to the devils face! Job 2.3.
This was the character that God gave of him in the former Chapter: I, but now
he goes on, and superaddes this unto his honor, Still he holds fast his
integrity. As it is usual with Kings and great men of the world, for great
services done them, especially in wars and battles, to make additions to their
Titles of Honor, to give some new Motto's, or put some new Devices in the
Coat Armor of those who serve them: thus does God here deal with Job; and this
honor (Beloved) have all Gods Saints, all that fear his Name.

6. And then last of all, as this grace is honorable, so it is comfortable unto
us: and hence it is, that you find it joined with joy and comfort in the holy
Ghost, Acts 9.31. where it is said of the Primitive Christians, Then had the
churches rest thorowout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, and were edified;
and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, were
multiplied. This holy fear will free our hearts from all base and carnal fears.
Carnal fear vanishes out of the sight of holy fear, as lesser lights do before
the Sun. This holy fear fills the heart with strong confidence and consolation,
making the man in whom it is, to hold up his head in the greatest hurly-burly,
and to walk about the world as a conqueror, void of all fear, either what men
or devils can do unto him. Hence is that of holy David, Psalm. 3.6. and again,
Psalm. 27.1, 2, 3. There is no peace or comfort to the wicked; this is the
portion of them, and only of them, that fear the Lord. The ready way to live
comfortably, is to live in the fear of God: that man, and that woman, shall
have comfort; comfort in life, comfort in death, comfort in every estate and
condition whatsoever.

And thus, Beloved, have you heard several Motives why you should set your
selves in all good earnest, for the obtaining of this grace of holy fear. In
the next place, I shall show you what Means you are to improve and make use of
to the procuring of this grace; and that shall be only one in general, viz. a
serious Meditation. There are three or four particulars, which I must desire of
you (that are yet without the fear of God) to meditate upon.

1. Reflect upon your selves, and consider how miserable your condition is:
wanting this holy fear of God, I must tell you (and you must bear with me in
it) that you are void and destitute of grace; you have not one grace, not one
piece of a grace, or spark of grace in you. As where this fear of God is, there
is every grace: so, where this is wanting, there is no grace. You are, as was
said in the Use of Information, graceless and irreligious persons, having not
the fear of God before your eyes: your heads, hearts and hands must needs be
full fraught with sin: there can be nothing but wickedness in you, and
wickedness issuing from you: and believe it, unless God show you the more
mercy, and put his fear into your hearts before you die, you must expect, for
indeed, nothing else can be expected, but all the miseries, torments and
tortures; which are the just reward of all such graceless persons, and profane
wretches, as want this holy fear. From all which you are utterly unable to free
your selves. You will be able neither to abide it, no, nor yet to avoid it. And
this is your very condition, if there be any truth in this Book of God here in
my hand. I could out of this Book lay out your estate into several branches;
your present and future miserable estate. I profess unto you in the presence of
God, a man would not be in your case for a million of worlds, if there were so
many: and this you your selves would confess, if God should ever season your
hearts with his fear. But I will not at present trouble you with particulars. Do
but go a little part from your families when you come home, and set your hearts
upon the meditation of what has been spoken unto you in general, as to your
condition, being without the fear of God; and this very cogitation or
meditation upon your present case, may be a means (if God will but bless it to
any of you) to pull you out of it, and of your procurement of this grace.

But then secondly, as you are to reflect upon your selves, so likewise should
you meditate upon God: let your thoughts be busied about him; and consider how
he is, 1. Represented unto you in his Word: 2. How he stands described in his
works.

You will say, it may be, What is spoken of God in his Word, that may persuade
our hearts to fear his Name?

Friends, there are diverse things recorded of God in this Book, that should
prevail with you to fear before him.

As first of all, he is transcendent, supereminent, and surpassing in majesty
and glory. And hence it is, that the Psalmist infers a necessity of his fear,
Psalm. 76.4. says Asaph there, Thou art more glorious and excellent then the
mountains of prey: or, the mountains of triumph, (as it is in the Hebrew) i e
the kingdoms of this world, which tear, spoil, and prey upon one another, like
wild beasts: or more particularly, the flourishing Assyrians, with their
goodly Monarchy: Thou art more illustrious, glorious, and excellent, then all
these. What then? see verse 7. Thou, even thou, art to be feared. And again,
verse 11. Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God; let all that be round about him,
bring presents unto him that ought to be feared. Let you hearts then, in the
first place, stand in a holy awe of God, because of his great, glorious, and
terrible Majesty.

Secondly, consider God as armed with infinite power and might: the Word
bespeaks him able to reward you, if you do fear him; and able to punish you, if
you fear him not. Servants, you know, fear their masters, because they have
power over their flesh, over their bodies: I, but God has power not only over
your bodies, but over your souls too; and therefore you should fear him. You
have this inference to the fear of God implied, if not expressed, Mat. 10.28.
God is said to be able to consume your body and soul in hellfire; Oh therefore
fear him, upon this consideration.

Thirdly, consider God as Omnipresent and Omniscient, as one that beholds and
takes knowledge of all that we think, speak, or do. Prove. 5.21. For the ways of
man are before the eyes of the Lord; he pondereth all his goings. God is (...),
as one says, all eye: to him all things are naked and open, Heb. 4.13. Psalm.
139.8, 9, 10. and following verses, Jer. 12.27. and 29 23. It was this very
meditation, that kept Joseph in a holy fear of sinning against God, Genesis 39.9.

And then lastly, consider God too as infinitely just, and singularly careful
to punish sin: and this may be a means to beget this holy fear of God in your
hearts: who would not fear before this just and impartial God! See to this
purpose, that sweet song of the triumphant Saints, Rev. 15.3, 4.

Nay, yet a little further: if you would have your hearts seasoned with the
holy fear of God, consider him as he is presented to you in his works: his
hanging the heavy and massy body of the earth upon nothing: Job 26.7 his
setting bounds to the proud waves of the sea. Hithereto shall you come, and no
further. Upon this account would the Psalmist have us to fear God. You may
read it, Psalm. 33.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

2. Turn your thoughts upon those particular judgments God has executed upon
others for our warning and caution. Psalm. 119.120. says the Prophet there, My
flesh trembles for fear of thee: I am afraid of thy judgments. When one
child is whipped in a School, the rest will tremble. Thus should it be with you,
when you see others punished* This is the second particular meditation, which
may serve as a means to bring you unto this holy fear, which I have so much
spoken of. I come to the third and last; and with this I shall conclude this
present discourse.

3. All you that are yet void of this holy fear of God, meditate, in the third
place, upon the general judgment, and the unconceivable terror of that last
and dreadful day, when (as the Apostle speaks) the heavens shall pass away with
a great noise, and the element shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also,
with the works that are therein, shall be burnt up. Knowing the terror of the
Lord in that day, I do earnestly persuade you to fear the Lord in this. Felix
(though a Pagan) trembled, when Paul discoursed of this great day, Acts 24.23.
nay, the devils themselves shake and tremble, when they think of it; and will not
you? How is it that you can think of that day, wherein the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance
on them who know not God, and who do not fear before him? The Preacher upon
this very ground, namely, because then God will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, persuades us to fear God: it is Eccless. 12 13, 14.

And thus have I showed you what means you should improve for your obtainment
of this holy fear. And truly, if God had revealed unto me any more excellent
way, then you have already heard; I do so much desire your everlasting good, as
that I should not conceal it from you. Let this therefore suffice for the first
branch of the Exhortation, which has been directed to those who are yet
without a holy fear of God in their hearts. I should proceed unto the second,
and reflect then upon you, whose hearts are already seasoned with this holy
fear; you I should exhort to grow up more and more in this grace; and lay
before you likewise (to this end) some motives, and some means. But I shall put
these things over unto the next opportunity.

I proceed unto the second Duty; and that shall be pressed and inculcated upon
you whose hearts are already seasoned with this holy fear of God. And you I do
earnestly exhort to abound and to grow up in this grace more and more. It is
not enough for you to get this fear planted into you; but you must increase
therein with the increase of God: you must go on, perfecting holiness in the
fear of God. And here, by way of Motive and Inducement, I shall refer four or
five particulars unto your most serious consideration. Pray attend them
diligently.

The first shall be taken from the nature of this holy fear. The true fear of
God is of a growing, of an increasing nature. He that grows not, and goes not
forward in this grace, had never yet this grace in truth Pro. 4.18. The path of
the just is as the shining light that shines more and more unto the perfect
day. A man truly fearing God, sets forth betimes in the morning, and travels to
meet the day: he proceeds from virtue to virtue, from knowledge to knowledge,
from grace to grace, until he become a perfect man in Christ Jesus. Being once
possessed with this grace, he ^^ill waxes brighter and brighter, until at length
he come to shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as the stars in heaven
for ever and ever. It may be, as the fairest sun may sometimes be overcast and
darkened with clouds, so the piety and holiness of a man truly fearing God, may
upon occasion be over-clouded, through violence of outward temptation, and
strength of inward corruption: but yet, through mercy, these mists are
dispelled, and he shines afterward far more brightly, and runs a more swift and
settled course in the practice of sanctification. Job 17.9. The righteous also
shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and
stronger. The words are a circumlocution describing the same person who was
before called fearing God, upright, innocent, holy: now says Job, he shall
hold on his way, he continues his course, both in the holy motions of his
Spirit toward God, and in the holy actings of his life toward man. And as a
man fearing God is in a good estate, so shall he go on in a good way. The
goodness indeed of hypocrites is as the morning cloud, and goes away as the
early dew, Hos. 6.4. the wind scatters the morning cloud, and the rising sun
exhales the early dews; thus the goodness of the hypocrite is gone: but the
goodness of the righteous, and of the man truly fearing God, like the goodness
of God, of whom it is, endures in its proportion continually: nay, such a man
holds on not only in fair way, and good weather; but in stormy weather, and
ragged ways, when his way lies among sharp stones, and ragged rocks, through
briers and thorns: yea, I may say, when his way lies among bears and lions, he
will on: The righteous shall hold on his way: and then it follows, And he that
has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger. The words are a
circumlocution, ut prius: he shall, says Job, be stronger and stronger: in the
Hebrew it is, he shall add strength; he shall proceed from one degree or step
unto another. What strength? why spiritual strength, answerable to that, Psalm.
84.7. They go from strength to strength: or, from company to company: i.e. from
one good company to another, still gathering goodness; and they go as the best
go, from Duty to Duty, from Ordinance to Ordinance, from Praying to Hearing, to
gather grace and strength: every grace has strength; and the more grace, the
more strength: till we come to that which is more strictly called strength of
grace. Nay, as it was said of the Israelites, that the more the Egyptians
afflicted them, the more they multiplied and grew, Exodus 4.12. they multiplied
in number, they grew in strength and stature; their oppression was their
addition in temporals: it is even so, Beloved, with all true Israelites in
spirituals, the more they are afflicted and troubled, the more they increase.

And then as this is the nature and quality of men and women truly fearing God;
so it is the nature of the true fear of God; where ever this is put into the
heart, it will grow: and therefore in Scripture you shall find it compared to
things of a growing and increasing nature: as, 1. to waters issuing out from
the sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Now this, says Mr. Deodate in his
Annotations, represents the progress and increases of grace and true fear of
God in believers of small beginnings. 2. It is compared to a grain of
Mustard Seed, which proves a great tree, Mat. 31.31, 32. They likewise resemble
it to the Stone that smote the Image, which became a great mountain, and filled
the whole earth, Dan. 2.34, 35. So then, this is the first Incentive to the
Duty in hand: grow up in this grace of the fear of God, because if true, it is
growing. By this you may come to know whether you fear God with a true and
lively fear: the true fear of God lives, and therefore it must needs grow.

But then in the second place, this is that which God requires and commands,
yea, that which he expects and looks for from our hands; namely, that we
should grow up more and more in this grace. Hitherto I may refer all those
Scriptures wherein we are exhorted to grow in grace in general, or in any
particular or individual grace whatsoever; because, as I have often told you in
the former part of this Discourse, the fear of God is an extensive or
comprehensive word, including all and every grace. For texts referring to our
growth in grace, or in the fear of God in general, read 1 Cor. 14.12. Even so
ye, forasmuch as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that ye may excel to
the edifying of the Church. (...), so it is in the Greek. It Is a metaphor taken
from rivers of water, which the further they run, the broader they are. Seek
that ye may excel in spiritual gifts and graces: i. e. that ye may abound in
them. So 1602. 15.58. -- Always abounding in the work of the Lord: In the work
of the Lord, i. e. in all actions belonging to your heavenly vocation, and to
the true service of God. See how the Apostle prays for the Ephesians, Ephesians.
3.18, 19. that they may be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ
which passes knowledge, that they might be filled with all the fullness of God.
Many Wits run riot in Geometrical notions about these Moral dimensions: and
whereas Naturalists give us but three dimensions of a Body; Longitude,
Latitude, and Profundity; the love and wisdom of God have Altitude added, which
is a fourth. All these dimensions serve only to show the immensity both of the
love and wisdom of God. Take this only in passage; and so we might that
expression too, To know the love of God which passes knowledge: the meaning
is, to know so much of it as is knowable: the love of God is past the knowledge
not only of Nature, but of Grace; because it is infinite. But this is not the
thing that I urge this text for: the passage which is to my purpose, and which
I would insist on a little, is that in verse 19. the later part of it; That ye
might be filled with the fullness of God. Divines distinguish of a twofold
fullness. There is (say they) an universal fullness; and there is a modified or
qualified fullness. For a creature to be universally so full as God is, is
impossible: as he is infinite, so his fullness is infinite; and a finite
creature is not capable or receptive of any such fullness. But now take this in
a qualified or modified sense, so we may; and it is ordinary to be filled with
the fullness of God; i. e. with all fullness accomplishable or attainable by us:
thus we ought to be filled with the fullness of God. We are not only enjoined
to get some grace, or some fear of God; but it is our bounden duty to aspire to,
and endeavor after the perfection of it, and after augmentation and growth in
it. And to this end too, is that, 2 Pet. 3.18. Grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (...).

This shall suffice to be spoken of those texts which conduce to the growth in
grace, or in the fear of God in general. I shall likewise briefly touch some
texts which require an abounding in the several branches of this holy fear: as,

1. We are commanded to abound in saving knowledge, in true spiritual wisdom,
Col. 1.10.

2. We should grow in faith: that which is lacking to our faith, must be
supplied and made up, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. 2 Thessalonians. 1.15. We should labor to grow
both in the assurance of faith, and in the exercise of it: in the full
assurance of it; using all diligence that we might get and keep the full
assurance of faith and hope unto the end; laboring to be established, rooted,
and soundly grounded in our particular assurance of Gods favor in Jesus
Christ, and of our own eternal salvation: Col. 2.6, 7. Heb. 10.22. And then for
the exercise and improvement of faith; we should learn every day to live by
faith: let faith be upon the wing in all the occasions and occurrences of our
life; holding fast our confidence, and striving to be examples one to another
in our faith in God; according to that, 1 Timothy 4.12.

3. We must abound in love: Phil. 1.10. bearing with, and forbearing one
another; seeking to enlarge our acquaintance with such as fear God; and to do
them good.

4. We must grow in mercy, and the fruits of mercy: 2 Cor. 8.7. Therefore (as
ye abound in every thing, in says, in utterance, in knowledge, and in all
diligence, and in your love to us) see that ye abound in this grace also: he
means, tender heartedness, or bowels of compassion.

5. We should grow in patience, meekness, and lowliness of mind: Jam. 1.4.

I might instance contentation, heavenly mindedness, contempt of the world, and
several other parts of this fear of God: but by these few links, you may guess
at the whole chain, or series of this grace. So then, the strength of this
second Motive lies thus: God requires and expects that we should grow up more
and more in the fear of his Name; he calls for it at our hands.

In the third place, this is the end of our union with, and implantation into
Jesus Christ, namely, that we should in all things grow up into him who is the
head: To which purpose, read Ephesians. 4.15, 16. But speaking the truth in love,
may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ: from whom
the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint
supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part,
makes increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love. The
importance of which words is this, namely, that we are joined and united unto
the Lord Jesus Christ, that so of his fullness we might all receive grace for
grace: that look as an infant grows not in one, but in every member; so we
should grow every way, in every member, and in every particular grace
appertaining unto the new creature. We must not walk by halfs, or obey God with
reservation; but grow up unto full holiness. As from the natural head, sense
and motion flows into the body; so there is internal influence of grace from
Christ the Head, into the whole mystical body: every true believer receives a
vital and quickening power or virtue from Christ; even as a graff set into a
stock, partaketh with it in the sap and life of it. Unless we walk in Christ,
we can never assure our selves that we have received Christ. If we shall sit
down and rest in a mediocrity and scanty measure of grace, and of the fear of
God; except we are still on the growing hand, laboring to arrive to the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, we cannot say that we are yet
put into Christ. A soul (as one notes very well) that has union with Christ,
will not be like Hezekiahs sun, which went backward; or like Joshua's sun, that
stood still: but like David's sun, that great and glorious giant of the
heavens, that like a bridegroom comes out of his chamber, and as a champion
that rejoices to run a race. If he be joined to Christ, he will join grace to
grace, according to that of the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. And thus
briefly of the third Motive.

In the fourth place, as God has given us his Son, to the end we should grow
up in his fear; so has be to the same end given us the Spirit of his Son: he
has sent forth his Spirit into our hearts, not only for the conveying of
grace to us, but for the strengthening and increasing of grace in us. Observe
how the Apostle prays for the Ephesians, Chap. 3.16. That he would grant you,
according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his
Spirit in the inner man. This is the very office of the Spirit; he is sent of
God to this purpose; not only to give us a being in grace, but to strengthen
us in grace: he does not only make us new men, but living men in Jesus Christ.
As the soul is to the body, so is the spirit to the soul: the Spirit furnishes
and enableth every faculty; it enlightens the Understanding, it rectifies the
Will, it sanctifies the Affections; it fills a man with joy, fear, love, and
all spiritual graces, which give strength to the inner man; it enables us to
command the winds and storms of our sinful lusts, and irregular passions. By
the power of this Spirit, we may eject and cast out all Satan's temptations,
quench all his fiery darts: In a word, by the mighty energie and efficacy of
this Spirit, we are enabled to every good word and work. And hence it is, that
sometimes the Spirit of God is called The power of the most High, Luke 1.35,
36. the Spirit of power too, 2 Timothy, 1.7. But, why the power of the most High?
why a spirit of power? Because of that effectual power which the Spirit puts
forth into the hearts of the elect; not only for their conversion from sin to
grace, but for their confirmation and growth up in grace, and in this fear of
God. So that now (Beloved) unless we do grow up in the fear of God more and
more, we do as much as in us lies to frustrate Gods end in sending to us his
Spirit; nay, we cannot conclude that we have as yet received the Spirit.

And then in the fifth and last place, it is to this end likewise, that God has
given to us, and continued to us his holy Ordinances. Look as the sun and rain
are given to make plants to grow; so the Ordinances are given to make our souls
to grow in grace, and in this holy fear of God: more particularly, for this
purpose it is, that God has 1. given us his Word; and 2. his Sacraments.

1. His Word is given us to make us fruitful, Isa. 55.10 11. Hence is it, that
the people of God are compared to grass, and tender herbs, which grow and
flourish, which are fed and bring forth fruit, when watered with the rain; it is
Deuteronomy. 32.2. A godly man, says the Psalmist, is like a tree planted by the
rivers of water, Psalm. 1.3. he is planted and placed where Gods Ordinances are;
and what then? he brings forth his fruit in his season. 1 Pet. 2.2. says the
Apostle there, As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye
may grow thereby. They are ignorant of the intent and end of the Word, that do
not grow by the Word. The Word is appointed not only to beget us, but also to
make the Saints perfect. For this, you have an excellent text, Ephesians. 4.11, 12,
13. The end of the Ministry is not only to plant grace but to strengthen
grace; and therefore you shall find, that when the Apostles had established
Churches, they returned to confirm the disciples hearts, Acts 4.21, 22.

And then secondly, as to this end God has appointed his Word, so to this end
likewise has he instituted and ordained the Sacraments: as they signify,
seal, and exhibit unto those that are within the Covenant of grace, the
benefits of Christ's mediation; so do they confirm and strengthen grace: this
does the Sacrament of Baptism, and this does the Sacrament of the Lords Supper:
this is the very use and end of them. Though indeed the Papists tie the grace
of God inseparably to them, and make the opus operatum matter of sufficient
virtue, and ascribe Divine power to the very outward signs or elements; yet
it is most clear and certain, that Jesus Christ set them up in his Church, to
the end that through the cooperation of his Spirit, they might be effectual
unto our spiritual growth; as I could show you at large, were it needful.

And thus have you heard what Reasons there are, why you whose hearts are
already seasoned with the holy fear of God, should grow up and abound in this
grace more and more.

I come in the last place to the means whereby we may be assisted and enabled
to and in the performance of this weighty, but yet incumbent duty. And here I
might in the first place urge upon you a careful, conscionable, and faithful
improvement of the foregoing Ordinances, the Word and Sacraments, which, as I
told you but now, were ordained to this very end and purpose. Did you but
holily employ your selves in the Word and Sacraments, you that have this holy
fear of God already put into your hearts, would grow up and abound in the same
yet daily more and more. But I shall enlarge no further upon them. There is one
Ordinance of God more, which is very conducible unto this great end. A Word or
two of that, and so I shall conclude this second Point.

If you that already fear God, would thrive and proceed in this grace, why then
make a constant and an assiduous use of faithful and fervent-prayer: desire
God, who is able to make all grace to abound, who is the finisher, as well as
the author of grace, that he would cause this great and comprehensive grace to
abound in you. Jam 1.5. says the Apostle there, If any of you lack wisdom, let
him ask it of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not: and it
shall be given him. This if does not argue doubt, but only infers a
supposition. But why does the Apostle speak with a supposition? is there any
man that does not lack wisdom? I answer: such expressions do more strongly aver
and affirm a thing; such suppositions imply a concession; as, Mal. 1.6. A son
honors his father, and a servant his master. If I then be a father, where is
mine honor? and if I be a master, where is my fear? q.d. you will grant I am a
father and a master. So here, If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask it of God:
you will grant, you all lack wisdom. The Apostle, I confess, if you look upon
the circumstances of the text, by wisdom, intends wisdom or skill to bear
affliction: but yet we may also take it generally for every grace: If any of
you lack wisdom, i. e. if he come short of, or be defective in any grace, let
him ask it of God: God will have every thing to be fetched out by prayer: He is
the sountain, yea, an unexhausted fountain of all grace; and therefore says
the same Apostle, in the same Chapter, verse 17. Every good gift, and every
perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights; with
whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. Pray mark, Every good and
every perfect gift; all spiritual blessings. It Is true, all common gifts come
from divine bounty: but the Apostle here intends special blessings, as
appears by the attributes of them, in that he calls them good and perfect; as
also, because these best suit with the context: as every good, so every perfect
gift; i. e. such as do any way conduce to our perfection; not only initial and
first grace, but all the progresses in grace; not only the beginnings, but the
gradual accesses of them. All these now are from God, from above, from heaven:
and if perfection and growth in every grace is from above, why then likewise in
this grace, wherein I am now persuading of you to grow perfect. Thus more
generally.

But more particularly, as to the grace in hand, considering that to fear God
is a supernatural gift; go to God for it, and pray with David, Psalm. 86.11.
later part of the verse: Unite my heart to fear thy Name: q. d. my heart of it
self is woefully divided and scattered up and down upon lying vanities; Oh now
do thou unite my heart to fear thy Name. The Septuagint render it, (...) make
my heart one; i.e. apply it only and constantly to thy fear: let not my heart
be divided between thy fear, and things of a lower consideration; let it not be
floating between two different ways, as if I had two hearts; but unite my heart
to fear thy Name: let the fear of thy great Name, be the one only thing that
my heart is carried after. Eliphaz alleges the neglect of this duty of
prayer, as the reason why men cast off this fear of God: it is, says he,
because they restrain prayer from God, Job 15.4. He that throws up the duty of
prayer, nay, he that shortneth or abateth prayer: for the word garang in the
Hebrew, signifies not only to withdraw or keep back, but to lessen and
diminish. So that, I say, whosoever holds prayer from God, or lesseneth and
abateth prayer, must never expect to grow up in this grace. Nay, to fear God,
and to seek God, are frequently in Scripture, especially in Psalm. 34. used for
one and the same thing; as you may observe, if you will but compare together
verse 9. and 10. of that Psalm: this being the ready way to that. Do but see,
in the last place, concerning the benesits and contents of the new Covenant,
Ezekiel. 36.37. one clause of which covenant is this: I will give them one heart
and one way, that they may fear me for ever: I will put my fear into their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Now says the Lord, verse 37. I
will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them.

And thus, Beloved, have you heard the means both how you may get this holy
fear of God; as also, how you may grow up in this grace more and more. I am
loath, by reason the time is almost spent, to enter upon a new Point at this
present: and therefore, in the last place, I shall add some few signs of this
growth, and so commend you to God, and to this Word of his grace.

Well then, here the Question will be; How a soul may come to know whether or
no he do thrive in this grace. And here in the first place, I might touch at
that which was spoken of, both in the Motives and in the Means.

1. A man may know it by his conscionable use of the Means and Ordinances of
growing. If we will but measure unto God in sincerity, in Hearing, Reading,
Praying, and Receiving; no doubt but God will measure unto us, in the plenty of
his blessing. We need no more doubt whether our souls do grow in this grace, if
we can bring constant affections to the means; then we need, whether the bodies
of our children would grow, if they have good Nurses, and do suck the breasts
well. To this purpose tend such Scriptures as these: Isa. 64 5 Thou meetest him
that rejoices and works righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways.
Those that remember thee in thy ways? what is that? i.e. in thy glorious
di^p^nsations: we may refer it either to the dispensations of the rod, or to
the dispensations of the Word. Those that remember God in either of these ways;
those that make a holy use of either, them will God meet: Thou meetest those
that remember thee in thy ways. And what, will he shake them only by the hand?
no, he will shake them by the heart too; he will bless his Ordinances to their
hearts, and make them profitable and of great consequence to their growth: as
it is yet more fully expressed, Mic 2.7. later part of the verse: Do not my
words do good to him that walks uprightly? i. e. My words will do good to
him; and as other good, so this good; it will make him grow, as you have it, 1
Pet. 2.2. So then, that is the first sign of growth.

2. We might discern this further, by our disrelishing of sin, by our
distasting of the world. According to the measures and degrees that the
sweetness of sin decays and abates in us, does grace grow and thrive in us. As
there is no vacuum in Nature, so neither is there in grace. As corruption
increases, so this grace of the fear of God increases.

3. We may know this likewise by our faith and confidence in God: Jer. 17.7, 8.
Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is: for
he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreads out her roots
by the river, and shall not see when heat comes, but her leaf shall be green;
and shall not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from
yielding fruit: q d. he shall grow.

4. We may know it by our constancy and frequency in good works, either of
piety or mercy: for says our Savior in this case, Matthew. 13.12. Whosoever
has, to him shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but whosoever has
not, from him shall be taken away, even that he has.

5. We may know this likewise by our frequency in communion with God, by our
delight in drawing near to him: this is the way to grow up to an holy temple in
the Lord: and in the Lords temple you may be sure all will prosper well. I
might enlarge upon these several symptoms: but the ordinary time is spent, and
therefore a word or two more, and I have done.

In the sixth place, we may try our growth in this grace, by our humility: look
as we thrive in the one, so do we thrive in the other. God has promised not
only to give grace, but to give more grace to the humble; Jam. 4.6 But he
gives more grace; or, he gives abundance of grace. Humble persons shall not
only have a being in grace, but they shall receive increases of grace.

7. And then last of all, we may know likewise whether we grow in this grace,
by our love and affection to the godly. This love is the very bond of
perfection, Col. 3 14. It Is not only a means of that true and perfect union
which ought to be among believers; but it is a means of their growth, yea, and a
trial of their growth too, in any other grace.

And thus have I finished this Point, as also the first property or periphrasis
of those godly ones here in my text: they were such as feared the Lord. I
should now proceed unto the second they were such as thought upon his Name. But
of this another time.

For the opening of which property, I shall consider, 1. An Object. 2. An Act.
The Object: The Name of God. The Act: Thinking upon.


A word or two of each, and so I shall come to the Observation.

First then, what are we to understand by the Name of God?

Beloved, the Name of God, among other significations in Scripture, has four
special ones.

1. It Is taken for God himself: the name of a thing, is put for the thing
named, Psalm. 44. Through thy Name will we tread them down that rise up against
us. Through thy Name, i. e. through thee: Through thee, and through thy Name,
are here the very same. Through thy Name, here in this verse, is added merely
exegetically, to expound the meaning of through thee in the beginning of the
verse. And so again, Psalm. 48.10. According to thy Name, so is thy praise unto
the ends of the earth. The sense of the words is this: Thou art praised like
thy self: as thou art in thy self, so thou art, or at least ought to be
praised by thy people. It Is frequent in Scripture to put the Name for the
Person: you have it clearly, Acts 1.15. The number of Names together were about
an hundred and twenty: i. e. the number of persons: so many persons, because
numbered by their names.

2. The Name of God is in Scripture often put for the Attributes of God, and
essential properties; for the power of God, wisdom of God, mercy of God,
justice of God, and the rest; as we could easily show you from Scripture. But I
would hasten to the Points.

3. The Name of God signifies his Ways, Ordinances, or Worship: Jer. 7.12. But
go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my Name at the first,
etc. What is that? i. e. where I first set up my public worship. And the
reason why the Name of God is put for his Ordinances and Worship, is, because
as a man is known by his proper name, so is God known by his proper Worship.
And hence it is, that often times false worship is called the setting up of a
strange god: this is evident, Psalm. 81.9. and so elsewhere in many places. And
then

4. And lastly, the Name of God signifies that reverence, esteem and honor
which angels and men give unto God; as you know amongst us, the report and
reputation that a man has among men, is a man's name; what men speak of him,
that is his name: such a one, we say, has a good name; such a one has an ill
name: i. e. men speak well or ill of ^uch persons. Gen 6.4. when Moses
describes the giants, he says they were men of renown, in the later part of
the verse. the Hebrew is, an sa hashem, they were men of name: men of name, by
an Hebraism, ^re men of renown. Number. 16 2. -- Famous in the congregation, men
of renown: the Hebrew is, These are men of name in the congregation. Because
the name of a man, is the opinion he has amongst men: as a man is esteemed, so
his name is carried, and himself is accepted in the world. Thus, I say, the
Name of God is that high esteem, those honorable apprehensions which good
angels and good men have of God. Such as the thoughts and speeches of men are,
for the celebration of Gods glory and praise; such is his Name in the world.

Well then, now the question will be, which of all these is intended in the
text, when it is said of these fearers of God, that they thought upon his Name.
Truly I know not how to exclude any of the^e four: I suppose all of them are
here intended: they thought upon God, and all other things which had any print
or image of God stamped upon them; his Attributes, Ways, Ordinances, Worship,
Honor; all these they thought upon. Then they that feared the Lord spoke often
one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it; and a book of remembrance
was writter before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon
his Name. And thus much of the Objects.

I shall speak a little of the Act which was conversant about the Object, and
then give you the Observation. The Act, you see, is thinking upon; And that
thought upon his Name. The word in the Original is put participially, it is
koshebka uleko sheba shemo; And for them thinking upon his Name. Now the root
or verb hashabh, whence this participle comes, is rendered by Calvin two ways:
1. To have in esteem or great price. These godly ones here in my text, were
such as had an high and honorable esteem of the Name of God. This I confess is
well expounded, and the Original is clear enough for it. But yet, in the second
place, it is as well, if not better expounded according to our Translation: They
excogitated, or, they thought upon his Name. And because this is fully as
clear, if not clearer, from the Original text, as the other; I shall not vary
from our English Translation. And this word hashabh does not signify simply or
nakedly to think: but to set the head and heart on work to find our something;
and carries the intention of the mind with it, as I could show you, from Jer.
18.18. Ezekiel. 38.10. and other places. Well then in fine, take the meaning of
the Prophet to be this: That thought upon his Name; i.e. that seriously
meditated, that busied and bended their best thoughts upon God, and the things
of God; upon God, and upon the things that were of divine concernment. Thus
succinctly and briefly, without any further enlargement. So that now having
opened this property of these holy ones, take the Doctrine or Observation,
thus: It is, and it should be the practice of all them that truly fear God, to
meditate diligently upon God, and upon the things of God. All such whose hearts
are possessed with the true fear of God, will be excogitating and thinking upon
his Name.

I shall clear this from Scripture, and then come to the Grounds and Reasons of
it. Read Prove. 11.23. The desire of the righteous is only good. Taavah
Haddikim: The desire of the righteous: or, the affection of the righteous is
only good: i. e. so far as he is righteous or spiritual: he delights in the
law of God after the inward man: the main stream of his desires, the course and
current of his heart, runs upon God and godliness. Although when the flesh gets
the wind and hill of the spirit, all is not so well carried: it is oftentimes
with a Christian, as it is with a Ferry-man; he plies the Oar, and eyes the
shore homeward, where he would be; yet there comes in the interim a gale of
wind, that carries him back again: So, I say, although a Christian in this
viatorous condition, is not so happy as to have his heart altogether empty of
evil thoughts and desires; yet that is the thing he strives unto and breathes
after: and God looks more upon the desires of his servants, then upon their
performances: every man is, in the account of God, as good as he desires to be.
So that in this sense, well might Solomon say, The desire of the righteous is
only good. So again, Pro. 12.5. The thoughts of the righteous are right. What
is that? why the meaning is, that he feeds his thoughts upon the best objects:
and if worse break in, as sometimes they will, he justles them out again, rids
the room of them, and will not suffer vain thoughts to take up their residence
or lodging within him. An instance hereof you have in David, Psalm. 119.113.
David was a man (as you may find thorowout the Book of the Psalms) whose heart
was much set upon God, Psalm. 16 8. he was a man very much busied in holy and
heavenly meditation: the ways, and words, and works of God, were the chief
objects of his meditation, as you may find almost every where. Another example
of this you have in the Church, Isa. 26 8. It Is said of these godly ones in my
text, that they feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name: and says the
Church here, The desire of our soul is to thy Name, and to the remembrunce of
thee: i.e. to all the signs, gages and testimonialls which thou bast given us
of thy grace, by thy words, works, or the like; the desire of our soul is to
the remembrance of these: or, we desire to remember these in our whole souls.
To the same purpose is that of the Church, Psalm. 44.17, 18, 19, 20. So that now
from all these Scriptures, and many more, it appears clearly, that it is, and
should be the practice of all them that truly fear God, to meditate diligently
upon God, and upon the things of God. Take one text more, which shows that this
should be the practice of all that fear God: as it is, so it ought to be their
practice; they are enjoined to it by command, as namely, Phil. 4.8. whence you
may perceive what the objects of our thoughts ought to be: the things that we
think upon, must be true, honest, just, pure, lovely, and of good report; they
must be heavenly and spiritual things. And so again, Col. 3.2. Set your
affections on things above, not on things on the earth. The word for set your
affections, in the Greek, is (...). and we may render it, mind or think upon
supernatural things, upon things that are above, things that are of a heavenly
and celestial concernment.

And thus you have heard the Point made good from Scripture. I shall in the
next place give you the grounds and reasons of it, and proceed therein further,
as far as time will permit.

Well then, in the first place, they that fear God, will be thinking upon his
Name; their thoughts will be taken up with, and exercised about the things of
God, because they know that God knows the secrets of their hearts: as he that
makes a Watch, knows every winding and turning in the Watch; so he that made
our spirits, and is the father of our spirits, knows all the motions and
contrivances of our spirits Nay, it is the sole privilege of God, to know. the
thoughts: the heart is his peculiar, which none can unlock, or look into, but
the most High: Jer. 17.10. I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins. Now
what is the heart that God searches, or what does God search for in the heart?
The heart is nothing else but the treasury of our thoughts; and God searches
for nothing else there, but our thoughts: either simple, as they are in our
meditations; or compound, as they are in our affections. David, you shall
find, ascribes this glory to the Lord, Psalm. 139.2. O Lord, thou have searched
me, and known me: thou know my down sitting, and mine up rising; thou
understandest my thought a far off: i. e. thou know all my outward motions:
but is that all? no, says he, thou know my thoughts afar off. Our thoughts
are evident to God, even before they are. Our thoughts are said to be afar off,
when they are not thought: yet then they are as nigh to God, as they are to us
when we are thinking them, even actually present to him. Nay, our thoughts are
as audible to God, as our words are to men: he hears the language of our
spirits, and what our hearts say, when our tongues are silent. One man knows
not the meaning of another man's thoughts while he is speaking, unless he speak
his thoughts, as some do not: but now let the tongues of men be never so cross
to their hearts; and what they speak, not a light to discover, but a shadow to
darken their thoughts; yet God knows them. It Is said of Christ in the Gospel,
Matthew. 9.4. that he knew their thoughts; and this was an unanswerable argument
of his Divinity, or that he was God. Only God, or as Christ was God man, can
reach the thoughts of man: and he knows as well what is in them, as what is
without. And this the godly well know; and hence it is, in the first place, that
they are so thoughtfull of his Name.

But then secondly ( Psalm. 44.17, 18, 19, 20.) the godly will be thinking upon
God, out of love, and strength of affection to his Name. It Is the nature and
property of love, to set the thoughts awork upon the thing or object beloved:
according to that in the Proverb, Animus est ubi amat, non animat: the mind of
a man is not where it lives, but where it loves. Pray observe that passage,
Cant. 1.3. the later part of the verse: Thy Name is as ointment powered forth,
therefore do the virgins love thee. Christ has his name, both in Hebrew and
Greek, from ointments; and these three words, Messiah, Christ, and Anointed,
are all one in signification. Now when the holy Ghost, in the mouth and
ministry of his faithful servants, shall take of Christ's excellencies, as it
is his office, you know, to do, and hold them out to the world; when he shall
hold up the Tapestry, as it were, and show men the Lord Jesus Christ, with an
ecce virum, behold the man, that one Mediator betwixt God and man, the man
Christ Jesus; when they shall see him in his Natures, in his Offices, Works,
and in the blessed effects of all: when his Name as ointment is poured forth;
this cannot but stir up wonderful love in all good souls: therefore do the
virgins love him. By virgins, we are to understand the faithful, so called for
their spiritual chastity. They love him for the odours of his good ointments;
and out of their dear love and respect which they bear to him, they will be
continually thinking upon him: they have tasted and seen how good the Lord is:
they have heard it not only by the hearing of the ear, but their hearts are
experimented in it: God has shed abroad his love, that part of his Name, in
their hearts, by the holy Ghost; and therefore they cannot choose but love him
back again; and loving him, be much in contemplation or meditation about him.

3. The Saints are set upon thoughts of Gods Name, because they are instructed
and enabled thereunto by his holy Spirit, who is their domestic Monitor, and
sweet inhabitant. It Is true, what the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we
are sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves: but our
sufficiency is of God. The meaning of it is, that all our strength and help
lies in him: we daily find a want in our selves; and God, as it pleases him,
lets out from his sufficiency unto us, now a little and then a little: we are
ever receiving from him, and enabled by his Grace and Spirit to do what is
done: I say, the Spirit disposes the heart to this holy meditation, and that
two ways: 1. By enlightening the heart: 2. By enlarging the heart. But the time
being past, I shall refer what remains to some further opportunity.

1. I say, the Spirit enlightens their hearts. The first and primary work of
the Spirit, is to beat out, as it were, new windows in the dark souls of men,
and to put in a principle of new light thereby; giving the soul some signs of
God, some sense of his sweetness, some glimpse of his glory. And hence it is,
that the holy Ghost in Scripture is sometimes called a spirit of wisdom and
understanding, a spirit of counsel and of knowledge, Isa. 11.2. sometimes a
spirit of wisdom and revelation, Ephesians. 1.17. sometimes a spirit of illumination,
Heb. 6.4 Now the Spirit is so called, from this effect which it has upon the
heart, because the Spirit causes a spiritual and heavenly light to shine about
our minds, by which, spiritual things are made manifest to the eye of our
understanding; as by the light of the Sun, bodily things are made manifest to
the eye of our body. The Spirit, (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.10.) searches
the deep things of God, and reveals them to us, and shows us the back parts of
God, though somewhat obscurely, as through a grate only; or darkly, as through
a glass. In this life we know but in part. And then,

2. The spirit having possessed the heart, he enlarges or wideneth the heart
toward God, and the things of God: it enables us to captivate our thoughts to
the obedience of Christ, to conform them to the severaignty of his grace, to
the rules of his Word, and the remembrance of his Name. Nay,

3. The Spirit sanctifies the heart, and so puts it upon a continual fresh
succession of holy thoughts. The whole spirit, soul and body of a Christian, is
sanctified thorowout. God writes his Law in their hearts, stamps his image upon
the spirit of their minds, makes them partakers of the divine nature; erecteth
a new nature, a blessed frame of grace: And hence have they an ability given
them of holy thoughts and meditations: for as the man is, so will his thoughts,
dispositions, meditations and affections be. Hence is that of the Prophet, Isa.
32.8. But the liberal devises liberal things, and by liberal things shall he
stand. A man of a noble, liberal, and generous spirit, will carry his heart out
after worthy and noble things. Nay, hence is that of our Savior, Matthew. 12.35.
A good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things. As
from the old and unregenerated heart proceed evil thoughts; so from the new and
sanctified heart, proceed holy and sanctified thoughts, gracious considerations
of, and holy reverend respects to God, and to his Name. That is the third
Reason of the Point. It is and should be the practice of all them that truly
fear God, to meditate diligently upon God, and upon the things of God: because
the Spirit does to this purpose enlighten their understandings, and possesses
and sanctifies their hearts.

4. But then last of all, it is and should be the practice of all them that
truly fear God, to meditate diligently upon God, and the things of God, because
all that truly fear God, stand in a mavelous near and dear relation unto God.
Near relations, you know, will mind one another. God and his servants are
nearly related: he is their friend and father, their God and guide, their
Prince and portion, their shield, and their exceeding great reward. Nay,
Beloved, he is their all in all, the stay and the strength of their hearts for
ever: and therefore it cannot be, but their hearts must run much upon God, and
upon the things of his kingdom. Nay, a little further: every faithful servant
of God, every true believer, has resigned and given up his name to God; he
has devoted himself to his fear. Mark what holy David says, Psalm. 119.38.
Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is devoted to thy fear. Believers have
as it were sworn themselves to the service of God: I am thy servant, I am thy
servant, says the same holy David oftentimes in the Psalms: they love the Lord
with all their soul, with all their heart, and with all their strength: and as
for the Name of God, they fly unto it in any difficulty and distress, as unto
a Garrison and strong Fort or Tower, Prove. 18.10. The righteous know that the
Name of God is so deep, that no Pyoner can undetmine it; so thick, that no
Cannon can pierce it; so high, that no Ladder can scale it: and hither they run
for refuge: Nay, they walk in this Name, as in a Garden or Gallery: Mic. 4 5.
We will walk in the Name of the Lord our God for ever and ever: they resolve to
walk in the Name, i. e. By the Laws, and under the view of the Lord their God,
who is God of gods, and Lord of lords: they rejoice and delight in it, as in
all treasure, Psalm. 119.14 Now, brethren, sum up all together in a word, and
then you shall find the force of this Argument.

Can the fearers of God rejoice in his Name, run unto it upon all occasions,
walk in it; and yet not mind it; and yet not have their hearts set upon it?
This is impossible. Can they, I say, vouch him for their God, set him up for
their Sovereign, converse with him as a friend; and yet not think upon his
Name? this cannot be well conceived.

And thus you hear what the grounds of the Point are. Let us now make some Use
of it.

I shall improve it four ways: 1. For Insormation. 2. For Increpation. 3. For
Examination. 4. For Exhortation.


In which Uses, I shall proceed so far this day as time will permit. I begin
with the first, the Use of Information.

1. Is it so, That it is and should be the practice of all them that truly fear
God, to meditate diligently upon God, and upon the things of God? Take we then
hence notice, That those who do not habitually, daily and diligently think upon
God; that make not his Attributes, Ways, Ordinances, Worship and Honor, the
matter of their meditation; these, I say, are excluded out of the number and
society of the true fearers of God. Yea, the want of this holy and heavenly
meditation, is laid down in holy Writ, as the Badge, Cognizance, or Character
of wicked men. You may find it, Psalm. 10.4. The wicked through the pride of
his countenance will not seek after God: God is not in all his thoughts: i. e.
he does not regard or care for God; he does not willingly meditate or think of
God: he maintains no correspondency or communion with him in his inner man:
peradventure God, like an unbidden or unwelcome guest, may put himself in his
thoughs, and move in his mind; he may present to his mind some manifestations
of himself in his justice and holiness; yea, of his truth, long suffering, and
goodness: but this proves a trouble, and becomes a pain unto a wicked man.
Wicked men neither desire or accept acquaintance with him in any of these.
Wicked men are weary of the presence of God* so Job describes them, Chap.
21.14. they think it best for them, when God departs. It Is true indeed,
Saints know not how to live a comfortable day, much less to be happy, without
him: but now wicked men know not how to live a comfortable hour, much less to
be happy, with him. The Church indeed says to God, Leave us not, Jer. 14.8.
and God says to her, Woe to you when I depart Hos. 9.12. I, but wicked men say
to God, Depart from us; trouble us not; when shall we be eased and disburdened
of his presence? As there is nothing so joyous to the righteous, so there is
nothing so grievous to the wicked, as to have God near them. If they can once
banish the thoughts of God, then they think they live indeed; and till then,
they reckon their lives as a kind of death. Thus the Apostle describes the
Gentiles before their conversion; they were such as were without God in the
world, Ephesians. 2.11, 12. All wicked and unregenerate men, with these Gentiles,
live without God in the world. Nay, Beloved, be informed from the Doctrine in
hand, That to be weary of the presence of God, and to expel God, and the
remembrance of his Name, out of the heart, is one of the strongest arguments,
and highest demonstrations, that a man is wicked.

Only to love and pray for the presence of God, is the surest sign of a
gracious heart; but to desire and wish the absence and departure of God, must
needs conclude, and positively argue the heart to be most ungracious. See what
David says, Psalm. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek
after; that I mar dwell in the house of the Lord, ^ll the days of my life, to
behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple. One thing have I
desired of the Lord, and that will I seek after: i e. I will earnestly pursue,
I will indefatigably and unweariedly prosecute the grant or concession of this
desire, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord, etc. In these sacred strains
of divinest Rhetoric, was David's soul carried out after God: God and his Name
was the one thing, the only thing he longed for: without God, all was nothing
with him: in him, he had all: his presence was enough and sufficient for him:
all companies, multitudes, throngs and crowds of men, yea, of Saints or good
men, was but solitariness and widowhood to him, without the presence of God.
And this was the highest ascent of David's holiness: well then, pray tell me,
is it not the lowest descent of unholiness, the greatest brand and argument of
wickedness, to be troubled at the presence of God? Is it not a full and plenary
conviction of a carnal mind, of a wicked man, to think it long until God be
gone, to deprecate his presence, and to urge his departure? Oh, I must acquaint
you, that this frame of heart is the very blackness of hellish darkness; it is
the express image and character of the devils person. Though peradventure such
are not possessed with, yet are they under the possession of the evil spirit.
Read that relation, Matthew. 8 28, 29. It is the devils torment to be near
Christ, or to have any appearance of God in him: and certainly they are nearest
the devil, they live next door to him, to whom the thought of God, and the
remembrance of his Name, is a torment; or who, like those Gaderenes to Christ,
in verse 34. of the forenamed Chapter, come and beseech him that he will
depart out of their coasts; that so, if it were possible, they might never more
either hear or think of him.

But you will reply, Why, do you think that any are so wicked, as to thrust God
from them, or to banish him out of their thoughts? or if they would, were it
possible for them so to do?

I might, I confess, frame two Objections upon what has been said in this Use:
and for the more methodical improvement of the Point, I don't care if I do: and
to these only I shall speak at present, and so conclude.

First then, concerning the impossibility of Gods departure from a wicked man;
the Apostle arguing with those at Athens, says, Acts 17.27, 28. He is not far
from any of us, good or bad: how then can wicked men put God from them?

To this I answer: Though wicked men cannot put themselves far from the eye and
knowledge of God, he being Omniscient and Omnipresent; yet may they put God far
from their thoughts: though they may see God in their Consciences, yet they
never found him in their Affections. As wicked men are far from the favor and
love of God, so are they far from love and affection to God. God may be and is
near them, in regard of his common and general presence; but they do not desire
the special presence of God in their hearts; that is a burden to them: and
hence it is that they say in their hearts, that there is no God, Psalm. 14.1. The
fool, i. e. the vile, wicked, and worthless person, says in his heart that
there is no God. A fools bolt, we say, is soon shot: it may be he does not
always speak it with his mouth; but his heart speaks it; he thinks there is no
God: with these wicked ones before my text, he denies the Attributes, Ways,
Ordinances, Providence, and Service of God, whatsoever is included in the whole
Name of God: he says, It Is in vain to serve the Lord, and there is no profit
in seeking to him. So that, I say, it is clear, that though wicked men cannot
put themselves out of the intuition and inspection of God, yet they may and do
put themselves far from the thoughts of God, and from the remembrance of his
Name.

But then secondly, it will be objected, Are any so wicked, as to forget God?
are there any so vile, as to put the Name of God out of their thoughts?

Yes, Beloved, that there are: every wicked man does it more or less: so Job
speaks in the forementioned text, Job 21.14. They say unto God, Depart from
us: for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. He speaks of wicked men
indefinitely; of all, yea, of every wicked man: every wicked man says to God,
Depart from me. This I could evidence to you in sundry passages and practices
of wicked men: but for brevity sake, I will exemplify only in that one set
down in that text, Job 21.12. Wicked men make it appear that God is not in all
their thoughts, because they desire not the knowledge of his ways. As the ways
of a wicked man are always grievous to God; so are the ways of God always
grievous to wicked men; therefore they desire no acquaintance with, no
knowledge of them: they are a very loaching to their souls; they are rough,
sharp, sad, and unsuitable to their spirits and genius: Wicked men, as they
think, are provided of better ways, of ways more easy, smooth, plain,
pleasant; and therefore they have no manner of desire to Gods ways: we desire
not the knowledge of thy ways. The word in the Hebrew signifying desire, is
rendered also to take pleasure or delight in; because those things which we
delight in, are most desired by us: and when they say, We desire not the
knowledge of thy ways, more is intended then the bare negative of their desire:
we may resolve this Negative into an Affirmative, thus: We dislike, yea, we
hate the knowledge of thy ways. But what are those ways of God which find so
little acceptance and entertainment with wicked men? In general, by the ways of
God, he intends not those ways in which God walks; but those which God has
made for man to walk in; as namely, the ways of his providence and outward
administrations; the ways of his commandments, or those rules of life in and by
which we ought to walk, and regulate our whole course, the ways of his Works,
the ways of his Word; the ways of his Worship; wicked men desire not the
practical or experimental knowledge of these. And thus much of the first Use.

I come to a second Use, and that shall be a Use of Increpation.

2. Is it so, that it is and should be the practice of all them that truly fear
God, to meditate diligently upon God, and upon the things of God? This Point
looks sadly and sowrely upon such as think basely, unworthily, and
dishonourably of God: upon such, who, in stead of holy and heavenly, entertain
atheistical, blasphemous, unbelieving, and rebellious thoughts. I shall give a
touch upon each of these, and so come to a third Use.

Some have gross, earthly, and terrene conceits of God; they become vain in
their imaginations about him, as those spoken of by the Apostle, Romans 1.23.
Thus ignorant persons, who fancy God to be some old man sitting in heaven, with
a Crown on his head, and a Scepter in his hand, administering his kingdom as an
earthly Prince. Others, though they conceive God to be a spirit, and not a
bodily substance; yet they in their thoughts rob him of his essential and
inseparable Attributes. 1. Some deprive him of his Omnipresence, thinking that
God is not present in all places; David could say, Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9, etc.
Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence?
If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold,
thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost
parts of the sea, etc. but now, wicked men, on the other side, are brought in
speaking of God, as if he were shut up in heaven, and had nothing to do in the
world. Job. 22.12, 13. Is not God in the height of heaven? and behold the
height of the stars, how high they are. And thou say, How does God know? can
he judge through the dark cloud? So again, Psalm. 44 7. Some deny in their hearts
his Omniscience, as if God did not know all the transactions of men. Psalm.
10.11. David speaking of the wicked man's thoughts, tells, He has said in his
heart, God has forgotten; he hides his face, he will never see it. So much
the Prophet Isaiah insinuates, in that woe which he denounces against wicked
men, Isa. 29.15. Woe unto them that seek deep to hide counsel from the Lord, and
their works are in the dark, and they say, Who sees us, and who knows us?
Some deprive God of his justice, thinking that although they proceed in the
practice and often repetition of sin, yet God will not punish them according to
the cominations and threatenings of his Word. If you doubt whether or no there
be any such imagination in man's heart, read Deuteronomy. 29.19. where Moses says,
And it come to pass, when he hears the words of this curse, that he bless
himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of mine heart, to add drunkenness to thirst. Nay, says David,
Psalm. 10.3. The wicked boasts of his hearts desire, and blesses the
covetous, whom the Lord abhors: or, we may read it, The covetous blesses
himself: So much is implied in that of the Lord unto the Jews, Jer. 7.9, 10.
Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and burn incense unto Baal, and
walk after other gods, whom ye know not; and come and stand before me in this
house, which is called by my Name, and say, We are delivered to do all these
abominations?

Some again think unworthily of God, by denying his providence, whereby he
orders and disposes of all things in the world; as if God regarded not his
people; as if he cared not which way things go. So did these wicked ones above
my text: so did they of whom the Prophet Zephaniab speaks, Zeph. 1.12. that say
in their heart, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil. Others
again rob God of his purity and holiness; they conceive God to be wicked as
themselves are, because he keeps silence at their sins: Psalm. 50.21. or else
because he does not presently execute wrath upon sin and sinners, Eccles. 8.11.
Others, and not a few, conceive God to be made up altogether of mercy: they
think he will save them, and not destroy the works of his own hands, though
they live never so wickedly. Others deny the truth of God, and make him a liar;
as if God would not accomplish either what he has promised to his people, or
threatened against his enemies: so did those wicked ones of whom the Apostle
Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. Others, in the last place, do not only think
basely and unworthily of God; but they think thoughts against him, such
thoughts as are directly opposite to his Name: they take up high and haughty
imaginations, such as exalt themselves against the knowledge of God, and
obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ: of which thoughts you read, 2 Cor. 10.4,
5. Nay, they have thoughts of high treason, and open rebellion against heaven;
saying as Pharaoh did, Exodus 5.2. Who is the Lord, that I should obey his
voice? or as they, Psalm 12.4. With our tongue we will prevail; our lips are
our own: who is lord over us? or as they, Jer. 44.15, 16, 17. As for the word
that thou have spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto
thee: but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth of our mouth.

Thus, Beloved, and many other ways which I might name, do wicked men think
dishonourably of God. Now, as I told you in the beginning of this Use, the
Doctrine which I have in hand looks very wishly and sowrely upon all these. As
it excludes them out of the society of the fearers of God, so it brings them
under heavy wrath, guilt, and punishment. God will one day discover and lay
open before the whole world, angels and men, those vile thoughts that wicked
men have had of him, and against him, in their hearts: he will set their
iniquities in order before them, and their secret sins in the light of his
countenance; as it is, Psalm. 90.8. he will bring every one of these secret
thoughts into judgment, Eccl. 12.14. And that none might be ignorant of this,
he makes proclamation thereof, as it were in open Court, by the voice of his
holy Prophet, Jer. 6.19. I desire all those that are guilty of sinful thoughts
against God, to observe this text well, and to lay it home unto and upon their
hearts this evening: Hear, O earth: behold, I will bring evil upon this people,
even the fruit of their thoughts. The heavy wrath and vengeance of Almighty
God, is both the just desert, and the certain issue and event of evil thoughts:
inward distempers, and mental abominations, shall not go unpunished.

And this shall suffice to be spoken of the second Use, the Use of Increpation.
I proceed to a third, and shall make what progress in it the ordinary time will
give me leave; and that shall be a Use of Trial and examination to every one
that hears me this evening.

3. Is it so, that it is and ought to be the practice of all them that truly
fear God, to meditate diligently upon God, and upon the things of God? Let then
every man and woman learn hence to make an estimate of his and her spiritual
estate, by the quality and disposition of their thoughts. For it is most
certain, that as the man is, such are his thoughts; and as the thoughts are
habitually and ordinarily, whether good or evil; so is the man. Thoughts are
called the possessions of the heart, Job 17.11. The thoughts of my heart: in
the Original it is, the possessions of my heart. Now they are called possessions
of the heart, two ways: 1. In a passive, and 2. in an active sense. Passively,
because thoughts are possessed by the heart; the heart does enclose and hold
our thoughts; the heart is the proper vessel and receptacle of thoughts; the
heart naturally is the soil and seat of thoughts: there they are planted, and
there they dwell. And then they are the possessions of the heart actively: for
as thoughts are possessed by the heart, so thoughts do possess the heart.
Thoughts are full of activity: they trouble, and they comfort the heart. Look
what our thoughts are, such is the estate of our hearts: if our thoughts be
quiet, our hearts be quiet; if our thoughts be unquiet, our hearts be unquiet:
if our thoughts be joyful, our hearts rejoice; if our thoughts be sad, our
hearts are sorrowful. And therefore it is said in the Gospel, Luke 24.38. Why
are you troubled, and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? i.e. Why do
troublesome, disconsolate thoughts arise in your hearts? It Is as natural for
thoughts to arise in the heart, as it is for water to rise in a spring or
fountain. Christ did not chide because thoughts, but because such thoughts did
arise in their hearts. We cannot hinder our thoughts from thinking, no more
then we can hinder the fire from burning, or water from wetting. They are the
possessions of our hearts; and being the possessions of our hearts, we may
easily judge of our estate and condition by them. Purity in the inward parts,
is the most sound, and infallible evidence of our fearing God. Whatever evil is
practiced or committed in the life, proceeds from the heart, Mat. 15.9. For out
of the heart proceed evil thoughts, etc. So again on the other side, whatever
good is acted in the life, proceeds from the heart: Out of the heart, says
Solomon, are the issues both of life and death. And therefore I say again,
Examine your estate by your hearts, and by your thoughts, which are the
possessions of your hearts.

Now there are two ways how a man may try his thoughts: 1. By the causes of
them; and 2. By the effects of them: A word or two of each, and so I shall
conclude.

1. Try your thoughts by the Causes of them.

Are they put in by God and his Spirit? does the Spirit of God raise them up in
your hearts; or else are they injected and cast in by the devil? And so I might
enlarge my self, in showing when our thoughts are formed and framed in us by
the Spirit of God, and when thrust in by the devil: but that would be a field
too large for me: and therefore I briefly pass it by.

2. Try your thoughts by the matter and substance of them. Are they holy,
heavenly, and gracious? Carnal men are projecting how to spend their days and
months in buying, in selling, and getting gain: the fool in the Gospel is
thinking of enlarging his barns, of pulling down his houses, and building
greater, Luke 12.17, 18. this is that which engrossed all his thoughts. One
Apostle describes such men thus: Minding earthly things. Phil. 3.19. another
thus: Having an heart exercised with covetous practices, 2 Pet. 2.14. With
covetous practices, i.e. with earnest contrivances how to promote their gain
and earthly aims. But now men and women fearing God, they are for gracious
projects; they are thinking how they may be more thankful; saying with David,
Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward
me? They are thinking how they may be more holy and spiritual, how they may be
more useful and serviceable to God, how they may be more fruitful in every good
word and work. So that, I say, in the second place, try your thoughts by the
matter of them.

3. Try them from the form and fashion of them. Are they notional, floating,
and accidental; or are they studious, sollicitous, and diligent thoughts? Do
you sit, as it were in the door of your hearts, on set purpose to entertain
good thoughts, as Abraham was wont to sit in the door of his tent, to entertain
strangers; or do they fall in only by the by, collaterally, and besides the
intention? These holy men in my text did not only think upon Gods Name
casually, or by chance; but they did it seriously and in good earnest, and
stayed up their hearts against all discouragements.

4. Examine your thoughts by the duration and continuance of them. Are your
good thoughts fixed, settled, constant and permanent; or are they flitting,
fugitive, transient, and temporary only; as soon gone as come, like a flash of
lighting in the air; like the stony ground, whose fruit was no sooner ripe then
rotten; or like the grass upon the house top, which the Psalmist speaks of,
which withers before it grows up? And then last of all,

5. Try your thoughts by the effects which they work in you. Do your thoughts
of Gods presence, purity, and holiness, make you to tremble, and afraid to sin;
thoughts of his mercy and patience, lead you to repentance; the thoughts of his
power and all sufficiency, work you to a close, even, and uniform walking with
God; the thoughts of heaven, wean you from the earth; the thoughts of the
vanity of life, fit you for death? Do the thoughts of the instability and
uncertainty of temporal things, edge and quicken your desire after eternal
things? Are your meditations driven to that issue which David's were, to make
you turn your feet unto Gods Testimonies; to have respect to his Ordinances, to
his Ways and Precepts? Are your thoughts thus improved? are your thoughts
improved to such holy ends and purposes as these are? I beseech you, when you
come home, to commune with your own hearts, and endeavor to conclude somewhat
of your estate and condition by your thoughts. And so much of this Use, and for
this time. I proceed unto the fourth and last Use of this Point, and that shall
be for Exhortation.

4. Is it so, that it is and should be the practice of all them that truly fear
God, to meditate diligently upon God, and the things of God? This Doctrine then
calls upon all the true fearers of God, to be much in meditating and thinking
upon his Name. And here, for the performance and better performance of this
great and necessary duty, I shall lay down before you in the first place some
Motives; Secondly, some Means; and thirdly, some Rules or Directions.

I begin with the Motives; and the first shall be taken from the necessity of
the duty. It Is necessary in a double consideration: 1. in regard of God: 2. in
regard of our selves.

1. In regard of God: he requires and commands the duty. See what God says to
Joshua, Josh. 1.8. This book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but
thou shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do
according to all that is written therein. One would think it should rather have
been said, This book of the Law shall not depart out of thy heart, but thou
shall, etc. of if not so, then thus: This book of the Law shall not depart out
of thy mouth, but thou shall speak of it day and night. Meditation is too high
a Muse for the mouth. But, Beloved, because there ought to be much meditation
about the Law of God, before a word of it comes out of the mouth; therefore the
Lord says, This book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou
shall meditate therein day and night. The meaning of it is this: As often as
thou shall speak, thou shall meditate; thou shall not speak rashly: it shall
not be the work of thy tongue alone, but of thy mind and tongue together. Now
as in this text, the Lord requires holy conference, of which I shall speak (God
willing) in the next Point: so does he likewise require holy meditation; Thou
shall meditate therein: This carries with it the full force of a command. So
again, Prove. 6.20, 21. My son, keep thy fathers commandment, and forsake not
the law of thy mother: bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them
about thy neck. The phrase of speech is borrowed from Garments or Jewels. The
meaning of it is: Lay them up as safe in your thoughts, tie them as fast to
your hearts, by holy meditation, as men do their clothes; nay, as they do their
chains and jewels, to their bodies: or else deal with them, by frequent
meditating upon them, as men do by those things which they set down in their
book or table, that so they may keep a precise memorandum of them. The like
injunction you find given, Phil 4.8. the text which I alleged in the
confirmation of this Point. So again, 1 Timothy 4.15. says Paul there to Timothy,
Meditate upon these things, give thyself wholly to them, that thy profitting
may appear to all: What things? why, the things of God and bis Gospel. So then,
this duty is necessary in respect of Gods positive and peremptory command.

Secondly, this duty is necessary in respect of God, because it is he that
endued us with reasonable souls, with thinking faculties: it is he that has
given us an ability this way; I mean, an ability or faculty to think or
meditate. The Apostle tells us, Acts 17.28. In him we live, and move, and have
our being. It Is in God that we move; I, and that with the motions of our
minds, no less then with the motions of our bodies: in him; i. e. by and
through him, through his power and goodness, that we are acted and moved in our
minds; 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing,
as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God. The Apostle, you see,
instanceth in this very duty of thinking, and of holy meditation. It Is not in
our own power to think, much less to think a good thought: all our sufficiency
this way is from God. Now then, if it be God, as you hear, that has put into
us thinking faculties; it is needful then that we should return them back upon
him again, by thinking seriously and industriously upon his Name. Nay, you
shall find, that upon this very ground, because God has given us our spirits,
our souls, and the several faculties of them; therefore we are to glorify him
with them. This is evident, 2 Cor. 6.20. the later part of the verse: Therefore
glorify God in your body, and in your spirits, which are Gods: q. d. your
spirits as well as your bodies are Gods, therefore glorify him in your
spirits. And can we better glorify God in and with our spirits, then by
frequent thinking upon his Name? Nay,

Thirdly, consider that God will account with us for our thoughts: we must one
day be as responsible or answerable to God for our thoughts and meditations, as
for any other things or talents whatsoever: Eccles. 12.14. At that day of
revelation (for so the day of account is sometimes called in Scripture) we
shall be made like a transparent, pellucid; and diaphanous body; and all shall
be laid naked and open: the books of Gods Omniscience and man's Conscience shall
be opened: thy secretest thoughts, thy most reserved, retired, and sequestered
meditations, shall be as legible in thy forehead, as if they were written with
the most glittering sunbeams upon a wall of Crystal. Not only men's words and
actions, but their thoughts, are all in print in Heaven, and God will in that
day read them aloud in the ears of all the World; although no heart in the
earth be privy to them but their own. That is worth your diligent observation
to this purpose, which you find, 1 Cor. 4.5. Therefore judge nothing before
the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things
of darkness, and will manifest the counsels of the hearts. What are more dark
or hidden then men's inward thoughts? we may call them hidden things of
darkness: yet even these, will God bring to light, these will he make manifest
at that day. The Apostle, as I conceive, speaks this for the encouragement of
the Saints; he encourages them to the very duty I am now upon: though they
have been called hypocrites, and disgraced; though they have had the dirt of a
thousand scandals cast in their faces, yet there is a day coming, when God will
take an account of your thoughts; your reproaches shall be wiped away, and your
thinking upon the Name of God shall be brought in open view.

And then fourthly, as God will in justice recompense wicked men, for the evil
and sinful managing; so he will in mercy reward the fearers of his Name, for
the right and holy management of their thoughts. When David entertained but a
thought or purpose of building an house for God, although God forbade him to do
it; yet he rewarded that thought and determination of David, in his seed, 2 Samuel 7.16. So when the Prodigal purposed with himself to return home to his
Father, you may see how it was rewarded, Luke 15.18, 19, etc. and therefore
says the Apostle, in the text before alleged, 1 Cor. 4.5. later part of the
verse, Then shall every man have praise of God. What, every man? Will God
praise those who are praiseless? will he praise the proud and covetous, the
drunkards and unclean? will he flatter men in their sin, and sow pillows of
commendation under their elbows? No: the Apostles meaning is, every man that is
praise worthy, every good and faithful man; every true believer, all sincere
and honest hearts, whose thoughts, counsels, and meditations, have been aright;
every such a man shall have praise of God.

And thus you see that this duty is necessary; as also, how many ways it is
necessary in respect of God. This is evident likewise in the text that I am now
upon.

But then in the second place, this thoughtfulness upon the Name of God is
needful in regard of our selves. Hereby, in the first place, we shall evidence
unto our own souls and consciences, that we are men and women truly fearing
God: This is in my text set down as the property or distinguishing character of
holy and godly men, that they thought upon his Name: Nay, they are conjoined
inseparably; they were such as feared God, and thought upon his Name. Those
beasts under the Law which chewed not the cud, and divided not the hoof, were
not to be eaten of; they were unclean. I could give you diverse significations
and applications of dividing the hoof, and chewing of the cud: Willet in his
eleventh Question upon this Chapter, alleging many: I shall at present speak
only of that which conduces to my purpose. The parting the hoof in twain,
signifies the right discerning of the Word and Will of God, when we are able
to judge of it, not carnally, but spiritually: 2. Chewing of the cud signified
the serious meditation of the Name and Law of God day and night; which is the
food of our souls. Well then, as those beasts were unclean which divided not
the hoof and chewed the cud; so those men and women are spiritually unclean,
unholy, and unsanctified, who do not discern spiritual things, and often recall
them to their minds, to meditate or to ruminate upon them.

2. This duty is needful in respect of our selves, because thoughts are the
original and principles of action; meditation is the rise and fountain both of
communication and conversation; of words and of practices: it causes the
stream or current of both these to run either clear or muddy. The progress or
method to action is, you must know, in this manner.

1. The Thoughts do excite and stir up the Affections; Affections do kindle
upon Thoughts, as Tinder does upon the striking of a spark of fire.

2. The Affections they carry and command the Will, even as winds do the ship.

3. The Will commands all the inferior powers to execute or to put in act that
which the Thoughts have suggested, the Affections seconded, and it self
accepted.

Now then, forasmuch as thoughts carry such an influence and tendencie unto
action, good Reason why we should holily and religiously employ them.

Thus far of the second Motive to the duty. I shall run over the rest with more
brevity, and proceed as far in them as the remaining time will give me leave.

Well then, in the second place, serious and diligent meditation upon the Name
of God, as it is a needful, so it is an excellent duty, such a duty as will
transform us into the image of God, from glory to glory. 2 Cor. 3.18. says the
Apostle there, But we all, with open face bebolding as in a glass the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord. As we by looking upon the glory, holiness, and excellency
of God; so likewise by meditating upon the glory, holiness, and excellency of
God, are changed into the same image: i. e. we are made conformable unto him,
we receive as it were the engravings of holiness upon our souls, by meditating
upon the holy One. As by a good concoction and digestion, our meat is
incorporated into, and assimilated unto us; so, by meditation, which is
spiritual concoction, we are assimilated and made like unto that Name upon
which we meditate. We read, Exodus 34.29. that when Moses had been with the Lord
upon the mount, his face did so shine, that Aaron and the children of Israel
were afraid to come nigh him. Beloved, as long as a man is in the duty of holy
meditation, as long as he is thinking upon the Name of God, he is with God, he
is in communion and fellwoship with him: and Oh, this will set a glistering
luster and brightness upon his heart; it will cause the face of his heart to
shine. Let me tell you, for your encouragement, that the way to be an excellent
Christian, is to be a holily contemplative Christian. Holy meditation will
render you, with the Kings daughter, all glorious within. I shall enlarge no
more upon this.

In the third place (and so I shall conclude for the present) Holy meditation
is a sweet and comfortable exercise. David met with marrow and fatness, honey
and honeycomb, yea, with surpassing delight and pleasure in this duty: and
therefore says he, ( Psalm 139.17.) How precious are thy thoughts unto me, O
God! how great is the sum of them! We may take the words two ways: 1. How
precious are thy thoughts! i.e. how sweet and precious are these thoughts of
mercy which flow from thy heart to me, which pass from thy soul to mine? But
this acceptance of the words is not for my present turn; and therefore in the
second place, you may take them thus, with Mr. Ainsworth, in his Annotations
upon the place: How precious are thy thoughts! i. e. The thoughts that I have
of thee, the thoughts that are raised out of my heart up to thee; Oh how
precious are they! Divine meditation (Beloved) is a very heaven upon earth;
it is an having of one foot already (if I may so speak) in the porch of heaven;
it is a fore-taste of eternal life: it is to the Saints, as the fiery chariot was
to Elijah; by it they are transported from earth to heaven in their spirits;
nay, so far ravished in their thinking upon Gods Name, as that sometimes they
know not those things that are before them, they mind not those persons that
are about them; but being in the body, they are as it were carried out of the
body, with spiritual ravishment: they taste such incomparable sweetnesses in
the good Name of God, as that they are not able to express them: even as the
chewing of our meat makes us to taste much more sweetness in it; so this
heavenly practice of meditation causes us to feel much more sweetness in the
Name of God. Meditation ever brings with it delight: therefore see how David
does knit them together, Psalm 119.15, 16. I will meditate in thy precepts, and
will have respect unto thy ways. I will delight my self in thy statutes; I will
not forget thy Word. That holy object about which a man's thoughts are much
conversant, he cannot but take much delight and complacencie in. As it argues
love to the object, Psalm 119.97. so, I say, it argues delight in the object.

And then, in the last place, to conclude the Motives; this is an exceeding
profitable and advantageous duty; and that diverse ways: I will name only two
or three of them.

1. Meditation turns the promises into marrow: it not only tastes, but
cheweth the promises and manifestations of God unto his people: and therefore
it is not only sweet and comfortable, as I told you before; but it is
profitable too. Read Psalm 63.5, 6. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow
and fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips: when I remember
thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night-watches. As there is all
manner of pleasure, so is there all manner of profit in the believing
meditations of God; they make the promises as a Royal feast to faith.
Meditation is not only an effect of faith, but it is an excellent means to
strengthen faith.

2. It Is profitable for the avoiding of evil: Meditation prevents the intrusion
of vain and sinful thoughts, of foul and fleshly lusts; which otherwise would
swarm in the soul: it leaves the devil no room for his black and hellish
suggestions, for his blasphemous injections. It defeats the world, which
otherwise would be ready to catch us, to get in to defile our hearts.

Nay, 3. It promotes our spiritual good: hereby we get into acquaintance with
God, the fountain of all goodness: hereby we attain unto a greater measure of
spiritual wisdom, grace, holiness; we prove tall and experienced Christians,
filled with all knowledge.

Nay, this holy meditation, in a word, is profitable to others; for why? it
fits us for holy and Christian conference.

Thus, and many other ways, is this Exercise profitable. Well then, you have
heard what an encouragement there is to the practice of this dudy. I come, in
the next place, to show you the means whereby you may be enabled to the
performance of it.

The Means shall be of two sorts.

1. Negative. 2. Positive.
By Negative, I intend those sins or impediments which we must labor against,
if we will fruitfully think upon the Name of God.

In the first place, avoid Pride, and a conceitedness of a sufficiency in your
selves to conceive of God, or to think of any thing else that is good. You have
heard before, what the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 3.5. Pride hinders the right
improvement of every holy duty, and communion with God in every holy duty. God
indeed has promised to impart himself and his secrets to the humble, Psalm
25.9. but God will have no acquaintance with proud persons; he looks upon them
afar off, as the Psalmist speaks. This causes a man's going out from God
indeed, but it hinders his drawing nigh to God, as in other exercises, so in
this of holy contemplation. God commonly leaves such to dote and busy their
brains about Questions and vain Disputations, which tend to nothing but strife
and ostentation. See what the Apostle speaks of a proud and self-conceited man,
1 Timothy 6.4, 5. He is proud: what follows? knowing nothing, but doting about
questions, and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil
surmisings; perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the
Truth, supposing that gain in godliness. From such withdraw thy self. It is
just with God, to leave proud hearts to unprofitable studies.

2. If you will religiously meditate upon the Name of God, take heed, as of
Pride, so of Passion: Passion carries us out of our selves, and carries us too
from the business and duty before us. As an angry man's discourse runs wild, so
his thoughts and cogitations run wild also. As the passions of the
Concupiscible appetite, and intemperancies of youth, carry a man beyond his
bounds; and therefore the Prodigal repenting, is said to come to himself, Luke
15.17. so likewise do the passions of the Irascible appetite. Anger disorders
and discomposeth the spirit. Passions in the mind, are like a tempest in the
air, which do exceedingly disturb the mind. Many a man, like a ship at sea,
has been over-set and sunk with the violent gusts and whirlwindes of his own
spirit. As a turbulent heart can neither hear nor pray as it ought; so so
neither can it think or meditate as it ought. Passion unfits the heart to and
for any religious duty.

Well may such a one exact folly, as Solomon speaks; but I warrant you, while
he is thus distempered, he wo'n't lift up many holy thoughts; these do require
a sedate and quiet spirit, free from the confused hurrie of troublesome
passions. And therefore, in the second place, see that you eschew passion. And
then

3. If you would conscionably perform this duty, beware of earthly-mindedness.
Worldliness or earthly-mindedness divides and distracts the heart, fills it
with noisome lusts; but indisposeth it to the thinking of God, or upon the
things of God. This corruption, if nourished, will eat all manner of goodness
out of the heart. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 7.32, 33. But I would have you
without carefulness. He that is unmarried, cares for the things that belong to
the Lord, how he may please the Lord: but he that is married, cares for the
things that are of the world, how he may please his wife. Implying, that an
excessive and an immoderate engaging of the heart in the world, is one main
cause why a man cannot take care for the things of the Lord as he ought to do:
such a man, such a woman, cannot attend upon the Lord in any duty, without
distraction. Mat. 6.24. says our Savior there, No man can serve two masters:
i. e. two masters of contrary interests, and who issue forth contrary commands.
Every wicked man serves more masters then two: he is a servant to lust; yea, he
serves diverse lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3.3. but yet he serves not that One,
who is infinitely better, and more deserving our service then all: and serving
Mammon, he cannot serve God as he ought, in any service; and therefore not in
that which I am now speaking of. Col. 3.2. Set your affections on things above,
not on things on the earth: q. d. If your thoughts run upon the things of the
earth, they wo'n't carry you out after things above.

And thus much of the Negative means, or rather, the hindrances of this holy
meditation. I come, in the next place, to speak of the Positive helps: and with
them I shall conclude this days public Exercise.

1. If you desire to think upon the Name of God, then begin the day with the
thoughts of him, and of his mercies renewed upon you, not only every morning,
but every moment. This seems to be David's constant course, from such texts as
these are, Psalm. 5.3. Psalm. 59.16. Psalm. 88.13. and the like you may find in
many other places, that to begin with the thoughts of God in the morning, is
the way to put the soul into an heavenly frame and temper the whole day
following. We have a saying amongst us, that the morning is a friend to the
Muses: Aurora Musis amica, i. e. the morning is a good studying time. I am
sure, the morning is a great friend to the Graces; it is the best time to begin
our thoughts and meditations; it will dispose the heart to and for communion
with God all the day after. And withal, remember to close up the heart with
God, when you go to bed at night; and, if possibly you can, fall asleep out of
some heavenly meditation. So will your heart be in a better plight when you
awake. He that thus raketh up fire overnight, (as one says) shall find fire
again in the morning. That is the first Means to the Duty in hand.

2. Guard and watch over your hearts all the day long, that they be not drawn
from God, or from the thoughts of him, either by any corruption from within, or
temptation from without. Prove 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence: defend
it from all inroads and incursions from the flesh, world and devil. Keep but
the heart well in tune, and then it will not so easily go out from God.
Beloved, if you suffer your hearts to be scattered up and down, upon earthly
vanities, it will be far to seek when you should wait upon God, either in
Prayer or Meditation; as a wild horse turned to range up and down into a wild
Common, that can hardly be taken when he should be sadled. As you should be in
the fear of the Lord all the day long; so should you be raising, elevating, and
winding up your hearts to God all the day long. You should hold communion with
God, even in the duties of your particular callings, and civil employments.
Phil. 3.20. says the Apostle there, Our conversation is in heaven. The word
(...), conversation, in the Greek, is properly rendered thus: Our civil life, or
our civil conversation is in heaven: q. d. we exercise our general callings in
our particular; we go about earthly businesses with heavenly minds;
extracting, by a Divine Alchymie, heavenly medi^^^ion^ out of earthly objects
and occasions. And I conceive there is something to this purpose in that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.39. where he says, Brethren, let every man wherein he is
earth, abide with God. How does a man abide, with God in his particular
calling? not only by keeping within the bounds and limits of that calling
wherein God has placed him; but also executing the duties of it as in the
sight of God, by minding God in the several passages and occurrences of it.
This also is to abide with God in our calling: and this we must do, if we will
be conscionable to the duty enjoined.

3. Would you have your thoughts to be set upon the right object, upon God and
goodness, with these godly ones here in my text? Then hold a strict hand over
your thoughts: be often in and upon the examination of them. Evils, you must
know, begin first in the thoughts, Mat. 15.19. For out of the heart proceed
evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness,
blasphemies. First, evil thoughts; and what then? murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies. Evil thoughts are set in the
front of this black Roll. When God would express the wickedness of the old
world, he says, Genesis 6.5. That every imagination of the thoughts of their
heart was only evil continually. The imagination gives shape to every thing
that the mind works upon. The reason of Atheism, is Blasphemy in the thoughts;
the reason of worldliness, is some wicked thought that lies hid in the bosom:
and therefore says God, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts. You must not only mark your way, but your
thoughts: trace every corrupt desire, every inclination, every affection, every
transient motion: whatever passes through your hearts in the whole day, call it
to an audit, set upon the trial of it. Our thoughts are even infinite, nimble,
slippery; and therefore we had the more need to watch them, and to set upon the
search of them; and having found of what nature they are, and of what tendencie
they are; cherish the good, and check the bad. One evil thought, one sinful
cogitation, being uncontrolled, and given way to; O how may it vex and disquiet
our hearts, when we come to lie upon our deathbeds! As David dealt with his
ways, so do you with your thoughts: I considered my ways, says he: so do you
your thoughts.

4. If you would think of God, and the things of God; then heighten your love
to God, and the things of God. Strong affections make strong impressions. and
cause great thoughts of heart. A man cannot but think much of that which he
loves much, and therefore says David, in Psalm 119. verse 97. O how I love thy
law! it is my meditation all the day: q. d. I do abundantly love thy law: I do
love it so greatly, as that I cannot well express how greatly I love it: O how
I love thy law! and therefore it is, that I am so much in the meditation of it.
Be sure of it, that our infinite wanderings, and woeful trifling away of our
golden hours in idle and evil thoughts, is caused very much by our coldness and
luke-warmness in our love to God, and the things that are of divine
concernment. Would we but prefer God, and the things of God, incomparably
before all other things whatsoever: would we once make supernatural and
heavenly things our chief portion and treasure; then would our hearts be
chiefly set upon them, and our thoughts mostly run on them. See what our
Savior says, Matthew. 6.21. Where your treasure is, there will your heart be
also.

5. And then in the last place, to this end, make use of Prayer too. You know
that God is both the heart-maker, and the heart-mender: desire him to put your
souls into a spiritual frame and temper; to direct your hearts unto the
remembrance of his Name. Pray for your selves, as David did once for his
people, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. Oh Lord God of Abraham. Isaac, and Israel our fathers,
keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy
people; and prepare our hearts unto the^. In like manner, let us pray, Lord,
keep thy Name for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of our hearts, and
prepare our hearts unto thee: or as he prays, Psalm 19.14. Let the words of my
mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my
strength and my redeemer. Pray that God would raise up your hearts, and ravish
your hearts; that you may so meditate upon his Name, that you may have respect
unto all his ways.

I should come to give you some Rules or Directions concerning this holy
meditation: But of them (God willing) the next time.

Now because circumstances bear such a weight in every action, as that they
either make or mar it; before I speak of the form and manner of our thinking
upon the Name of God, I shall deliver a word or two concerning the
circumstances of Meditation. There are two circumstances to be heeded in this
duty.

1. The circumstance of Time. 2. The circumstance of Place.
I begin with the circumstance of Time. Though it cannot be denied, but that a
Christian should have daily converse and communion with God; he should be
always ejaculating and raising up of his heart to heaven, saying with David,
Psalm 36.4. later part of the verse: Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.
Though he ought to take occasion, even from those things which do occur and
offer themselves unto his outward senses, to aspire and climb up to God in his
heart; yet without doubt, every Christian should redeem some ^it and convenient
portion of time, and set it apart from other employments, that so he may
solemaly and seriously think upon the Name of God: he must not only do it
occasionally, but he must appoint some time or other on set purpose, that he
may the more thoroughly discharge this necessary duty: at which time he should
concentre, and draw as it were into one point, all the powers and faculties of
his soul, and command them to attend this heavenly exercise, as much as may be,
without distaction. And I suppose, Beloved, it were no great task, to fetch in
the practice of some of the holy men of God this way. Isaac went out to
meditate at the eventide, Genesis 24.63. It Is conceived, Isaac did this usually,
though at this time peradventure more earnestly, by reason of that important
business he had in hand; which was his marriage. It seems that Isaac did
ordinarily go forth about even-tide (which was, says Mr. Ainsworth, at the
ninth hour of the day; with us, the third hour in the afternoon, about three of
the clock) to meditate. This was Isaac's set-time for meditation, as (I say)
it is generally conceived. So David; the Name of God, and the Word of God, was
his meditation all the day, Psalm 119.97. and in the night, Psalm 119.55. yet
there are some texts which lead us to think, that David had his set and solemn
times for this purpose: amongst others, I will instance only in that one,
Psalm 139.18. the last words of the verse: When I awake, I am still with thee.
Some indeed refer this to the last resurrection; and give out David's meaning
to be this: When I arise out of my grave, I shall be still with thee, I shall
ever be with the Lord.

But we need not to force the text: as David had other set-times to meditate
upon God, so the morning was one of them: When I awake out of my sleep, or, as
soon as I awake out of my sleep, I am with thee in holy meditation. So that,
Beloved, ye are not only to maintain a constant communion with God in this
duty; but there must be some time laid aside on set purpose for this duty.

The second circumstance that I shall speak of, is the circumstance of Place;
and here, as I spoke of the time, so I may speak of the place for holy
meditation: As at all times we should think upon the Name of God, so in all
places; not only in this place appointed for the public service of God, but
in all other places; in your houses, in your shops, and places of trading; at
board, and at bed; at home, and abroad. But yet, for preventing of distraction,
and considering that Satan is ready to take all advantages against us,
laboring might and main, by outward objects, to distract and divide the
faculties of our souls with impertinent or unprofitable thoughts, yea with
sinful and corrupt thoughts; therefore I conceive it necessary, that the place
where we meditate most seriously and solemnly, should be retired and secret.
The devil well knows how near and familiar earthly things are to our senses,
and how remote and far distant heavenly and supernatural things are; therefore
he would fain work upon our carnality, by presenting earthly objects, and by
them would fain convey to our hearts earthly-mindedness; and so bereave us of
the benefit of meditation. So that, I say, to prevent the policy and malice of
the devil, it is best, whenever we desire in good earnest to set upon this duty,
to withdraw our selves into some private place, into our chambers, studies, or
closets. What our Savior speaks concerning the duty of Prayer, we may apply
unto the duty of holy meditation: Matthew. 6.6. When thou prayest, enter into thy
closet: so, when thou meditatest, enter into thy closet; withdraw as much as
may be from the noise and clutter of the world; do it as privately and
reservedly as may be. I might give you some instances for this too. Isaac did
it in the field, as you may find in the text before alleged, Genesis 24.63. he
was private in meditation and soliloquie. Upon this passage of Isaac, I find
one to have this observation. Domitian, says he, about the beginning of his
Empire, usually sequestered himself from company an hour every day; but did
nothing the while, but catch Flies, and kill them with a penknife: but Isaac
sequestered himself from company, to a better-purpose; he improved his
solitariness for deep meditation and soliloquie. David performed this duty in
his bed, Psalm 63.6. and therefore says he, Psalm 4.4. Commune with your own
heart upon your bed.

And thus have I given you a word or two concerning the circumstances that are
to be considered in and about this duty. Before I come to the form or manner of
performance, I might speak something of the matter or substance of the duty.
But I shall only hint at this, because I have spoken already to this purpose,
in the opening of this part of the text, And thought upon his Name. That which
we think upon, must be the Name of God. A little word, but of large extent. We
must think upon all that is possible for us creatures to know of God: think
upon his Essence, think upon his Attributes, Wisdom, Power, Justice, Mercy,
Infiniteness, Holiness, Omniscience, Omnipresence, etc. We must think upon his
Ordinances, Ways, Word, and Worship; think upon his work^, whether common to
the world, as creation and providence; or as more proper and peculiar to his
Church, as Election, Redemotion, Justification, Sanctification. Upon these must
we think, and whatsoever is comprised under the Name of God.

But I pass by this, and come unto the more particular directions. I desire you
to observe these following Rules, in reference unto Meditation.

1. Think upon God primarily, chiefly, and in the first place. Let the Name of
God have the first fruits of your thoughts: begin with God in the morning, as
David did, in the place fore-alleadged, Psalm 139.18 and as the Church did,
Isai. 26.9 With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea, with my spirit
within (...) will I seek thee early: i.e. I have not only thought upon thee in
my most retired thoughts; but thou have had my first, as well as my last
thoughts: I ended with thee at night, and I began with thee in the morning. Oh
Beloved, as it is a sweet thing to close our eyes, so it is our duty to open our
eyes, and to begin the day with God. I shall not stand upon this, because I
spoke something to this purpose in the Means. That rule of our Savior is
general, and therefore holds here: Matthew. 6.33. But seek ye first the kingdom
of God, and his righteousness: Let heavenly things or objects have the
priority, superiority, and principality in your thoughts. No doubt but it is
lawful for us to think of our necessary businesses: but we must think of them
in their proper place and season; secondarily, subordinately, and in the second
place: Be sure that God have the Primitiae and first fruits of your thoughts.
But in the second place:

2. Think upon the Name of God sollicitously and carefully, and with all your
might. So much is implied in that word (...), Matt. 6.33. The word seeking
includes pain, toil, and labor; not an idle velleity, or a supine and lazy
wish. If we urge the extent of the word, it notes so to require or exact, as
does an importunate disputer in the Schools, or a violent tormentor on the
Rack. This Greek word implies the same that the Hebrew word hashabh does in my
text: it carries with it, as I told you in the opening of this phrase, the
intention of the mind. I confess, that with Martha, we are apt to trouble our
heads about many things, apt to turmoil our spirits with fretting, vexing,
carking and corroding cares and thoughts of the things of this life; quite
contrary to that Gospel-precept, Mat. 6.31. and Phil. 4.6. This, I say, we are
prone and ready enough unto: Oh that we could but more largely, more
affectionately, more carefully and industriously think upon the things of God!
This is a duty of the first Commandment; yea, this is that first and great
Commandment, Thoushalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy
mind, and with all thy might. This duty of meditation upon the Name of God,
requires much earnestness.

3. Practice this duty cheerfully, readily and willingly: The worldly man needs
not to be invited to mind his profit, the voluptuous man his pleasure, or the
ambitious man his honor: these they do naturally; and what men do naturally,
that they do freely and willingly. Oh but how many invitations and inducements
must Christians have to this duty! how averse from it, how backward are we unto
it! We can think of any thing more easily and readily, then we can think of
God, and the things of God. I beseech you that fear God to consider, that God
loves not to strain upon any, neither regards he an involuntary or unwilling
service. It Is said indeed, 2 Cor. 9.7. later part of the verse: God loves a
cheerful giver. And what is spoken of that service, is as true of any other.
God loves to see us set upon our duties cheerfully, and with a willing mind:
this is acceptable and delightful to him, Isa. 1.19. Psalm 110.3. God expects a
free and a Princely spirit from his people toward his service: Exodus 35.5. A
true worshipper of God is not thrust and driven on by an outward written Law;
but finds a law written in his own heart. They who have felt the day of Divine
power, are not acted by humane power, by the coertions and ordinances of men;
they are under no constraint, in this duty of meditation especially, but that
of the love of God, and of Christ. If God shall delight in what thou do, let
it be thy delight and recreation to think upon his Name. I must not stand long
upon these particulars, because I see the time hasteneth away. Well then, in
the fourth place,

4. Think upon God soberly, not thinking to pry into Gods secrets further then
he has been pleased to reveal them, Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret things belong unto
the Lord our God: but those things which are revealed, belong unto us. This is
one of those places which in the Hebrew is marked with a special note, to the
end that we should take special notice of it. As we must not think of our
selves beyond sobriety, according to that of the Apostle, Romans 12.3. so neither
must we think of God beyond sobriety, or above what is written of him: if we
do, we shall quickly lose our selves, and be swallowed up in a Maze or
Whirl-pool of errors. Ye may sooner drain the Ocean with a shell or spoon,
then the perfections of God, with our largest understandings: Job 38.22. Have
thou entered into the treasures of the snow? or have thou seen the treasures of
the hail? There are secrets in Nature, which were never entered into by Art: the
treasures of the snow and of the hail descend upon us; but we cannot ascend
into the treasures of them. We cannot enter into natural things: how then shall
we enter into spiritual? how shall we enter into, or our thoughts comprehend
the God of spirits? 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has propared for them that
love him: and if the things that God has prepared for man, are not yet entered
into his heart; how can God, who has prepared these things, enter into his
heart? And therefore be modest and sober, keep within the bounds of the Word,
in your divinest contemplations.

5. Think of God spiritually. To frame any gross, carnal, or earthly image of
God in our minds; or to represent him to our understandings, by the similitude
or likeness of any creature whatsoever; this is plain idolatry, forbidden in
the second Commandment. See what God says, D^ut 4.15, 16, 17, 18. Nay, this
was a chief part of their Hellenism or Gentilism, of whom the Apostle speaks,
Romans 1.23. However, this may be very helpful to us in our thoughts of God, to
conceive of him as of God in Christ. Christ is, as the author to the Hebrews
tell us, Heb. 1.3. The brightness of his glory, and the expross image of his
person. Christ is as it were the ladder of ascension, by which we may climb up
safely unto God. Doubtless we may six our minds upon the humane nature, in
which the Godhead dwells bodily, and to which it is personally united. And under
any other character or resemblance, we may not think of God.

6. Think upon God reverently: We are bid to serve him with fear, Psalm 2.11.
i.e. with a holy, filial, and reverential fear. If we do not thus think upon
his Name, we take his Name in vain; we defile and pollute his Name. Thus those
wicked Priests, spoken of in the beginning of this Prophecy of Malachi, are
said to despise the Name of God, yea to pollute it: and why was it? why because
they thought that any thing was good enough for God, Mal 1.6, 7, 8. Beloved,
the Name of God is a great, dreadful, and terrible Name; and therefore we had
need to think of it with prepared hearts, and composed affections. While we
think upon his Name, let us awe his Name, and dread his Name. But I can enlarge
my self no further, the time being past. And therefore, in the last place,

7. Perform this duty constantly: not only primarily, sollicitously,
cheerfully, soberly, spiritually, and reverently; but perpetually and
constantly. These godly ones here in thy text, as they did not confer together
only once or twice, but often; so they often thought upon the Name of God:
they did it habitually, it was their usual practice. We should never give over
thinking upon the Name of God, until our thinking upon his Name be impoved to
and for practice. Hos. 6.3. says the Prophet there, Then shall we know, if we
follow on to know the Lord: i.e. We shall experimentally know the Lord, if we
shall prosecute knowledge, and not content our selves with measures already
attained.

And so much for this Point, and for this time.

FINIS.

