TRVTH Seeks no CORNERS: OR, Seven CASES of Conscience Humbly presented to the
Army and Parliament.

Claud. Nec tibi quid liceat, sed quid fecisse decebit, Occurrat.

Have in your thought,
Not what you may effect,
But what you ought.
He seldom returns in safety that fights unjustly.

Cl. Printed in the Year, 1659.

Gentlemen,
THe ensuing Cases of Conscience are intended only to set you strait, wherein
you have swerved from the way of Truth and Charity; though they be not so well
ordered, yet they were better meant, and the true purport of them only is, if
possible, that I amongst others might cast my mite also into the Treasury, for
the safety and preservation of this most glorious and most splendid Island,
from slavery, bondage, war and blood.

Gentlemen Soldiers, sometimes you know its better to make an honorable
retreat, then to hazard your country, by engaging an over-powerful enemy, and
many times more discretion by far: So whether it be not much more convenient
for your selves and this Nation, to retreat from this heap of confusion,
disorder, and incertainties, wherein we are now plunged, to that settlement,
with some amendments, wherein the generality of the Nation of late did so much
rejoice.

1 Because its the likeliest way to come to a settlement, and at unity amongst
our selves, and to have a free Parliament called and chosen, and so a
conclusion put to the distractions of the Land, which are otherwise likely to
continue. 2 Because in so doing you will discharge a good conscience, you will
perform your vows and covenants, oaths, protestations to God, your Country, and
the Protector, which else I cannot in my poor judgment discern how you can
eseape the dint and stroke of Gods judgments. 3 You will wipe off that calumny
and reproach which will for ever remain upon you and your posterity, of being
some of you perjured and forsworn, except Sir H. V. can help you out with a
distinction to salve your consciences for a while, and all of you Nallifidians,
men of no Faith or truth: For my part I speak the truth and lie not, I know not
which way you can escape these most notorious imputations; all that I have
further to say is, that you would accept these things kindly from the hand of
your faithful friend to serve you.
Truth seeks no Corners: OR, Seven Cases of Conscience humbly presented to the
Army and Parliament.
1 Case. HOw we can in conscience so highly magnify this Convention, by the
specious Epi^hites and titles of the Parliament of England, the Rep esentatives
of the People, a Commonwealth-Government, a Free State* and what not? Because;

First, there is now remaining but abo^t 80 persons, when the complete number
should be near five hundred, and yet these Gentlemen have the confidence of
terming themselves the Parliament, the Representatives of the People, etc. and
doubtless esteem it not an ace less then Treason for any man to deliver his
opinion otherwise. Now suppose these Gentlemen should trust an Army of ten
thousand men (as the people has trusted them) to defend such a country or
place; this Army, through the casualty of war, and the like, are reduced to
about fifteen hundred, or two thousand at most; but so it is, having power in
their hands. they will admit of no other supply, though there be the same
reason, hazard and danger, as at first; would not this Parliament judge and
conceive, think you, that these were dangerous persons, and ran a direct course
to hazard, overturn, and ruin all: or for the East India Company to send a 100
Factors and Agents to manage their affairs to their best advantage in the
East Indies, and that eighty or more of this hundred should miscarry by the
way, do you think it either fit, or would it not be presumption for the twenty
remaining, to undertake that trust, and the mannagement of that, which was both
trusted, ordered, and disposed of for a hundred; or having power in their
hands, they will admit of no other help or assistance from their imployers,
whose servants they are. Now the plain and naked case is, that if such a kind
of demeanor was to be seen in, and practiced by others whether it were not
most abominable, tyrannical, and the greatest usurpation lightly imaginable.

Secondly, because the people of England, yea, according to their own
qualifications and rules, have entrusted other persons to sit in Parliament
several times since; and if this be a rule, which doubtless it is, that the
people were not made for Parliaments, but Parliaments were made and constituted
for the peoples good, then the people, and their sense and notion of things,
ought to be preferred, accepted, and entertained before ten or twenty men's
apprehensions of things, for the rest stand but for ciphers, who are only a
remnant, or a broken end of a rejected and distrusted Parliament: for it is a
strange Solecisme in Economy, or governing a man's family, or household affairs,
that I shall not have liberty to alter or change my servants, though under the
greatest trust, if I have opportunity put into my hand to fit my self (as I
conceive) with more able, honest, and faithful persons; and having thus
furnished and fitted my self, that the old servants that I rejected, finding me
either from home, or otherwise dispose of my self, should thrust themselves
into my employment without my consent, leave, or approbation, is certainly a
temper not to be endured or tolerated amongst men.

Thirdly, because the present power did not only allow, but approve and commend
the Armies act in dissolving or incapacitating their Brethren in 1648. although
they were the major or prevailing part of that Parliament; then if the Armies
power and practice was good and commendable in 1648. upon the most eminent and
prevailing part of a Parliament, what is it that has made the difference, that
their power and practice was not as good in 1653. upon themselves? For
certainly if I allow and approve of any thing done to my brother, I cannot
disallow or disapprove of the same thing done to my self: so that it plainly
appears, that if the Armies authority was good which they exercised upon their
brethren, their Fellow-Trustees, it must needs be good also upon themselves;
and if it were neither lawful to the one, nor to the other in 1648. nor in
1653. then ought they all to return to their trust, had not the people passed
their judgment, and delegated their trust to others in the mean time: so that
these three things considered, the question and case of conscience is, how
either they, or any man else, can lawfully give them the terms and appellations
of a Parliament, the Representatives of the people, etc.

2 Case. How then in conscience can these Gentlemen thus impose or irrogate
themselves upon the people as their Parliament, when they have not their
approbation or consent, let any man's conscience but speak, without quenching,
smotheting, or diverting it? and will it not speak usurpation and tyranny,
because the people of England have always thought meet, being assembled in
Parliament, to have their full number? Now for these Gentlemen to deprive the
poor people of their native right, that they can have either none, or as good
as none to plead for their rights, and to keep this poor Nation in quiet.

Whether the thirty tyrants of Athens ever exercised greater injury to the
Athenians, then is now imposed and offered to this poor Land, for we are
subjected to the wills of such a number, both lives and fortunes; and yet that
which is worst of all, we are flapt in the mouth with a free Parliament, a
Commonwealth-Government, a Free State: even as David said, Their words are
smother then oil, but they have war in their hearts: and as the Scripture
speaks elsewhere* ye have a name to live, but indeed are dead. By this rule we
shall shortly be brought to believe any thing, as the poor blind Papists are;
if their Leaders say that flesh is fish, they will eat it, though on a Friday,
which otherwise they would not. It Is to be feared we shall shortly call and
term all things by contrariety, light darkness, midnight noonday, for we begin
fair, calling our greatest thraldomes liberty, and where we are most deprived
of our rights, freedom, and run our selves into the greatest dangers that we
may do so: but these things considered, which is but a touch, God knows, of
what might be said, how can these Gentlemen, nay those men of conscience (for
so I believe of some of them) term themselves the Parliament, the peoples
Trustees, and not blush, and their consciences not fly in their faces.

3 Case. How in conscience then can these persons in power dispense with, or
how dare they to presume the selling or disposing of any public Lands and
Revenues, or impose any tax upon the people: (beside the inconveniency of
laying taxes for if some Counties have no Trustees, they are like to bear the
burden of the rest) and if any persons should buy or sell with these men, whose
authority is so questionable, certainly they had need have great pennyworths;
but it may be if they sell any, the money may be spent in another Country; but
(...) ^ll is matter of conscience to both buyer and seller, only Cav^ Emptor.

4 Case. Is to the Army, how in conscience you should give your power to that
which is not, and so inslave your selves and the people to a mere usurpation;
Is this the fruit of your valor? Is this the product of our blood and
treasure? Is this the issue and end of all, to give us and ours up to ten or
twelve men's humors, and none of the best neither, for the rest signify little
you know? who would have said that the army should be so far given over to a
mind void of judgment, to subject themselves to a shadow, and to turn so
ignoble, as to wait for Commissions as for an alms at the hands of a power of
their own making, and that which is worse, by this means to erect and build up
that now, which has cost so much blood to pull down, viz. usurpation over the
people, and a power against their minds. It seems to many of your friends, that
you are left of God, your hearts they fail you, your glory is departed, your
zeal waxen cold, you are even dead while you live, and want but burying, and
the solemnities of your Funeral cannot be far off, for you are already dead;
when the sentence is once past, you know the party is dead in Law, though the
execution be deferred. Its to be feared you indeed are Sampson-like, he thought
when Delilah told him the Philistines be upon thee, he had retained his wonted
strength, but it was not so, Judge. 16.20. Then she said, the Philistines be
upon thee Sampson: and he awoke out of his sleep, and said, I will now go out
as at other times before, and shake my self; but he knew not that the Lord was
departed from him; therefore the Philistines took him, and put out his eyes,
and brought him down to Gaza, and bound him with fetters, and he did grind in
the Prisonhouse.

If you in conscience find it otherwise, that your hands do not hang down, and
your hearts faint not, your love to God and goodness is as potent as ever, it
would be the rejoicing of my heart; but I am in good earnest, jealous over you,
I hope with a godly jealousy, and afraid.

5 Case. Whether in conscience there be any lawful power in England at this
day, but the Protector, and the Army; for if all lawful power be derived from
the people, then the Pro^c^tor and Army doubtless are the Supreme Authority,
until a Parliament be chosen freely by the people, whose determinations ought
to stand: For first, the peoples testimony, as well by Parliament, as
otherwise, intitles the Protector sufficiently. The Army was raised by the
power of the people lawfully assembled, before any force or interruption
whatsoever, that so these two are coordinate, and have the same
superscription, viz. the stamp of the peoples consent and approbation, which
none else can pretend unto; its proposed to your consciences, let them be the
sole judges in the Case.

6 Whether the Army in conscience can stand still, and see the Protector
himself, and all his right and interest laid wast, and trampled upon as mire in
the street, and also by the carriage of theirs, render themselves unto the
world most unfaithful? Do they think in conscience that all their applications
to him, and all their promises, nay, their oaths also will not pursue them unto
destruction? Shall not the God of all the earth do right, when you even forced
him, or rather over-perswaded him to dissolve the last and most free
Parliament? what promises, what vows, what engagements was then made, and
before; all that I can desire is, that you were free from them, and disobliged:
Are your vows, and promises, and engagements at Triploe-Heath, at St. Albones
so sacred, as to be insisted upon, even upon the hazard of all, and those since
under your hands to the Protector, and other large testimonies and
acknowledgements now to be of no force; certainly if those promises, addresses,
besides proclamations and engagements, both public and private, be not
according to the tenor of them fulfilled, and you go out of the world without
some characters of divine vengeance, its much, and will be a temptation for all
men to engage, swear, vow, promise, and all that can be done by men, and not
much matter whether they keep them or no, for God will not be mocked under any
pretense whatsoever.

7 Whether in conscience the most probable way to preserve the Land in peace in
this Juncture of affairs, and as the face of things seem to appear, be not
first to unite the Army and Protector together by some fit expedients which may
readily be proposed; for we cannot but see, that before the interruption of the
Protectors government, all were in peace, and the Land in great unity, a
thousandfold then since this late alteration, whether therefore there be any
thing seen in it of Gods displeasure, let men judge, for wars and dissentions
are tokens of his anger; and peace the promise of his love, good will, and
blessings.

FINIS.

