May 24, 1649. A true Representation of the present sad and lamentable
condition of the County of Lancaster, and particularly of the Towns of Wigan,
Ashton, and the parts adjacent.
THE hand of God is evidently seen stretched out upon the County, chastening it
with a three-corded scourge of Sword, Pestilence, and Famine, all at once
afflicting it: They have borne the heat and burden of a first and second War,
in an especial manner above other parts of the Nation: through them the two
great bodies of the late Scottish and English Armies passed, and in their very
bowels was that great fighting, bloodshed and breaking. In this County has
the plague of Pestilence been ranging these three years and upward, occasioned
manifestly by the Wars. There is a very great scarsity and dearth of all
provisions, especially of all sorts of grain; particularly that kind by which
that Country is most sustained, which is full six-fold the price that of late
it has been. All trade (by which they have been much supported) is utterly
decayed: it would melt any good heart to see the numerous swarms of begging
poor, and the many families that pine away at home, not having faces to beg:
Very many now craving alms at other men's doors, who were used to give others
alms at their doors: To see palenesse, nay death appear in the cheeks of the
poor; and often to hear of some found dead in their houses or highways for
want of bread. But particularly the Towns of Wigan and Ashton, with the
neighboring parts, lying at present under the sore stroke of God in the
Pestilence: In one whereof are full two thousand poor, who for three months
and upward have been restrained, no relief to be had for them in the ordinary
course of Law, there being none at present to act as Justices of the peace: The
Collections in our Congregations (there only supply hitherto) being generally
very slack and slender, those wanting ability to help who have hearts to pity
them: Most men's Estates, being much drained by the Wars, and now almost quite
exhaust by the present scarsity, and many other burdens incumbent upon them:
There is no bonds to keep in the infected hunger-starved poor, whose breaking
out jeapoardeth all the Neighborhood. Some of them already, being at the
point to perish through famine, have fetched in and eaten Carrion and other
unwholesome food to the destroying of themselves, and increasing of the
infection: And the more to provoke pity and mercy it may be considered, that
this fatal Contagion had its rise evidently from the wounded soldiers of our
Army left there for cure.

All which is certified to some of the Reverend Ministers of the City of
London, by the Major, Minister, and other persons of credit inhabitants in, or
wel-wishers to, and well acquainted with the Town of Wigan, together with four
godly and faithful Ministers of Lanchashire, by providence in this city at
this present.

Now if God shall stir up the hearts of any or more Congregations in and about
the City of London (the premises considered) to yield their charitable
contribution to the necessities of these afflicted and distressed parts and
places, it will be carefully sought after, and thankfully received by Mr. James
Wainewright, Mr. Thomas Markelande, Mr. James Winstanley, and Mr. John Leaver
or some of them, and faithfully disposed according to Christian discretion by
Major General Ashton, William Ashurst, Peter Brooks, Esquires, Mr. Jolly Major
of Wigan, together with Mr. Richard Heyricke, Mr. Charles Herle, Mr. Alexander
Horrockes, and Mr. James Hyet Ministers of the Gospel, or some of them.

of the Town of Wigan. Ambrose Jolly Major James Bradshaw Minister John
Standish Bailiff Ralph Markland Bailiff
Ministers of Lancast^^. James Hyet Richard Hollingworth Isaac Ambrose John
Tilsley




