A true State of the Case concerning Sir EDMOND TURNOR Knight. and GEORGE CAREW Esquire;
DEPENDING Upon an especial Appeal, to the Judges Delegates, with adjuncts from
a Sentence pronounced against them, and others in the Admiralty Court, at the
Instance of Jacob Neitz, Andreas Vanden Bogaerd, Michael Vander Plancken, and
others, Subjects of the King of Spain.
THe King of Great Britain; in the year 1665. having granted special Letters of
Reprisals, against the States General and their Subjects (for the reasons
therein contained) under the great Seal of England, unto the said Sir Edmond
Turnor, and George Carew; and their Assigns, to continue effectually in force,
until the sum of 151612 l. sterling, should be recovered, with Costs and
Damages; wherein His Majesty, signified his Will and Pleasure to be such. That
all Judges, Officers, Ministers, and Subjects of England, should be Ayding and
Assisting therein; and to take care that the said Letters Patents, and
Commissions thereupon, should be favorably interpreted, and construed in all
respects, to the benefit and best advantage of Sir Edmond Turnor, and George
Carew, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns; as by an authentic Copy of
the said Letters Patents hereunto annexed appears.

At the importunity of several Persons interessed, in the said Letters Patents,
for whom the said Turnor and Carew were nominated and entrusted. An
Exemplification of the said Original grant; was delivered to one Captain
Tyrence Birne, by the said George Carew to put the same in Execution, according
to the force and effect thereof, against the States General and their Subjects.
Whereupon the said Carew, only indorsed an appointment upon the back side of
the Exemplification in these words (viz) I the within named George Carew, do
hereby constitute, assign, and appoint Captain Tyrence Birne, Commander of the
good Ship the Royal; mentioning therein the burden, number of Men, Guns, and
time of victualling, to do, and Execute all and every such Act, and thing as by
him the said Birne may be done, Executed and performed; by virtue of the said
Letters Patents, In witness whereof, the said Carew set his Hand and Seal. The
said Captain Birne, promising to procure Sir Edmond Turnor to sign the same,
which the said Birne neglected to do.

In pursuance of the said single appointment, Captain Birne pirocured Jonathan
Frost, and other his part-owners, to set forth the said Ship to Sea; and
consequently in or about the Month of August 1666. near Portland Bay, He seized
a Fly-boat, laden with Wine, Salt, etc. lately named the Godlive of Brugis,
coming from France, and bound for Amsterdam; and carried the said Fly-boat into
the Harbor of Chichester, from whence he sent to Mr. Suckling his Proctor for
a Commission to examine the Master and the Seamen, who confessed themselves to
be Hollanders born, the Ship Dutch built, and the goods cousigned to Dutchmen.
Then upon return of the said Commission from the chief Magistrates of
Chichester; the Judge of the Admiralty, pronounced that there was good cause of
seizure, and condemned the pretended claimers in the expenses; But in regard
one Peter Gerrard claimed the Ship and Goods, for the account of Jacob Neitz,
and others, Burgers and Inhabitants of Brugis in Flanders; an Order of Court
was made (the Goods being perishable,) that both Ship and Goods should be
restored, upon Bail to abide the Sentence, upon hearing the cause; which the
Claymer refused to give, pretending, that before the Ship was taken into the
Vice-Admiralls custody, or Wayters of the Custom-House put upon her; that much
Salt, Wine, and Saffron, was imbeazelled. Whereupon they Arrested Captain
Birne, by Writ out of the Admiralty for 1000 l. damages, and committed him to
the Marshallsey, who gave good and sufficient Bail by two Citizens of London,
to answer the said Action.

Afterward the Ship and Goods, upon pretended Certificates from Brugis; and
new examinations, were restored by decree of the Court, and confirmed by the
Lords Commissioners for Prizes; and actually delivered accordingly. Then Mr.
Francklin Proctor for the pretended Claimers, Exhibited a Libel against Sir
Edmond Turnor, George Carew, Captain Birne, and Jonathan Frost, without any
discontinuance, or prosecution of the Action for 1000 l. against Birne, And
framed an impertinent Sentence against Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew (who
were not Arrested, Cited, or Summoned to defend the said Cause) Tyrence Birne,
and Jonathan Frost, for eighteen hundred pounds damages, through imbeazilments
leakage and spoiling the Ship and Goods by lying, (although occassoned by the
wilful default of the pretended owners) wherefore Sir Edmond Turnor and George
Carew, appealed by themselves for a Nullity of the said Sentence as repugnant
to Law, and of a dangerous consequence to the Subjects of England, if such
practices should be brought into president.

That one Peter Victorine a person born in Amsterdam appeared for the pretended
Clamers (after Peter Gerrard run away to avoid payment of the expenses, and the
charges of the Seamen at Chichester, which are yet unsatisfied) and continues
in his malicious and vexatious prosecutions against Turnor and Carew,
notwithstanding there is not upon their own showing, any the least proof
against the said Turnor and Carew in all their Examinations, (though of no
Record, to make them chargeable or guilty of any imbeazilment, or so much as
the knowledge of any of the said transactions mentioned in the said Sentence,
from which they appealed to His Majesty in the High Court of Chancery, who
appointed the same to be heard, and determined by the Right Honorable the Lord
Chief Justice Rainsford, Judge Wild, Judge Windam, Faron Littleton, Sir Richard
Loyde, Sir Timothy Baldwin, Sir Edward Low, Dr. Pinfold, Dr. Trumball, Dr.
Digby, Dr. and Briggs, or a competent number of them, as by the said Commission
unto them directed, under the great Seal of England appears.

Several Reasons and Arguments, why the said Sentence of 1800 l. ought to be
reversed, made null and void against the said Sir Edmond Turnor, and George
Carew.
IT is alleged in the first Article of the pretended Libel against Sir Edmond
T^^^r, and George Carew, and also against Jonathan Frost, and Tyrence (...) and
it is so pronounced in the Sentence (from which the said Sir (...) Turnor, and
George Carew, by themselves appealed; especially for a (...) directed to
several Judges of the Common Law, as Adjuncts with the ordinary Delegates,
Civil Lawyers, unto which Doctors, Frost and Brine, appealed) that they were
Owners, Fraighters, or Insurers of the Ship Royal; whereof the said Tyrence
Pirne was Captain, and that they did Man, Equip, Victual, Furnish, and set the
said Ship to Sea at their Costs and Charges, which is a gross mistake,
Erroneous, false and contrary to the truth of the matter, so far forth as
concerns the said Sir Edmond Turnor, and George Carew; neither is there any
such thing proved, or any ways deposed in the Admiralty Court in the said
Process transmitted; wherefore (Libellum non probatum secundum allegatum) the
Sentence is null and void, as erroneous and unjust.

And in the following Articles of the said pretended Libell, it is alleged that
Tur^^^ and Carew ratified, allowed and confirmed the seizure of the Ship
Godilive of Brugis, and her Lading, and the disposal of the Goods taken out by
Birne, and others, And the damnifying the rest of the Goods by lying; in
regard, Frost and Birne proceeded to adjudication in the Admiralty, in the
names of Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew. Although neither of them, the said
Turnor and Carew gave any such Order; or did at any time lay out any Money, or
promise by way of contribution toward the prosecution thereof, for any Fees or
Salaries to Advocates, Proctors, or Registers, who were employed in the said
Process before Sentence; neither are any of these things made out in the proofs
transmitted, pro ut, etc.

3 Admitting that Sir Edmond Turnor, had also signed the Deputation to Captain
Birne, whereby he might have seized any Ships, Goods, or Merchandises belonging
to the States General and their Subjects; Yet if he had taken, or seized any
Ships or Goods, belonging to the Subjects of any other Prince or State, he had
no Warrant or Authority from Turnor or Carew so to do, or to break bulk before
Adjudication, or to do any thing beyond the force and effect of the Letters
Patents, such Actions are personal injuries; and by the Law of England, no man
shall suffer for the offense of another, and Birne himself was Arrested for it;
and had taken upon him to defend it, and given in good Bail accordingly.

4. It is against the rules of all Justice, that any man should be condemned
before he be heard; and how Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew should make
their defense upon any Action, or Libell against them, being not Arrested or
Legally cited, or summoned to see such Libell admitted against them. Wherefore,
such an Action, Proceedings and Sentence upon it, is void and null to all
intents and purposes of the Law,

5. It appears upon the pretended claimer's own showing throughout their whole
Process transmitted, wherein so much Paper is spoiled, that the greatest
damages were occasioned by delay of proceedings after the Capture; for which
the said Claimers were condemned in expensis retardati processus, at the
instance of Birne and Frost, that only Prosecuted in the names of Turnor and
Carew. And it also appears in the proofs that the Embeazelments were done by
particular persons in the Ports, Havens, and Rivers of Chichester, and Pool,
within the Bodies of the Counties of Sussex, and Dorcet, and ought to be tried
there according to the Common Laws and Statutes of England, by matter of
Record; and those persons to be questioned only (by Action of Trover, or by
Information) that did the wrong; there cannot be any president found, that ever
any Admiral, Commissioner of the Peace, or any other Officer, or Minister
whatsoever, who was neither particeps Criminis nec Muneris, was questioned for
any thing done contrary to a Legal Warrant and Authority given or granted out
by either of them; but that only the party offending was called to question for
exceeding his Commission, or Authority.

In the 42 of Ed. III. it is enacted that no Man be put to answer, but by due
Process, and matter of Record according to the old Law of the Land, and if any
thing be done to the contrary, it shall be void in Law, and holden for Error.
In the 8. Ed. II. Tit. Coron. 399. It is no part of the Sea, where one Man may
see the Land of both sides, and of any thing done there, the Country may have
knowledge; whereby it appears, that things done there, are tryable by the
Country; (that is by Jury) and consequently not in the Admiral Court. In Ed.
I. Tit. Avowry 191. A Replevin was brought in Murfords Case, for taking of a
Ship on the Coast of Scarborow in the Sea, and for carrying the same into the
County of Northumberland, Berry Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, adjudged
when a taking is partly on the Sea, and partly in a River, the Common Law shall
have Jurisdiction. By the several Statutes in the 13 of R. 2. Cap. 3. and the
15. of R. 2. Cap. 5. and the 2. of H. 4 Cap. 11. wherein all the Subjects of
England have an interest, it is enacted that the Court of the Admiral shall
have no Jurisdiction, or to meddle with any thing done within the Realm, by
Land or Water, within the bodies of any County of England. And there being
grievious Complaints made in those days by the Commons of England, that the
Court of Admiralty had incroached upon the Jurisdiction of the Common Law, to
the intolerable grievance of the Subjects; it was enacted that any person
finding himself grieved against the form of the Statutes, and the Common Law,
shall have his Action pronounced upon the Case against him that pursues in the
Admiralls Court, and shall recover his double damages against the pursuant; and
the said pursuant shall Incur the penalty of 10 l. to the King for the pursuit
so made, if he be convicted thereof.
The seizure was adjudged Legal, upon several circumstances in the Case, the
damages afterward was through the default of the pretended Claimers: And the
embeazilments being done by several persons within the bodies of the County of
Sussex and Dorcet, where the municipal Law of England, and not the Civil Law
has the Jurisdiction. It is positively against the Rights, Liberties, and
Properties of the Subjects, that any such Sentence should be confirmed against
Sir Edmond Turnor and George Carew.

As Sir ^dmond Turnor and George Carew, do not take upon themselves to excuse
Captain ^irne and Jonathan ^rost, or the persons who are Bail for either; but
leave them to the due course of Law: So the said Turnor and Carew, cannot but
accuse the pretended Claimers, or owners of the Fly-bote and her Lading; for
that the pretended Claimers and their Agents, persisted in their Practices, to
defraud the King as they had done his Subjects, whereby they forfeited both
Ship and Goods, upon two several offenses against several Acts of Parliament,
as by several Certificates under the Officers hands of the Custom-house and
other Testimonials appears.

viz. After the Ship and Goods were restored, as belonging to the Subjects of
the King of Spain, and ought to have gone for Brugis or Ostend. Yet they did
contrary to the Act of Navigation, bring Ship and Goods to the port of London,
(without Letters of Safe Conduct) and there deliver them, being of the growth
of France, which was a forfeiture of both Ship and Goods by the Law. Secondly,
The Wine, Salt, etc. were Entered as English Goods by an English Man that they
had procured to Enter the same, to defraud the King of Forraigners duties, so
they wanted not Common Claimers to make them first Spanish, and then English,
for their purposes notwithstanding they were Hollanders Goods.

It is to be observed, that Sir Edward Turnor and George Carew, (in regard they
did not repectively make the least defense in the said Cause, before the
Sentence) have severally purged themselves upon Oath before a Master of
Chancery, to confirm all that they have respectively alleged in their own
defense, before the Judges, Delligates, which Affidavits ought to be read, and
come in Issue, at the hearing and final determination of the said Cause.

Actum 12th. of January 1677.

