The 11th. day of April, 1653. A true Report of the great Costs and Charges of
the five Hospitalls in the City of London under the Care of the Lord Mayor,
Commonalty, and Citizens of London, in the maintaining of a very great Number
of poor the year last past.
CHildren kept and and maintained this last year at the Charge of Christ's
Hospital in the said House, in diverse places in this City and Subburbs, and
with sundry Nurses in the Country -- 674

The names of all which are Registered in the Books kept in Christ's Hospital,
there to be seen from what Parishes, and by what means they have been from
time to time admitted.

Children put forth Apprentices, discharged, and dead this year last past -- 70

So remains now in the House, and kept abroad at the said Hospitalls Charge --
604

And lately admitted into the said Hospital -- 200

Which in all is -- 804

THe said Hospital has diverse ways fallen very short of means formerly
Received, viz. heretofore many have given Moneys privately, others very
bountiful at their Deaths: And several Parishes in London have sent in large
Contributions, and now but one that sends any thing at all: Yet notwithstanding
all these discouragements, by reason of these hard and miserable times among
poor people, and the great number of distressed, needy, and comfortless
suitors: The Governors of the said Hospital, have lately admitted as
abovesaid, into their Care and Charge 200. poor Children, with hopes that
diverse able and well affected persons, will liberally Contribute toward the
Charges of the keeping of the aforesaid 804. Children, which yearly amounts
unto so great a sum of Money, as the Revenue of the said Hospital does not
discharge the Moytie thereof

THere has been Cured this year last past, at the Charge of St. Bartholomews
Hospital, of maimed Soldiers and other diseased persons, to the number of --
1096

Many whereof being Soldiers, have been relieved with Money, and other
necessaries at their departure.

Buried this year after much Charge in their Sickness -- 168

Remaining under Cure, at this present, at the Charge of the said Hospital --
322

THere has been Cured at the Charge of St. Thomas Hospital, this year last
past, of diseased persons, whereof many being Soldiers, have been relieved
with Money and other necessaries at their departure. -- 985

Buried this year past, after much Charge in the time of their sickness -- 152

Remaining under Cure at present, upon the Charge of the said Hospital -- 262

THere has been brought to the Hospital of Bridewell, within the space of one
whole year last past of wandering Soldiers, and other Vagrant people, to the
number of -- 705

Many whereof have been very chargeable to the said Hospital, for Apparel,
sick diet, and Surgery, besides the ordinary diet, and other provisions and
charges expended about them, which could not be avoided by reason of their
necessities, and many of them have been passed into their Countries, with
Clothing Apparel, and other charges which could not be avoided considering
their naked and miserable condition, nor they thence passed without such
charge. And there are now kept and maintained in Arts and Occupations, and
other servile works and labors, at the charge of the said Hospital,
Apprentices and of her persons, to the number of -- 177

The Hospital of Bethlem is of great Antiquity, use, and necessity, for keeping
and curing distracted persons, who are of all others the most miserable, by
reason of their wants, both for soul and body, and have no sense thereof.

The charge thereof is very great, there being kept and maintained with
Physic, Diet, and other relief: 43. distracted persons constantly at least,
besides the charge of Servants to look to them, they being most unruly and not
able to help themselves, and the Rents and Revenues of the said Hospital being
very small, not amounting to two third parts of the yearly charge, and
therefore this Hospital is a fit object of charity, there having been of late
by the blessing of God, upon the charge of the said Hospital, and the care of
those that are entrusted with the said distracted people, diverse reduced to
their former senses.


