A VINDICATION OF SOME OBJECTIONS Lately RAISED Against Dr. JOHN COLBATCH HIS
HIPOTHESIS. Together with Some Observations on his ESSAY of ALKALY and ACID and
it is APPENDIX.

By Dr. Francis Tuthill of Dorchester.

Via trita, via tuta. LONDON, Printed for A. and J. Churchill, and for Robert
Gaylhard Bookseller in Dorchester, School.

Worthy SIR,
I Have read over the Doctrine of Acids, etc. Your Solutions are very Ingenious:
I would fain acquiesce in them, that so I might give neither my Self, or the
World any further Trouble; but I assure you I cannot. I am not insensible how
dangerous a Thing it is to expose my Self to the common Censure in this
scribbling Age; and I had not appeared in Public again, had not some particular
Friends, whom I should have disobliged by a Refusal, pressed and urged me to a
fresh Attack. I hope you will meet with nothing of a cavilling Humor, nor any
Thing that looks like Insulting in this Treatise; I cannot imagine you will have
any Occasion to write a Recantation. No doubt but you will find a Defect in
some of my Arguments, and make your Animadversions according to your usual
Candor. I would not be thought to patronize Alkalies so far as to be at Enmity
with all Acids. I can entertain a good Opinion of them in many Cases, and hope
to see the Use of them Established in those Cases upon surer Foundations than
ever. All that I contend for, is, that Alkalies are not of such a poisonous
Nature as you represent them. They were created to preserve, in no wise to
destroy, us. I shall use the same Method, in replying to your Answers, as you
have done to my Objections: Take 'em in Pieces, and where they seem defective
make my Observation. The first of my Objections did run thus, If Alkalies are
the Original of Distempers, then posito Alkali ponitur morbus. But this will
not hold Good; for all healthy Person's Serum is Alkalizated, as is evident
from it is green Color when mixed with Syrups of Violets. May not this
Phenomenon then arise rather from a due Mixture of the Principles, then from
any violated Habit of Blood? Your Answer to this is pretty long; but the most
material Parts of it are these.

The first of which is, That though there are Alkaline Particles in healthy
People's Blood, yet not enough to cause a Distemper. They abound much more in
Sick Persons. Reply, If you please to compare the Alkaline Spirit, that you
extracted from the consumptive Blood, with that which the healthy Blood
afforded, you will find no great Disproportion, especially if you consider the
Caput Mortuum of the sound Blood. For you say, that it being broken into small
Atoms, each Atom appeared to be so many little Bodies of Fire in your
Microscope. That there is not the least Spark of Fire in the Blood, I shall
endeavor to prove anon; wherefore it is not irrational to suppose, that those
lucid Atoms were of the Family of Salts: And if Salts, then Alkaline, according
to the Rules of your own Hypothesis. But then (you reply) the tabid Blood would
have yielded much more Alkaly, had the great quantity of luxuriant Alkaly been
thrown upon the Lungs. Methinks this seems a little strange. For, if you
remember, the consumptive Person did sweat prodigiously. Now you make Sweat to
be nothing but an excrementitious Alkaly. If this Alkaly then was carried off
in such quantities, it could not well abound so much in the Lungs.

The second Part of your Answer to my first Objection, that no Man may be said
to enjoy perfect Health; that this Alkaly, which is found in the Blood of every
Man, is the Principle of his Destruction. Reply, If this be true, then Old Men,
who are near a Dissolution, in whom Nature is almost spent, must needs have
their Blood ten-times more deeply tinctured with Alkalies than Young Men. This
may be so for ought I know. I have experienced nothing to the contrary as yet,
having none of your Conveniences at Hand. But I am of Opinion, that if either
of us were to distill the Blood of a phlegmatic Aged Constitution, and that of a
bilious Juvenile, the latter's Alkalies would not fall short of the formers: My
second Objection was;

But Secondly, There is another way of discovering an Alkaly, besides that of
it is Appearance, and that is by it is Effects, viz. it is Fermentation with
Spirits of Vitriol. Now I aver this Serum will not serment with the aforesaid
Spirit. I believe I might be somewhat deceived in making this Experiment. For I
have found since, that the Spirit of Vitriol was not Good, neither did I allow
enough in Proportion to the Serum. But this I have Experimented since with what
Care I could. I took such Serum as would turn Syrups of Violets Green, put into
a little Pot, and poured some Oil of Vitriol on it. It immediately became
somewhat hot, but 'twas far from being intensely so. I took some more of the
same Serum, put it into another Pot, poured Spirit of Sulphur on it. The Spirit
gave it a very languid Heat, scarcely exceeding lukewarm. After this I took
some grumous Parts of the same Blood, poured some Oil of Vitriol on them. They
grew not so warm as the Serum did with the Oil: There were very few Degrees of
Heat in them. From all which I infer, that, though there may be somewhat of an
Alkaly in the Blood, which I never denied; yet not so great a quantity as you
imagine, a general Stock for all Diseases: And indeed upon the Supposal of five
Principles in the Blood (which no Chemist denis) why might not either those
Principles offend and breed Distempers as well as the Salts? In page 67. you
are at a loss how to interpret my warm Particles. Answer, I mean Alk.
Particles, such as I believe the Blood abounds with in some Feavors, in which I
grant you, that Acids are of Use. But yet I cannot away with your Notion of
Feavors. A Feavor (say you in page 68.) proceeds from a Constipation of some of
the Emunctories, so that the Excrementitious Alkaly, which should be carried
off by them is detained in the Blood, which by breaking it is Globules, etc.
This Doctrine does not seem to correspond at all with your Practice. For,
Spirit. Vitrioli and other Acids, which are very Stiptic, the Use of which you
applaud in Feavors, should methinks constipate the Emunctories more closely:
And then they being of a very fixing Nature, should fetter or retain these
Excrementitions Alkalies. Again, if Feavors are occasioned only by a Detention
of these Alkalies, then it must follow, that whenever they have free Vent, the
Feavor must abate. But the contrary has been sometimes experienced; where the
Patient has sweated very liberally and yet died at last. Is this will not serve
the turn, I hope to make it appear anon, that Alkalies are not capable of
breaking the Globules, and making such a Bustle in the Blood: But I cannot but
speak one Word or two in their Defense before I go any further. I am very apt
to think, that in some Feavors, especially Pestilential and Malignant, the
Spirits are primarily affected according to the Hypothesis of the Ingenious Dr.
Morton, witness those Symptoms which attend the Genus nervosum immediately upon
the first Seizure. But you must not admit this Notion, the Soil which you must
lodge in the Blood, and thence be communicated to the Spirits. Well, let it be
so; I will not dispute it: The difficulty on your side will be great still.
For, though I shall readily grant the Globules to be broken in the aforesaid
Feavors; yet, 'twill be a hard Matter to convict Alkalies of those Tragical
Disorders. For first, Experience shows, that nothing is more proper in those
Cases malignant (I shall adventure to use the Term, notwithstanding it has been
so scouted of late) then Pulv. e chel. rad. Serpentar. nay, Sp. C. C. it self
given in a proper Vehicle. But secondly, nothing does so readily dissolve the
Mass of Bood, or separate it is Principles as Acids, which I shall prove by and
by, when I come to speak something of Dropsies. But this long Discourse of the
Heat of the Blood, does naturally lead me to consider somewhat of it is Flame.

First, And here the Life of Man you take to be a Fire or Flame, and all we Eat
and Drink, together with the Air we draw in to be Fuel for this Flame. The
chief Arguments you bring to confirm this Doctrine, are taken from the
Excrements of this Flame and it is Fuel. The Excrements are Alkalies, which are
near of kind to Ashes, the Relicts of other Flames: And for it is Pabulum, it is
Acid and Sulphur the common Pabulum of all Flames. Here I must confess you talk
very ingeniously, and highly improve the Notions of that great Philosopher. But
let us examine this Hypothesis a little. As for Alkalies, I confess they are of
the same Nature with Ashes and Soot: Yet it does not follow, that because
Alkalies are found in the Blood there must be a Flame too. We extract Alkaly
out of several Herbs. It Is true the Herbs must be calcined first. But certainly
the Salt was pre-existent in the Herb before the Calcination, or else the Fire
produced it de novo, which you will by no means admit. The Inference then is
plain. I will not adventure to say any Thing of Crabs-Claws, Oyster-Shells,
etc. least you should make them the Recrements of a vital Flame. Come we next
to the Pabulum and that is Acid and Sulphur. That Bodies in which Sulphur is
predominant, are inflamable no body questions: But that such in which Acid is
the chief Ingredient should burn, looks like a Paradox. To instance in a few:
Acet. Spirit. of Vitriol Suc. Limon. etc. are so far from promoting Flame, that
they immediately quench it: And indeed I know but one Acid in Nature, which is
inflamable, and that is Nitre. But then this Vital Flame is not of a Nature
with Culinary Flames. Answer, Since the Pabulum is the same, methinks the Flame
should be so too. Again, though you speak so much of this Vital Flame, yet you do
not (as I remember) much care to fix the Place of it is Existence. I suppose it
must be in the Blood, if any where. Now it is very hard to suppose a Flame in
that Body, of which no Part is inflamable. If you open a Vein and the Blood
spouts out reeking hot on the Fire, it will immediately quench it. So that
methinks, these Notions seem to be a little too finely spun. Acid and Sulphur
did support human Life, Men live upon Coals, Brimstone, etc. in which there is
store of Acid and Sulphur, that we cannot subsist without Air is evident: For
though there is no Fire in the Blood, there is Motion undoubtedly. Now the
Nitro-acreal Particles give a fresh Fermentation (or Motion) to it, and free it
from Coagulation. If you are not satisfied with this, consult the Ingenious Dr.
Mayow. But then the Blood has heat and warmth; and these are the Properties of
Fire. Answ. May they not be excited by it is Motion? No (you Reply) we are much
warmer in Bed, when we use no Exercise, then when we are up and in Motion.
Answ. The Body indeed is in no Motion there; but the Blood is greater then when
we are out of our Beds; and it is impossible should be otherwise. For, do not
the Bed-cloaths protect us from the Coldness of the ambient Air? And are not a
great many of the Volatile Alkalies detained by them, which reflecting upon the
Body, warm it, and accelerate the Motion of the Blood. But after all, if we
move violently, when out of our Beds, we are much warmer, than when in them.
You are pleased to Object, it is impossible mere Motion should cause any Heat in
fluid Bodies. How so? Let a Man put Spirit. Corn Cerv. and Spirit. Vitrioli
together and observe their Effects. They will soon grow warm. It Is evident,
they do not stand still, but move very briskly before they are warm. And what
is the Heat of these Bodies occasioned by, but their Fermentation or intestine
Motion? Surely it cannot be by Accension. My third Objection was this;

But Thirdly, If Alkalies are the Original of Distempers, whence is it, that in
Dropsies, Catarrhs, some Gouts and other Diseases, we find the Texture of the
Blood so thin? It Is observable, that those Particles you term Alkalies, the
more the Blood is saturated with them, of the more thick Consistence it is, as
we see in Pleurisies, Rheumatisms and other Inflamatory Cases (in which
Distempers, if in any, the Alkalies abound) is not then it is Tenuity rather to
be imputed to Acids? Do not Acids immediately put the Blood in a Fusion, and
render it thin? Your Answer to this is, that it is not the Thinness of the Blood
is the only Cause of these Distempers, but a Destruction of the Tone of the
Parts. Here methinks you do not argue so fairly. For, you mention little or
nothing of the Destruction of the Tone of the Parts in your Etymologies of
Distempers till now. And why may I not as well say, in Inflamatory Cases the
Blood is not affected with any Alkaline Particles? These Inflammations only
arise from a Destruction of the Tone of the Parts: Especially, if you consider
what you asserted in your Notion of Feavors: For there the Emunctories are very
much out of Order. But (you Object) since Acids will reduce the Blood to it is
due Consistence, it is not reasonable to suppose they should be the Cause of
it is Fusion. Answ. Whether Acids will restore the Consistence of the Blood I
shall examine by and by: I fear they will not. But this I am certain of, they
will put it in a Fusion. It Is well known that your celebrated Oil of Vitriol
taken alone, or though in a Vehicle, if in too great Quantity, kills. Now how
does it kill? Does it not by dissolving the Mass of Blood, by separating the
Grumous Parts from the Serous, and breaking it is Texture after the same Manner
as it does that of Milk? Sure I am, that Blood coagulated by the aforesaid Oil,
does much more resemble Whey and Curds than Jelly of Hartshorn. Now then, what
is all this but an extraordinary Fusion? And if a large Dose will make such mad
Work, and put the Blood into so great a Fusion; certainly a less Dose must
cause somewhat of a Fusion. And it is rational to believe that Oil of Vitriol is
proper only in those Distempers, where the Blood is too thick; very pernicious
in such as have it too thin. And here I am very glad, that you so opportunely
give us your Sentiments of Dropsies. A Dropsy (say you) or the Thinness of
Blood in that Disease does not proceed from Acids, but over much Drinking.
Answ. That large Draughts (there being little Evacuation by Urin) render the
Blood more thin is very obvious. But now the Patient had no such desire for
Drink, till the Distemper was actually upon him. So that the Question is, what
first brought on the Distemper. Was it not a Weakness of Blood or Want of due
Consistence. I do not see how you can well deny it. But then (you Reply) let it
be so, it is Impossible, Acids should occasion this ill Habit of Blood. For,
Hydropical People are Thirsty, and it is ridiculous to imagine that Acids should
excite Thirst, when they are the only Things in the World that will quench it.
Answ. This I confess, at first Sight, looks like an invincible Argument: But I
must crave leave to weigh it a little. That Acids drank or held in the Mouth
usually quench Thirst, is an undeniable Truth. Though twill hardly hold Good in
all Cases. For, let a Man drink Brine, which is very much impregnated with
Acids, or eat high-seasoned Meats; I believe though he were a Stoic he would
immediately grow Thirsty. But common Salt is not an Acid of a right Nature.
Well, admit this. The most famous Acids that I know for suppressing Thirst, are
Oil. Vitriol. Spirit. Vitriol. etc. Now I hope to make it appear, that these or
Acids of the same Nature abounding in the Blood may provoke Thirst. I proved
just now, that Oil of Vitriol had an ugly Faculty of coagulating the Blood, or
separating it is Serum. That there is a Separation of the Serum in Dropsies is
evident: If any Man should deny it, let him look upon the Abdomen and extreme
Parts, and his Eyes are enough to convince him. Well then the Serum being thus
separated (pray observe) and the Mass of Blood not enough diluted: The oral
Glands must necessarily be defrauded of their due Moisture and consequently
Thirst excited. But still you harp upon the same String: Those Medicines which
restore the Consistence of the Blood, cannot well be supposed to impair it. Now
Acids restore it; and Steel in particular. Answ. That Steel is of excellent
Use, and a very great Restaurative is not to be denied. But under Favor, though
you discourse very ingeniously of the Nature of Steel: Yet all you have said
will not amount to a Proof of it is being an Acid. I am still inclined to think
it is an Alkaly. For though it does not discover it self to be such by it is
Color, yet, it plainly does by it is Effects, viz. It Is Fermentation with
Acids. If, notwithstanding this Phenomenon, you will needs have it to be an
Acid, why then one Acid will ferment with another; and so one Alkaly with
another: wherefore, though we should subscribe to the Hypothesis, that Alkalies
are the Original of all Distempers, yet it is hard to exclude the Use of them in
general in distempers. For some Alkalies or other might be found out that
should dispute it with these offending Alkalies. You are pleased to quote
Beeker for a Confirmation of the Acidity of Steel. The chief Sentence of the
Citation seems to be this. Hoc tantum hic loci allegabo, omne acidum
substantiae martialis esse, in quocunque oleo, pinguedine, fuligine, limo,
silice and arena, imo etiam ipsa flamma reperibile, and ad oculum demonstrari
posse; quaecunque ergo naturae Acidae and martialis sunt, illa potestatem
habent Alkali tanquam substantiam metallorum mercurialem alterandi and
transmutandi. If I apprehend the Sense of the Author, this does not make so
much for you. But suppose it did, Beeker was never reckoned Infallible. And
though Chalybs were an Acid, it does not follow, because one Acid will renew the
State of the Blood, that others will do so too. But since we have so happily
fallen on this Subject, viz. the Strengthening the Mass of Blood; let us see
what other Medicines besides Chalybs are subservient to this End. And here I
suppose your bitter Herbs may not be infimi subsellii. It Is needless to prove
it; for hardly any Physician but what has experienced it. I do not believe you
will dare to say, there is any Thing of an Acid in these, since you know very
well that Alkaly may be extracted from most, if not all of them. So that poor
Alkaly is effectual in some Cases you see. But then ( you say) Oakbark,
Bistort, Tormentile, Comfrey-roots and others of that Tribe will reduce the
Blood to Consistence. Answ. That they are astringent I grant; whether they will
reduce the Blood or invigorate it is depauperated Principles, I much question.
It Is very rare to see them prescribed in Dropsies, Cackexies and the like
Distempers where the Blood is poor and low. They are proper indeed in Fluxes by
virtue of their astringent Faculty. But then they owe this Astringency to
Acids. Whether they do or not it matters not much. But why may not this Quality
be derived as well from the Terrestrious as the Salt Particles of these
Vegetables: Since Bol. Arm. Terra Lemnia and other plain Earths are very
Stiptick. I do not say, these Earths are so simple as to have no manner of Salt
in them, but surely they have very little Acid. Another Object. was: If
Alkalies did always offend and cause Pain, it must follow that Acids must give
Ease: But I assure you, I have often experienced the contrary; for upon the
Exhibition of Rhenish, Whitewine and other Acids, I have found the [ Gouty]
Pains immediately exasperated, and many times it has been a long while e're
they went off.

I shall not repeat your whole Answer to this, but sum up the most material
Parts of it. Answ. It is not improbable, but upon giving a small quantity of
Acid, where there is a large quantity of Alkaly lodged on any Part, so as to
cause Pain, it may only in part dissolve the Alkaly, which was before more
fixed, and so by accident exasperate the Pain, whereas by continuing the Use of
the Acid, the Alkaly would be perfectly dissolved and extirpated, and so the
Pain would altogether vanish. But Pain being sometimes exasperated more upon
the first giving of them in too small Quantities, has I doubt not, been one
great. Cause of deterring People from proceeding in the Use of them, and also
of attributing to them the Cause of Pain. Reply, This I confess is a good sound
Solution, and would admit of no Reply, if it did but hang together with what
follows. For here Acids cause Pain, because they are not taken in Quantity
sufficient. By and by they produce the same Effect, because they are taken in
too great Quantity. For these are your own Words. And for the Pain you say, you
have often found to be excited upon the giving Rhenish and White Wind, I have
assigned a Reason for that, if they are drunk in too large Quantities, etc.
It Is plain then, that neither too little or too much Acid must be taken. Now I
fancy it would be a difficult Matter for you or any Man else to determine the
Quantity. It Is enough to employ the Wits of a Virtuoso. Besides, if you
remember what you have laid down in your Hypothesis, Acids cannot be taken in
too great Quantity: For the Alkaline Gouty Particles remain in the Blood:
Indeed, if all these Particles were subdued, then to load the Blood with Acids
would be superfluous. But this I fear you cannot say, you ever experienced. I
should be very glad to hear you could. It would be an Improvement of Physic to
some purpose. Another Object. was. Again, if the Gout proceed from an Alkaly,
what is the Reason you use so much Sassafras in it is Cure? Is Sassafras an
Acid, and so proper to subdue this Alkaly. Answ. I can cure the Gout, if there
were no such thing as Sassafras. I only use Sassafras in Apozems as a proper
Vehicle to dilute other Medicines in the Stomach. But however Sassafras is no
contemptible Medicine, and if you will but give your self the Trouble of
distilling a Pound in Retort per se, if you afterward reckon Sassafras amongst
the Number of Alkalies, I am mistaken; and if I am I shall willingly own it.
Reply, That you should use Sassafras on purpose to diluto other Medicines,
methinks is no fair way of arguing. I did never distill any Sassafras in a
Retort, and therefore can pronounce nothing positively of it is Nature. But I am
of Opinion, that by it is Effects it may much better be ranged under Alkalies
than Acids. I fear 'twill be a hard task for you to prove it an Acid, which yet
you ought to do to make your Practice consonant to your Hypothesis, unless you
will have recourse to it as a Specific. Object. I have only a Word or two to
speak concerning the green Color of Syrup of Violets, and so I have done. I
believe it may be turned green without an Alkaly. On the Exhibition of it to
Infants it comes away green very often, and brings away a great deal of green
Matter by stool; and yet I believe they do not abound with Alkalies. Answ. I
own that upon the Exhibition of Syrup of Violets to Infants, it will frequently
occasion green stools: But from whence does that proceed, but from it is Mixture
with the Bile in the small Guts? And that Bile is an Alkaly, I know not any one
that doubts. Reply, Every body knows that Bile is an Alkaly and of a greenish
Color: yet it is much to be questioned, whether it occasions these green
stools. For First, The Color of it is altered in the Duodenum, by it is mixture
with the Pancreatick Juyde. Secondly, If this were so, whence is it that in
adult Persons, even of the most Bilious Constitutions, we seldom or never find
the Excrements green. The yellow Color of the Excrements is usually imputed to
Bile. Object. You may read in a late Author of undoubted Credit, that upon an
Infant's swallowing a Dose of Testaceous Powder, an extraordinaray Ferment was
raised in the Stomach of the Child. Now how could this be done if it had not an
Acid to work upon? Besides does not Experience show, that nothing is so proper
in Infants Distempers as Alkalies? Answ. Acids may abound in the Stomach and
cause a Disorder, but in no other Parts of the Body. Reply, This Doctrine seems
to me very precarious; and if I can but shake it, a great Part of your
Hypothesis must be in danger. First, then give me leave to enquire, how these
Acids come to abound in the Stomach. Here you are pleased to deny an innate
Ferment: This Acid Liquor must by no means proceed from the Vessels or Glands
of the Ventricle: But is conveyed thither from the salivatory Glands. That
Saliva is an Acid, and does descend to the Stomach is very evident. But why you
should take no Notice of it is proper Glands, I cannot see. Nature does seldom
bungle in her Operations, and dispose things at random. Therefore since she has
placed such a parcel of excretory Vessels in the Stomach, it is irrational to
suppose they are of no Use. But to come to the Point. I hope to convince you
presently, that Acids exist in the Blood as well as the Stomach. And in order
to this, I shall have no need to carry them from the Stomach to the Blood, as
some have done; but shall endeavor to prove them preexistent in the Blood,
even by the Rules of your own Hypothesis. We have an old Maxim in Philosophy;
Nihil dat quod in se non habet. How this Acid current of Saliva, therefore
should spring from a Fountain void of all Acidity (for the Serum must be it is
Fountain) I cannot so easily conceive. If any thing was capable of
metamorphosing this Alkaline Serum into Acid, it must be the Texture of the
Parts, through which it pasles. But this the Texture cannot do. For the Oral
Glands have nothing of an Acid Ferment in them, or any alterative Faculty. They
only separate such Particles as are adopted to their Pores. It Is true these
Particles before their Separation are so confused and intermixed with the other
Principles, that you cannot make any sensible Discovery of them; yet it is no
good Logic to conclude, that they are not in the Blood. It Is very seldom that
we can perceive any thing of Bile in it when drawn either by Color or Taste,
yet surely it is never without Bile. And the Liver does not generate Choler (as
some ignorantly suppose) it only strains it off from the Blood. For if it is
Glands are any way impaired either by Schirrus, Exulceration, etc. the Blood is
so far from wanting Choler, that it immediately abounds with it; wherefore
since Bile is really preexistent in the Blood till to it is Separation, it is
very rational to suppose that Spittle is so too: For they are both percolated
after the same Manner, though not through the same Glands. And indeed I admire that
your repeated Analyzes of the Blood should produce nothing of an Acid. I had
almost said, you overlook it: If we may believe Mr. Boil, the Blood is not
without Acids. And give me leave to tell you, that you do not deal fairly with
Alkalies; you derogate from the Dignity of their Nature, when you make them
wholly excrementitious. Is there a more noble Juice in human Bodies than Bile,
than Alkalizated Bile? Sure I am, no true Concoction can be performed without
it. A thousand other good Offices might be attributed to it. This is all Sir, I
have to offer in maintenance of my Objections. If I have expressed my self
indecently any where, do not impute it to Rudeness or Disrespect. Your good
Nature cannot but easily find out the true Occasion of it. God forbid I should
treat you as a Gentleman has lately done. I think we are all of us obliged to
you for your Care and Industry. Whether Acids are of universal Use, will be
determined in time. I believe they will never prove so. But certainly they are
of some Use: And in this you have gained a considerable Point, and done the
World very eminent Service. For many of our old Galenical Brethren had a great
Antipathy to them: Nay the most moderate Use of that mild Acid, Vinegar has
been declaimed against for souring the Blood: And for other Acids of a stronger
Nature, they have represented them to their Patients as hurtful as the Venom of
a Mad-dog. Your Enemies cannot but acknowledge the Generosity of your Temper in
your not being discouraged at the Snarls of such Cynicks: Nor even at the base
and villainous Practices of some Chyrurgeons; who have meditated against your
Life, because you have put them in a fair Way to save that of others. I should
here conclude, and make no farther Observations on your Hypothesis, but that
you desire me and every one else, before we take up with any Thing that comes
from you, to examine it in the Balances of Reason and Experience. Pardon me
therefore, if I adventure to examine some Passages in your Essay of Alkaly and
Acid.

OF THE Smallpox.
THE first Thing that occurs there is the Smallpox. You suppose it (in pages 3
and 13) to proceed from an Intromission of Heterogeneous Particles, or
Particles of a different Nature and Texture from the Blood, into it: By means
of which Particles the Blood is put into a very great hurry and disorder, in
order to throw off it is Enemy: And that the Place that Nature designs the
Discharge of these Particles by, is the Cutaneous Glands. Now the
Inconveniences that you observed to attend the Use of Alkalies, where the
throwing out of more Pustles than Nature designed, the destroying the Globules
of the Blood, and a waste of too great Quantity of Serum. This Hypothesis, how
ingeniously soever contrived, I fear will look somewhat strange by and by,
especially when compared with your Practice. Well then, the Occasion of the
Smallpox is an Intromission of Heterogeneous Particles. Here you term the
morbifick Particles Heterogeneous, but do not much care to fix the Nature of
them, I suppose they must be of an Alkaline if any. For nothing but Alkaly with
you is the Principal of Destruction. Now I shall endeavor to prove that these
intromitted Particles cannot well be of an Alkaline Nature: And though they were
so, that a moderate Use of them could not be always Prejudicial, but sometimes
of great Advantage. First then, these Particles cannot be Alkaline, because no
tolerable Account can be given from the Rules of your Hypothesis, how these
Alkalies should excite such a disorderly Motion in the Blood. The Globules you
say are broken, but you explain not the Manner of their being broken. They must
either be broken by Accension (the vital Flame burning very furiously) or by
Fermentation? 'Twill be very difficult to find out another Way. Now Alkalies
cannot well accend the Blood; Acid and Sulphur (with you) being the only
Pabulum of Flame. Ashes or Alkalies should rather choke it. But here I only
argue against your Hypothesis of Accension. I do not deny but Alkalies may
raise some slight disorders in the Blood. They may occasion some Fevours. But
they are never so ill natured as to break the Globules. Acids are much better
armed to do this Work. Neither Secondly, Can they be so easily found guilty of
Fermentation; since you exclude all Acids from the Blood. These Salts do not
use to be so nimble, they are dull enough of themselves, unless an Acid
Antagonist rouses their Courage. But Secondly, grant these intromitted
Particles were Alkaline (which you have not proved hitherto) yet Alkalies could
not be always improper in this Distemper. Indeed when the Blood runs. High, and
it is Motion is very violent, then to add Alkaly, to the intromitted Alkaly
would be highly pernicious. But if this Motion is naturally weak, or is
accidentally checked, so as to be unable to promote an Excretion of the
Particles, what harm is it to help it on with Alkalies? There is nothing more
usual than upon taking Cold, or by too liberal an Use of cooling Liquors, for
the Pox, as soon as they appear to strike in again (as they call it) or vanish:
And if they do not strike in, they maturate very slowly, the Patient being
fevorish all the while. In such a case as this, you may give Acids ad infinitum
to no purpose, or allow your Patients as much small-Beer as you please; it
shall not fill up the Pustules; 'twill be a hard Matter for Dame Nature to
escape a drowning. And I appeal to your Learned Society, if upon such Accidents
as these, pulv. e chel. marg. pp. and above all ead. Serpentar. Virgin. are not
of wonderful Use. Indeed in a Confluent-Pox, you may bleed, indulge small-Beer
liberally, give Acids; and all will not stop, they will but regulate the Motion
of the Blood: But if you should observe the same Method in more gentle Poxes,
it is much but the Patient pays dear for it; and therefore you act like an
honest good Physician, being more tender of others Lives than your own
Hypothesis, in prescribing nothing of Acids in Variolis Benignis. Neither is it
good (I confess) to tamper too much with Alkalies here. But this I assure you
(having often engaged with this Distemper) that I never saw the Testaceous
Powders moderately administered produce any ill Effect even in the most
favorable Poxs: Which is more (I verily believe) than can be said of Acids.
And here I cannot but take notice of one Thing, which I omitted in it is proper
Place. Alkalies you acknowledge are good Medicines for Children, because they
are of a mild Nature. Are there not Acids of a mild Nature as well as Alkalies?
Why then do you not exhibit those mild Acids? Indeed you prescribe them in some
particular Cases not without Success. But they will hardly ever be found so
generally effectual as Alkalies. But to return to the Smallpox: You displease
me in giving Syrup. de Meconio. even upon their first Invasion. Methinks, it
should hinder their Eruption. The worthy Sydenham, that true Patron of a cold
Regimen, seemed to be sensible of this, and therefore never prescribed it till
they were all come out. One Word more and I have done with this. If the Pox
were occasioned by the Intromission of Heterogeneous Particles, a Man might as
well labor under them ten times as once. But this is contrary to Experience, I
never saw any Man that had the true Pox twice.

OF THE Scurvy.
THAT the Testaceous Powders are of no great Use in the Scurvy: That there is
something of a Lixivious fixed Alkaly in Scrobutical Blood: That Tartar and
it is Preparations are proper to correct this Salt, I verily believe. And yet
notwithstanding all this, there are a Sort of Alkalies in the World that may be
seasonably applied even in this very Distemper. It Is well known that the
Stomach as well as Blood of Scorbutical Persons is often out of order. They
complain of a bad Appetite and worse Digestion. Now though Tartarous Medicines
may do something toward the removal of the ill Symptoms of the Stomach as well
as those of the Blood: Yet they do not operate so powerfully as your digestive
bitter Herbs, whose Salts are undeniably Alkaline.

Indeed, if you give the Bitters by themselves to some Scorbutical
Constitutions, they will warm their Blood a little too much. And it may not be
amiss to prescribe Acids with them. For since, neither will work a Cure
separately, the best way I think is to unite their Forces. Not but that Acids
by themselves (I grant you) will do the business, where the Ventricle is under
no Indisposition. But by the way you do not seem to have answered a
considerable Objection, which has been started against your Doctrine of the
Scurvy in your Appendix. Objection, You say, that the Scurvy is occasioned by
too great a Quantity of Alkalious Particles in the Blood, and is only cured by
Acids. If so, how comes it to pass, that those People who live upon nothing
almost, but highly-seasoned Meat, are more troubled with the Scurvy than other
People, when you own Salt to be an Acid? Answer, This does not proceed from
their eating a larger Quantity of Salt than other People, but from their eating
more Flesh and Fish than other People, which abound with Alkalious Particles,
and the Moistness of the Air. Reply, Whether a moist Air breeds the Scurvy is
much to be questioned; but that a salt Air will is very plain, It Is observable,
that those People which live in the most Fenny Places of our Inland-Counties,
are not so miserably Plagued with this Distemper, as others which dwell in
Hilly Places, if by the Seaside. There is hardly a more dry Mountainous Country
in England than the North-part of Devonshire, and at the same time no Place
more miserably overrun with the Scurvy. What Reason can be given for this, but
the Saltness of the Air? And I have observed that the meaner Sort of the same
County, whose Diet is chiefly on Irish Beef and Newfoundland Fish, are much
more obnoxious to this Disease than others, who eat greater Quantities of
unseasoned Flesh and Fish.

OF Rheumatisms.
AS for Rheumatisms, though something might be objected to your Notion of the
Serum's Viscosity in that Distemper, yet I shall wave it. We will not quarrel
about the Theory, when we agree well enough in the Practick.

OF Consumptions.
COME we last of all to Consumptions: And here you make Acids very beneficial.
This Assertion of yours, though it strikes an Eight to your Hypothesis, will
hardly do so to Experience: it is flatly repugnant to it. You cannot be
insensible that a Catarrh is the usual Harbinger to this fatal Distemper: That
in all Catarrhs the Blood is in a Fusion; as is evident from the continual
Excretion or Distillation of Rheum from the Glands of the Pharynx upon the
Lungs, and it is throwing out great Plenty of clear Spittle ( alias clear Acid)
from the Salivatory-ducts: And you know well enough that Vinegar, Lime-Juyce,
Stale-Beer, Sowr-Wines, etc. are so far from allaying this Fluxion, that they
incontinently promote it. Be pleased then but to meditate on these Premises,
and the Conclusion will be obvious enough. You talk indeed of Oil of Sulphur,
that it has wrought great Cures in a Phthisis: But did you ever see these
Cures? You are not pleased to give one Instance of this kind: Though you furnish
us with several on other Distempers, to confirm your Hypothesis. You quote
Helmont for a Story of an old Soldier, that was strangly preserved by Oil of
Sulphur. But the Man was not at all Consumptive as I can find. It must be
confessed in Asthmatical Cases, where the Phlegm is very thick and viscous; and
the Serum it self glutinous; that Oil of Sulphur may be of excellent Use by
reason of it is inciding or attenuating Faculty. But in a Consumption, properly
so called, it seems to be destructive to all intents and purposes. I should now
make an End; but that I meet with something in the Appendix, that I cannot well
pass by. It Is honest Mr. Kemp's Encomium on Vinegar. That a moderate Use of
Vinegar may be agreeable to some Constitutions no body can deny; though I fear an
immoderate to none at all. That Acetum, especially when mixed with
Alexipharmacks, is a noble Medicine even in pestilential Distempers is more
than probable. But I am sure it is far from being a Panacaea. Let a lean Man eat
Vinegar till doomsday, he shall not improve his Habit of Body, or grow fat
upon it; notwithstanding you assert Fat to be generated of Acid Particles. I
shall not anatomize your Notion of Fat at present, or the Manner of it is being
made. Suffice it to observe to you that I never heard of this pinguefying
Virtue of Acids till now. I could give you many Instances to the contrary; but
I believe no body will be angry with me, if I spare my Pains. However I shall
single out one to satisfy you, that Acids are hurtful in Catarrhs, and are too
apt to make Men lean. A certain Gentleman, whose Name you know (but I must not
mention it) was highly seasoned about 14 Months time with the Scurvy. He had a
great Fancy, that Sevil-Oranges and Lemons would rebuke this Malady:
Accordingly furnishes himself on the first opportunity with a large Parcel of
them. His Medicines proving so pleasant, he dosed himself very liberally with
them, and eat several of them in a day. Observe the Event, he had not continued
this Course above a Fortnight, before he fell into a most violent Catarrh. He
soon became sensible of his Error, threw away the Residue of his Fruit, and
timely applied himself to astringent and agglutinating Medicines, some Alkalies
being intermixed. Notwithstanding the daily Use of these wholesome
Prescriptions, he grew very thin, his Cough trouble him much; and 'twas a
considerable while e're he recovered the Fault. This is all I have to offer
against you: I believe we might be reconciled if you would but let fall your
Hypothesis a little, and not strain it quite so high. Acids no doubt are of
Use, and so are Alkalies too. Wherefore, if we consult our own, or our Patients
Safety, medio eamus. I have only one Thing to beg of You and the Reader, That
you would Pardon what you see amiss in these Papers. Which I hope you will do
the sooner, upon Promise of my arresting my Pen, and never troubling the World
again with the impertinent Notions, of

SIR, Your Friend and Servant FRANCIS TUTHILL.

FINIS.

