The true State and Condition of the seven foot-Companies in the City of
Londonderry, under the command of the several Captains following, viz Robert
Thornton, Simon Pit, Henry Fynch, Henry Osborn, John Kilner, Robert Lawson,
and William Patsall, (who now commands that Company which was raised by Hewet
Finch, deceased, and for some time commanded by Captain Henry Vaughan) is as
follows, viz.
FIRST,

THE said several Captains by authority, derived from the right Honorable
the Lords Justices, and Council of Ireland; about the twenty seventh of
October, 1641. did raise, feed, Cloth, Arm, and at their own proper cost
and charges, maintain their said Companies, each Company consisting of one
hundred men besides Officers, and by the careful industry, of the said
Commanders, were made able, ready, and expert Soldiers, as by Certificate
dated the first of September, 1642. Signed by Colonel Sir William Stewart
Knight and Barronet, Colonel Sir Robert Stewart Knight, Sir William Sempill
Knight, and diverse other persons of quality, ready to be produced, appears
more at large.

Secondly, That the said Captains and their said Companies, from the time of
their said raising, have constantly, faithfully, and successefully served, not
only in guarding, repairing, and preserving the said City, but have also often
marched out, into the field, and given Battle to the Rebels, and been Actors
in the greatest services that have been performed in the Counties of Tyrone,
Donnegall, and Londonderry; the said Captains, always furnished their said
Companies, with all provisions, at their own costs and charges, as by the said
Certificate likewise appears.

Thirdly, That the said Captains, and their said Comapnies, have been a very
prevalent means, for the preservation of the said City of Londonderry, and
the Country adjacent; and that without the assistance of the said Captains and
their said Companies, and the supplies, and support, which some of the said
Captains upon credit, (out of their affection to the Public service) did
advance in ready money, victuals, and other provisions, (wherewith other
Regiments were furnished) several other Regiments, could not have so well
subsisted, as by the said Certificate may also appear.

Fourthly, That the said Lords Justices, and Council, by their Letters, dated
the sixth of September, 1642. directed to the then Mayor of Londonderry, and
to Sir John Vaughan, Knight, taking notice how helpefull the Forces in that
City, had been to the other Regiments in those parts, and to the service, did
render them thanks for it; and require the continuance thereof, from time to
time: by their said letters, also signifying, That their Lordships formerly
had, and were then again, writing into England, as well for their pay, as for
provisions of Victuals, Clothes, and other Necessaries for them, as by a copy
of the said Letters may appear.

Fifthly, That by Order of the honorable House of Commons, dated the
seventeenth of May, 1643. the said Companies were to have entertainment,
according to the pay of the Army there, to begin from the date of the
Muster-booke, signed by Commissary Roberts, by order of the Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, which was taken the nineteenth of August, 1642. as by a Copy of the
said Order appears.

Sixthly, That upon the Petition of Robert Harrington, Esquire, Agent for the
City of Londonderry, presented unto the Committee of Adventurers, of the
honorable House of Commons, and Adventurers chosen in the City of London, for
the Irish affairs, An Order was made the eighth of September, 1643. by which
for the Reasons therein mentioned, It was ordered that as the said Committee
should be enabled, they would take care to provide for the said several
Companies in the next Ship, that should go to Londonderry, in such manner and
measure, as other the Companies there, should be provided for; as by the said
Order appears.

It is now hereupon humbly offered to consideration. That although diverse
provisions, have been sent to Londonderry, and to Knock fergus, since the
said Companies were raised, and since all the said services by them performed
as aforesaid, (and lately a Ship with provisions of victuals, which came out of
Holland, sent unto Knock fergus) yet have not any of the said Captains, nor any
of their said Companies, at any time since their being raised as aforesaid,
received any manner of provision, either in Money, Victual, Clothes, Arms,
Ammunition, or ought else whatsoever, to their extreme discouragement: And now
upon the Cessation, if some reasonable and present respect, be not had of
them, and their doing and suffering for the time past, And such provision for
the future, to be made for them, as for others of their quality in those
parts. They are like in short time to be utterly ruined and destroyed: The
speedy prevention whereof, is now by them, and their said Agent, in their
behalf, humbly prayed and desired.


