The true state of the TRANSACTIONS OF Colonel George Monk WITH
Owen-Roe-mac-Art-O-Neal; As it was Reported to the Parliament BY THE Council of
State. Together with the VOTES and RESOLUTIONS OF The PARLIAMENT thereupon.

ORdered, That it be referred to the Council of State, to give Direction for
printing the Report from the Council of State, and so much of the Letters and
Proceedings as concern this business, and the Votes of the House thereupon.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of England,
August 15. 1649.

Die Veneris, 10 Augusti, 1649.
Mr. Scot Reports from the Council of State, a Letter and Paper concerning a
Cessation made by Colonel Monk with General Owen Roe mac Art O Neal, sent to
the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland by Colonel Monk, and were by the Lord Lieutenant
brought and delivered to the Council, and by them taken into consideration, and
that the whole Business was then disapproved by the Council; and the Council
has declared unto Colonel Monk, That they neither did nor do approve of what
he has done therein; and Ordered, That both the foresaid Letter and Papers,
and also the Reasons now exhibited to the Council by Colonel Monk, for his
making the Cessation, should be Reported to the House; which were all this day
read.

The House being informed, That Colonel Monk was at the door, he was called in;
and being come to the Bar,

Mr. Speaker by Commands of the House declared to him, That the House had
received a Report from the Council of State, touching an Agreement for a
Cessation between him and Owen Roe; and whereas in his Letter he does mention,
That he had done it with advice with some others there, Mr. Speaker demanded of
him, what persons he intended thereby: To which Colonel Monk answered, That he
did it upon his own score, without the advice of any other person; only having
formerly had Discourse with Colonel Jones, Colonel Jones told him, That if he
the said Colonel Monk could keep off Owen Roe and Ormond from joining, it would
be a good service.

Being demanded by Mr. Speaker, Whether he had any advice or direction from the
Parliament, or Council of State, or Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, or any other
person here to do the same; he did expressly deny, That he had any advice or
direction therein from the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, or from the Council of
State, or from the Parliament, or any Member of either; but he did it only on
his own score, conceiving it was for the preservation of the English Interest
there, and that they have had some fruits thereof accordingly.

Being withdrawn, and afterward called in again, the questions demanded him by
Mr. Speaker, and his answers thereunto, were read unto him; and the said
Colonel Monk did acknowledge, That the same are his answers to the said
questions.

REsolved, etc. That this House does utterly disapprove of the proceedings of
Colonel Monk, in the Treaty and Cessation made between him and Owen Roe O Neal;
And that the innocent Blood which has been shed in Ireland, is so fresh in the
memory of this House, that this House does detest and abhor the thoughts of any
closing with any party of Popish Rebels there, who have had their hands in
shedding that blood.

Nevertheless, the House being satisfied that what the said Colonel Monk did
therein, was in his apprehension necessary for the preservation of the
Parliament of England Interest, That the House is content the further
consideration thereof, as to him, be laid aside, and shall not at any time
hereafter be called in question.

Ordered, That it be referred to the Council of State, to give Direction for
printing the Report from the Council of State, and so much of the Letters and
Proceedings as concern this business, and the Votes of the House thereupon.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

Colonel George Monks Letter to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
Right Honorable,
SInce I received advertisement of your resolution of coming into this Kingdom,
I have very much rejoiced, and withal do assure you, that you have no servant
in the world more glad of it, then my self; I am infinitely obliged to you for
your many favors, for which I return you hearty thanks. I do account it a
principal part of my duty, to give you account of affairs here in this service:
I have, since, the Scots deserting me (although they are unwilling to own it)
notwithstanding their actions do fully manifest it, used my utmost endeavors to
reserve the interest of England in the North, and to keep some footing there. I
have taken care to provide the Garrison of Lisnegarvy, with two months
provision of corn, which is kept there safe, if any rupture happen between,
which is likely to be, since their ends are clear opposite: As also I have well
furnished with victual the Garrison of Derry, the only pass into the North,
and Green Castle, Cartingford, Dundalk and Colerane, if my Forces should
advance to besiege either of them. And being in a very ill condition with these
Garrisons between the Scots and Irish, Owen mac Art's Army, I have adventured,
by the advice of some special friends and well-wishers to this Service, to
treat with Owen mac Art, to keep him from joining with Ormond, which if he had
done, Colonel Jones and I had been in a very great hazard of losing the
Parliaments footing in this Kingdom; whereupon finding Colonel Jones in such a
condition, that he could not relieve me, it made me the more confident to
adventure upon a Cessation of Arms between Owen mac Art's Party and mine, he
engaging himself to oppose Ormond, which he does really intend to do, and has
already by his endeavors manifested his willingness to ruin Ormond, for a
greater feud cannot possibly be between them, then there is now: wherefore upon
this score I have treated with him, and according to his desire, sent you the
Copy of the Propositions made by him, and according to his desire sent you the
Copy of the Propositions made by him, to the Parliament, which are wonderful
high, but I believe will descend much lower: I have sent you likewise a Copy of
Agreement for the three months Cessation betwixt Owen mac Art and I. I do not
think it fit to signify this to the Council of State, but do wholly refer the
business to you, either to make further use of it, or else to move it, or as
you conceive most fit to be done, since there was great necessity for me to do
it, I hope it will beget no ill construction, when the advantage gained to the
Service, by dividing Ormond and Mac Art, is fully weighed.

By this business I have very much quieted the Scots, who were upon so high
terms, that nothing would satisfy them, but that I must deliver up the
provisions, Arms and Ammunition to them which I had in my Stores, as you may
perceive by the Copies of their Letters at their meetings; but now they do not
stir, either to send Forces to join with those against Derry, or to advance
toward me: wherefore being driven to this great straight, I shall desire that
it may not receive any ill censure, but that it may be thoroughly considered.

I doubt I have already trespassed too much upon your time, and do therefore
crave pardon for this boldness, and humbly beseech you to continue your good
opinion toward me, and esteem me, as I am

Dundalk, this 25. of May 1649. Your faithful and most humble Servant, GEORGE
MONK.
Ormond within this three days has taken a Garrison of Owen mac Arts, and put
most of the men to the sword, the place called Mary-Burrow, and the has sent
Preston to lie before Athy, another of Owen mac Arts Garrisons.




Articles condescended unto, and agreed upon, by and between General Owen O
Neal, Commander in chief of the confederate Catholics, and Colonel George
Monk, Commander in chief of the Parliament Forces, within the Province of
Ulster. Dated 8 May, 1649.
I. IT is agreed that there be a Cessation of Arms, and of all acts of
Hostility, between the Forces and Parties commanded by, and adhering to General
Owen O Neal, as well in Ulster as in the rest of the Provinces of the Kingdom,
and the Forces or Parties under Colonel George Monk his command, for three
months after the date hereof; Provided that in the said time, there be not any
agreement made with the Marquess of Ormond, the Lord of Inchiqueen, or any
their adherents, or with any who are Enemies to the Parliament of England.

II. That upon all occasions during the said time, both Parties be ready with
their Forces to assist one another, until a more absolute agreement be made and
condescended unto by the Parliament of England.

III. It is agreed between the said Parties, that the Creaghts of Ulster,
residing within the quarters of Colonel Monk, pay contribution to General Owen
O Neal; And that it may be likewise lawful for the said Colonel Monk to receive
contribution from such Creaghts of Ulster, as well those who have not as yet
paid him contribution, as those that do; and in case any of them refuse so to
do, it shall be lawful for Colonel Monk to compel them thereunto, excepting
those who belong to the County of Cavan.

IV. It is also agreed, That if General Owen O Neal shall happen to fight
against the Forces under the command of the Marquess of Ormond, the Lord
Inchiqueen, or any other Enemies to the Parliament of England, and thereby
spend his Ammunition, if he be near unto my Quarters, and be distressed for
want of Ammunition. I shall then furnish him.

V. It is agreed between the said Parties, And the said Colonel Monk does in
the behalf of himself and his Party, faithfully promise and undertake, that
free leave and liberty shall be given to any Ship or Ships, that may arrive at
any Harbor, or Port-Town within the said Colonel Monk's liberty, during the
time of our Agreement, with any Silver, Gold, Provision, Arms, Ammunition, or
any other commodities, to the use of the said General or his Forces: And that
the said General O Neal, or such as shall be by him authorized hereunto, shall
be admitted to fetch away the same with security and safety; and that no
interruption or impediment be given to the said shipping, to depart without any
prejudice, at their will and pleasure.

The Propositions of General Owen O Neal, the Lords, Gentry and Commons of the
confederate Catholics of Ulster, to the most High and most Honorable, the
PARLIAMENT of England.
I. IMprimis, That such as are already joined, or shall within the space of
three months, join with General Owen O Neal, in the service of the Parliament
of England in this Kingdom, as well Clergy as others, may have all laws and
penalties against their Religion and its Professors, taken off by Act of
Parliament, and that Act to extend to the said Parties, their Heirs and
Successors for ever, while they loyally serve the Parliament of England.

II. The said General O Neal desires an Act of oblivion to be passed, to
extend to all and every of his party, for all things done since the beginning
of the year 1641.

III. They desire that General Owen O Neal, be provided with a competent
command in the Army, befitting his worth and quality.

IV. They desire that they may enjoy all the Lands that were, or ought to be in
their or their Ancestors possession.

V. That all incapacity, inability and distrust hitherto, by Act of State or
otherwise, against the said party, be taken off.

VI. That on both sides all jealousies, hate and aversion, be laid aside,
unity, love and amity, be renewed and practiced between both parties.

VII. That General Owen O Neal may be restored and put in possession of his
Successors estates, or some estates equivalent to it, in the Counties of
Tyrome, Ardmach, or London-dery, in reward of his merit, and the good service
that he shall perform in the Parliament of Englands service, in the
preservation of their interest in this Kingdom.

VIII. That the Army belonging to General Owen O Neal and his party, be
provided for, in all points as the rest of the Army shall be.

IX. That the said party be provided with, and possessed of a convenient Sea
port in the Province of Ulster.

I do, upon receiving a confirmation of these Propositions, forthwith undertake
and promise in behalf of my self, and the whole Party under my command,
faithfully and firmly to adhere to the service of the Parliament of England in
this Kingdom, and maintain their interest hereafter, with the hazard of our
lives and fortunes, against all opposers whatsoever. In witness whereof, I have
hereunto put my hand and seal, this 8 day of May, Anno Dom. 1649.

Signed, Owen O Neal.

The REASONS inducing Colonel Monk to make a Cessation with Owen Roe O Neal for
three Months, which is now expired, were as follows:
1. THat about April last, the Scots under his command having relinquished
their obedience to the Parliament, and denied to obey any command from him,
upon refusing to join with them in a Declaration against the Parliament and
Army, he desired assistance from Colonel Jones to reduce them to obedience: But
Colonel Jones finding by good Intelligence, that the Lord of Ormond had made a
Peace with all the Irish, except Owen Roe O Neal; That he had set up the
Princes Interest, and upon that score was raising all the force he could make
to distress Colonel Jones in his quarters, thought it not safe, as to the
Parliaments Interest in Lemster, to spare any assistance to Colonel Monk. 2.
That Colonel Monk being upon this necessitated to retire to his Garrison of
Dundalk, found Owen Roe O Neal quartered with his Forces, being Six thousand
Foot, and about Seven hundred horse, in the counties of Cavan and Monahan,
within twenty or thirty miles march of his Garrison; and also received good
Intelligence, that the Lord of Ormond at that time used all possible means to
draw Owen Roe to his party, offering him any Conditions to induce to it. 3.
That Colonel Monk finding himself thus environed with the Scots on the one
hand, with whom he understood the Lord of Ormond kept Intelligence at that
time, and with Owen Roe on the other; and finding how dangerous it would in all
probability be, not only to himself, but also to Colonel Jones, and so
consequently to all the Parliaments Interest in Ireland, to have Owen Roe and
the Scots thus upon the sudden, and before any Forces could be expected to
arrive out of England, either to Colonel Jones or his own relief, united with
the Lord of Ormond. 4. Finding that if he could keep the Lord of Ormond and
Owen Roe at distance, until supplies arrived, he should not only deprive the
Lord of Ormond of that accession of strength which Owen Roe's Forces would have
added unto him, but also render the Scots in Ulster, and the Earl of
Clanrickard with his Connaght Forces (all which being joined together, would
have made Twelve thousand horse and foot) useless to the Lord of Ormond, as to
any assistance he could expect from them to join with him against Colonel
Jones, Owen Roe lying so with his Forces, as that he might within two or three
days march, have fallen either into the Scots quarters, or Clanrickards
quarters, if they had not kept their Forces to attend his motions. 5. Finding
also that Owen Roe, in regard of his own safety, would accept the large Offers
made him by the Earl of Ormond, if he had not been speedily prevented; Colonel
Monk well weighing all the dangers and advantages as aforesaid, that might in
all probability ensue thereupon; and likewise what hazard it might have been to
retard a conclusion with Owen Roe (whom he found impatient of all Delays) until
he might receive Directions either from the Council of State or the Parliament,
for his farther proceeding therein, thought it most agreeable to the discharge
of his trust, and the safety of the Parliaments Interest in that Kingdom,
rather to cast himself upon the Parliaments favorable interpretation, and to
conclude a Cessation with Owen Roe for three months, then by any further
delay, to lose the advantages aforesaid, the fruits whereof have in some
measure answered his expectation, and prevented the Earl of Ormond all this
while from a strict besieging of Dublin, and so consequently of taking it, for
want of a competent number of foot to lie down before it, which he could not
have done, without the addition of the Scots and Connaght forces as aforesaid;
and in the mean time necessitated him to spend his time in taking of the
out-Garisons, which if Dublin had been taken, he knew would have speedily
fallen into his hands. The truth of all which, and of the advantages gained by
his proceedings, he submits to the further testimony of those that Command in
chief for the Parliament upon the place.
A Letter of the Scottish Officers in Ulster, to Colonel MONK.
Honorable Sir,
WE are very well satisfied in our own consciences, and are confident all,
except the parties against whom we do declare, will be so, That we have
discharged our duties in relation to you, and that we have with a great deal of
honesty and fidelity, declared our selves for the Parliament of England, And
only against those who have illegally usurped their power, for whose service
we are confident the Arms, Ammunition and Clothes sent to the Army, were never
ordained; nor can we see how you discharge your trust to the Parliament, when
you detain those provisions sent by them to us, who are still willing cordially
to prosecute those ends to which we were engaged, when you got your Commission,
and to follow the commands of that lawful Power which did give it you. Thus far
we are free, because we cannot lie under the accusation of that crime, whereof
others are guilty, etc.

Major Rawden will give you an account of our Answers to your desires, which we
are confident will witness our respects to you, and we do earnestly desire that
you may be as careful in preserving a good correspondency and neighbor-hood, as

Belfast, the 9. of May, 1649. Your affectionate humble Servants. Signed:
Montgomery, John Edmonstone, Uti Knox, William Hamilton, George Kieth, James
Clotworthy, James Shaw, Fergus Kennedy, Ed: Ellis.


FINIS.

