The 10th day of April 1655. A true Report of the great number of poor
Children, and other poor people maintained in the several Hospitalls by the
pious care of the Lord Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of the City of LONDON.
CHildren put forth Apprentices, and discharged out of Christ's Hospital the
year last past -- 68

Children buried the year last past -- 16

Children now remaining under the care and Charge of the said Hospital (with
them lately admitted) which are kept in the house, and diverse places in London,
and suburbs thereof, and at Nurse in the Country, amounting in the whole to
the number of -- 948

The names of all which are Registered in the Books kept in the said Hospital,
and are there to be seen from what Parishes they have been from time to time
admitted.

There being so great a number of Children as aforesaid, under the care and
Charge of the said Hospital; It is hoped several well affected persons will
freely Contribute toward the maintenance of them, the certain Revenew of the
said Hospital being little more then the Moytie of the necessary Charges
thereof.

THere has been Cured this year last past, at the Charge of St Bartholomews
Hospital, of maimed Soldiers, Seamen, and other diseased persons, many
whereof being Soldiers and Seamen have been relieved with money and other
necessaries at their departure -- 1154

Buried this year after much Charge in their sickness. -- 211

Remaining under Cure, at this present, at the Charge of the said Hospital --
361

THere have been Cured at the Charge of St Thomas Hospital, this year last
past, of diseased persons, whereof many being Soldiers and Seamen, have been
relieved with money, and other necessaries at their departure. -- 1052

Buried this year after much Charge in the time of their sickness -- 154

Remaining under Cure at present, upon the Charge of the said Hospital -- 249

THere has been brought to the Hospital of Bridewell, within the space of one
whole year last past of wandering Soldiers, and other Vagrant people, to the
number of -- 688

Many whereof have been very chargeable to the said Hospital, for Apparel,
sick Diet, and Surgery, besides the ordinary diet, and other provisions and
charges expended about them, which could not be avoided by reason of their
necessities, and many of them have been passed into their Countries, with
Clothing, Apparel, and other charges, which could not be avoided, considering
their naked and miserable condition, nor they thence passed without such
charge. And there are now kept and maintained in Arts and Occupations, and
other useful and necessary works and labors, at the charge of the said
Hospital, Apprentices, and other persons, the number of -- 130

THe Hospital of Bethlehem is of great Antiquity, use, and necessity, for
keeping and curing distracted persons who are of all others most miserable, by
reason of their wants, both for soul and body, and have no sense thereof.

The charge thereof is very great, there being kept and maintained with
Physic, Diet, and other relief, 51. distracted persons constantly at least,
besides the charge of servants to look to them, they being most unruly and not
able to help themselves; and the Rents and Revenues of the said Hospital being
very small, not amounting to two third parts of the yearly charge, and
therefore this Hospital is a fit object of charity, there having been of late,
by the blessing of God, upon the charge of the said Hospital, and the care of
those that are entrusted with the said distracted people, diverse reduced to
their former senses.


