A TRUE STATE OF THE CASE OF Liberty of Conscience in the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND.

Together with a true NARRATIVE OF The Cause, and Manner, of Mr. John Biddle's
Sufferings.

London, Printed in the year, 1655.

A true State of the Case, etc.
THough it is to be confessed, as his Highness says in his first Speech to the
last Parliament, That Liberty of Conscience, and Liberty of Subjects are
oftentimes abused for the patronizing of Villainies; yet let it be said also (as
he in the same place) That these two are as glorious things as can be contended
for; and that whosoever abuses Liberty (as in the Epistle to the Reader
prefixed to the Speech of the Counselor to the King of Scots, James 5. which
his Highness caused to be printed) turning it into Licentiousnes, shall bear
his own shame, as he that sins, because Grace abounds. True Liberty nor Grace
are the less so, because abused; nor the more to be stumbled at. And because
Liberty of Conscience is pleaded in opposition sometimes to Civil Government,
and for the shelter of wicked and dissolute persons; that yet there may not be
a Case, and that in such a case it may not be lawful to plead, and that such
pleadings should not enter into the hearts of all those that have any true
affection to Liberty, it does not at all follow. And if in the Case here
presented to thy view, this Liberty be not rightly pleaded (as being highly
violated) we shall utterly despair of ever finding any. Certainly we do but
delude and deceive men, if while we cry out for Liberty of Conscience, we only
intend Liberty to others, to profess that whereof we are at present doubtful,
and not that which we maturely believe to be absolutely Erroneous: Provided
that the persons so erring, either in Doctrine, Discipline, or Worship, do
profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ, and abuse not the Liberty to the Civil
injury of others, and to the actual disturbance of the public peace on their
parts, nor profess and exercise Popery and Prelacy, nor under the profession of
Christ hold forth and practice licentionsness. These things premised, we
proceed to the Case.

A Member of that Society, whereof Mr. John Griffin is Teacher, differing from
the said Mr. Griffin in some Opinions touching the Deity of Jesus Christ, the
Son of the most high God, viz. Doubting, or Denying that he was indeed that
most high God, of whom he is the Son: And having some Discourse about the same
with Mr. Griffin in the said Society, being threatened with a Warrant from his
Highness, and the Constable being sent for to suppress him; at last Mr. Griffin
thinking his Victory would not be great, in overcoming this young man, and that
it would tend more to the establishing the Truth of what he maintained, if he
should in a public Dispute vanquish by Argument Mr. John Biddle, whom he
accounted the chief, and ablest Oppugner of the supreme Divinity of Jesus
Christ; He Challenges to Dispute at Paul's in the Stone-Chappel with Mr. John
Biddle, and gives notice to the Congregation accordingly: Whereupon notice was
given to Mr. Biddle; who knowing the unlearnedness and unskilfulness of his
Opponent, was very unwilling to Answer him: but the second Challenge being
urged by the young man, and other friend, Mr. Biddle promised a Meeting, which
came to pass accordingly on Thursday the 28 of June last, at the place
aforesaid; where the two Disputants being placed one against the other, the
Question was stated in these terms, Whether Jesus Christ be the most High, or
Almighty GOD? Which Question being stated, Mr. Griffin undertook to prove the
Affirmative, but required first to know if any man did deny it; which with how
much ingenuity it was done on his part, considering that was the very business
they came about, and the denial thereof was of so great danger and damage, as
by the sequel appears, let sober men judge: whereupon Mr. Biddle, according to
the manner of a Disputant, did openly Deny.

We are not here to give an account of that Dispute; only in the Conclusion,
Mr. Griffin being weary, the further Dispute of this Question was referred to
the Thursday following; but before that time, to wit, on Wednesday last, the
Marshal of the City, with the Constable, were sent with a Warrant for Mr.
Biddle, which follows in these words; or to this purpose: By an Order of the
Council, dated July the 3d. You are forthwith to apprehend the body of John
Biddle, and to carry him before some Justice of Peace to Answer to such matters
as shall be objected by one Mr. Brookbank, etc. Signed by Chapter P. L. M. of the
City of London, etc.

Whereupon forthwith Mr. Biddle was carried before Alderman Andrews, who
without any Examination or Mittimus, save a verbal one, Commanded Mr. Biddle to
the Poultry-Compter-Prison, where he now abides. In the evening of the day
(this Commitment being done at 10 of the Clock in the morning) about 9 at night
comes a Mittimus from the Lord Major; A Copy whereof follows:

London ss. THese are in pursuance of an Order of the Council of the 3 of July
instant, to require you to Receive and retain in your Custody the body of John
Biddle until further Order, and this shall be your Warrant.

C. P. M.
Dated the 4th. day of July, 1655.
To the Keeper of the Poultry-Compter, London.
Here in the first place you have a man committed to prison by the bare word of
a Justice of Peace. Secondly, You have him detained by virtue of an Order that
expresses no Crime: there is indeed mention made of an Order of the Council,
but what that is, who knows! or whether that Order extend to the imprisoning of
Mr. Biddle, or only to the suppressing of the intended Dispute, which might
have been done with a word! However, Mr. Biddle continues a prisoner, and
cannot be Bayl'd; yea, it is intended, as was intimated by the Lord Major, to
bring him to Trial at the next Sessions upon the Ordinance made in 1648 against
Blasphemy and Heresy.

Having given thus a very short account of Mr. Biddle's imprisonment and
suffering, it will now be necessary to say something concerning the man
himself, his faith and practice, that it may appear whether he be a subject
capable of the Liberty promised in the Instrument of Government. First, for his
Faith, we may refer the Reader to the Catechism set forth under his Name,
wherein he Asserts the plain Scripture without any Exposition, save what
appears by the Questions; wherein, though you find many things contrary to the
Opinions of the present Ministers, yet that does not prove his Opinions to be
Erroneous, any more than the Opinions of Luther, a single person, against the
Judgment of so many thousands of the Learned Clergy that condemned him. And
indeed, the authority of Scripture is of so great account with him, that
however he may be traduced for one that will not believe any more than his
shallow reason can comprehend; yet we are assured that he does constantly
profess, That it is sufficient to him for Faith, if it be either in plain words
asserted in Scripture, or deduced thence by good and necessary consequence:
indeed he has for many years given himself to the diligent reading and study
of the Scriptures, with Prayer to God through Christ for direction and guidance
therein; yet he cannot see sufficient ground to assent to many Consequences
that are generally received, and reputed Orthodox.

Thus though with Paul ( Acts 24.14, 15.) he worships God, and believes,
according to the way which some men call Heresies; yet our consciences can bear
him witness, that he confesses with his mouth, and his conversation testifies
to us that he believes in his heart the Lord Jesus to be his Lord, and his God,
Joh. 20.28. his Savior, Act. 5.31. and by him does believe in God, who raised
him from the dead, and gave him glory, 1 Pet. 1.21. having set him at his right
hand; angels, and authorities, and powers, being made subject to him: and that
he is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, 1 Cor. 3.30. That he is the only begotten Son of God, and to be
honored as the Father, Joh. 5.23. That it is he which is ordained of God to be
Judge of quick and dead, Acts 10.42. That he is the author of eternal life to
all those that obey him: That there is no other name given under heaven among
men, whereby we must be saved: That his blood is the blood of the new Covenant,
that is shed for many, for remission of sins, Matthew. 26.28. That he is
perfectly able to save them that come unto God by him.

And however his opinion concerning the holy Ghost has been apprehended, it is
yet most certain, that he does not deny him to be the third Person of the
sacred Trinity; nor his mighty power and gifts appearing in signs and
miracles, bearing witness to the truth of the Gospel, and the Ministers
thereof, Heb. 2.3, 4. but beleiveth the same; and that the Holy Scriptures are
the dictates and inspirations of that blessed Spirit; according to which he
tryes all Doctrines, and would have others to do the same. Contrary to these
things he teaches not, therefore can by no means be guilty of not believing in
God through Jesus Christ, or of bringing in damnable Heresies, denying the Lord
that bought him.

As for his Conversation, we have had intimate knowledge thereof for some years:
but we think he needs not us, but may appeal even to his enemies, for his
vindication therein. Let those that knew him at Oxford, for the space of 7 or 8
years; those that knew him at Gloucester about 3 years; those that knew him at
London these 8 or 9 years, (most of which time he has been a prisoner) speak
what they know of unrighteousness, uncleanness, unpeaceableness, malice, pride,
profaness, drunkenness, or any the like iniquity, which they can accuse him of.
Or has he, (as the manner of Heretics is, 2 Pet. 2.3.) through covetousness
with feigned words made merchandise of any? Has he not herein walked upon such
true grounds of Christian Self-denial, that none in the world can stand more
clear and blameless herein also? he having shunned to make any of those
Advantages which are easily made in the world by men of his Parts and Breeding,
Languages and Learning; that (if any known to us) he may truly say as the
Apostle, I have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel: yea, ye your
selves know, that these hands have ministered to my necessities; he ever
accompting it a more blessed thing to give, than receive.

And that he should, in holding or publishing any Opinions in Religion,
wilfully sin, doing the same against his own Conscience and Judgment, and so
should fall under that Character of an Heretic, to be condemned of himself,
Tit. 3.10, 11. we cannot imagine that his most zealous enemies do suppose, much
less charge him with such gross wickedness.

However for our selves that know him, we crave leave upon knowledge to affirm,
that he lives constantly in such a filial fear of God, with so much
watchfulness over his ways, and lays so great a wait upon wilful sin, that it
is impossible he can be guilty of so abhorrid an evil; being so far from
self-condemning, that we are persuaded he would not hold, or publish any
Opinion or Doctrine which to his understanding he did not judge to have clear
grounds in holy Scripture, though thereby he might gain the whole world: Such
confidence have those that know him of his cleerness in those particulars of
wilful sinning, or self-condemning.

And indeed, since he has found cause to differ in his Judgment from the
multitude, he has not only diligently examined the Scriptures himself, but
also has desired and sought the Knowledge and Discourse of any Learned and
good man he could hear of, for his further information: But though he has
Discoursed with many, yet never received he an Admonition from any, to change
his Judgment or Opinion.

So that these things well weighed in the true balance of Scripture truth, and
true Christian charity, we hope it will appear, though he may err in some part
of his Judgment, yet can he not by any means be esteemed less than a Believer
in God through Jesus Christ, and one that exercises himself to have always a
good Conscience, void of offense toward God and men, having hope of the
Resurrection both of the just and unjust; and so not an Heretic, the
Characters of such an one not at all appearing in him: and much less a
Blasphemer, having never been known to be either a Curser, or Swearer, or
Rayler against acknowledged Truths. Insomuch that were he in a true un-erring
Church of Christ, they could not so much as excommunicate him out of their
fellowship as an Heretic, much less persecute him to imprisonment or other
punishment; it clearly appearing, that if he be mistaken in any thing (as who
in some measure is not?) it is necessarily from the intanglement of his
understanding, and not in the least of wilfulness. Nor could we ever perceive,
but that even in those things wherein he most differed from the stream of
interpreters, in those high points of Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity,
that he contended therein out of curiosity, or vainglory, but conscientiously
and to the clearing of the Truth to him so appearing, and vindication of the
honor of God therein, which we believe to be the supreme end of all his
endeavors. And though he should somewhat mistake the way, yet doubtless, God,
who often accepts the will for the deed, will look upon it as an Error of his
zeal and love, and receive him to his mercy. And we trust all well-minded
people will receive much satisfaction herein.

And as we have undertaken (as being moved in Conscience thereto) to vindicate
Mr. Biddle from any Heresy in Faith, or licentiousness in Practice, that might
render him justly incapable of Liberty of Conscience promised in the
Government; so in particular we can boldly defend him against the Charge of
abusing his Liberty to the Civil injury of others, or any manner of way
endeavoring the disturbance of the public Peace or Civil Government upon any
pretense. Does he not in the 17 Chapter of his Catechism deliver his Judgment
for subjection to Government, and paying Tribute even for Conscience sake? What
needs more, seeing all that know him, know his practice to be conformable
thereunto?

As for Popery, or Prelacy, which may exclude from Liberty, we think we need
say nothing; seeing his enemies in Religion, in these things opposed by him,
join hands with Papists and Prelates.

And the truth is, He is much encouraged in his Opinions, in that they give him
irresistible weapons against Popery and Prelacy, whereas others are daily
wounded in their encounters with them.

What though it has been frequent for Parliaments, Kings, and Councels, by
instigation and misinformation, to exercise their Authority in matters of
Religion? yet if it please you to examine the Records of those their
proceedings, whether in relation to the Opinions that have been condemned or
approved; or in relation to the persons, that have suffered Imprisonments,
Banishments, Deaths, with all kinds of Torments, by occasion of such their
proceedings, all the long times of Popery before Queen Mary's days, but
especially the whole time of her Reign; will (we conceive) afford nothing but
matter of weeping and lamentation.

Throughout all which times, the grossest Errors passed for the most Orthodox
Truths; and the Opinions and persons then suppressed and persecuted, which
latter times have found to be the most approved Truths; and the persons so
suffering, have been accounted worthy of the names of Martyrs.

And though the times of Episcopacy seemed more refined in their Opinions, and
less violent in their Persecutions: yet if the cruel deaths of Mr. Greenwood,
Penry, and Barrow, and also of some Anabaptists, and the barbarous usage of Mr.
Udall, be seriously considered, put a black mark upon those times also.

And all the gross abuses practiced against the Puritans, and Nonconformists
(as they were called) throughout King James and King Charles their times, were
all imposed by Authority of Acts of Parliament, and found no check until that
barbarous cruelty exercised upon Mr Burton, Prynne, and Bastwick, which opened
the understandings of some worthy and Conscientious Patriots, so far, as to
discern, that as Fathers, General Councels, Convocations, Synods, Assemblies,
and all of them in their several times erred: Even so Parliaments and Kings,
through a mistaken Zeal, had frequently countenanced the grossest Errors,
suppressed the Truth, and brought abundance of misery upon the most peaceable,
quiet, meek, and conscientious people of the Land.

And which occasionally through Gods mercy gave the first rise to the just
Liberty of Conscience lately enjoyed: for although the Parliament, soon after
they had relieved those Sufferers, were by the Assembly then sitting, induced
to make Orders and Ordinances, to the ensnaring and intangling Conscientious
people in the exercise of their just Liberties, under the notion of punishing
Heretics, Schismatics, and Blasphemers; yet through the pious interposition
of the most Conscientious part of the Parliament and Army, that returned to the
greater Freedom, ending in the Repeal of all Laws and Ordinances of Parliament
formerly made for Compulsion and Molestation in matters of Religion.

And it was no small satisfaction to all conscientious, peaceable, and well
minded people, to see the same just Liberty ratified and confirmed by the Lord
Protector, in the Instrument of Government, Article 35, 36, 37, 38. and
maintaining and defending the Government against all Opposers, upon this
account, that therein was a provision for differing Consciences: Liberty of
Conscience, (says he in his Second Speech to the last Parliament) is a
National Right; and he that would have it, ought to give it. Every Sect says,
Oh! give me Liberty: but give it him, and to his power, he will not yield it to
any body else. Where is our ingenuity! And we hear, that the Argument he uses
to make appear the Necessity of taking upon him this Government, is, the
maintenance of Liberty of Conscience; and that he does often boast to those
that are offended at the Government, That no man in England, Scotland, or
Ireland, suffers merely for Conscience sake.

Shall this truly-Religious, and Conscientious man, Mr. John Biddle, be the
only man excepted? Is he not every way as capable as any man that enjoyes it?
Shall the Laws and Ordinances against Liberty be Repealed and Nulled, and he
notwithstanding suffer by virtue of such Laws; or rather, against all Laws? Qui
uni facit injuriam, multis minatur: if Mr. Biddle suffer for Conscience sake,
let no man, differing from the multitude, think to go free; nor let those that
now, by reason of their consent with those in power, enjoy present Liberty,
dream of keeping it, except they resolve to change with the changeable Spirits
of men, or the vicissitude of times. History does afford us, long ago, an
Experiment of this nature, in the matter of the Athanasians and Arians.

Neither does Liberty at present exempt from Persecution in after times. Who
knows whether God is trying us whether we are sincere for Liberty or no?
Remember, we beseech you, Its better that a thousand Erroneous persons be
tolerated, than one good man be persecuted. God will required that at your
hands. Be thoroughly assured you do not persecute a conscientious man; for he
that doubts is damned, Romans 14.23. and when you have attained the hight of
Confidence, of the righteousness and necessity of your Persecution, then tell
us whether your predecessors have not been mistaken in the like Confidence.

And for our Governors, if this Paper shall providentially fall into any of
their hands, let them not henceforth tell us we have Liberty of Conscience by a
Law, seeing it is at Pleasure given to some, and taken away from others that
are equally capable thereof.

And if we have not that, what (we pray) have we, to countervail the expense of
so much Blood and Treasure, which will, at the hands of some, be required?

Let the Jurymen and Judges into whose hands this man's life may possibly be
cast, consider, That it is far more easy and possible for them to err in
stretching out their hands against the life of a poor sinful man, that is void
of the power of Miracles and Wonders to confirm his Doctrine by, and is only
guarded by the evidence of the holy Scriptures, then it was for the whole Order
of Priests and Nation of the Jews to mistake in Crucifying and by wicked hands
slaying the immaculate Son of God, A man approved by God among them, by
Miracles, Wonders, and Signs, which God did by him in the midst of them.

Let them remember what Christ himself their Lord says concerning such as
believe not his Doctrine, John 12. If any man hear my words, and believe not, I
judge him not; for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world: He
that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him; the
words that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day.

And when the Sadduces denied the Resurrection, which is so gross an Error,
that it takes away all Piety; yet did not our Savior declare that they
deserved to be imprisoned, or otherwise punished by the Civil Magistrate; but
only dealt with them by powerful Arguments, for their Conviction: thereby
leaving an Example to them that are his followers, how they ought to behave
themselves toward such as they conceive to be mistaken even in the highest
points of Religion. Nor was he pleased ( Matthew. 13.) that the Tares should be
plucked up and burned, although they were known to be Tares: How much less then
would he have them plucked up, and burned, or destroyed, who do by their Fruits
show, if not evidently, yet with probability, that they are Wheat, and no Tares?

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for Richard Moon, at the Seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard,
1655.


