Truth Vindicated. OR, AN ANSWER TO A LETTER SENT FROM JOHN PERROT OVT OF
JAMAICA INTO ENGLAND, etc.

London, Written in the Year, 1665.

Truth Vindicated, etc.
WHereas a Letter of John Perrots from Jamaica to Mary Booth, John Coopland,
Margaret Bradish and Francis Walker, bearing date the 12th. of the 4th. Month
1665. was produced by Robert Cobbet to Morgan Watkins in favor to John Perrot
or intentionally for the clearing of the said John from such things as had been
reported of him or charged against him to be inconsistant with Truth, and
contrary to the leadings and teachings of the Principles and spirit of Truth,
which we have received, and which he professed though afterward he apostatized
or departed therefrom to hide himself under the Earth, or disappear as in
respect of the Lord and his Truth; so that the said Letter by Robert Cobbet
produced as aforesaid does not serve to the use, intent, and purpose for which
it was produced, but rather to confirm and make good such things as were
reported of the said John, or charged against him to be inconsistent with
Truth, and contrary to the dealings of God and the experiences of his servants
and messengers whom he has sent forth to declare and manifest truth unto many,
who have in love received the same, and do manifest their faithfulness unto God
by continuing therein under the Gospel Dispensation.

First, The said John Perrot (in that Letter) said, Children I never told you
otherwise at any time, and now tell you again weeping, that I never deemed my
self to be more then a man of Infirmity; if he was infirm in his judgment,
council, principles, doctrine, impositions, and practices, then he was unsound
in the bottom or root of the matter, and contrary to the spirit and mind of
Christ Jesus, and therefore no fellow labourer with God in the work of the
Ministry; for they who are acquainted with God, and have received the spirit
and power of God as the true Gospel Ministers do, and aforetime did, to enable
them to be as workers together with him in their Ministration received of God,
2 Cor. 4. 1. who has made them able Ministers of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3.
5, 6. enabling them for his own service that they are as workers together with
him, 2 Cor. 6. 1. In all things approving themselves as the Ministers of God,
their sufficiency is of him; but they who speak of themselves and act from
their own wisdom and reason, and the man's part only, and not from the spirit
and power of God, are no more indeed then men of Infirmity as in respect of
their Ministration; And if John was any thing more then a man of Infirmity, and
if he was not unsound and infirm upon the aforesaid consideration, why should
he have made mention of it upon the account that he has done, seeing he has
so much cried down man, and would have man to be nothing, but the Lord to be
all, who is not unsound or infirm in any thing, if John was no more but a man
of Infirmity then he spoke of himself, and his speaking, standing, and acting
was of himself, and so his Natural parts and abilities were his sufficiency,
therefore it was of self and not of the Lord; and self sufficiency we deny as
inconsistent with Truth, in respect of the Ministry, and acknowledge to the
Lord and his power to be our sufficiency, not that we are sufficient of our
selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, who
also has made us able Ministers of the New Testament.

And whereas he (in that Letter) said unto them (by way of accusation of
others) whilst many have come forth in fury as an Host of armed Men with
Instruments of War in attempts and pursuits to slay me, yet are they no more in
mine eye then as Children laboring to beat the air. Whereby it appears that
John in his own account has not been hurt, nor at all harmed by them that he
has so falsely accused, who deny that they have gone forth in any fury as an
host of armed Men in pursuites with Instruments of War to slay him, neither
could he prove it, who turned false accuser of the brethren, and that is the
work of old Antichrist and for joining with him therein, he might expect a
reward from the hand of the Lord according to his doings. And whereas he said
many are striving in an evil day. That may stand for himself and those that
strives on his behalf by an evil spirit to sow the feed of dissension, and lead
people into a separation from that which God leads into: And that indeed is
an evil work which he and others were striving to accomplish, but the Lord is
blasting and will spoil their Antichristian design.

And whereas in that Letter he said unto them it shall go well with you and me
if we all keep in the root of their matter, and in it be hid under the Earth
till the winter is past and gone, is not that to make no appearance for God,
neither in meeting or preaching, or any thing else that may expose them to
sufferings for Righteousness sake, if so, is not that an Antichristian trick of
deceit, and altogether inconsistent with Truth. And did not John lead you to
forsake the practice and testimony of Truth, and center under the Earth in the
root of deceit, from whence proceeds unsoundness and infirmity in Council,
Doctrine, Judgment and Practice, which is naught in the foundation thereof, and
root of the matter, and what was amiss and naught in the foundation could never
be made good by John's confirmation. And if by the root of the matter be meant
the principle of Truth, and the Heavenly gift or Talent, which God has
committed to any for his own use and service to beget and gather to the
brightness of his risings, that is neither to be hid in the Earth, nor laid up
in a Napkin until troubles, trials, afflictions, and persecutions for
Righteousness sake (which may be accounted the Winter) be past and gone:
Therefore John's judgment and council in the case was unsound and infirm, and
of the man's part in him, which as he himself accounted was never otherwise;
therefore inconsistent with Truth, and not according to the direction, judgment
and council of the spirit and power of God (in man) which is sound and firm,
or else it would signify nothing for a souls instruction, confirmation,
satisfaction and consolation. And that spirit which leads people who have
received any heavenly gift or talent from God wherein they have appeared in
principle and practice on the behalf of the Lord, to hide the same under the
Earth again, so as to disappear in respect of the work of the Lord by hiding
themselves under the Earth, and so lie hid in obscurity for their self safely
until troubles, trials, afflictions, and persecutions cease and be gone, is
not the spirit that we have received of God, but a contrary spirit, as John
Perrots was, which we have already denied, and by the truth it is condemned, for
they who hide themselves under the Earth as John advised to do, are covered
with Earth and deceit, and not with the spirit and power of truth, and the woe
against them is already pronounced, for woe unto them that cover with a
covering, but not of my spirit, says the Lord: And it is very evident and plain
unto us that John Perrot was as that branch (he spoke of) which has striven to
bud out of its natural season, and that is the cause his blossoms did fall,
and its boughs wither according to his own reason.

And whereas John Perrot in that Letter said, I was once a Minister of Truth
and Righteousness amongst you and many others, and was faithful in what I did,
though somethings of the Mystery of the Gospel could not be borne of my Elders.

Ans. What is that to the purpose if he was once a Minister of Righteousness or
numbered amongst them that are so, seeing that by transgression he fell from it,
and turned down under the Earth to hide himself there, and turned enemy to them
who are Ministers of Righteousness, and in preaching the Word are instant both
in season and out of season according to the charge given before the Lord; he
is no more to be accounted of: Judas was once numbered amongst the Apostles of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and had received part of the Ministry and Apostleship,
Act. 1. 16, 17, 20.
but he afterward by transgression fell from it, and his end was miserable,
and he no more accounted of but Act 1. 23, 24. 25. 26
as a Traitor and an Apostate; however that part of the Ministry and
Apostleship which he fell from, was desirable and prayed for, so that truth is
truth, though some may betray their trust and depart or fall from it, and it
will outlive all deceit and Apostates; and as for those things of the Mystery
of the Gospel he spoke of, which he said could not be borne by his Elders, what
were they but such things as tended to faction, as teaching people to be
irreverent in keeping on their Hats at Prayer: And forasmuch as he acknowledged
Elders he should have kept in a place of subjection, and not have presumed to
impose things upon them, for the Lord has required that the Younger do submit
to the Elder; and what is it that makes true Eldership but the eternal Spirit
and power of Truth, that does open the mystery unto them to whom its given to
know the Mysteries of the Kingdom: And how durst John rise up in false
accusations and judgment against them as he has done, did not that bespeak
great pride in his heart, and that he aspired to be great in a self exaltation,
and now the Lord has abased him for so doing.

And whereas he said, I am not provoked unto have seeing all times will have
their Revolution, and I wait until a change comes, and a renewed commission
is given from above, that if I sound the Trump of the Lord it shall not be at
uncertainty.

Ans. It seems that what he said then and before was but at uncertainty, and he
was no Minister of Truth and Righteousness then in his own account, nor in the
account of Robert Cobbet, who confessed that he had jealousies of John Perrot
before us, and greater jealousies then we had, and said he was then no
Minister, for his commission was ended, what change was it that John waited for
to see come, was it to see persecutions and afflictions over and be gone; and
what commission was it he waited for seeing that he has formerly said that
pleading the cause that is truly righteous, and bearing his testimony of the
power of love was finished, and if that was finished as he said it was, would
he have had a commission to plead the cause that is unrighteous, and to bear
testimony against the power of love; if so, he might expect that from old
Antichrist, for the Lord would never grant him any such, and because he has
rejected the Lord in rejecting his Council, he was rejected of God so as to be
any Minister of his.

And whereas (in the Letter aforesaid) he said to Mary Booth, In reading thy
particular lines I find that thy love would have me become yet again very
honorable in Israel. Seeing he acknowledged Mary Booths love in wishing his
Restoration from that which renders him dishonorable in Israel, ought not he
to have accepted her love so as to have sought to return to that which in her
apprehension he was fallen from, for it appeared that both in her and his own
account he was degenerated and fallen from what he once either really was, or
at least was by them apprehended so to be, for Robert Cobbet suspected John,
and had jealousies of him, before he so fell; And when that he was fallen the
love of Mary Booth in wishing that he might become once again very honorable
in Israel, bespoke in her mind unto others that he was fallen from that which
in her account once made him honorable in Israel, and that he was then
dishonorable therein, or amongst them; and her love desiring that he might
become once again very honorable in Israel, bespoke that he stood in need of a
Restoration unto that which he had lost by degeneration, which thing he told
her he sought not, having once seen the great evil and snare that has attended
such a condition, both as touching what it might prove to others and to
himself; and for that cause (he said) it was best to him to be the most
contemptible, and it was with him at that present to walk and live both in
respect of judgment and fellowship void of the appearance of having it with any
Creature.

Ans. Whereby it appeared that an honorable estate and condition in Israel was
not in his account to be sought or desired after, because it might be attended
with danger, thereby bespeaking distrust in his mind, as if God could not
preserve out of the snare. 2. That it was better for him to be in that which
made him contemptible, then in that which makes honorable in Israel; and Judas
was contemptible enough, when by transgression he was fallen from what he
received, as in respect of the Ministry, the which if he had abode in, might
have made him honorable, does it therefore follow that because Judas might have
been honorable if he had abode in the Ministry received, but being attended
with temptations departed from the Lord, and by transgression fell from his
Ministry, (and into compliance with the spirit of the World, and so became
contemptible and a stink to this day, as such are and will be who depart from
the truth, and walk in Judas way of Apostasy) that therefore the way of the
Lord, and the work of the Ministry, is not to be desired and if any fall from
it that its best for them to be contemptible in not seeking or endeavoring a
Restoration, if the love of the Lord thorough any desire it, or if the Lord
call thereunto. And thirdly, that in respect of judgment, and fellowship he
said he did walk, and live void of the appearance of having it with any
Creature, and did stand still for a season as one dumb and mute, looking round
about him to see which way the world man's mind would roll, which is not sound
Doctrine, for God is Light, and they that walk in the Light as he is in the
Light they have fellowship one with another, who would therefore have depended
upon John Perrot, except such as declined in their hearts from the Lord, and
incline to the world, and are seeking an occasion to forsake the truth and
break off from the way of the Lord, whose minds are preparing for Ranterisme,
and to walk in the way of separation from God and his People, by following a
spirit of delusion, to turn unto any thing that suites with a fleshly communion
according to the worldly imaginations, under pretense of liberty in a mystery
which is not bounded by the spirit of truth and holiness, and let them take
heed least the spirit of delusion which entered John do enter them, so as to
prepare them to center in Rantisme: for he said, Children be not offended if I
ask something that the light in you may in due time answer you, did God by his
light in us draw us from any thing of appearance, or the formal customs
outward which are not of worship in themselves, but through the cross which
stood against our carnal affections in them things, and now if we are
naturalized to a custom which the natural affection takes part of, is not the
cross to be to that, and would it not be now a cross to us to do those things
which were never sin simply in themselves, which once through the cross we were
led from, consider all manner of gestures, salutations, and external, formal
appearances for the great mystery of the Gospel, and Righteousness, thereof is
held in the cross, which touching many things no man can measure in another.

What Is that to the purpose if no man can measure such things the spirit of God
in man, and the true measuring time can measure these things in all that
appertain to the Gospel, and the Righteousness thereof. Therefore it was deceit
in John that so spoke, and made the aforesaid inquiry whereby they might if
they were not blinded in their understandings see how the old ranting spirit
was making way for its design, and how the Serpent is ^ing and twining to wind
in his subtlety, and thereby to turn their minds from the simplicity of the
Truth for the fitting of them to conform to any thing but truth, in the life
and power thereof, as if God did by the light of his Son discover an evil, and
lead from the same, and afterward lead back from the good into the evil again:
It seems that the continuation in any practice, doctrine, or thing that God by
the light of Christ Jesus does lead men into, and work them into love with the
same, was accounted by John a form, and to be naturalized into the thing, for
which God may cross Men, and lead them therefrom again, because they are in
love with the same which was but John's fancy and vain imagination, and
contrary to sound Doctrine, for said the Apostle and Ambassador of our Lord
Jesus Christ unto Timothy, That good thing which was committed unto thee keep
by the Holy Ghost which dwells in us: This thou know that all they which
are in Asia be turned away from me, of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes, 2 Timothy 1. 14, 15. for some are already turned aside after Satan, 1 Timothy 5. 15.
as John Perrot did, and they that received his spirit have done, who may take
notice of their examples to be such as aforesaid, who turned away from the
Apostles of Christ, and turned aside from the Truth after Satan: But the
Apostle exhorted Timothy to take heed to himself at such a time, and unto his
Doctrine to continue therein, for in so doing he should both save himself and
them that heard him, 1 Timothy 4. 16. And they who have received a Ministry from
God are to continue in the same, and in preaching the Word to be instant both
in season and out of season, to reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long
suffering and Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 2. and not do as John Perrot did, if the
continuation in the Doctrines, Principles and Practices which the light of God
leads into, became a custom in John's esteem, and if because the outward man
be naturalized into love with the Truth, or made conformable to the inner Man,
and be affected with the same, must be crossed and broken off to go aside into
Men's traditions and the worlds vanities again, John therein was greatly
mistaken, for as God by his Light and Spirit of Grace within us has led us
from the Will-Worships, by the same light he will never lead us into them
again: 2. As God by the Light of Christ in us has led us in the Cross to our
wills to keep on our Hats and not put them off in respect of honoring Men's
persons, he will not by the same light and spirit lead us to put them off again
upon the same consideration: 3. As God has led us by the light of Christ in us
to assemble and meet together to wait upon him in the way of his worship in the
cross to our wills, he will never by the same light and spirit of grace lead us
from the continuation of that godly practice, though we be affected with the
same, because of his presence with us who does enjoyne his People to continue
therein; for it is the duty of the People of God to continue in the same,
because the Lord has led into it, and does own them therein, and it is a
danger to be negligent in that respect through the workings of Satan, for God
will not lead us from the continuation in that godly practice, though the
Natural Man may partake of the knowledge and virtue of God with the Spiritual
man, for the Earth as well as Heaven shall be filled with the knowledge of God
as it is written: 4. The same light and spirit of Grace in us that has led us
into acquaintance with God, and has led us to put off our Hats in time of
Prayer, and owned us therein all along from the first to this day in such a
practice in our supplications to the Lord in the Assemblies of his people from
whose blessed and heavenly power we have received many refreshings and
Testimonies for our confirmation, satisfaction and consolation will never lead
us to keep on our Hats in the time of Prayer in the Assemblies of the Saints in
opposition to Gods present and former leadings, did not John go about by his
Imaginations to change the Truth of God into a lie if he could, and to set the
Lord in opposition to the leadings of his own spirit and power, which he could
not do, and to make God as changable as he was contrary to the Lords own
sayings, who has said, I am God, I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are
not consumed: Might not John have as well said, that God would not have People
to be fixed and centred in an unchangable thing so as to continue therein, and
in the practices that he leads into, and confirms them in under a spiritual
dispensation: And likewise might he not as well have said that the same light
and spirit of Christ Jesus that has led Men out of the vanities and wickedness
of the World into love with God and his Truth, may lead them from Him and his
Truth again, because they are naturalized or made conformable to it, so as to
abide and continue therein, and are in love with him: Oh damnable Doctrine! for
they that are just and faithful to God must continue in that and those things
which the eternal Spirit and power of God has led them into, and enjoined them
by his own Spirit therein to abide, that they may not be as wandering Stars, but
fixed in the Firmament of Truth, and keep their standing and place in the power
of God, so will their Consciences be kept void of offense in the sight of God
as they stand approved in his sight by continuing in that and those practices
and things which the Lord leads his People into, and enjoynes them to
continue and abide therein, under his own spiritual and heavenly dispensation.

And whereas John said, that the Mystery of the Gospel and the Righteousness
thereof is held in the Cross, and said keep to your own, and see that for
Conscience sake ye have no more respect (through any custom, form of greeting
or salutation) to please one sort of People passing only under one
denomination, then caution in your hearts by such custom to displease others
of other denominations, and if that offend man you are to bear the Cross, which
the Jews would nail you unto.

If by the Jews he did mean and intend good ancient old friends who continue
and abide in the Truth, as his Writing imports; and if by nailing them to the
Cross (who are given to change their Principles and Practices as he did) be to
fix and fasten them to the power of Truth, or Mystery of the Gospel, and the
Righteousness thereof, (which is held in the Cross that they may continue and
abide in the same, be the nailing of them thereto that he spoke of, that they
may not run into delusions and turn from the Truth to conform unto and comply
with all sorts of People under every denomination in that which the Spirit and
power of Truth does not allow of and own, wherein are they to be blamed? for so
fixing and fasting them to the Truth for their establishment, confirmation and
continuation therein? But if by the Jews he did mean the enemies of Christ,
and accounted good friends to be such; and if by the nailing of them to the
Cross be to expose them to sufferings for Righteousness, as the Jews did
Christ by nailing him to the Cross; he was greatly mistaken, and did falsely
accuse the brethren, and ran himself into confusion and self contradiction, and
so was ensnared by the words of his mouth; and if all sorts of People under
every denomination, who have an outward profession of Godliness must be
conformed unto and complied with in such manner of gestures, salutations, and
external, formal appearances for the pleasing of them in that and those things
which the light and spirit of God does not allow of nor own where is the Cross
taken up and stood in, to those things, for as the light of Christ does
discover the evil and cross the carnal affections when they would run out into
such actions as the truth does condemn, so they who forsake that which the Lord
leads into, they run in their own will, and carnal affections into that which
the World's fellow ship stands in, whereby they go through their fleshly wisdom
and natural affection to cross the Light and Spirit of the Lord, and so they
forsake the true Cross, which is of power to crucify them to the World, and
the World unto them; and that is the cause why the enmity remains, and a life is
pleaded for and sought after, which the spirit and power of Truth does condemn.
And whereas John Perrot in that Letter has said my heart meditates the thing
that is just and equal among all, but can hardly yet come to this very rule,
because of present evil in me, which I cannot escape, which is of having a
greater respect in the general of the satisfaction of Quakers in me rather then
others, but this must be overcome, and I wait for it, though none have
persecuted me as Quakers have done.

It seems John had not then wholly and altogether gotten into a perfect state
of Rantisme because he had not altogether slain the witness and got over the
same, so as to conform unto and run into any thing that truth does not own,
and account it no sin, for it seems the witness in him that did bear witness
unto the People of God, reproachfully called Quakers, was not wholly overcome
in him at that time, because he could not but have a greater respect in him to
them then unto others, but he accounted it an evil in him to have a respect to
the Quakers more then to others, and he expected to overcome that, and waited
for it; who was turned to be a false accuser of them, for he said he never was
so persecuted by any as by them; whereby it appears that he never was
persecuted to do him any harm, neither has he been in any wise wronged or
hurt by them; for he has falsely accused the brethren in that thing, and has
before cleared them from the force of the said false accusation, confessing in
effect that they never did him any harm: But however the Innocent People of
God reproachfully called Quakers are clcar from his Aspersions, and do deny all
persecutions, and he also has cleared them whom he has so unjustly accused by
acknowledging that they have done him no harm as aforesaid.

And as for that unity he spoke of or having unity with candidness of heart of
John Swinton in a paper of his lately given forth to Israel; he has so much
the more discovered and manifested his spirit in opposition to friends; and
John Swinton may take notice what spirits they are whom he has so gratified by
his paper as aforesaid: But it is certainly true that offenses must come, and
the Woe is pronounced from God against them by whom they do come. And it is
certainly true that the enemy did heretofore enter John Perrot, and made use of
him as an Instrument, to offend many of the little ones that believes in the
Lord Jesus, and to cause the way of Truth to be evil spoken of, and he might
expect to bear the displeasure of the Lord for so doing; and as for John
Swinton in what he has written against Friends the Lord does not own it, for
it did not proceed from his own power and spirit; and therefore the witness of
God in his People do deny it, and it cannot be received into the spirit and
power of Truth, because it proceeded not from it, so that he has not the
answer of God in the hearts of his People for its acceptance, but is testified
against, because it is for condemnation; therefore John Swinton had better
never have written the same, but it may be a warning to him for the time to come
to take heed how he presumes to do any such thing.

And as for the ground and cause of John Perrot forsaking his Ministry, he
said, he had cause as well natural in Manhood and tender affection to his Wife
and Children, as spiritual in obedience to that life which drew him for example
sake to labor in his proper station. It seems his ground was first earthly,
and proceeded from a Natural cause, that was the first motive to lay down his
Ministry, viz. in respect of his Wife and Children, not considering that they
who have received a Ministry from God are to continue faithful to the Lord in
their Ministration, and in preaching the Word, to be instant in season and out
of season, notwithstanding Wife and Children; for Christ has said he that
loves any thing more then me is not worthy of me; and that which a man most
loves that he is most constant unto, and can do the most for, and do it most
freely. And as for the second cause, it was but a pretense and mere deceit, as
if God should give a Ministry to one, and afterward lead him from it again to
be covered over with earth as an example to others, which is contrary to the
truth, and to the command of the spirit of Christ in the true Gospel Ministers,
who said walk as ye have us for Examples. And they did not do as John Perrot
did, for if he should have been followed as an example, then all the Ministers
of the Gospel of Christ might forsake their Ministry according to John's
account, and turn into the Earthly Employments, and lie hid under the Earth,
and no more appear for the Lord and his Truth; so that it appears his Ministry
stood in his own will to dispense with, and now he is laid aside as one
useless. And whereas he said, he could not bear; that the Gospel should be
chargable on his part, but was willing to lay forth his all for the glory of
Gods sake that was concerned therein. That Is but deceit that spoke in him, for
who has been chargable like unto him upon that consideration, and then he had
forsaken that which he made so chargable to his shame and confusion, and is
turned into the Earth again, which is his proper station or place according to
his own saying. And as for John Harwood, John Whitehouse, and Dorothy White,
they are denied, disowned, and judged by Robert Cobbet as he has acknowledged
to some of us; and we do deny them to be of us, and hereby declare that we do
not own them but do testify against them, and all such factious spirits.

And whereas John Perrot in that Letter from Iamaica said, he was tossed on
every hand yet not moved by any. If he was not moved by any, has he not hereby
contradicted them who say that Friends drove him from the Truth, to drive a man
from the Truth is to move him, but Friends did not drive him from the Truth;
and John in effect has cleared them from such an aspersion; saying, though he
was tossed on every hand, yet not moved by any; if not moved by any then not
removed or driven from the Truth by Friends; therefore John in effect has
cleared them from the force of such an accusation or charge as aforesaid. And
whereas John Perrot said in that Letter, I am given to be this day the reproach
of many. Who has given him to be so? did he not give himself unto the
delusions of Satan to be an occasion of the reproach of many? and who are they
that he was a reproach unto? a reproach he was, and one that was given, to
change both Ministry, Doctrine and practice, which God has led his People
into, and enjoined them to continue in, and not do as John did, (and those that
followed him for their example) have done; therefore he has been a reproach to
the truth, and to them that keep their first love, who abide in the Covenant of
Grace, and he might be ashamed of his doings, and so may all they who joined
with him in that and those things that tends to devision and separation from
God and his Truth, and to bring a reproach upon them who continue and abide in
the Principles, Doctrines, practice and power of God received. And seeing that
John Perrot by harkening to Satan and in yielding unto him as the principal
cause of his removal from truth, who being thereby so removed was the
instrumental cause or only man who made such dissension amongst Friends that
were in so great love and unity before, and has led many into Marks of
separation, which God does not lead his People into: And seeing that John did
become a reproach unto many as aforesaid, this may teach all such as are
preserved out of his spirit, and the deceivable workings and ways of Satan to
mind their stedfastness to and continuation with God, his Truth and People in
that and those things which makes for unity peace and reconciliation, and they
may for ever prise the love, mercy and power of God, which preserved them that
they did not meddle with upholding and following the fantafies and imaginations
of him the said J^hn, or any of them that are given to change, and do as he
has done, and it may be a shame to them who either follow or plead for such an
example, so as to mind the light of Christ Jesus to move them to consider how
they went out from unity with us and in obedience to the manifestation,
direction, and calling of the Principle and Spirit of truth, to return from
whence they are fallen, and from those marks of separation, and from such
things as John's impositions, example and practice in his tossed estate and
condition since he began to quarrel and wrangle with Friends they have been led
into, which we and the truth cannot own.

And to testify our love to the Lord, his Truth, and People, who continue and
abide in unity and peace with God, and one with another in the refressing life,
love, virtue and power thereof, and in that godly order and practice which the
Lord has led us into, and by his own spirit enjoined us therein to continue
and abide; and in testimony against all such spirits, actions and things
aforementioned meant and intended as do devide and separate from the truth, and
turn to the reproach of our profession, and to the dishonor of God whom we
profess, and to the turning of the weak out of the way of the Lord and to the
reproach of his People. We have hereunto subscribed, whose Names are here under
written.

Richard Farneworth, Morgan Watkins, Solomon Eccles, Thomas Lo, Stephen
Crispe, John Elson, J^si^h Coal, Samuel Newton, Gerrard Roberts, Thomas Green,
Am^r Stodard, Gilbert Laty.

THE END.

