THE Scriptures Sufficiency To Determine All Matters of Faith, Made good
against the PAPIST: OR, That a Christian may be infallibly certain of his Faith
and Religion by the Holy Scriptures.

By that Great and Famous Light of Gods Church, William Twisse D.D. And
Prolocutor of the late Assembly of Divines.

LONDON: Printed for Matthew Keynton, at the Fountain in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1656.

SIR,
I Have read this learned and satisfactory Answer to the Perplexing Question
and Doubtful Case of Conscience, in the life time of D. Twisse, and if you
shall please to give it your Imprimatur, I think it may be advantageous in this
juncture of time. I rest,

Yours, Ja. Cranford.

May 3. 1652.
Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy

THE APPROBATION OF That Reverend Father of the Church, Joseph Hall, Bishop. of
NORWICH.
In a Letter to his worthily respected friend, Mr. W. S.
Worthy Sir,
I Return you many thanks for the favor you have done me, in affording me the
view of this solid and seasonable piece of Dr. Twisse, in full answer to this
pretended Questionist; who under the color of a Perplexing Case of Conscience
from a Preacher of the Gospel, sends forth a foolish kind of challenge to all
Protestant Divines. Had you not named the Author of the satisfactory Answer,
and seconded it by another attestation, I could both have known and avouched
him. There is a face of a style, by which we Scholars know one another, no less
than our persons by a visible countenance; whosoever has read the witty and
accute exercitations of this Author upon the writings of Doctor Jackson, will
easily find him in this Tractate both for form and matter. This sculking and
disguised Chalenger could not have met with a meeter Combatant; a man so
eminent in School Divinity, that the Jesuits have felt, and (for ought I see)
shrunk under his strength, in their Scientia Media, and whom the States of the
Netherlands out of the fame of his worth, would fain have tempted away with
large profers to a Public Professorship in one of their Universities. I only
wish he had met with a more able Adversary: For certainly, as I intimated to
you in my last, this Beagle, whosoever he be, whether out of misprision or
craft, hunts counter, and runs all the while upon a wrong ground; vainly
supposing, that differences in points not fundamental, make a diversity of
Religions; and weakly conceiving, that because there are many false claims to
Truth in the world, God has not left us means enough in his revealed Will to
distinguish Truth from Error; as if, because there are store of counterfeit
coyns abroad, it could not be safe for a man to receive, or possible to discern
current money: whereas, if his wit would have served him, he might have
considered, that all, both Agenda and Credenda necessary to salvation (which
only can difference Religion) are clearly laid down in the sacred Oracles of
Scripture, with which if any refractory soul will unjustly quarrel, he may by
those helps which God has left to his Church, be either convinced, or shamed;
in the mean while it is no reason that his absurd obstinacy should cast any
blemish upon the clear face of truth, or be any prejudice to others, who are
blessed with better apprehensions, whose not-forestalled souls, out of that
judgment of discretion, which God has endowed all wise Christians withal,
upon due search may by those good means which God has held forth to us, give
himself so full satisfaction in all important Truths, as wherein he may securely
rest, with a resolute defiance of all oppositions.

Had this Questionist but consulted with learned Bishop Davenant's irrefragable
Discourse, De judice ac norma fidei, he had forborne the blurring of his Paper,
and spared the labor of this his perplexed and shuffling proposal of his
pretend. edly-perplexing Question, which in very truth is no other than a stale
and often exploded Cavil, newly furbushed over with a false color of a
tenderly-conscientious irresolution. The man will find himself here
over-answer'd, and receive too much honor from such an Antagonist, in that it
may be said of him, Aeneae magni dextra cadis. Now since you are pleased to
desire my Opinion of the whole work: to speak freely, One or two passages, I
confess, to meet with in this learned and weighty Discourse, (as concerning the
name and number of the Apocalypticall Beast, 666.) which do not altogether
carry my assent. That Mystery must and will lie still close, after all the
scanning of the sharpest Wits and Judgments. But for all the Doctrinall
points, I cannot but applaud them as worthy of the Author, and satisfactory to
the Reader, and convictive of the Adversary. Farewell, from your much devoted

J.H.B.N.
Higham, April 29. 1652.
A Perplexing Question: OR, A doubtful Case of CONSCIENCE, Of a certain
Preacher of the GOSPEL.
OUR Religion is our Faith; Faith either saves or condemns; justly ought we
therefore to be able to understand and prove our Faith.

But now there arises a great doubt to me, and other of the simpler sort of
Christians, Whether it be possible for us to have an infallible certainty of
our Faith out of the holy Scriptures, and so consequently to rely on and trust
to this faith, as to an unshaken foundation?

The reason of our doubting is this, Both Papists and Calvinists holding
contrary opinions, do maintain and prove by the holy Scriptures (as they
suppose) the contrary to that which the Lutherans hold; seriously affirming,
that in the Scriptures the Lutheran Religion is condemned, and theirs
confirmed. Which thing no man will deny to be an evident Argument of the
obscurity of the holy Scriptures. If there be two Physicians of equal
learning, and of the same intent in curing the sick, that is, alike desirous to
cure the disease, and if these Physicians should out of one and the same Book
gather, the one that a Fever is cured with wine, and the other, that wine is as
bad as poison to them that have the Fever, how, I pray, shall we know which of
these two to take part withal? A man can gather nothing, but that the remedy
for that disease is obscurely expressed in that Book.

Some may object, The Sects do not follow the Scriptures only, but they add
their traditions; the Calvinists add their reason, the Anabaptists their dreams.

I answer: They do so, in those things which are not clearly taught in the holy
Scriptures, but in the controversies between them and Lutherans, they proceed
not so, but by Scriptures they fight against Lutheran Tenants, which are
confirmed by the Scriptures, and endeavor by the help of the Scriptures to
sight for, and defend their own, which the Lutherans by Scriptures do condemn.
Nay more, there are some ( viz. the Anabaptists) that urge the Scriptures in
the very Letter more than the rest. The Calvinists use their reason, and out of
the Scriptures draw Arguments, which thing the Lutherans also do, never
suffering any of theirs to reason against the Scriptures.

2. If it be objected unto them, that they wilfully, and against their
consciences do condemn the Lutheran Tenants, and confirm their own: They will
answer, That this were a very grievous sin, and that men ought not to presume
that they would salsifie and corrupt the Letters and Commands of their Lord to
his sons and subjects, much less that they do maliciously err and lead
themselves and others into the danger of their salvation; and to say the truth,
it is not likely that so many hundred thousands of men would come to that pitch
of malice, though one should, especially seeing they dare confirm their honest
meaning with an Oath; wherefore unless they be convinced of maliciously-wilfull
error, we shall seem injuriously to slander them.

3. It may be objected, Perhaps they be fore-stalled with preconceived
opinions. I answer. How? You will say they accustom themselves from their
cradles to their own Religion, forsaking the Bible and other Books. I answer.
This is true in Popery, but not in Calvinists, and others which urge the Bible
more than we do. These have more freedom than we have to the other Religions.
Do not the children of the Lutherans also inure themselves to their Religion
from their childhood? Do they learn a Popish or Calvinisticall Catechism,
before they have learned a Lutheran one? Is not that a man's Religion to which
he accustoms himself? How does a child or a Layman, that has been taught no
Religion, know what is Lutheranism, or Calvinism? Does he not take that
Religion which is first offered to him? Besides, no fore-conceited Opinion is
so fast rooted, but that it will give place to clear demonstrations, which is
confessed among all. Therefore we shall never be able to confute any Religion
with the Objection of fore-conceived opinions.

What shall I say more? Do other Religions want civil learning? There are
found amongst them sufficiently learned and ingenious men, and oftentimes they
have much better and fitter means for the advancement of Learning, than the
Lutherans have; especially the Papists, who make choice of the best wits, whom
they employ in a manner from their cradles to their full age in nothing else
but study, meditation, and continual exercises, and do abundantly supply them
with all things which serve or seem to serve for their furthering and
forwarding, and with all care and diligence do remove and take away whatsoever
causes, or seems to cause any hindrance of their course. They study the
Scriptures and Fathers night and day, and refuse no labor in learning the
foundation of their own Religion, and in knowing and understanding the Errors
of others. Nay, the method and manner of learning, of comparing the Scriptures,
of interpreting according to the (...) of Faith, of bringing no sense to the
Scriptures, and such other rules, cannot be unknown to them.

Obj. But perhaps God has not granted them his Spirit and this grace.

I answer: God being sought unto and solicited by prayers, denies to no man his
grace and Spirit of Truth. Now men of other Religions crave of God the
inlightning of their mind and direction in a right way, no less than our
selves, nay (as far as we can discern) perhaps with a greater fervency and
zeal, neither are we to think that they ask it out of hypocrisy and with
dissimulation, and that so they would mock God. Therefore it is to be taken for
granted, that the Spirit is where the fruits of the Spirit are found, of which
none ought to boast above others. Nay more, the knowledge of understanding the
Scriptures is a peculiar gift of the Spirit, which is granted no less to others
than to us. It is true indeed that he only understands the Scriptures, which
has the Spirit that dictated them; and (as it is in worldly Laws) no Doctors
interpretation or deciding does justify, till the Lawgiver approve that
deciding. Yet he that boasts of such approbation of the Spirit is bound to
show it, unless he will be counted but an ordinary Doctor.

Obj. If any should here object, that the Scriptures themselves bear witness of
their own cleerness, according to that, Thy Word is a Lanthorn to my feet, etc.
and you have a more sure Word, etc.

I answer: All the Commands of God are his Word, and so are all his Works which
are through his Word; for it is confessed by all, that God sets forth his Word
by Nature, the Creature, Signs, Wonders, beneath, above, and by infinite ways;
also the Scriptures witness that many things neither are nor can be written.
Therefore the Word of his Voice is taken diversely in the Scriptures, and so by
consequence, all that is called Gods Word is not necessarily to be understood
of the Scriptures. Hereunto add, that at that time many parts of Scripture were
not yet written; wherefore the evidence of the thing manifestly proves, that
this is not spoken of the whole Argument and Letter of the Scripture, for as
much as the Figures of the Prophecy of the Apocalypse, and infinite other things
belonging to the fulfilling of those Prophecies, were hidden from the Prophets
themselves, and the Fathers, (much more then from others) and are yet hidden.
Christ himself speaks in parables, to the end that men may hear with their ears
and not understand. The Scripture it self in very many places witnesses that
the Word of God is secret, obscure, hidden, and discovered only to the Spirit,
or to the Godly only, to whom God reveals it, so that in the Scriptures there
are more testimonies of their obscurity, than of their clearness; yet is not
the Scripture hereby either rejected, or slighted. For even before the Law was
given and written, men had a certain light, by the help whereof they might (if
they would) have found out the truth more clearly than we; and although in the
New Testament a great light be risen, yet must we not think that in the Old
Testament there was a mere blindness. Whence we may reason, that God thought it
not useful for us to reveal all things to us, but though all things perhaps be
not necessary to be known, yet nevertheless there may be had a certain and
infallible way of interpreting, by the help whereof the most, and most
necessary Controversies may be decided; of which if trial be made, a clear
light and mere harmony may be shown, in such Scriptures, as according to the
opinion of many, are obscure. It is possible also, that there should be not a
few other ways of illustrating that which is obscure, although this ill tried
way be not used alone, for there may both be admitted and used, agreements
coming from the same Spirit and word, sometimes where there is no demonstration.

Nor am I moved with that Objection, that it is enough for the Lutherans, that
they are assured of the truth of Lutheranism, though others cannot see and
believe it. For this is not that which I would have. I enquire, how a man may
be sure not of his own opinion, but of the truth: Now if I believe and
determine that such a thing is true, this is my opinion, yet is it not
therefore the truth, seeing truth and opinion have nothing in them alike. A
steadfast persuasion changes not the essence of the thing whereof a man is
persuaded. For then might melancholic persons, whose opinion is unmovable,
work miracles, and make all their conceits essential. The nature of true
knowledge is this, to be demonstrable, not to me, or some men, but to all, and
to win a consent from any man, as two and three makes five. A thing
controverted, and which some understand one way, some another, can never make
me certain and free from doubt, whether I have the truth or no; and he that
knows no other than what he determines may be excused of malice and
hypocrisy. But this reasoning, I and my follower are sure of this thing,
therefore it is true, is unreasonable reasoning.

Lastly, If we build our Religion only upon the Scripture, the learned shall
have a great Prerogative above the unlearned in the matter of Faith and
Religion, and shall be more engaged in thankefulness to God than they; and so
Religion shall favor and cleave to good wits. Also many have their senses
exercised in the Scripture, or are more inventive and ingenious than others;
therefore if a man could by disputing and reasoning confute some Thesis, and as
it were take away a man's opinion from him, and become Conqueror, he should also
take away his Religion, and the other should be constrained either to take up
this Conquerors Religion, or against his conscience to keep his own.

Nor will that Answer serve the turn, Our Divines and Pastors can answer you,
though I cannot: for then should I believe with another man's says; but faith
must be mine, not another man's, else should salvation also be another man's. If
Religion be the service of God, surely it is necessary that I understand that
service which I must perform to my Lord. Seeing God will not reckon another
man's service for mine, and cannot be served by a Substitute, it remains that
we conclude, Controversies are to be left to learned men, and are not so very
necessary. It may be answered, Then also Religion is to be left to learned men;
for Controversies are our very Religion, for (saving the consideration of them)
there is no difference, but Papists are Protestants, and Protestants are
Papists; look how much a man knows of Controversies, so much does he know of
his own Religion. The state of a man's salvation is such as is his Religion and
his Faith: Now there is but one salvation, nor but one faith. But if
Controversies belong to the learned only, wherefore have the Laymen endured
so many afflictions, distresses, nay and death it self, for those Controversies
sake?

I know indeed that a Calvinist Doctor, one Doctor Bergius, a Preacher at
Bremen, affirms in his late published Sermons, that Controvrsies are not merely
necessary to salvation; That the Scripture is plain and clear in those things
which are necessary to salvation, and that there was never any contrariety
between the Religions themselves. At which also the Leipsich-Collation between
the Lutherans and Calvinists seems to aim.

This I am persuaded is very true, that had the Holy Ghost judged those
Controverted Questions necessary to salvation, it would have expressed and
propounded them in the holy Scripture clearly and plainly, seeing those
Epistles were sent to simple and Laymen especially. Nor does it seem likely to
be true, that ever there were so many Articles of Faith drawn out of them as
are now to be read in the Catechisms, Common-places, and Compends of Divines.
As yet there is no certain number of them determined, seeing some Divines have
propounded more, and some fewer; and some Religions have in process of time,
either added or abated whole Articles, and after many miseries endured for the
defense of some of them, entering a way of moderation, they have determined that
for tolerable and indifferent, which before they thought damnable. But
howsoever, there are so many of them, that a man may deservedly call in
question the precise necessity of them. And this seems the best Solution to
disintangle and appease perplexed, doubtful, and erring Consciences.

But could so many thousand Divines of former Ages be ignorant of this? Have
there not so many Wars been undertaken for this cause? Could those learned men
suffer so many thousands of men to run headlong, both by doing and suffering,
into the hazard of body and soul for Religions sake? and so many unspeable
mischiefs to arise, whenas it is possible for a man to be saved without the
Controversies of Religion? But if this be the command of God under pain of
temporal and everlasting punishment, to fight for those Controversies, how can
we excuse those shuffling agreements of Faith, Religion, and Gods Worship? A
Servant may not abate any thing of his Lords due.

Let this thing be considered, seeing it is so intricate, and leads me and many
others into disquiet of mind; for which perplexities of Conscience, none will
deny that a remedy is to be sought at the hands of those that have Christian
fellow-feeling, and might be found if all the Divines of those sides that have
left Popery, would vouchsafe to afford me a wise, mild, and solid Answer in
writing, not savouring of partiality, prejudice, or passion.

THE Doubting Conscience Resolved. In Answer to a (pretended) Perplexing
Question.
Consideration.
IT is an old saying, that Vniversus Mundus exercet histrioniam, but I think
never more verified in any Age than in this. There was a time when the Devil
played his part in the shape of a Dragon with seven heads and ten horns, Rev.
12.3, 7, 9. But after the war in heaven between Michael and his Angels on the
one side, and the Dragon and his Angels on the other, the Dragon was cast out
into the earth, and his Angels were cast out with him. But he continued to
play the part of an old Serpent still which deceives the whole world, Leo
Sermon. 6. de Epiphan.
Adversarius qui in apertis inefficax persecutionibus tecta nocendi art
desaevit; and no marvel if intelligent spirits are very subdolous and full of
craft, Bernard in Quadrag. Sermon. 5.
Eum nimis astutum fecit tam natura subtilis, quam longa exercitatio malitiae
ejus. And afterward he found as powerful means to do mischief to the Church
of God, Gladio oris, by the sword of the mouth, as formerly he had done ore
Gladii, by the mouth or edge of the sword, even by another Beast who had two
horns like the Lamb, Rev. 13.11, 13. but spoke like the Dragon. And this Beast
first was operative by deceit: For he did great wonders, so that he made fire
to come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men, and deceived them
that dwelt on earth by the means of his miracles. This is that Man of Sin St.
Paul speaks of, whose coming was in the effectual power of Satan, in signs
and lying wonders, and in all deceivableness of unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.9,
10. and by his cunning practices got at length as many heads to his body, and
horns to his head, as the Dragon had, and got him a mistress too like himself,
the Whore of Babylon, whom John saw Rev. 17.6. drunken with the blood of the
Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus: Witness the slaughters
made, and barbarous outrages committed upon the Waldenses, who first proclaimed
to the world that Rome was the Whore of Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist. But
in these later days the Lord has blasted that Man of Sin with the breath of
his mouth, and broken off many horns of the Beast, which has provoked those
Antichristian Generations in a very high degree, Rev. 12. and the Devil
undoubtedly has now greater wrath than ever, because he knows that he has
but a short time. Now of late years his greatest Proctors the Jesuits have not
spared to profess despair of prevailing in their cause by disputation, as
appears by Westons Preface to his Book, De triplici hominis statu; The Gordian
knot of Controversies in Religion must be cut assunder by some Alexanders
sword. Belike this sect was privy to some intentions on foot for the raising of
such Meteors as at length have broken forth into those storms which since have
exercised all Germany, if not all Christendom in the West: And I have read a
discourse written by one who was sometimes Secretary to the Pope, discovering
the practices of those times, and relating a counsel for the propagating of
Religion, erected and instituted by Clemens Octavus that whining Pope, thereby
concealing the bloody and barbarous intention of his heart; some say that for
all his whining he was as impure as bloody. Now these courses wherewith they
traveled many years, being now brought forth unto the light, I wonder not a
little that they persist in their motive learning, which of all others is of
the basest allay, and has more of the nature of a charm than of a medicine to
cure Error in a rational way: For I cannot be persuaded otherwise, but that
some vile Jesuit has an hand in this Argument to style himself a Preacher of
the Gospel, for though he holds the Pope to be Judge of Controversies, yet I
presume when he preaches he does not take his Text out of the Popes Canons,
but out of the Word of God; and we know there are Dutch Jesuits, as well as
Spanish Jesuits, and I have heard, that when the Arminian quarrels were rife
in the Netherlands, some Jesuits have insinuated themselves amongst them, and
preached in their Congregations, to promote the Arminian cause, though not
known to be any other than their own Ministers.

This Preacher of the Gospel shapes his discourse at pleasure, calling it a
Perplexing Question, or a Doubtful Case of Conscience, whereas it contains
nothing but a threed-bare and old worn-out Argument; he was ashamed to say that
it proceeds concerning the Scripture, lest the conscience of every sober
Christian should rise against it, therefore he balks that, and shapes it to
proceed, Concerning the foundation of the Religion of the Protestants and
others which have made a separation from the Pope. Now this foundation is no
other than the Scripture of the Prophets and Apostles, which S. Paul calls the
foundation whereupon the Church is built. And the Perplexing Question and
Doubtful Case of Conscience comes to this, Whether the Scripture or the Pope
be the foundation whereupon the Church is built? I do not well understand what
he means by distinguishing those who have made a separation from the Pope, into
Protestants and others; for none separate from the Pope, but by reason of the
corruptions they find in the Church of Rome in the way of Error and Heresy,
Superstition and Idolatry, and their bloody and barbarous disposition against
all those that cannot brook her abominations; and Protestants have their name
from their protestation against these their courses.

As for the Question, Whether any Christian be altogether and infallibly
certain of his Faith and Religion by the holy Scriptures, and safely rely upon
it against all tentations and objections? Is this the Perplexing Question? Is
this the Doubtful Case of Conscience? It is now above 1600. years since
Christ's Resurrection, and the coming down of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles
on the day of Pentecost; who ever was known to make question of this in the
Church of God, until this last hundred years, wherein so great and general a
separation has been made, not from the Church of God, but from communion with
the Church of Rome? After Christ's practice in incountring Satan, and that after
a manner competent to every simple Christian, not discovering the Devils
adulterating the Text, Psalm. 91. He shall give his Angels charge over thee to
keep thee in all thy ways, which last clause in all thy ways, the Devil
omitted, but replying, ( Mat. 4.) It is written, thou shall not tempt the Lord
thy God; and reprehending the Sadduces for not knowing the Scriptures and the
power of God, imputing their error to this their ignorance; and showing how
little need there is that any man should rise from the dead to tell men of that
place of torment in case they have Moses and the Prophets, and that who so will
not believe Moses and the Prophets, neither will they believe though a man rise
from the dead, Luke 16. and counselling the Jews to search the Scriptures, Joh.
5. and justifying them in their opinion, thinking them to be sufficient to
direct them unto everlasting life: Afterward the Apostles submitted their
Doctrine to be examined by the Word of God. The Bereans being commended for
this, ( Act. 7.) and professing that the Scriptures are able to make us wise
unto salvation through faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 3.15. After the
ancient Fathers have called the trial of Controversies to the Word of God, and
Constantine at the Council of Nice referred all the Bishops there assembled to
proceed according to this; and both Chrysostom and Austin have professed that
all things necessary to salvation are clearly set down in Scripture; and in the
Controversy between Hierome and Austin about Paul's reproving Peter, whether it
were done seriously, or in pretense only, Hierome pleading variety of Fathers
for his way, and Austin opposing the clear evidence of the Text against them
all. And Papists themselves, many of the more ingenious sort of them, having
been found to confess that the last resolution of our faith ought to be made
into the Word of God; and the contradictory nature of the Popish. Tenet in
proving the true Church by the Scriptures, and the Scriptures by the Church,
having been made manifest to the world by Divines. After all this, I say; that
a Preacher of the Gospel should be brought upon the Stage to propose such a
Question, as Whether any Christian can be certain of his faith by the holy
Scriptures; nor propose it only; but to call it A Perplexed Question, and a
Doubtful Case of Conscience, is so unshamefast a course, as in my judgment it
becomes none but such an one as has a mores forehead, and cannot be ashamed.

Yet I consider the condition of these present times in Germany, where the
Antichristian Congregations have confederated themselves, and taken counsel
against Gods Secretaries, and as Pharaoh pursued the Israelites thinking to
overtake them, and that their lust should be satisfied upon them, so these have
not only thought so, but done so; it is not impossible but that some weak
Preacher of the Gospel may fall into their hands, and be so charmed with
fears, or hopes, or both, as to be drawn unto their lure, and brought to do
them this piece of service, as to propose such a Question, and name the child
after this manner: For these times are the very hour and power of darkness, and
Satan is not yet bound, though we trust his binding is not far off. And it is
not strange that men should be given over to believe lies, and to become some
Jesuits Proctor, calling men to relieve a scrupulous and perplexed conscience,
and to entreat all Christians (especially the Calvinists Divines and Preachers)
with all due respect to give a Solution to this proposed Question, and this in
Dutch, whereas I had thought that this Question had neither being, life, or
motion in any other part of the Christian world, but only in this our England.
Well, let us consider wherein the perplexity of this Question consists, or what
it is that makes it.

Disc. Our Religion is our Faith; Faith either saves or condemus; justly ought
we therefore to be able to understand and prove our Faith.

Cansid. The first proposition, That our Religion is our Faith, is brought in
to no purpose, the Argument here used subsists well enough without it, such as
it is. The faith that saves is an act in man; but that which is to be proved,
is no act in man, but the object of that act, the thing believed; what
conscience the Author of this discourse had I know not, but I doubt he will
appear to be but of little wit.

Disc. But now there arises a great doubt to me, and others of the simpler
sort of Christians, Whether it be possible for us to have an infallible
certainty of our Faith out of the holy Scriptures, and so consequently to rely
and trust to this faith as to an unshaken foundation.

Consideration. Let my Faith be never so certain, and my Repentance and good
works never so sincere, I trust neither to the one nor to the other; Christ is
the Rock and foundation whereupon Gods Church is built, upon which we are built
by the knowledge of Christ, and faith in Christ, and in him alone I trust both
for the keeping of me in this knowledge and faith of Christ, and for the
bringing of me thereby unto salvation, as Paul says, 1 Cor. 1.20. I know whom
I have trusted, and I know that he is able to keep that which I have committed
to him. And 1 Cor. 1.30. God has made him unto us wisdom and righteousness,
sanctification and redemption.

Who so doubts whether it be possible to have any certainty of faith out of the
holy Scriptures, I demand of him, whether he doubts of the possibility for a
man to have any certain faith at all, or no; if he doubts whether this be
possible, who sees not that it is more fit this Question should be proposed in
the first place, and upon the solution thereof, and not before, to proceed to
inquire by what this certainty may be had; if he doubts not but that this is
possible, let him show us how or by what means he is assured hereof, as namely,
whether by natural reason, or by the word of the Pope, or by the word of an
Angel. And indeed if the Question were proposed indifferently and fairly with
distinction, we should soon perceive how little cause there is to call this a
Perplexed Question, or a Doubtful case of Conscience, though these forms
savor of no learning, nor judgment; for the perplexity that is found in this
Argument is not in the Question, if it be, it is the mere fault of the
propounder exhibiting it in perplexed terms, the meaning whereof cannot be
easily unfolded; but rather in finding out the truth thereof, and that is only
in case the reasons be of equal moment on both sides, wherewith the truth is
incombred; so that the light and convincing evidence thereof cannot easily
break forth and appear. Then as for a case of Conscience that is a very alien
notion, and ill applied in this place: for cases of Conscience are only
touching what we ought to do in a certain case; but this is only touching
possibility of assurance, as, Whether we can have any certain faith by the holy
Scriptures. But let us proceed distinctly, And

1. Let us inquire, Whether a man can have any certain faith at all? I answer.
1. They may; for many have had it, as it is defined by S. Paul, Heb. 11. to be
the evidence of things not seen, the ground of things hoped for; and there the
Apostle reckons up a Catalogue of many that had such a faith. I presume the
propounder of this, if he be a Christian, makes no question hereof: And that
Abraham the Father of the faithful, Romans 4.18, 19, 20. was such a one, who
against hope believed in hope, and being not weak in faith, he staggered not at
the promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving glory to
God, and that all the true children of Abraham have the like faith as Abraham
had. 2. But then let us distinguish when we treat of possibility, this may be
understood either in reference to the power of Nature, or in respect of the
power of God; and according to this distinction I answer, That it is utterly
impossible to believe this by power of Nature, Mat. 16. Flesh and blood has
not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven; and 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man perceives not the things of God, for they are foolishness unto
him, neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned; And Esa.
53.1. Who has believed our report? and to whom has the arm of God been
revealed? And Joh. 12.39. Therefore they could not believe, because Esaias
says again, he has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they
should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be
converted, and I should heal them; And Romans 8.8. They that are in the flesh
cannot please God, and consequently they cannot have faith, for surely by faith
we please God. But then on the other side, it is most true, that by the power
of God a man may believe, Act. 18.27. They believed through grace. And Phil.
1.29. To you it is given not only to believe in him, but to suffer for him,
and to believe and find mercy at Gods hands are all one, Romans 11.30.

Now if it be granted that faith may be had in what degree of certainty soever,
what sober Christian can make doubt but that if question be made about the
means whereby we may have it, it may be had by holy Scripture as well as by any
other means? yea and far better, considering that faith is in the proper notion
thereof the assent to somewhat from the authority of the speaker, and if the
speaker is but a man, it is no better than faith human; if the speaker be God,
that and that alone makes it to be faith divine. Now we all confess, that the
holy Scripture is the Word of God, and therefore if by any word faith may be
had in what degree of certainty soever, sure it may be had by the Word of God;
yea and that no other way can Divine Faith be had but by the Word of God, not
by the word of the creature, whether man or Angel. And if faith may be wrought
by the power of Gods Spirit in the heart of any man, he that makes question
whether this may be done by the holy Scriptures, had need of some good measure
of Ellebore to purge his brain, for he seems to me to be in the next degree to
a madman; for seeing faith is no faith, unless it depend upon some word, that
God should work his faith by another word than his own, is as uncouth and
contradictious assertion I should think as ever was heard among the learned.
But it may be this Author through the confusion of his wits, has not hitherto
been so happy as to deliver himself fairly of his own meaning: Therefore let us
take notice of the Discourse it self, whether it may bear any better state of
the Question than yet we have been acquainted with: For I guess that in the
issue the state of the Question will come to this,

Whether it be possible for us by the holy Scripture to have any certain
assurance of the meaning of it.

Disc. The reason of our doubting is this, Both Papists and Calvinists holding
contrary opinions, do maintain and prove by the holy Scriptures (as they
suppose) the contrary to that which the Lutherans hold; seriously affirming,
that in the Scriptures the Lutheran Religion is condemned, and theirs
confirmed. Which thing no man will deny to be an evident Argument of the
obseurity of theholy Scriptures. If there be two Physicians of equal learning,
and of the same intent in curing the sick, that is, alike desirous to cure the
disease, and if these Physicians should out of one and the same Book gather,
the one, that a Fever is cured with wine, and the other, that wine is as bad as
poison to them that have the Fever, how, I pray, shall we know which of these
two to take part withal? A man can gather nothing, but that the remedy for
that disease is obscurely expressed in that Book.

Consid. The sum of all this is, that the Scripture is obscure; and that which
the Author would infer from hence is this, therefore it is impossible to be
sure of the meaning of it; whereby now I perceive the Perplexed Question and
Doubtful case of Conscience comes but to this in plain terms, Whether it be
possible for a man to be sure of the meaning of Scripture; the Author maintains
the Negative, and proves it, because the Scripture is obscure, and the
obscurity of Scripture he proves by this, that men differ in the exposition of
it: Now this I will examine in order, and first observe the dodging disposition
of this Author, and manifest evidence of his corrupt affection, and that he
comes to this work with an intention not to seek the truth, but to circumvent
it rather: For whereas the force of his Argument to prove that the Scripture is
obscure, is but this, that Divines differ in the interpretation of Scripture,
yet it served his turn rather to instance in Papists and Calvinists joining
together in the interpretation of Scripture contrary to the Lutherans. Might he
not as well give instance in Papists and Lutherans holding together in
interpretation of Scripture contrary to the Calvinists? Might he not as well
have instanced in Lutherans and Calvinists joining together in the
interpretation of Scripture contrary to the Papists? undoubtedly he might, for
it is but an indefinite proposition, and the matter is clearly contingent. Now
an indesinite proposition in a contingent matter is confessed in Schools to
have no greater force than of a particular proposition: As much as to say, they
differ one from another in the interpretation of some Scriptures. Now this may
very well be true, not only of Papists differing from Protestants, but of
Papists differing from Papists, as Maldonate from Jansemus, and Protestants
from Protestants, not only Lutherans from Calvinists, but one Lutheran from
another, and one Calvinist from another in the interpretation of some places of
Scripture. Nay, does not one Father differ from another after this very manner?
And do not Modern Divines, even Papists as well as Protestants, take liberty of
dissenting from all the Ancients, in the interpretation of some places of
Scripture? Witness Maldonate in the interpretation of that Mat. 5. Blessed are
the poor in spirit, who takes a way of interpretation different from all the
Ancients, by his own confession. And Cardinal Cajetan when he was put upon the
studying of Scripture by occasion of his conference with Martin Luther, who
would hear nothing but Scripture, see what a profession he makes in his
entrance upon writing Commentaries on the Scriptures, Si quando occurrerit
novus sensus Textui consonus, nec a sacra Scriptura, nec ab Ecclesiae Doctrina
dissonus, quamvis a Torrente Doctorum sacrorum alienum, aequos se praebeant
censores: And when Austin takes notice of the multiplicity of translations of
the Scripture, he was so far from being offended thereat, that he professed
there was more profit than damage redounding thereby to the Church; and why may
it not be so by different interpretations also? it being more easy to judge
which of them is the right, or by refuting them all to find out the true
interpretation, than at the first dash to find out the true meaning.

2. Observe the absurd and malicious carriage of this Author. 1. In shaping
different Religions, according to different interpretations of Scriptures,
whereas I have showed, that the force of the proposition is only a particular,
namely, that they differ in the interpretation of some places of Scripture,
which difference I have showed may be found, and ever has been found more or
less, even amongst them that are of the same Religion, as amongst none have
been more different interpretations of Scripture found, than amongst the
Ancients; yet what Christian is found to be so impudent and immodest, as to lay
to their charge that they differed in Religion; and look how many different
interpretations of Scripture were found amongst them, so many different
Religions there were amongst them? he might as well profess, that the Papists
amongst themselves, the Lutherans amongst themselves, and the Calvinists
amongst themselves are of different Religions.

3. We acknowledge different opinions between Lutherans and Calvinians; so no
doubt there are different opinions among the Lutherans themselves, and the
Calvinians themselves, but we utterly deny there are different Religions. The
Lutherans we hold to be true Churches, agreeing with us in the fundamental
points of faith, and likewise in being free from Idolatry; for albeit they have
Images in their Churches, which we conceive to be a very dangerous thing, yet
they do not worship them; and although they hold real Presence in the
Sacrament, yet they do not adore it.

So that albeit we think some of their opinions are contrary to the Scripture,
and they think the like of some of ours, yet neither we say of their Religion,
nor they of ours I trow, that it is contrary to the Scripture, much less that
it is condemned in Scripture.

But come we to the main scope of this Authors Discourse, which is to prove
that the Scriptures are obscure, and from thence to infer, that we can have no
assurance of the true meaning of it. To this we answer,

1. By denying the consequence, which is this, Divines differ in the
interpretation of Scripture, therefore the Scripture is obscure.

And I prove the absurdity, and untruth, and weakness of it.

1. It is weak; for at the uttermost it proves that it is obscure but in some
places: For this difference of interpretation is but of some places, as I have
showed, and the force of the proposition I have showed to be no greater than
the force of a particular.

2. It is absurd; for by the same reason I may prove, that the Scripture is
clear, thus: That Scripture is clear in the interpretation, wherein men of
different opinions and different Religions do agree; But men of different
opinions and Religions do agree in the interpretation of divine Scripture;
therefore the divine Scripture is clear; and indeed it will be found that we
agree in the interpretation not of some only, but of many places of holy
Scripture. Now what absurd a course is it for a Disputant so to dispute, as
that his Argument may be retorted with as good force against him; yea, and much
more? For when men of different opinions are found to differ about the
interpretation of a Scripture, it may be this arises from the love of their
own opinions, which makes the Scripture seem to sound the same way, but when
they agree in the interpretation of Scripture, notwithstanding their other
differences, this argues the Scripture to be clear enough: Nay, we know
Bellarmine will dislike an opinion, and Maldonate an interpretation of
Scripture, for Calvin's sake, striving to differ from such as they hate, though
without all just cause, and to wrest the Scriptures to serve their turns.

3. Lastly, the Consequence is as untrue, as it is weak and absurd; for the
cause of this difference may be in the darkness of their understanding, who
take upon them to interpret it, rather than in the darkness of the Scripture it
self, which whether we consider the Law or the Gospel, each of them is termed
light by the Spirit of God. Thy Law is a Lanthorn to my feet, and a light unto
my paths, says David, Psalm. 119. And of the Gospel our Savior speaks, Light
came into the world, but men loved darkness rather than light, Joh. 3. the
greater will be their condemnation.

And as for the instance proposed to prove the Consequence, of two Physicians,
1. The particular proposed is most inficete, and a mere fiction without all
color.

2. Yet I doubt not but Galen and Hipocrates in diverse places may admit
different interpretations: Therefore I answer,

1. This also may arise not so much from the obscurity of the Text, as from the
fault of the Interpreter.

2. It is a most alien course, to compare the Word of God, and the word of Man
together; for man may contradict himself, God cannot; man may forget one time
what he delivered at another, God cannot.

3. There is a vast difference between the things of men and the things of God;
so that whereas natural reason and natural instruction may be sufficient to
enable a man to understand the writing of another man, yet only supernatural
illumination is sufficient to enable a man to discern the things of God; yet I
confess, on this particular some judicious reader may think to find a flaw, yet
I presume that upon serious consideration that attempt will prove but vain, and
none but a Socinian will oppose in this, who denies all fides infusa, and
acknowledges none but acquisita, faith natural, and shrewd suspicions that
way are betrayed by Mr. Chillingsworth, as if he acknowledged no faith, but
faith natural.

2. But be it granted, that the Scripture is obscure. 1. Consider the force of
this proposition, it is but an indefinite, and the matter is apparently
contingent; for undoubtedly it was at the good pleasure of God to speak after
what manner he thought good: Hence it follows, that the force hereof is but
the force of a particular proposition, as much as to say, that the Scripture in
some places is obscure, or some places of Scripture are obscure. And indeed
Gregory of old has professed that the holy Scripture is like unto a ford,
wherein a Lamb may wade, and an Elephant may swim; and before him S. Paul tells
us, that it contains both milk for babes, and strong meat for men; there is
enough, and that plain enough, to satisfy the hungry; and there is also
enough, and that obscure enough, to prevent non-sealing, especially in the
Prophecies for the times to come. The first promise of the Covenant of Grace
was this, the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head: Here is a double
mystery in general notions carried, the one the mystery of Christ's Person
expressed by the seed of the woman, but implied to be somewhat more, yea much
more, even such a one as should break the Serpents head; the other the mystery
of his Office, carried only in this general notion of breaking the Serpents
head. In this time of grace we know this to have been brought to pass by his
dying for our sins, and his rising again for our justification. Had this been
known to Satan, as now it is to us, is it credible that he would have
persuaded Judas as he did to contract with the high Priests to betray him into
their hands? that were Judas like after he had betrayed his Master to go forth
and hang himself: For we know that upon the Cross he spoiled Principalities and
Powers, and made a show of them openly, and triumphed over them. The day of
Christ's Resurrection undoubtly was a day of extreme confusion to the Devil,
and all his Angels of darkness: So the Jews had they known this mystery of
his Person, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. but
this wisdom of God in a mystery was hid from them, 1 Cor. 2.7. and because they
knew him not, nor the words of the Prophets which were read every Sabbath day,
they fulfilled them in condemning him, Acts 13.27. But if all things necessary
to salvation are plainly set down in holy Scripture, as both Chrysostom a Greek
Father, and Austin a Latin Father, have concurrently delivered, what are we
the worse for the obscurity of the same? 2. But suppose all were obscure, yet
are there not degrees of obscurity? Amongst Writers in all Languages there is
this difference, some write more obscurely, some more clearly, as amongst the
Greeks, what difference between Chrysostom and Epiphanius this way? among the
Latins between Tertullian and Cyprian? yet who doubts but even Tertullian may
be understood, and that by Cyprian, who was wont to call for him in these
terms, Da mihi Magistrum; so amongst School-Divines, Aquinas and Durand are
perspicuous and clear, not so with Scot or Cajetan; so Alvares fair and clear,
Navarrettus a Dominicanto, but all along labors of obscurity as a man does of
the Gout; whether he understood himself or no, I know not, sure I am he
torments his Reader, yet by pains and intention of study the difficulty may be
overcome, as I have found in part, but I do not think any knowledge in him
worthy to be redeemed with the like labor; never any thing tormented me more
unless it were the construing of Dr. Jacksons English, yet no where else that I
know save in treating of the Divine Essence, Prove. 14.16. Now the Word of God
has taught us that knowledge is easy to him that will understand. If thou
call after knowledge, and criest for understanding: If thou seek her as
silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures; Then shall thou understand
the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God, Prove. 2.3, 4, 5.
especially as touching all things necessary unto salvation. 2. But suppose it
were very obscure throughout, is not God the Author able to instruct us in his
own meaning, and make us assured of it? And has not our Savior assured us,
that if earthly Fathers know how to give good things to their children, much
more shall the heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him. The
holy Apostle teaches us this saying, 1 John 2.27. That annoynting which ye
received of him dwells in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as
the same annoynting teaches you all things, -- Hereupon Nider a Papist, in his
Consolatorium timoratae Conscientiae, acknowledges, that every child of God
has the direction of the Spirit to lead him into all truth necessary to
salvation. And certainly the truth of Gods Word is infallible, Cui non potest
subesse falsum As for the certainty ex part Scientis, 1. That God can work in
such a measure as he pleases. 2. Yet we know in the best there is the flesh
lusting against the Spirit, and that swayes to infidelity, but the better part
masters it. 3. And as for doubting, that is rather on the part of fiducia, than
of fides, and those doubts are mastered, and that is the best faith that
masters doubts, and overcomes tentations.

Thus I presume the sober Reader may observe the rotten condition of this
Discourse throughout, yet we have spoken nothing of the Scripture, in
comparison to other means of assurance which this Author subdolously, or simply
conceals, because to leave Scripture, and to seek forth for assurance elsewhere,
he perceives that this would manifestly appear in the end to be no better than
to leave the fountain of living water, and to dig unto our selves pits, even
broken pits that can hold no water, Jer. 2. For consider, shall we fly to the
voice of the Church? consider, the voice of God it is the voice of the Church,
and more. 1. It is the voice of the Church, yea of the best Church, and purest
Church, namely, the voice of the Prophetical and Apostolical Church, For Deus
loquitur per Prophetas and Apostolos. And this is that Church into whose voice
the last resolution of our Faith ought to be made, in the opinion of Durand;
then it is more than the voice of the Church, for holy men speak, (...), as
they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. ult. You will say, but all the
question is about the meaning of it.

I answer, 1. May there not be as much question about the meaning of the voice
of the Church, as about the meaning of Gods Word? Where does the Church speak
more authentically than in general Councills? See the Council of Trent, the
Pope was unwilling to confirm it, Hist. of the Council of Trent.
till Cardinal Bon Compagio Bishop of Befirice urged him thereunto upon this
ground, That withal he should publish an EDICT, forbidding all men to take
upon them the interpretation thereof, and commanding them to seek that from
him, and then (says he) let us alone to devise a convenient interpretation of
it without prejudices to the advantages of the Court of Rome.

2. Again, General Councills may err, as Austin observes, the former have
been corrected by the later in some things.

3. Such Councills never went about to write Commentaries upon the Scripture,
and if they should, Cajetan confesses, an interpretation may be given
congruous to the Text, yet different from the Torrent of Doctors,
notwithstanding which we ought to receive it.

4. Lastly, after what sense soever I interpret Scripture in any Argument, if I
am not able to make it good by convincing arguments to every sober conscience,
let my proofs be rejected, but withal let him look to it after what manner he
resists the evidence brought, as he will answer for it at the day of Judgment,
according to that of our Savior, Joh. 12.48. He that refuses me, and
receives not my words, has one that judges him, the word that I have spoken,
it shall judge him at the last day.

5. It were easiy to produce variety of testimonies, even of Papists
acknowledging the last resolution of our faith ought to be made into the Word
of God, and that the true Church, and the power which it has, is not known but
by the Word of God.

2. Or will they say the Pope is to resolve us as touching the meaning of
Scripture. To this I answer, 1. That I care not who interprets Scripture to me,
so he performs the part of an Interpreter indeed, and make it appear to be the
meaning of it. 2. And if I do not so, I am content to suffer the loss of that
Argument whatever it be.

3. Then it has been a very rare thing for Popes to set themselves to
interpret Scripture. 4. It is well known that Liberius Pope of Rome, subscribed
to Arianism; Honorius was a Monotholite; Pope John the 22. denied that the
souls of men lived after separation from the body, like to the Socinians of
these days, whose opinion was cried down at Paris, and openly proclaimed
heretical by the sound of a Trumpet.

3. Or shall the Rule of interpretation of Scripture be the congruity of it to
natural reason, as the Socinians make it? This is most shameful and
unreasonable, considering, 1. That our natural reason is much corrupt by the
sin of Adam, The things of God seem foolishness to the natural man, 1 Cor.
2.14. naturally we are all darkness. 2. In the state of innocence, do we think
that Adam by natural reason was able to find out or justify the Trinity of
Persons in the Unity of the Deity? We say God may be known by light of Nature,
Quod attinet ad Vnitatem naturae, but not known quod attinet at Trinitatem
Personarum. God has set the world in man's heart (says Solomon) yet can he not
find out the works that he has wrought from the beginning to the end, Eccl.
3. and if he cannot find out the works of God, is he able to find out the
nature of God himself? we know he is said to dwell in a dark cloud.

Disc. Obj. Some may object, The Sects do not follow the Scriptures only, but
they add, the Papists their Traditions; the Calvinists their Reasons; the
Anabaptists their Dreams.

I answer: They do so, in those things which are not clearly taught in the holy
Scriptures, but in the controversies between them and Lutherans, they proceed
not so, but by Scriptures they fight against Lutheran Tenants, which are
confirmed by the Scriptures, and endeavor by the help of the Scriptures to
sight for, and defend their own, which the Lutherans by Scriptures do condemn.
Nay more, there are some (viz. the Anabaptists) that urge the Scriptures in the
very Letter more than the rest. The Calvinists use their reason, and out of the
Scriptures draw Arguments, which thing the Lutherans also do, never suffering
any of theirs to reason against the Scriptures.

Consid. This Author will have the making of his own bed, and shapes his Reader
at the first encounter to yield, acknowledging the uncontradictable nature of
his former one only Argument, which yet I have showed to be both very weak,
very ridiculous, and very untrue: But we keep our ground, professing to the
world, that the Scriptures alone being the Word of God, are the rule of our
faith, and no word of man; Papists add Traditions, which yet they account the
Word of God unwritten; we abhor to make any thing the rule of our faith but the
written Word of God. It is falsely said, that Calvinists add their Reason, they
rather suppose Reason than add it, the Word of God being given to none but
reasonable creatures. Neither do we make this Reason of ours a rule of faith
added to Gods Word, but it is that light which God has given us wherewith to
search into the meaning of his Word, and by studious inquisition and
observation to discover it, and make it known to others, and by good reason out
of the Text to convict others of the truth. And does this Authors reason go to
bed, and sleep when he comes to read and studiously to consider the Word of
God? If it does, he will prove no better than a drowsy Student, and I know no
reason but such a one may be in love with dreams as well as Anabaptists.

1. In his Answer he carries himself most absurdly and ridiculously. For, 1.
Most insipidly he supposes that the Controversies amongst Protestant Divines,
are about such things as are clearly taught in Scripture, as if they agreed in
those things which are not clearly set down in Scripture, and differ only
about things which are clearly delivered there.

2. He supposes that Calvinists do not use reason in the controversies between
them and the Lutherans, but only in other things, which is most untrue, and
absurd withal; for controversies cannot possibly be managed without reason,
both as touching the proof of their own Tenet, and touching the disproof of the
Tenet oposite: And this must needs be the guise of the Lutherans also.

It is false which he says of Anabaptists, that they urge the very letter of
Scriptures more than the rest. For both Calvinists and Lutherans insist wholly
upon the literal sense of Scripture, and more than the Anabaptist in case they
(as formerly by this Author said) did depend in dreams, for so do not
Protestants but on Scripture only, and that according unto sense literal, not
at all according to sense mystical, save only in case the sense mystical be
expounded by some Apostle, and thereby made literal. 2. But herein this
Authors ignorance discovers its self, that he confounds sense literal with
the proper sense of the words. We acknowledge sense literal to comprehend
sense Metaphorical as well as proper, and to stand in contradiction only to
sense mystical: But in case we take that in a metaphorical sense which our
adversaries in any point take in a sense proper, if we do not prove the sense
wherein we take it, and disprove theirs by convincing Arguments, we will allow
the liberty to reject our Tenet, and follow their own; for we desire to make
our faith evident to the consciences of all opposites, and if they can make
their Tenets in like manner evident to us, we will renounce our own and embrace
theirs. 3. And this Author speaks at random, and he knows not what, when he
would have his Reader believe the Calvinists permit any to reason against the
Scriptures; for by reason to clear the meaning of Scripture, is not, I trust,
to reason against it, but for it rather, especially considering that by reason
of Scripture only we dispute the meaning of any place.

Disc. Object. 2. If it be objected unto them, that they wilfully and against
their consciences do condemn the Lutheran Tenets., and confirm their own, they
will answer,

Ans. This were a very grievous sin, and that men ought not to presume that
they would falsify and corrupt the Letters and Commands of their Lord to his
sons and subjects, much less that they do maliciously err, and lead themselves
and others into the danger of their salvation; and to say the truth, it is not
likely that so many hundred thousands of men would come to that pitch of
malice, though one should, especially seeing they dare confirm their honest
meaning with an Oath; wherefore unless they be convicted of maliciously wilful
error, we shall seem injuriously to slander them.

Consid. I see no reason why such a censure should be passed upon the
Calvinians more than upon the Lutherans, more speciously it should be passed by
them that are Orthodox upon them that are not, though I justify not this
censure whosoever makes it; and certainly there is no just cause to pass it
upon them who are in the right, and charity will forbid us rashly to pass this
censure upon them who are in the wrong. And as I find defect of love in them
who pass such censures hand over head upon their opposites; so I find wnat of
judgment in this Author, who puts it upon a man's Oath to clear himself of going
against his conscience in the Tenets he maintains; for he that says a thing
against his conscience is next door by to the swearing of it. But these are
such idle and addle conceits that it causes no small indignation in me to wast
precious time in them, which might be better spent on worthier subjects.

Disc. Obj. 3. It may be objected, Perhaps they may be forestalled with
preconceived opinions.

Ans. I answer, How? You will say, they accustom themselves from their cradles
to their own Religion, forsaking the Bible and other Books. I answer. This is
true in Popery, but not in Calvinists, and others which urge the Bible more
than we do. These have more freedom than we have to try other Religions. Do
not the children of the Lutherans also inure themselves to try Religion from
their childhood? Do they learn a Popish or Calvinisticall Catechism, before
they have learned a Lutheran one? Is not that a man's Religion to which he
accustoms himself? How does a child or a Layman, that has been taught no
Religion, know what is Lutheranism, or Calvinism? Does he not take that
Religion which is first offered to him? Besides, no fore-conceited Opinion is
so fast rooted, but that it will give place to clear demonstrations, which is
confessed among all. Therefore we shall never be able to confute any Religion
with the Objection of fore-conceived opinions.

What shall I say more? Do other Religions want civil learning? There are
found amongst them sufficiently learned and ingenious men, and oftentimes they
have much better and fitter means for the advancement of Learning, than the
Lutherans have; especially the Papists, who make choice of the best wits, whom
they employ in a manner from their cradles to their full age in nothing else
but study, meditation, and continual exercises, and do abundantly supply them
with all things which serve or seem to serve for their furthering and
forwarding, and with all care and diligence do remove and take away whatsoever
causes, or seems to cause any hindrance of their course. They study the
Scriptures and Fathers night and day, and refuse no labor in learning the
foundation of their own Religion, and in knowing and understanding the Errors
of others. Nay, the method and manner of learning, of comparing the Scriptures,
of interpreting according to the (...) of Faith, of bringing in sense to the
Scriptures, and such other rules, cannot be unknown to them.

Consid. Who is not forestalled with preconceived opinions? Is not every one
brought up in the Religion of his Parents? which yet breeds but a natural
complying with it, be it the best Religion, until God by his Spirit of
Regeneration opens their eyes to apprehend the power of God, and the wisdom of
God therein, without which in their most zealous profession of it, for their
fathers sake, and their education sake, they will prove no better than
hypocrites and factious, rather than conscionable in the maintenance of it,
which yet may be done with as great strength of learning, as a natural man is
capable of. And though it be a false way wherein they have been brought up and
bred, and they as zealous and factious in maintaining it as ever Saul was, who
made havoc of the Church, and entered into every house and drew out both men
and women and put them in prison; yet the Lord in the midst of his
persecutions met with him in the way, and confounded him, and struck him with
blindness natural, to mind him thereby of his blindness spiritual, but
afterward opened his eyes, and brought him out of darkness unto light, and
made him not only a Professor of that way of the Gospel, which before he
persecuted, but a famous Preacher of it also, even the great Doctor of the
Gentiles. So says Peter of the Jews to whom he wrote, that they were
redeemed from their vain consersation received by Tradition of their Fathers:
And as this was true of the Jews, so of the Gentiles also, as Jeremiah
prophesied, Jer. 16.19. The Gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends of the
world, and shall say, surely our forefathers have inherited lies and vanity
wherein there was no profit. And Isaiah also, I have been sought of them that
asked not, I was found of them that sought me not, I said, Behold me, behold
me, to a Nation that was not called by my Name. Some while the Apostles and
Evangelists abstained from preaching to the Gentles, and Peter was called in
question for going in and preaching Christ, unto the Gentiles, Act. 11.19. And
they that were scattered abroad because of the persecution that arose about
Stephen, went throughout till they came unto Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch,
preaching the Word to no man, but the Jews only; v. 20. Now some of them were
men of Cyprus and Cyrene, which when they were come to Antioch, spoke unto the
Grecians and preached the Lord Jesus; v. 21. And the hand of the Lord was with
them, so that a great number believed and turned unto the Lord. See how
suddenly they turned from Idols to serve the living God, quite contrary to the
Traditions received of their forefathers. So true is that of Leo, Vbi Deus
Magister est quam cito dissitur quod docetur.

So that these were as little trained up in the Bible and other Books of
Christian Religion as the Papists; yea and far less. Any man has freedom to
try other Religions, have not we Christians freedom to try the Religion of the
Jews and of the Turks? and God abandons some to turn Turks; and Papists have
liberty to try our Protestant Religion, Vergerius did so, a Popish Bishop, with
a purpose to refute it, but the hand of God was with him to open his eyes, as
with Saul, and he turned Protestant. By these words, Calvinists and others urge
the Bible more than we do, it appears this Author is no Calvinist; so by the
words following, Do not the children of the Lutherans also inure themselves to
their Religion from their childhood also? do argue that this Author is no
Lutheran; so that what to make of him I know not, for he would not seem to be a
Papist; it seems he is yet to choose his Religion: And yet if this course of
his be serious, it is considerable, but he needs not go far for an Answer to so
superficiary a Discourse as this.

It is true, naturally every one is apt to be of the Religion he received of
his Fathers, but without illumination divine, though he be in the right way,
yet shall he have no comfortable apprehension of it, and by illumination divine
Saul of a Persecutor shall become a Preacher, and the Gentiles shall have their
eyes opened, and be brought out of darkness into light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, though blindness come upon Israel, as they have been held under
it now for 1600. years. A very absurd thing it is to say, we shall never be
able to confute any Religion with the objection of fore-conceived opinions: For
this may be objected to them that are in the right way, as well as to them that
are in a wrong way; and undoubtedly the true way may be embraced in a wrong
manner, For they are not all Israel that are of Israel, Romans 9. God threatens
sometimes to visit the circumcised with the uncircumcised, and the reason why
the Lord gave the Christian world over to illusions, to believe lies, was
because they received not the love of the truth.

As for civil learning, surely there wanted not both civil and natural
knowledge among the Gentiles more than enough; for this made them esteem the
Cross of Christ foolishness, which yet to them that are saved, is the power of
God: For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will cast
away the understanding of the prudent. Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe?
Where is the Disputer of this world? Has not God made the wisdom of this world
foolishness? For seeing the world by wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God,
it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe, 1
Cor. 1.18, 18, 19, 20, 21. And shall we now think that civil learning and
natural ingenuity prefers men to the grace of God, or makes them the more fit
to receive the Gospel? Of Princes, who more famous for natural parts,
learning, wisdom, ingenuity, than Trajan and Mareus Antonius? of inferior
condition, than Pliny the second, the Officer of Trajan, who speaks in
commendations of the innocence of Christians, yet neither of these became a
Christian; nay both these Princes were persecutors of the Church of God; and at
Athens for all their learning, which made them renowned throughout the world
who were converted by Paul's preaching there, but Dionysius, and Damaris, and
some other, Act. 17. last.

Papists are great Scholars undoubtedly, not in Logic and Philosophy only,
and that in all kinds, but in Divinity also, and that in the most learned way,
Aquinas a great Divine, his Sums, I have heard Doctor Reynolds call it, that
absolute Body of Divinity, but his wit served him to serve that Churches turn
in those days, and in maintaining Idolatry he is the most shameful Writer that
ever was, for he will have the Image worshipped with the same honor that is
due to the thing represented by it, and that by an Argument drawn out of
Aristoile, Dememoria and reminiscentia, opposed herein by Durand and Picus
Mirandula, and others; I remember what Cicero said of the Grecians, Do illis
eruditionem, do Doctrinam; filem and Religionem nunquam Coluerunt: yet I will
not say so of the Church of Rome, though one sometimes did. I know it was
renowned for faith all the world over in the days of S. Paul, but a degenerate
time came, and as at the first preaching of the Gospel men turned from Idols
to to serve the living God, so in after Ages even Christians and Roman
Christians as much as any, if not more, turned from the living God to serve
Idols; and the Whore of Babylon who made all Nations drunken with the blood of
Gods Saints, is clearly the Church of Rome, as it is at this day, and has been
for many generations, whatsoever their learning be, the greater advantage they
have for the countenancing of their Errors, Heresies, Superstitions and
Idolatries, which yet we nothing fear. The Apostle has taught us to esteem no
knowledge but this, even of Christ and him crucified, Si Christum descis nihil
est si caetera nescis, si Christum nescis nihil est si caetera discis: And if
we fear not their learning, much less have we cause to fear their wit or wisdom
either, or whatsoever projects of theirs; likewise none of these should in
common reason commend their Religion, God usually infatuating the wisdom of the
wise. They have all furtherance, I confess, beyond us, yet God has not tied
himself to annex his truth to these furtherances, least of all if they be
employed not indifferently to the investigation of truth, but prejudicately to
support their own cause, the madness whereof has been in these later days
made known to the world more than ever. The trial whereof we make by the
Touchstone of Gods Word, according to the counsel of God himself, To the Law
and to the Testimonies if they speak not according to this, it is because there
is no light in them, Esai. 8. Yet we study Scriptures and Fathers too as well
as they, and we have them amongst us that yield to them not a jot; nay do we
not study their writings too, much more than our own? I willingly profess, I
have done so all along, that I might come acquainted with their best strength
and fastness, in all which I find nothing but illusions in the maintenance of
those Tenets wherein we differ from them. As for interpreting of Scriptures, it
is well known they have been brought unto it per force, so was Cajetan in his
old years, after he had tasted of Luthers course, who would admit of no other
Authority in dispute but the Word of God. And their Commentaries for the most
part, are but a Mass of Collections out of others, yet I despise them not, I am
content to use them as soon as any of our own, not so much to learn by them as
to observe how they strain their wits to quench that light of truth, which in
most places breaks forth to the discovering of their Errors. Well they may talk
of bringing no sense to the Scriptures, but their practice is nothing
answerable.

Discourse. But perhaps God has not granted them his Spirit and his grace. I
answer, God being sought unto and solicited to by prayers, denies to no man his
Grace and Spirit of Truth. Now men of other Religions crave of God the
enlightening of their mind, and direction in a right way no less than our
selves; nay as far as we can discern perhaps with a greater fervency and zeal,
neither are we to think that they ask it out of hypocrisy, and with
dissimulation, and that so they would mock God; therefore it is to be taken for
granted that the Spirit is where the fruits of the Spirit are found, of which
none ought to boast above others.

Nay more, the knowledge of understanding the Scriptures is a peculiar gift of
the Spirit, which is granted no less to others than to us: It is true, indeed
that he only understands the Scriptures which has the Spirit that dictated
them, and (as it is in worldly laws) no Doctors interpretation or deciding does
justify, till the Lawgiver approve that deciding. Yet he that boasts of
such approbation of the Spirit is bound to show it, unless he will be counted
but an ordinary Doctor.

Consid. We are bid to try the spirits whether they be of God: Now we have no
other trial of the Spirit of Truth speaking in any, but by the Word of God, so
the Bereans tried the Doctrine of Saint Paul, Act. 17. and the Apostles
professed to preach nothing but what they confirmed by the Word of God. And our
Savior referred the Jews hereunto for the trial of himself, Search the
Scriptures for in them you think to have eternal life, they are they that
t^stifie of me. Now we have a more complete rule of trial, the Books both of
the Old Testament, and of the New: Saint Paul delivered the whole counsel of
God to the Ephesians, Act. 20. and do we think that the whole Scripture does
fail in some necessary part thereof? But I would Popery did not plainly
contradict that Scripture which is generally received by us both, if so, I
would bear with them for the rest, though in two things we cannot endure that
ought should be imposed upon us besides the written Word, namely, Articles of
Faith, and parts of Gods Worship. Now by this course of trial we find, that
not the spirit of Truth, but the spirit of Error has possessed them in all
points of difference between us.

Prayers (I grant) are the ordinary means to obtain any grace at the hands of
God, save one, and that is the Spirit of Prayer, and that is the Spirit of
Faith, of all the rest it is true fides impetrat and lex imperat, but with a
limitation, or two. 1. All knowledge necessary to salvation, according to that
1 John 2.27. and Nider (though a Papist) his interpretation thereof in his
Consolatory of an affrighted Conscience. 2. Other graces also, and that in such
a measure also as shall be found fit for each man's calling: And I think every
Christian should rest contented with such an Indulgence. If the whole body were
an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where were the
smelling? But now has God disposed the members every one of them in the body
at his own pleasure: For if they were all one member, where were the body? but
now are there many members, yet but one body, 1 Cor. 12.17, 18, 19.

But men may draw near to God with their lips, when their hearts are estranged
far from him; and how their hearts stand affected we know not, God alone
beholds their heart; nay we are not so much as privy to their prayers: but we
examine their Doctrines by Gods Word, according to that, Sunt certi libri
dominici, and it was a worthy saying of Martin Luther mentioned by Scultetus in
his Story of the first ten years of Reformation, Solis Canonicis debemus fidem,
caeteris omnibus judicium. I do not deny but all the Regenerate who have the
Spirit of God (according to that, Because ye are sons, God has sent the Spirit
of his Son into your hearts, whereby ye cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.6.) do seek
unto God to inlighten their minds, and God hears them, and grants their
requests in his good time, according to the limitations formerly mentioned, but
who they are we know not; and we are bid to try the spirits; nor what their
fervency and zeal is are we acquainted with, yet surely it is not for their
fervency sake that God hears them, but for Christ's sake. And are not they as
far bound in charity to think of us, as this Author would shape us to be
obliged to think of them? we acknowledge no Spirit of Faith, but that which is
the Spirit of Truth, at least in all fundamentalls necessarily required unto
salvation, and to Gods holy Worship without Idolatry.

As for the Prayers of Papists, they are well known to be shamefully foul, they
were wont more frequently to run to Saints than to God, and the Bishop of Boss
was to seek whether he should run to God in the name of Christ's blood, or in
the name of the Virgins Milk, for he was made to profess in the wall in certain
verses, that he knew not well which of the two he should prefer; nay, if of any
prayers God says, though he make many prayers I will not hear, Esa. 1. surely
he should say as much of these in my judgment. Have not Turks their prayers as
well as Papists, and may they not be performed with great fervency and zeal?
and may they not be as expert in tricks of gesture, as the Papists? as I have
heard once of a child trained up to it by her mother, even unto admiration; the
countenance composed unto a sad and solemn disposition, and the hands lift up
first to an equal height with the breasts, after a while to an equal height
with the head, and lastly above the head, and all this in dumb shows without
one word of ejaculation.

As for hypocrisy here mentioned, I doubt it is delivered hand over head: For
first, Hypocrisy is most considerable in a right way, and not in a wrong way;
the reason whereof is, because natural men are naturally apt to embrace false
ways and lewd ways too too truly, and as apt they may be to embrace the way
of truth hypocritically, and not only to profess Christ, but to preach him in
pretense, that is not chastely, even to add afflictions to the bonds of so holy
an Apostle even as Paul was; so we nothing doubt but Papists are true Papists
without hypocrisy, but I much doubt that the greatest part of them by far are
too far off from being true Christians, and this I willingly confess they
pretend, but very hypocritically, this runs with them in a blood, they have it
from their Mother, even the Mother of Whoredoms, and her Arms are Babylon in a
mystery. And the second beast though he had two horns like the Lamb, yet he
spoke like the Dragon; we know all their proceedings in pretense are In Nomine
Domini incipit omne malum, neither is it necessary that by hypocrisy a man
should think to mock God, if God could be mocked; for there is a secret
hypocrisy which a man's own heart is not conscious of, until God be pleased in
mercy to discover it; and as for gross hypocrisy it makes a man a plain
Atheist.

This Author seems to be taken with the beauty of the Whore of Babylon, he is
so much in love with Papists as to obtrude upon us an acknowledgement that they
have the fruits of the Spirit, and consequently without any denial that they
have the Spirit. To proceed one degree further, were to profess Antichrist to
be Christ, and Christ Antichrist.

To understand the Scriptures is but to acknowledge the true meaning of them,
and this we deny that Papists have; as touching all the points of difference
between us, which they pretend to ground upon Scripture, yea and in many other
particulars they are wide of the right understanding of them; so may our
Divines be also, and like enough, that as M. Hooker says, there are some
depths of Scripture, the searching out whereof will hold us as long as the
world lasts. Yet I deny not but a Reprobate may have the knowledge of the
Scriptures as well as an Elect, this being no grace of Sanctification, but of
Edification; but to know the Scriptures to be the Word of God, the Wisdom of
God, and the Power of God, that I take to be peculiar to a regenerate spirit
in whom the Spirit of God dwells as the fountain of the life of grace, of which
in-dwelling of the Spirit a child of God may be conscious in a comfortable
manner without boasting.

I count it an absurd course for any to justisie his interpretation of
Scripture to be sound, because he has the Spirit; we are ready to dispute the
meaning we give of Scripture, and to prove it against all opposites made
against it; and we look not that any interpretation of Scripture we give should
be received any further than we make it appear to be the truth of God to the
consciences of them we deal with.

Obj. If any should here object, that the Scriptures themselves bear witness of
their own cleerness, according to that, Thy Word is a Lanthorn to my feet, and
a light unto my paths.

I answer: All the Commands of God are his Word, and so are all his Works which
are through his Word; for it is confessed by all, that God sets forth his Word
by Nature, the Creature, Signs, Wonders, beneath, above, and by infinite ways;
also the Scriptures witness that many things neither are nor can be written.
Therefore the Word of his Voice is taken diversely in the Scriptures, and so by
consequence, all that is called Gods Word is not necessarily to be understood
of the Scriptures. Hereunto add, that at that time many parts of Scripture were
not yet written; wherefore the evidence of the thing manifestly proves, that
this is not spoken of the whole Argument and Letter of the Scripture, for as
much as the Figures of the Prophecy of the Apocalypse, and infinite other things
belonging to the fulfilling of those Prophecies, were hidden from the Prophets
themselves, and the Fathers, (much more then from others) and are yet hidden.
Christ himself speaks in parables, to the end that men may hear with their ears
and not understand. The Scripture it self in very many places witnesses that
the Word of God is secret, obscure, hidden, and discovered only to the Spirit,
or to the Godly only, to whom God reveals it, so that in the Scriptures there
are more testimonies of their obscurity, than of their clearness; yet is not
the Scripture hereby either rejected, or slighted. For even before the Law was
given and written, men had a certain light, by the help whereof they might (if
they would) have found out the truth more clearly than we; and although in the
New Testament a great light be risen, yet must we not think that in the Old
Testament there was a mere blindness; whence we may reason, that God thought it
not useful for us to reveal all things to us; but though all things perhaps be
not necessary to be known, yet nevertheless there may be had a certain and
infallible way of interpreting, by the help whereof the most and most necessary
Controversies may be decided, of which if trial be made, a clear light and
mere harmony may be shown in such Scriptures, as according to the opinion of
many are obscure; it is possible also that there should be not a few other
ways of illustrating that which is obscure, although this ill-tried way be not
used alone; for they may be both admitted and used, agreements coming from
the same spirit and word, where there is no demonsiration.

Consid. The further I wade in this business, the worse I like my employment,
and hereupon I resolve I will no more be employed in any such business, unless
I am fairly dealt withal, that I may know who is the Author I am to deal with,
at least of what profession he is in Religion; for upon the perusing of this
Section some doubts arise within me concerning the intention of the Author,
carrying himself in a covert manner that he may be unknown, which does much
move me. Henry the seventh of England was wont to say, he desired nothing more
than that he might know his Adversary that encountered him; we do not use to buy
a pig in a poke; nor will I hereafter encounter with I know not whom, nor of
what profession he is.

Here the Author returns to oppose the cleerness of Scripture, considering it
hand over head, and so opposing it, whereas our Savior requires that we should
search the Scriptures, that is, study them well, and inquire after the true
meaning of them. No man searches after that which is before his eyes, yea, we
are commanded to search for wisdom as we search after gold and silver, and a
man will be content to search deep for treasure. It was wont to be said, that
in profundo latet veritas, Truth lies deep, how much more should we be content
to search diligently and dig deep for the treasures of that truth which is
according unto godliness, after the treasures of that wisdom which makes us
wise unto salvation? Then again, we distinguish between things necessary to
salvation, and other things: Things necessary to salvation, we say are plainly
contained in Scripture, many other things are not so.

Here we have a wild answer at the first, All the Commandments of God are his
Word, and so are all his Works which are through his Word.

1. To say, so are all his Works, is to say, all his Works are his Word, which
yet forthwith is corrected, by saying they are through his Word: Yet of old I
have read in Chrysostom of a double Book of God, the Book of his Word, and the
Book of his Creatures, and that God at the first did teach his Creatures (...)
by his Works, afterward (...) by his written Word. It is most true, The
heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy works,
Psalm. 19. And the invisible things of God even his eternal Power and Godhead
are seen from the Creation, being considered in his works, Romans 1.20. So by the
administration of his providence in governing the world, He leaves not himself
without witness, giving us rain and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with
food and gladness, Act. 14.17. Yet the knowledge of God hereby being gathered
only by discourse of natural reason, men may fail of finding God though they
grope after him, Act. 17.27. and the wisest of Philosophers has denied the
Creation, and maintained God to be a necessary Agent; And they who granted and
acknowledged the beginning of the world (as all they who were before) yet
utterly denied that the world was made originally out of nothing; and therefore
the Apostle tells us, that by faith we believe the world was made. Not only
Gods Commands are his Word, but the revelations of the mystery of Godliness,
and these are the things most remote from our capacities. As for the Law as a
rule of life, that is more or less written in the hearts of all men. It is
true, the Author of the Book De Vocatione Gentium, talks of such a manner of
instruction by Gods Works, but (I pray) do not compare that in clearness to
the Word of God; what ground have we for the right interpretation of signs, and
wonders, beneath, above? Astrologers would make us believe they read strange
things in the Constellations referred to men's Nativities, but what ground have
we for this Calculation? what Abraham the father of the faithful discoursed
thereof in his Astronomicall Lectures read by him in the plain of Mamre, we
have received no tidings hereof from the hill Amarath in Aethiopia. I know that
in holy Scripture Thunder is called the voice of God; I know also that the
Lord-spake unto the Patriarks, but that word is not written; winds and storms
also are said to fulfill his Word, by a Metaphor, because what he will have
done by them, is done by them, as if they were most obedient and faithful
servants unto their Master, whom yet they know not any more than Ravens do,
though in Scripture Phrase, and by a figure of speech, they are said to call
upon him. Now we are upon another point, namely, as touching the Scriptures,
the written Word of the Prophets and Apostles, and the question is about the
clearness of them, or the intelligible nature of them to all such as will
understand: And to such faith Solomon, knowledge is easy, which I take to be
spoken of the knowledge of God by the Scriptures, whereunto I am sure our
Savior refers the Jews, and the Apostle would not have us affect to be wise
(...) above that which is written.

It is true, when that was delivered, thy Law is a Lanthorn unto my feet, none
of the later Prophets had committed their Prophecies unto writing, much less
were the Books of the New Testament written then: But in reference to all the
Books of the Old Testament our Savior spoke, when he said, Search the
Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal life, and they are they that
testify of me, Joh. 5. And as for the Books of the New Testament, the Gospels
were written that men might acknowledge the certainty of those things whereof
they had been instructed by word of mouth, Luke 1.4. which could not be were
they not intelligible by a studious Reader, and Paul was in bonds when he wrote
of the whole Scripture, that it was profitable to teach, to convince, to
correct, to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God might be made
absolute, being made perfect to all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. Now if we deny
the intelligible condition of Scripture, the profitable nature of it
therewithal must utterly be removed. The Apostles we know by preaching
converted many, surely the Word preached was understood by the hearers,
otherwise it had wrought but a wild conversion: Now look what they preached
that is committed to writing in the Acts of the Apostles, and in their Epistles
written unto several Churches.

The knowledge of the figures of the Prophecies of the Revelation and the like,
is not necessary to salvation; and great reason they should be carried in a
mysterious way, like as the mysteries of Christ's Person, and of his Office, in
breaking the Serpents head, were carried a long time in the clouds of types and
figures; had it been known that the Messiah must be crucified before he
reigned, the Devil would not have been so forward to possess the heart of
Judas with a project of betraying him into the hands of his enemies to procure
his death. So the Revelation in the New Testament, and many of the like nature
in the Old concerning the Devils and Antichrists practice, no marvel if they
be mysteriously carried, that neither the Devil nor Antichrist should
understand them until they were accomplished. Nevertheless the Lord by his
Spirit which dictated them, can inspire his servants with an understanding
heart to know the meaning of them when the time comes appointed for the
communication of this knowledge; many shall pass to and fro, and knowledge
shall be increased; as if the opening of the world by Navigation and Commerce,
and the increase of knowledge, should meet together in one time and age, as one
wittily observes; we have seen of late years a strange progress made in
opening the mysteries of the Revelation, and other mysterious Prophecies of the
Old Testament even to admiration; The time when first Antichrist should be
discovered and protested against is found out in Daniels Numbers, lest we
should wonder at the Fathers ignorance hereof: For as Christians at their first
conversion from Idols to serve the living God, did forthwith look for the Son
of God his coming from heaven to deliver us from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1.
last Yea, and some were of opinion in the Apostles days, that it should be
within the age of a man, whereupon Paul wrote his second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, wherein he gives to understand, that an Apostasy must come
first, and the man of sin must be revealed, and before that the Roman Empire
must be broken 2 These. 2. compared with 1 These. 4.15. So in Austins days that
good Father projects that the coming of Christ might be 400. years off, nay,
suppose 500. he would not go further, presuming that the Beast which
slaughtered the Lords witnesses, should not continue above three years and an
half. Now we have no cause to wonder at this, when we consider what Daniel has
written concerning this, and how blessed a thing it should be to live at that
time when Antichrist should be proclaimed to the world and revealed, Dan. 11.
For then nothing remained to be looked for but the blasting of him with the
breath of the Lords mouth, and the utter abolishing of him by the brightness of
his coming. The reconciling of Ezekiels measures of new Jerusalem with John's
measures in the Revelations, is a great mystery, and held to be desperate, yet
now it is made feisible, nor so only, but cleared throughout. So the number of
the Beast 666. how long has the Christian world groped after the meaning of
it, as a blind man after his way? What various notions has the investigation
hereof produced in men's brains, after that of Ireneus accommodated to the word
(...), and at length for want of a better the best Stndents in these mysteries
driven to come back thither again. But now the vanity thereof newly
discovered, and that at full, even by every Text calling us expressly to
calculate this, which is not to rest in this number, but by Calculation of
this to find out another number, which will notably decipher unto us that
Beast: And indeed the number of the Beast 666. is opposed to the number of
Christ's Church, 144. and the number most momentous arising by the Calculation
thereof, is the number 12. the root thereof, and no other calculation belongs
to a single number than that which is called the extraction of roots, and the
number 25. found to be the root of 666. so far as it comes to be said in the
usual way of Arithmetic, to have a root, discovering strange mysteries
concerning the delineating of that Beast the body of Antichrist in a wonderful
manner.

No marvel if these mysteries were hidden from the Prophets themselves, who
wrote those Prophecies, for first the knowledge of them was nothing necessary
to their salvation. 2. God had appointed a certain time when the light of them
should break forth to irradiate his Church with unspeakable consolation, when
they stood most in need thereof, the accomplishment of those Prophecies drawing
near.

Christ spoke in parables to some, not to all, yet some of his parables were
understood by them even against whom they were spoken in particular: Those that
were not understood by the multitude, our Savior revealed to his Disciples as
often as they sought it, yea, and other mysteries too, namely the signs
foregoing the destruction of Jerusalem, his own coming, and the end of the
world, Mat. 24.

It is true the Scriptures contain the mysteries of godliness, which are not
apprehended according to their condition, but by the Regenerate; but as for the
meaning of the Scripture, it is quite of another nature, (which this Author
considers not) and is incident to a reprobate, yea, in such a measure as to
make him an able Doctor in the Church, and Orthodox throughout, which may tend
to the edification of others, when in the mean time such a one shall fall short
of the salvation of his own soul. The secrets of the Lord which he reveals to
them that fear him, is the secret of his Covenant, Psalm. 25. There is a secret
also in Faith-Catholike, and in all the mysteries of godliness, which is
peculiar to the Regenerate only, and it is to discern the wisdom of God, and
the power of God in them which have true Faith. A reprobate may believe the
same things by a natural faith only, yea believe it, and carry themselves
like good scholars too while they instruct others therein.

Still we say, that the Scripture is plain and clear enough, as touching all
things necessary to salvation, and all this discourse is plausible only
through distinction, and to deny the Scripture to be fairly intelligible to one
that is desirous to know the meaning of it, is a great disparagement to the
Word of God, and dishonor to God himself, disparaging either his goodness that
would not, or his wisdom that he knew not how to order it, so that by searching
the Scriptures they might have eternal life.

If before the Law men had a light whereby they might find the truth more
clearly than we, then the former times were times of greater light and grace
than the later; but this is contrary both to the general judgment of the
Christian world, and to universal experience. For as light naturally
increases more and more until it be perfect day, so it has been with light
spiritual; yet the Sun the fountain of light natural, has sometimes gone
backward ten degrees, not so the sun of rigteousness; men have gone backward, I
confess, in the course of their obedience, but God has gone forward rather
than backward in the course of administration of his grace. We do not say
there was a mere blindness, or blindness at all in Gods children, (although in
present discourse not of man's blindness, but of Gods progress in causing the
irradiation of his light) but this we say, that the word of the Prophets was a
most sure word, to which our forefathers did well to take heed, as to a light
that shines in a dark place; but now a long time day has dawned, and the
Gospel is the day star that arises in our hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. For that God
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, is he which has shined in
our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. And in these days of grace, we all behold as in a
mirror, the glory of the Lord with open face, and are changed into the same
Image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18.

To say; that though all things be not necessary to be known, yet nevertheless
there may be had a certain and infallible way of interpreting, whereby the most
and most necessary Controversies may be decided, is to represent a show of
Antithesis where there is none. But that is little material, but here is a
declination to the contrary extreme; hitherto the clearness of Scripture has
been opposed, here an infallibility of interpreting is introduced; but Medio
tutissimus ibis, and virtue usually consists in a mediocrity, which Horace
calls auream Mediocritatem. Since the Apostles days the true Church of Christ
challenges to her self no infallible authority of interpreting Scripture, it is
enough that in things necessary to salvation the Lord assures us by his Spirit
that we are not deceived, that is sufficicient for the state of grace, and as
for infallibility, let us be content to have that condition reserved for the
state of glory. I nothing doubt but by study and care and pains, most
Controversies may be so clearly decided, as shall be sufficient either for the
converting of a capable Hearer, to the embracing of it, or for the convicting
him of obstinacy in withstanding it; but I little looked that the beginning of
this discourse would have so unsuitable an end. Mr. Dury (as I remember) is
occupied about some such method as this, I wish heartily it may succeed well,
but take heed we do not cry down all performances that have gone before us, as
if they were palpable insufficiencies, in comparison to our own new inventions,
whether in clearing truths controversial, or obscure places of Scripture. Well,
we shall rest contented with that measure we are arrived unto, until a greater
measure of light arise above the Horizon of our Sphere, and whenever it comes
I trust we shall give it that respect which it deserves, and right thankfully
entertain it, whether in the way of illustration which best pleases the sense,
or in the way of demonstration, which most justifies the judgment.

Disc. Nor am I moved with that Objection, that it is enough for the Lutherans
that they are assured of the truth of Lutheranism, though others cannot see and
believe it, for this is not that which I would have, I enquire how a man may be
sure, not of his own opinion, but of the truth. Now if I believe and determine
that such a thing is true, this is my opinion, yet is not therefore the truth,
seeing truth and opinion have nothing in them alike, and steadfast persuasion
changes not the essence of the thing whereof a man is persuaded; for then
should melancholic persons, whose opinion is unmovable, work miracles, and
make all their conceits essential. The nature of true knowledge is this, so be
demonstrable not to me, or some men, but to all, and to win a consent from any
man, as two and three make five. A thing controverted, and which some
understand one way, and some another, can never make me certain and free from
doubt, whether I have the truth or no; and he that knows no other than what he
determines, may be excused of malice and hypocrisy: But this reasoning, I and
my follower are sure of this thing, therefore it is true, is unreasonable
reasoning.

Consid. Surely if I am in a right way, it is enough for me to be assured of
the truth, for me, it is for my salvation; yet because I am bound to seek for
the salvation of others also, No man must imitate Cain, in saying, am I my
brothers keeper? yet that which is enough for me to be assured of the truth
which I maintain, may be enough for another also, to bring him to be assured of
the same truth: For if this sufficiency I speak of be in the way of rational
discourse out of the Word of God, if it is it self sufficient, it is sufficient
for the satisfaction of any that is capable thereof, and all such light being
light natural, and in the way of discourse, is of a communicable nature to all
rational creatures by a rational discourse: But true faith is wrought by
spiritual illumination, which is not in my power to communicate unto any
other, only the Spirit of God can do this, enlightening whom he will, while
others are suffered to sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death. And this is
the only saving way to be sure of Truths Theological. It is true, that which
I believe (whatsoever it be, and in what kind soever it be believed) is not
therefore truth, because I believe it; but if I believe by illumination divine,
it is therefore truth, because I believe it after such a manner, though this I
cannot communicate to another, or make another hereby either be persuaded of
it himself, or be persuaded that I am after such a sort persuaded of it. Light
natural I may communicate unto another, light spiritual I cannot; and light
natural either in way of natural discourse is communicative of it self from
commonly-known principles by the light of nature, or from principles on both
sides agreed, as namely, that the Scriptures are the Word of God: Now when the
Spirit of God inlightens me, the thing I embrace is not my opinion, but my
faith, and my persuasion herein is in stedfastness, and nothing inferior to
natural knowledge but superior rather, light spiritual and divine being
superior to light natural, like as knowledge by sense is superior to
knowledge by reason, rational knowledge depending upon knowledge sensitive:
For general principles do arise from experience and enumeration of
particulars. And as I remember, Theologia is said to be non argumentativa, to
wit as it is supernatural, and compared rather to sensitive knowledge; as to
the sense of seeing, open mine eyes that I may see the wonderful things of thy
Law; and to the sense of hearing, He that has an ear let him hear; for it is
one thing to hear the voice of a man, another thing to hear the voice of God;
one thing to see a work wrought, another thing to behold the hand of God in it;
one thing to discern the meaning of a Scripture-passage, another thing to
discern the wisdom of God, and the power of God in it. So it is compared to the
sense of smelling, 2 Cor. 2.14. We are a sweet savor unto God in Christ, in
them that are saved, and in them that perish; and where the body is, there will
the Eagles be gathered together: Sometimes to the sense of tasting, as 1 Pet.
2.1. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the Word that ye may grow
thereby, if ye have tasted that the Lord is bountiful: So Halensis professes,
that the things of God are apprehended per modum gustus. The sense of feeling
does fairly represent the knowledge of God by his works, Act. 17.27. That they
should seek the Lord, if so be they might have groped after him and found him,
though doubtless he be not far from every one of us. This Author seems to take
no notice hereof, no more than the Socinians do in these days, and that is
the foul spot I find in Master Shillingsworth Book: And be pleased, I pray,
to put a difference between melancholic persons, and the children of God, who
because they are sons, God has sent the Spirit of his Son into their hearts;
remember that of the Apostle, This persuasion is not of God, plainly giving to
understand, that the persuasions of Christian Faith are of God; yet I confess,
this Faith is grounded always upon Gods Word, wherein they should beso expert,
as to be ready thence at all times to render a reason of their faith to any
that should demand it. But that may an unregenetate person be able to do as
well, yea and many times better too.

When he says, the nature of true knowledge is demonstrable, this is true of
knowledge natural, not of knowledge Christian, which is grounded only on Gods
Word, and it was never known that to prove a thing out of Scripture was called
demonstration. Aristotle denies that Moral Philosophy is capable of
demonstration, it proceeds only by persuasion: but it may be for the evidence
of the Scripture aptly alleged, he calls it demonstration (...), yet consider,
no deduction out of Scripture can be so clear, as to be exempted from all
cavillings; but never was it known that any man cavilled with a truth as clear
as this that two and three makes five. If we can never be free from doubt if
the thing be controverted, as for instance a passage of Scripture, some
understanding it one way, and some another, what oertainty can I have of any
point of Faith I maintain in opposition to Papists, to Socinians, to any
Heretic? yet I should not look that the thing controverted should free me from
doubt, it is enough that I have good evidence for it, though all the world run
a madding in controverting that which I believe. Now no evidence of truths
Theological, and saving truths, is comparable to the evidence which proceeds
from the illumination of the Spirit, giving me new eyes (as it were) and
opening the eyes of my understanding, that I may see and discern the things of
God, and that holy Spirit is able to free me from all doubt, yet there is
another knowledge, which is natural, partly derived from natural principles,
and partly from a dextrous interpretation of Scriptures, which we shall be
able to make good against all Cavillers to their confusion, and upon sober
consciences to their assent; but this is inferior to the illumination of the
Spirit. I can hardly think any Christian to be so simple or wilful to reason
thus, I and my follower are sure of this thing, therefore it is true; if they
should, I see no reason but they might proceed one step further, and say, I my
selfalone think this to be true, and therefore it is true; but the Spirit of
illumination is given only to satisfy them that have it, not to boast of it,
(but to comfort themselves with it rather) much less to obtrude it upon others,
only light natural is communicable unto others by rational discourse, light
spiritual is not. I cannot more communicate that to another than my seeing or
hearing, or smelling, or tasting.

Disc. Lastly, If we build our Religion only upon the Scriptures, the learned
shall have a great prerogative above the unlearned in the matter of Faith and
Religion, and shall be more engaged in thankefulness unto God than they, and so
Religion shall favor and cleave to good wits.

Also many have their senses exercised in the Scriptures, or are more inventive
than others; therefore if a man could by disputing and reasoning consute some
Thesis, and as it were take away a man's opinion from him, and become conqueror,
he should also take away his Religion, and the other should be constrained
either to take up his Conquerors Religion, or against his conscience to keep
his own.

Nor will that Answer serve the turn, our Divines and Pastors can answer you,
though I cannot: for then should I believe with another man's faith; but says
must be mine, not another man's, else should salvation also be another man's. If
Religion be the service of God, certainly it is necessary that I should
understand that service which I must perform to my Lord. Seeing God will not
reckon another man's service for mine, and cannot be served by a Substitute, it
remains that we conclude, Controversies are to be left to learned men, and are
not so very necessary. It may be answered, Then also Religion is to be left to
learned men; for Controversies are our very Religion, for (saving the
consideration of them) there is no difference, but Papists are Protestants, and
Protestants are Papists; look how much a man knows of Controversies, so much
does he know of his own Religion. The state of a man's salvation is such as his
Religion and his Faith. Now there is but one salvation and but one faith: But
if Controversies belong to the learned only, wherefore have Laymen endured so
many afflictions, distresses, nay and death it self for these controversies
sake? I know indeed that a Calvinist Doctor, one Doctor Bergius, a Preacher at
Breme, affirms in his late published Sermons, that Controversies are not merely
necessary to salvation, that the Scripture is plain and clear about those
things which are necessary to salvation, and that there was never any
contrariety between the Religious themselves. At which also the Leipsich-
Collation between the Lutherans and the Calvinists seems to aim.

Consid. In all professions, whether liberal or mechanical, the learned have
a prerogative above the unlearned, and what inconvenience is there if it be so
in Christian Religion also? Does not S. Peter tell us that the unlearned
pervert the Scripture to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3. yet this prerogative
is in learning only, not in holiness, the unlearned may be as holy as the
learned, and have as great an interest both in sanctifying grace and in saving
glory. What said Austin of himself, and such like Scholars in comparison of his
mother Monica, and such like holy, though simple women, Mulierculae istae
lacrimis suis caelum nobis praeripiunt, when we have done all we can with all
our learning, these women with their tears will get heaven before us. And as
for holiness, so for faith, an unlearned man may have faith as well as the
learned; nay, that faith which is called fides infusa, may be found in a man
unlearned, when the faith of him that is learned is found to be no better than
fides acquisita, a faith natural; and they that have true faith by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost shall not want gracious wits; howsoever that
Religion which is by faith natural, be accompanied with better natural wits;
yet an idle wit, be it never so good will hardly prove learned, and be it never
so learned if it be without grace, such a man's Religion will prove but vain,
and though he be able to worst another in disputation, yet shall he never pull
true Religion in any child of God (be he never so weak and unlearned) out of
socket, because our Faith and Religion consists not in wisdom of words, but in
the power of the Spirit, as S. Paul speaks, saying, My word and my preaching
stood not in the enticing speech of Man's wisdom, but in plain evidence of the
Spirit and Power; That your Faith should not be in the wisdom of Men, but in
the power of God, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. Nay, were my Faith only natural, and I had
good evidence out of the Scripture for it, though that knowledge be no other
than such as is annexed to the common profession of Christianity; yet the
Philosopher tells me, that I must not be beaten out of my hold in such a case,
because I am not able to answer every Sophism or Argument that is brought
against it: Nay, the Philosopher in his Ethics teaches me, that some are as
tenacious of their opinions, for which they have but weak reasons, as others
are of their opinions which they hold confirmed with great strength of
Argument; so that every way it is an inficete fiction, that the most learned
must always conquer the Faith and the Religion of the unlearned without flying
to any such sculking hole, as to say, Our Divines and Pastors can answer you
though I cannot. But I wonder much that any sober Christian upon any pretense
should dispute against the building of our Religion only upon Scripture,
unless with Papists, he would bring in Traditions, or rely on the Church, or
on the decision of the Pope: For if we fly from the Word of God, we must rest
either upon the word of Man, or upon natural reason. A Christian, I conceive,
should think the Scripture sufficient to direct us in the Service of God: Our
Savior directs the Jews to the searching of Scripture for the discerning of
him.

And if Controversies be left to learned men, yet there is no cause why our
Religion should, but only the defense of it controversially, maintaining it by
variety of Arguments and deductions out of holy Scripture, and solving contrary
Arguments brought against it in any particular point of Faith; but the
profession of it surely shall belong to him that sits at Gamaliels feet, as
well as to Gamaliel himself, nor only to such as sit at his feet, but to such
also as follow the plowtail, yea, and to the weaker sex of women, and to
children too; for even to such belongs the Kingdom of God. And were there no
book at all written, or Sermon preached in any point of Controversies or
difference between us, yet Papists should be Papists still, and not
Protestants, and Protestants should be Protestants still, and not Papists, and
the Whore of Babylon should be the Whore of Babylon still, and no Spouse of
Christ, and Antichrist a false Prophet still, and no true Prophet. For the
faith and profession of a Papist makes him a Papist, whether he writes
Controversies or no, the smallest part of them being able to perform the task;
so the Protestants profession and protestation against the corruptions of the
Church of Rome, makes him a Protestant, though he never set pen to paper to
contend for the Faith once given to the Saints; though this be a duty, I
confess, but no common duty belonging unto all, but peculiarly appertaining to
the man of God, able not only to exhort with wholesome doctrine, but also to
convince them that say against it. For Articles of Faith and their profession
of them, Laymen have suffered with great constancy and patience, but not for
controversies, though they have been ready to give a reason of their Faith to
all that asked it, and witness a good confession of it, as our Savior did
before Pilate, as the Book of Acts and Monuments records of them, and S. Paul
of our blessed Savior. Doctor Bergius is acknowledged to say as much,
confessing the Controversies are not very necessary to salvation, which I
interpret thus, not necessary to the being of the Church, but only to her
well-being, when the Christian Faith is oppugned by Heretics: Between
Lutherans and Calvinists we acknowledge there is no difference in
fundamentalls, as appears sufficiently at the Conference at Leipsich.

Disc. This I am persuaded is very true, that had the Holy Ghost judged those
Controverted Questions necessary to salvation, it would have expressed and
propounded them in the holy Scripture clearly and plainly, seeing those
Epistles were sent to simple and Laymen especially. Nor does it seem likely to
be true, that ever there were so many Articles of Faith drawn out of them as
are now to be read in the Catechisms, Common-places, and Compounds of Divines;
As yet there is no certain number of them determined, seeing some Divines have
propounded more, and some fewer; and some Religions have in process of time,
either added or abated whole Articles, and after many miseries endured for the
defense of some of them, entering a way of moderation, they have determined that
for tolerable and indifferent, which before they thought damnable: But
howsoever, there are so many of them, that a man may deservedly call in
question the precise necessity of them. and this seems the best Solution to
disintangle and appease perplexed, doubtful, and erring Consciences.

Consid. It is a very uncouth speech, proceeding from a wild conceit, to say,
that God would have expressed and appointed Controverted Questions plainly and
clearly, if they had been necessary. It is not the proposition of Controverted
Questions, though never so plainly and clearly delivered, that sets an end to
Controversies, but the clear and substantial solution of them; for herein that
which has any show of being necessary, is not the proposing of them, but the
deciding of them: and it were a very preposterous course to talk of deciding
Controversies before there were any Controversies moved, right as if a
Physicians wisdom and goodness shoud move him to heal a man before he is
wounded; rather he should take care to preserve a man's health that he might
not fall into sickness. And so Gods wisdom and goodness has sufficiently
provided for the health of his Church through the integrity of Doctrine
delivered in his Word, and that in a manner sufficiently intelligible and
plain to them that come with honest hearts, and studious desires to seek after
truth and to embrace it. But S. Paul tells us of oppositions to the truth made
by men of corrupt minds, plainly giving us to understand, that they came with
corrupt minds to the reading of Gods Word, and so pervert it as Peter speaks,
and thereby pervert themselves first, and afterward they speak (...) wrested
things to the corrupting of others, and hinder them from that (...) to be found
in the faith, Tit. 1.13.

S. Peter exhorts us to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ, 2 Pet. 3.18. And S. Paul would not have us stand at a stay, but grow
forward unto perfection There is a plerophory and fullness of faith that we
should strive unto, and of knowledge as well as of holiness: For this life is
our way to heaven, and still we must draw nearer thitherwards, by knowing all
that we can know by the Word, Deuteronomy. 29.29. It is revealed to that purpose, and
it is able to make the man of God perfect to every good work, 2 Timothy 3. last.
Add unto virtue knowledge, says Peter, 2 Pet. 1.5. and Paul prays on the
behalf of the Colossians, that they might be fulfilled with the knowledge of
Gods Will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, Col. 19. that they might
walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, fruitful in every good work, and
increasing in the knowledge of God, v. 10. Why then should we take offense at
the multiplying of Articles? In all professions men that delight in knowledge
are never satisfied, nothing is more congruous to our intelligent natures than
light of knowledge, while we live here on earth we shall never come to ripeness
of age in Christ, therefore we must be growing still, and edifying our selves,
and one another in our most holy faith; the body of Christ must be edified till
we come to fullness of age; and as we must increase in knowledge, so being
obnoxious to error, it behooves us to labor for the discovery of it more and
more. That error in taking the number of the Beast 666. to denote only (...)
has endured ever since the days of Ireneus, that is from the next age after
the Apostles; and it is now lately discovered, and the true meaning substituted
in the place thereof, as never the like before; and it is commendable for men
to see their former errors, much more to confess them. Of all Austins works
there are none more tending to his honor and renown than his Retractations,
wherein he retracts the errors of his Faith, and his Confestions, where he
acknowledges the errors of his life, and this is most Christian ingenuity, and
I think never was any man more renowned in this kind than he. It is necessary
for every Christian to strive forwards unto perfection, necessitate Praecepti,
by necessity of Commandment, but if he fail through negligence this is a very
pardonable sin upon our confession of it. As for things necessary to salvation
they are but few, but the knowledge of God and the things of God is so sweet to
a regenerate taste, having already tasted how bountiful the Lord is, that he
will be carried as naturally to desire the sincere milk of the Word, that he
may grow thereby, as new born babes do desire the milk of their mothers
breasts, 1 Pet. 2.1. As for perplexed and doubting, and erring Consciences, men
may perplex themselves, and raise doubts causlesly, and err in this, and this
error will be the greater, when after all this they pretend perplexity and
doubts made unto them, when they are only the mists which themselves have
raised to blear their own eyes, and such a work, I think, is never more
inauspiciously performed than when they set their wits on work to dispute
themselves out of the Lords verge, and circle, within the compass whereof alone
he uses to charm all his Elect, after they have run their wild race and
compass, and bring them home like the prodigal child to his father, so them to
their heavenly father, and therewithal to the sobriety of their wits, and
integrity of their senses, that they may say, Oh, what love have I to thy Law!
all the day long is my study in it; the Law of thy mouth is deerer to me than
thousands of gold and silver: by this I have more understanding than my
Teachers. Indeed the Law of the Lord is a perfect Law converting the soul, the
testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom to the simple, yea, and such
wisdom as makes wise unto salvation, and what should we desire more?

Disc. But could so many Divines of former. Ages be ignorant of this? Have
there not so many Wars been undertaken for this cause? Could those learned men
suffer so many thousands of men to run headlong, hoth by doing and suffering,
into the hazard of body and soul for Religions sake? and so many unspeable
mischiefs to arise, whenas it is possible for a man to be saved without the
Controversies of Religion? But if this be the command of God under the pain of
temporal and everlasting punishment, to fight for those Controversies, how can
we excuse those shuffling arguments of Faith, Religion, and Gods Worship? A
Servant may not abate any thing of his Lords due.

Consid. Be ignorant of this; of what? That Controversies are not necessary to
salvation; how does that appear they deserved any such censure? but let us not
please our selves in confusion of things that deserve to be distinguished: A
man, yea, an whole Nation, may live in peace without war, but if they are not
suffered to live in peace, but some enemy or other invades them, as Aram
before, and the Philistines behind, ready to devour us with open mouth, shall
we sit still with our hands in our bosom, till these monsters devour us one
after another? as Polyphemus intended to deal with Ulysses and his soldiers,
though he showed him this favor, that he should be the last that should go to
pot: This is the condition of Gods Church, and has been from the very days of
the Apostles inclusively, the mysteries of godliness, being now revealed in
Gods word. Many there be that cannot digest these mysteries and submit unto
them by faith, but though they embrace the truths of the Gospel in some
particulars, yet they resist it in others, or pretending to embrace it, they
pervert and wrest it by corrupt interpretation. In this case are not the
Orthodox driven to hold their own, and (as S. Jude exhorts them) to contend
earnestly for the faith once given to the Saints, and to endeavor to kill
error, rather than to suffer error to strangle the holy truth of God, open the
truth of God which is according unto godliness; rather to root out weeds, than
to suffer them to over-grow the good corn. Thus we are cast upon Controversies
whether we will or no, yet this is not a duty that belongs to all, many, yea
most shall be saved without it; like as when an enemy invades us we gather an
Army against them to oppose them and drive them out, the rest pray for their
fellow-brethren, but do not fight, yet by this war they may have as great an
interest in the desired peace, as those that fight for it. Thus Chamayar of the
French Church has written his (...) Bella Domini, the Wars of the Lord,
against the Philistines, the Antichristian Philistines of the Church of Rome,
scarce one has done the like, yet many sons of that honorable Church have
done valiantly, but Chamayer has surmounted them all; every one does not gird
himself with the sword upon the thigh at all, but only those who are the Lords
Naunchan, his instructed ones, for these who are overseers and keepers of the
Tower of David, built for defense, a thousand shields hung therein, and all the
Targets of the strong men, Cant. 4.4. and these are well acquainted with them,
and know how to use them, yea and to handle the sword too as expert in war, and
in this holy war they will be content to hazard their life, as S. Paul
professes, saying, and now I go bound to Jerusalem in the Spirit, not knowing
what things shall come unto me there, save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in
every like saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me, but I pass not for
these things, neither is my life deer unto me, so I may fulfill my course with
joy, and the Ministration which I have received of the Lord Jesus to testify
the Gospel of the grace of God.

As for the shuffling Arguments here spoken of, when I know them I shall upon
due consideration pass my judgment on them as I see cause. A man may
sophisticate I confess, in making Arguments, but shuffling courses commonly
have place in shifting them off by an undue solution: We know what Paul's
course was, he fought with Beasts at Ephesus, and Stephens fortunes too, when
certain of the Synagogue which were called Libertines and Cyrenians, disputed
with Stephen, did not he also dispute with them? The Text says expressly, they
were not able to resist the wisdom of the Spirit by which he spoke; If Lam
offered up (says Paul) upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I rejoice
therein, and will joy.

Dis. Let this thing be considered, seeing it is so intricate, and lead me and
many others into disquiet of mind; for which perplexities of Conscience, none
will deny that a remedy is to be sought at the hands of those that have
Christian fellow-feeling, and might be found if all the Divines of those sides
that have left Popery, would vouchsafe to afford me a wise, mild, and solid
Answer in writing, not savouring of partiality, prejudice, or passion.

Consid. When Boste was taken by the States, there was seen in the wall a
Bishop sometimes of that town, painted with Christ and his blood on the one
side, and the Virgin Mary and her breasts sprouting milk on the other side, and
the devout Bishop was represented there in the gesture of a man in great
perplexity and ambiguity, not knowing well which to prefer, whether Christ's
blood before Mary's milk, or Mary's milk before Christ's blood, and this
expressed in Latin Verses, and one of the Martialists (as it were) to put him
out of his mood and perplexity, Why thou Sott (quoth he) get thee to Got. Who,
I pray, was the cause of this man's perplexity, was it not his own extreme
superstition most abominable? If the Author of this Discourse had proposed any
thing on the other side to the Scripture, and pretended ambiguity and
perplexity, which of them he preferred according whereunto to order his faith,
that Martialists resolution of the doubt might have been congruous enough: But
only concerning the Scripture-doubts are here proposed how a man should ground
his faith thereupon; what he is, I know not, and whether this be res gesta, or
ficta, I am to seek, for the present world is full of juggling. But when we
make such doubts unto our selves, do we well consider the goodness and wisdom
of God in giving us his holy Word to direct us in the ways of everlasting
life? if still there were just cause to complain of a perplexed condition,
whereinto we were cast, not knowing whether we shall take hold of it, or run
away from it, as Moses did from his rod when it was turned into a Serpent. But
do we find any the like Metamorphosis here? yet when the Lord bid Moses take
the Serpent by the tail, he was bold to do it; surely Gods Word is no Serpent,
but we rather, and his Word alone has power to charm us, and make us vomit all
our poison of erroneous and unholy ways, and the Lord Christ has bid us to
take hold of them, saying, Search the Scriptures; yet if any thing in this my
Answer seem amiss, and not answerable to the Authors expectation, but savouring
(as he thinks) of partiality, prejudice, or passion, I confess prejudice
against such discourses as these, accompting them most vile, and nothing
becoming an understanding and godly Christian; but as for the rest let him
impute it to my ignorance, that know not so much as what is the way of his
passion, for he seems to me to be neither Lutheran nor Calvinist, and would not
seem to be a Papist, though I am most prone to conceive it to be the trick of
some Papist; least of all do I know his person or Country.

But let every sober Christian consider well, and inquire, whether that since
the beginning that Gods Word was committed to writing, there were at any time
any such questions moved until this last and worst Age of the world, when
Cajetan the Cardinal, a great School-Divine, first encountered with Martin
Luther, and found that no Authority prevailed with him but Scripturall,
hereupon he was moved to study Scripture, and wrote Commentaries upon it in
his old age. But Silvester Prierius of Rome, he thought that way too far about,
and therefore took a shorter course, and maintained that the Scriptures
contained not all things necessary to salvation, and therefore the rule of
faith to be made complete must be pieced up with the unwritten Word added to
the written Word, which unwritten Word they called Traditions. Since that the
Papists have strengthened themselves with the Authority of the Church, yet
confess the true Church cannot be known to be a true Church, nor the Authority
thereof known, but by the Scriptures, and the issue of the resolution of the
Church must be the resolution of the Pope concerning the true interpretation
of Scripture, shamefully obtruding upon us that we make the resolution of our
faith into our own private spirit, whereas we to the contrary extend the
testimony of the spirit only to each private man's best satisfaction, and teach
no other herein than the Papists themselves acknowledge to be most true, as
touching the resolution physical of our faith, as I am able to prove by
variety of pregnant evidences ready at hand without any more ado than the bare
transcribing of them. Now this light being not of a nature communicable unto
others, we meddle not with it in disputing upon any other point of Divinity
with Papists or any other. But therein walk in all our disputations by way of
Resolution Logical, either into some confessed principles as concerning the
Attributes Divine, or into express passages of holy Scripture, the meaning
whereof if it be excepted against, we are ready to justify it by rational
discourse against any adversary, nothing doubting but we shall either convict
him of obstinacy in shutting his eyes against the clear evidence of truth, and
make him condemned in his own conscience, or at least in the conscience of all
sober Christians, being well assured that whosoever resists the evidence of
Gods Word upon pretense of inevidence, that Word shall be found of evidence
enough to judge him at the last day.

This Jesuiticall Question was sent out of Germany when the Assembly of Divines
were sitting at Westminster, and was translated out of High Dutch.

FINIS.

