TWO PETITIONS Presented To His Excellency the Lord Fairfax.

THE ONE By the Officers and Soldiers of the Garrisons of Newcastle, Tinmouth,
Hartlepoole, Holy-Jsle: Together with several Officers of BARWICK then present.

The other by the Officers and Soldiers commanded by Colonel HEWSON.

The first presented at Windsor, Friday November. 24.

The second on Saturday November. 25. 1648.

LONDON, Prnted for John Partridge. 1648.

TO His Excellency the Lord FAIRFAX; The humble and unanimous Petition and
Representation of the Officers and Soldiers of the Garrisons of Newcastle,
Tinmouth, Hartlepool, Holy-Isle, together with several Officers of Barwick then
present;
SHOWS,
THat whereas the whole Kingdom has groaned under the miseries of seven years
unnatural bloody War, occasioned by the Kings deserting his Parliament, levying
and marching in the head of an Army against them; which (though then
principally imputed to the seducement of wicked Counselors,) yet was it
adjudged by the Parliament, in their Votes of the 20. of May, 1642. to be a
breach of the Trust reposed in him by his people, contrary to his Oath, and
tending to the dissolution of this Government. But when we consider what latter
times have produced, as that Declaration of the House of Commons, February 11.
1647. and the daily experience we have of him, we cannot but conceive. That
although evil Counselors were very instrumental, yet that himself was and is
the principal Author, Contriver, Abettor, Manager of all the Bloodshed,
Massacres, Devastations, and whatsoever Ruins have befaln, not only this
Kingdom, but also that of Ireland: And we are the rather induced to be of this
opinion, in regard that no means possible have been left unessayed for the
gaining him in; witness the several Treaties formerly had with him; the many
Petitions, Propositions, so often tendered to him; and above all the late Treaty
of forty days, which being after a total seclusion, for so many months, from
all evil Counselors whatsoever, and after those solemn Votes of the Parliament
cutting him off from all future hopes of having any thing to do with the
Authority of this Kingdom; whereupon followed a Charge of many high Crimes; and
being, by a special overruling hand of providence, disposed not to begin till
God himself had spoke so loud from heaven unto him, by destroying all his
carnal confidences in a most miraculous manner, as that of Kent, the Scots
Army, and the rest; so that had not his heart been wholly shut up and obdurate,
and himself resolvedly set upon the Destruction of the Kingdom, he could not
but readily have yielded to all such things as might have tended to the common
good: But we find, that he is still as averse as ever; and though some specious
pretenses are held forth to delude ignorant souls, yet really advantage is
thereby made for the laying of a new design to bring about his former wicked
intentions, as appears by the Princes continuing still in Rebellion, and the
late transactions of Ormond in Ireland, not disavowed by the King; and withal
considering, That all endeavors, for the bringing of other Instruments and
Incendiaries to condign punishment, while the grand Delinquent is untouched,
are to little purpose, as being not an acceptable Sacrifice to the Justice of
God, to offer him ought else, while the Agag is spared; nor answerable, either
to the true sense and equity of all former Declarations and Engagements to that
purpose, (especially that of the Army, upon the Parliaments Votes of
Non-addresses to the King,) or to the proper end and intention of them, which
was not the Ruin, but the Preservation of the Kingdom.

We therefore Your humble Petitioners, in consideration of the Premises, and
encouraged thereunto by the long experience we have had of Your faithfulness
and readiness to serve Your Country, do beseech Your Excellency, that You will
now be pleased to show Your Self, and to use such means as may be effectual;
That no further Application be made unto the King, but that, according to
former Presidents in this Kingdom upon far less Crimes, he may be speedily
called to answer to such Charges, as are, or shall be brought in against him;
and so, Justice being done upon him, way will be made, with less difficulty and
more success, for the prosecution of other Offenders, the prevention of future
Insurrections, and firm settling the Kingdom in Peace and Safety.

And we shall ever pray, etc. Signed by us the Officers of the said Garrisons
with the joint consent of the Soldiers, etc.
Presented to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, Lord General, at Windsor, Friday
November. 24. 1648.
TO The Right Honorable Thomas Lord Fairfax, our noble and faithful General:
The Petition of the Officers and Soldiers of the Regiment commanded by Colonel
Hewson.
Humbly Shows,
THat whereas Your Excellency's approved, worth and fidelity have opened the
doors and ears to admit and hear any thing, having tendency to the healing of
this bruised and diseased Kingdom; we being many ways provoked to make a
present address to the Representatives, know no better nor safer hand to convey
it by then your own, which is so dear unto us: Therefore being more sadly
sencible of the complaints from all parts, but especially these which seem to
crack the axletree of all our hopes; viz. 1. A renewed design upon this Army,
by forcing us to free quarter, still to make us the contempt and hissing of the
people, though we crave your witness that we have not boggled very often, to
make brick without straw, and born burden to the cracking of many faithful
shoulders, and thereby fill your heart and ours with unspeakable grief, even
almost reluctancies, to despair, had not your firm influence prevented our
divisions, and thereby the Kingdoms ruin, which would have gratified the
Devil, and our enemies, his instruments. 2. As English men we cannot but be
sensible of the inconveniences of this late Treaty, whereby it is attempted to
null all Contracts, Protestations, Votes, yea to our particular undertaking to
bring Delinquents of all sorts to condign punishments, offering thereby more
then a conquered; yet implacable enemy, could expect. 3. The exhausting the
peoples treasure by many ways, Offices and Officers, and no public account
given thereof, rooted upon cursed self-seeking in some, maintaining the
jealousies of many. 4. The Kingdom left naked without any settled Government, so
often cried for; a Parliament rather being a medicine for mal-administrations,
and an Instrument to make Laws with, then a proper Government, as all confess.
5. An inequality of punishments, censures, and compositions, as if we had no
net made to catch the greater flies. 6. Oppression by Foraign un-English'd Laws
and Lawyers grown to swarms when the best ordered Common-weals have the fewest
of that brood, and who have been found by their increase a Pathagnomical
Symptom of a crazy State, and Caclectick Commonwealth. 7. The slighting and
contemptuous dealing with Petitioners and Petitions, whereby redress has been
sought to the peoples Grievances; a practice as dangerous as unusual, in places
where the preservation of the whole is in the eye and aim of Trustees.

We do therefore heartily and fully concur with our brethren in the Army, in
their several just Petitions presented to your Excellency, calling for Justice,
and just things, and the same we do with those in the City and Country, being
the rather pressed hereunto, because our late employment has made some of us eye
and ear witnesses of the last transactions with the grand Enemy, and great
abettor of Ormond in Ireland, his son in Holland, and any other party that has
but a sword to draw for his destructive designs, we know, and therefore speak.

Wherefore we most humbly pray, that your Excellency would forthwith
communicate these our sighs and restless breathings of our spirits to the
Parliament. Viz. 1. We cannot, we dare not make such a forfeiture of our
unparelled mercies, nor betray our dear bought Freedom, as to leave our selves
and the Nation to the Freedom of one man's will most unhappy in the whole course
of his reign, and now dashing this Kingdom into pieces again by his easily
discerned subtilties. 2. We desire all the faithful Patriots of the Commons
House, may declare and protest against all men, under the same roof with them,
that have so plainly betrayed the common safety by pardoning 30. of 37. that
were appointed to death, and these 7. of no note, and but one within reach; for
sending most of the rest as their Agents into France, and other parts, which
they call banishment. 3. We most earnestly beg, we may be governed and free I
from fear of confusion and Anarchy by such a settlement as cannot be expected
from 400. men so strangely chosen, and diversely affected: We wish to that
purpose, that the Government of Venice, Holland, Switzerland, and other parts,
may be examined, that we may not idolize any one Creature, nor never be any
more at this charge, since of 25. Princes of this Nation many have been
impeached and deposed by the sword of the people in the hands of their
Trustees. 4. We expect that we be not voted against if we do not deliver up
prisoners in our power upon those easy terms voted: We are not ignorant how it
is designed, that this Army must be provoked to do evil things, and by those
men who are vexed, we have done so many good.
Dearest Sir, In the gaining of these, and other righteous things for the poor
tattered Nation, we shall follow your Excellency through Rocks and Mountains of
difficulty, or lose all in that work; for we having bin so often dying, that we
would choose once to dye indeed, that our dear Native Country may Live.

Presented to his Excellency at Windsor, Saturday, November 25. 1648.
FINIS.

