TWO GREAT FIGHTS In IRELAND, On Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday last,
between the Marq. of Ormonds Forces, and the Lord Lieut. Cromwels, at the two
strong Garrisons of Tredah and Dundalke; showing the manner how they four
several times sallyed out upon the Parl. forces beat up the Guards, the manner
of their repulse, the number killed and taken prisoners, together with 6 pieces
of Ordnance, and great store of Arms and Ammunition. As also, the Declaration
of the great Engineer Col. Ashton, to fight under the Banner of loyalty, in
preservation of the town of Tredah for Charles the II, and his new Engine of
War for the cutting off both Legs and Arms of any that shall oppose him.



TWO FIGHTS IN IRELAND ON Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday last, between
the Forces commanded by the Marq. of Ormond, and the Lord Lieutenant Cromwell.
SIR,
UPon the Lord Governor Cromwels near approach with his Army, to the frontier
and impregnable Garrison of Tredah, his Lordship sent a Summons to the
Governor Colonel Ashton, for the surrender thereof to the power and obedience
of the Parliament of England, but the Governor returned a very resolute and
peremptory Answer, intimating, That he abhord with his soul the brand of
perfidiousnesse, that he was resolved to display the banner of loyalty, and to
stand in the defense and preservation of the trust reposed in him to the last
man, etc. Whereupon, the Lord Governor immediately called a Council of
Officers, for the well-ordering of the Army, to the end the work might appear
more facile and easy, and indeed so excellent were the debates and
consultations thereof, that their Design was looked upon with great admiration.

And upon Saturday morning being the 8. of this instant September. twelve
thousand Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, marched up in battell-array, with Trumpets
sounding, and Drums beating against the Town, where they soon encamped
themselves, cutting off diverse passes, and using the rarest stratagems of war,
for streightning the enemies quarters.

About 7 at night, the Army advanced somewhat nearer, and diverse strong Guards
both of Horse and Foot were placed within twice musket shot of the walls, where
the Foot entrenched themselves. And about 5 in the morning, the besieged
discovered us, who drawing nearer to each other, said, they would give us a
dinner to welcome us into Ireland; and indeed they were very circumspect in
keeping of their word, for between 11 and 12 they gave us a visit, sallying
forth with a considerable party of Horse, and lining the obscure places with
many hundreds of foot, but failed in their promise; for upon their first charg
against one of our horse-guards, they were so gallantly received, that they
soon quitted the place, our horse pursued them within musket shot of their
works, receiving a great volley from their Ambuscado, in which we lost 4 men,
and 7 horse; of the enemy killed and taken 13. The next morning being Monday they
attempted another sally, but not daring to put it in execution, retreated in
again without action, remaining all day very silent, till the Curtain of the
most high Canopy began to expel and darken the splendour of Sols beauty, who
even at the close of the day upon the relieving our guards, gave us a volley
both with great and round shot, which grazed and did no execution.

On Tuesday being the 11. instant, about break of the day, we received a new
allarum from these troubled spirits, who (upon an unexpected salley) suddenly
fell upon Col. Hewsons foot guard, but were repulsed, and the loss equally
balanced.

On Wednesday being the 12. instant, Lieu. col. Ashton (a great Papist, and
Nephew to the Governor) about two of the clock in the morning made a very
desperate salley upon two of our foot-guards, with 500. Irish, which by reason
of the sudden surprizall of our Perdews, and Sentinels, caused great
difficulties to intervene, yet notwithstanding, the Wings of providence seeming
as a great Bulwark to preserve and defend us, our men received their furious
onset, but being overpowred, the Vau-guard retreated to the next, and bodying,
advanced to the other engaged, fell upon the Irish killed 40, took 20
prisoners, and forced the rest to a dishonorable retreat, with the loss of ten;
besides those in the former engagements, prisoners exchangd were equal, about
50. above 100 killed and wounded, whereof on our part 30.

From the Siege at Tredah Sept. 13. 1649.
Other Letters from Ireland, purport the further engagement of the two Armies.
SIR,
Upon the advance of the Lord Governor Cromwell horse toward Trim, great was
the preparation of the Marq. of Ormond, and the Lord Inchiquin to receive him,
and upon his near approach with the Van, a selected party were drawn forth to
represent the Royal salutation (as they called it) and accordingly the Lord
Inchiquin had the honor and conduct of leading those vanting Troops, who no
sooner had marched four miles from the town, but a discovery were made of a
great Body of the Parl. horse; whereupon he drew out a Forlorn consisting of
two hundred horse, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Gerrard, who advanced about
Musket shot from the Body, the rest marching after.

The Parliaments forces seeing this, immediately ec'd choforth a great deal of
alacrity to dispute an engagement, drawing out a Forlorn likewise, and
advancing toward them; insomuch, that after an hours rallying, and wheeling
for wind and ground, both bodies had embattail'd themselves in a
well-disciplin'd posture for the receiving of each others charge with the most
advantage and safety.

And after some short time spent in consultation by the Officers, the Trumpets
sounded, and both parties joined battle, a most violent and desperate charge
being given to each other at the first on set, during which conflict, sharp and
cruel was the action, each man striving for Conquest, and endeavoring to
become master of the field; but the victory seemed dubious a long time, until
by main force; the enemies left wing were disordered and put to a retreat,
which the right wing, and the Center-body seeing (for they were divided into
three bodies) began to decline farther engagement, endeavoring an honorable
retreat, but the L. Governors horse falling in with them, upon their wheeling
off, diverse of them were killed and taken prisoners, the rest received
sanctuary near a spacious bog, where they rallyed, and by the coming in of a
fresh Reserve of three Regiments of horse, commanded by Colonel Steward,
Colonel Cotton, and Collonell Cunningham, the Lord Inchiquin attempted a
second Onset against the Lord Governors forces, who finding themselves to be
both overpowred and unfitting for an second engagement, made an honorable
retreat with the loss of thirty men, the enemy not daring to embrace pursuit
for a mile together, whose loss we hear was exceeding great in the first
engagement, by estimation at least three hundred.

Since which time they wholly decline engagement, and dare not stand a charge,
unless at a place of great advantage; many of the English Horse under the
conduct of the Lord Inchiquin desert him daily, and come in to the Lord
Governor, who solemnly protest and declare to be true to the English Interest,
and to assist his Lordship, in the defense of the Parl. of England, with their
lives and fortunes.

By Letters further from the Siege at Tredah in Ireland, thus: The Marq. of
Ormond has exceedingly victuald and strengthened this place, and all other
Garrisons adjacent, most of the Foot being quartered there at present, but has
a very considerable Party in the field, which they call the flying Army,
consisting of three thousand horse, three thousand Irish Foot-boggers, and
fifteen hundred Dragoons; all which are well mounted and completely armed, men
resolute and well disciplined, and as many affirm, not inferior to the
greatest Sons of Chivalry in Europe; yet notwithstanding, the English renowned
Heroes has challenged them to a field, promising fair play, and to equallize
them in number; but they decline engagement, and will not fight them, unless
forced. We hear that the Lord Lieutenant is advanced with a considerable party
of horse and foot to Dundalk, and has besiegd the same threatening a storm, if
they do not speedily surrender; which they deny; the Lord Lieut. has as
stubborn an enemy to deal withal there, as at Tredah, some affirming that they
have made a desperate salley, and disputed a sharp conflict, in which many lost
their lives, but soon after the Lord Governor stormd a Fort, and at his
gaining thereof, took and killed above four hundred prisoners, 6 pieces of
Ordnance, 2 Cariages, great store of arms and ammunition.

The great Engineer Col. Ashton (its said) has studied a new stratagem of War,
for the taking off either leg or arm, the Engine runs upon three wheels, and is
to be planted both at Gates or Breaches upon any attempt or storm.

Imprimatur,

J. T.

FINIS.

