THE Preachers Plea: OR, A short Declaration, touching the sad condition of our
Clergy, in relation to the smalnesse of their maintenance, throughout the
Kingdom.

By WILLIAM TYPING. Esquire

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by W. WILSON, for Christopher Meredith, at the Sign of the
Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

THE Preachers Plea.
WE live in doubtful times; I fear a Cloud of blood hangs over us, as a
stream of blood has already ran round about us. Me thinks the frame of our
spirits, presage it; for we have had various dispensations of Gods dealings
with us. First, shewers of judgments, then gleams of mercy scattered in the
Land; yet the same temper lies still brooding

on our hearts. Punishments will not awaken us, blessings cannot melt us.
Perdidimus utilitatem calamitatis nostrae, miseri facti sumus, and pessimi
permanemus. What should God do with such a sinful people? We have been, and
will continue a stubborn generation. Is it not strange that in such a gracious
season as this, when such an inundatlon of loving kindness have broken in upon
us from the Lord, and he has helped us so miraculously in our pinching
necessities, far beyond what we could expect, or hope for. Yea, that now,
whilst his mercies are hot, and reaking in our memories, the work of our God
should so stick in our hands, and our begun Reformation move, like Pharaohs
Chariots when the Wheelos were off, with such a dull and slow progression. The
Lord grant our Preservations prove not reservations to greater judgments. I
fear, lest what Salvianus sighed our against another people, should prove our
fatal doom. Sopor infunditur ut perditio subsequatur. The Truth is, nothing,
gives beauty and gloss to our cause, but our glorious victories. Take us
abstracted from our happy successes, (and they are none of ours) and what
miserable Christians shall we appear. Was there ever any Christian Nation
under heaven, that after so many Covenants to reform, so many clear
demonstrations from heaven, of Gods acceptance of our Covenants, have yet
abounded in so many and various Sects, Schisms, Heresies, Blasphemies, and
that with so high a hand, and in so uncontrolable a way, as this out Nation.
Add to this, what a world of time has been crumbled away in debate on
Church Government; yet how little Progress is made therein? How far are we at
this day, from an establishment thereof throughout the Kingdom? Something
indeed has been concluded on by our Worthy Patriots, in order to the
Presbyterian way: but what is a branch to the Tree; what is this to the settling
of the whole body, and Bulk of a Church Government, and of Ecclesiastical
Discipline in the Realm; for want whereof, sin abounds, and many fearful
Transgressions go unpunished. And how does our unhappy Church (notwithstanding
this good hand of God upon us) lie still destitute, afflicted, disgraced,
impoverished, clothed with her old Rags, fed with her old maintenance,
served with her old Chaplains, having neither means nor Ministers serviceable
for any use almost, but to stand as Monuments of her shame. The consideration
whereof has (I must confess) very often, much sadded my heart; and at this
time pressed me to this Discourse. Surely, what ever men's hearts may desire,
their eyes shall never see able Ministers in our Church, until there be able
maintenance to encourage them: For Workmen will not be got without wages, nor
will the wages be any invitation to the work, if it be set forth as formerly,
in a base and despicable proportion. It Is true indeed, we have formerly had to
the scorn of our Church and Kingdom, and to the undoing of thousands of
souls, the lowest of the people for the serviee of Gods house. Ignorant and
contemptible persons through the corruption of this worser age, have been
advanced to the most honorable calling the world could yield. And from whence
proceeded this iniquity? why scandalous means ushered in scandalous men: ad
tenuitatem beneficiorum, sequebatur ignorantia sacerdotum. Poverty brought in
ignorance into the Church, and ignorance brought in scorn. For what eve men's
integrity and parts may be, a torn coat seldom finds reverence or regard
amonst the common sort of people; who for the most part measure out their
respect to their Pastors, not according to their inward abilites, but according
to their outward garb and greatness. The Parliaments frame the 27. of Henry
the 8. (who gave away impropriations from the Church, or did that which
amounted to the same) to this day, have (I fear) something to answer for, that
in so large a tract of time, have found out no expedient, whereby to reduce the
Patrimony of the Church into a competency.

It was but reason when they had taken away the jointure of the Church, to
assign some livelihood to maintain her. Truly want amongst all conditions of
men, is a very melancholy thing: but it must needs lie nearest the heart of a
laborious Pastor, because over and besides his own personal sufferings, the
honor of God is concerned therein. For let reason speak, is it not sin and
shame, that the servants of the most high God, who in a peculiar manner draw
nigh to him in the service of his Church, should be so coursly entertained, as
to have little better then Daniels dainties, to preserve them, or live like
poor Lazarus with the crumbs that fall from rich men's Tables. Certainly the
slighting of an Ambassador reflects upon the Sovereign, and the Mr. Takes
himself to be dishonored, when his servant is abused, or held in a base
esteem, and can we reasonably imagine the Lord of Heaven and Earth, who, when
he might justly have made us the reproach of all Nations for our sins, has
now so gloriously exalted us in the sight of men, will not take it unkindly,
yea in high indignation, if after all our endeavors in a blessed Reformation
we should look on his Ambassadors with a regardlesse eye? but I hope better
things. I trust the time is coming, and will hasten on, when burning and
shining lamps shall be set up in every corner of the Land, and oil enough
provided to keep them flaming. But till the second be brought to pass, I
expect not the first, until there be a tolerable subsistence provided in every
Parish, it is impossible there should be (what we have so long expected) a
constant faithful preaching Ministry throughout the Kingdom. Men may fancy
to themselves what they please, talk of Elders, debate on government; but
believe it, these things will never be brought into act and exercise, so as God
shall be glorified, and the people edified thereby, till this be done. This is
the hinge on which all must turn. I know not how the iniquity of the times have
brought it about, but so it is, God is not in credit among Christians as in
days of old. Nor has his servants and service (Pudet haec dici potuisse)
that reverend regard, which former age has given them.

Time was when men of honor and high Parentage, cheerfully devoted themselves
to the service of the Church, as Hilary, Easill, Fulgentius, and diverse others,
though Nobly borne, yet thought it there higher honor to make themselves
instrumental to the work of the Gospel. But alas as the means and fortunes of
the Church grew low, so devotion and affection to the service thereof declined
with them, and the encouragements to learning being taken away, men's spirits
were soon becalmed toward that way. I hope, I shall not here be offensive to
any in speaking for those, who blush to speak for themselves, and in pleading
for due honor to a despised calling.

I think it were a noble Christian policy; and now is the golden opportunity,
to set forth good preferment for this high and honorable employment, that
thereby men of the worthiest parts, and most exquisite endowments of nature and
learning, might be invited thereunto. The want whereof has been the cause
that such as have been of the darkest and dullest constitutions, and to whom
nature has been, some way or other an unkind Stepmother, and have bin thought
fit for nothing else, have formerly been condemned to this work. When as men
of the most refined wits and greatest hopes have been settled by their parents
and guardians, to other vocations, as in especial the Law, that being looked
on as a step to honor and dignity, but this reputed as a downright way to
beggary. Some there are, but I believe they are such as partake more of the
Serpent then of the Dove, who upon this change of Church Government, seem to
be very anxious, lest the Praelaticall power should only put on a new coat, as
it wear, and fashion, and retain his former pride and stateliness, under the
form of the Presbytery. Therefore cry out, keep them poor to restrain their
pride, raise not the winds that should fill their sails, for means will but
make them swell.

Thus wanton wits fall heavily upon the Ministers of the GOSPEL in these
censorious times, and praejudge them for their pride whereas God knows for the
present they stand in that despicable condition in diverse places, that they
scarce have clothes to cover them. Yet I dare be bold to say, never were there
any times since the foundation of the Gospel in this Kingdom, wherein the
people of this Land have been more engaged to their Pastors (I relate more
specially to this City) for their prayers, painfulnesse in preaching, and all
offices of Christian love and piety then in these our days. What ever unkind
blasts they lie under, sure I am, the right hand of the Lord has done
gloriously for us by their means, these are the Doves of the valley, which
have brought in more Victories by their cries and tears to heaven, then all
our armies by their strength, yet these are the men (as some calumniate) whom
no bonds are like to hold, no bounds to restrain, unless they be held in
with bit and bridle. But let men of this temper and condition speak as
smoothly as they please, and bring the most plausible arguments their wits can
devise, to cover their naughty hearts withal: yet shall I never believe he
loves a godly Minister that pleads to keep him low, or that he is soundly
good that swells at good men's greatness. If the Ministers of the Gospel be
good, its necessary they should be great, I mean that their maintenance be
raised to such an ample proportion, as should not only shelter them from
scorn, but adorn their Callings. The Priests and Levites under the Law, as
they drew nighest to God in regard of Office, and were next to his presence, in
regard of place (for they were by Gods express command to pitch their Tents
round about the Tabernacle) so also was the Lord pleased to make honorable
provision for them, by assigning the tenths and other liberal allowance for
their support. Now whether the tenths of all men's profits, do in these times,
as under the law, in duty appertain to the Ministers of the Gospel, I intend
not here to discuss. But sure I am, maintenance is their right, and the
dispensers of the Gospel are not inferior to the Ministers of the Law,
therefore Religion and reason suggests, they should have that proportion or a
better part, at least a sufficiency to buy books, keep Hospitality, and live
like Ministers in a reasonable condition.

It was well with Gods Ministers, when they were at Gods finding, as under the
Law; but we, alas, have strait Bowels, and close hands, and God knows, there
is too much of self in all our bosoms; (and that which checks our
forwardness, I fear in this particular is) we have too much of their Bread in
our own possessions. I beseech those whom this great business does most
properly concern, to lay their hands upon their hearts, and seriously consider
and consult, which way this Epidemicall sickness in the Church may be
removed. It would make a man's heart bleed, to see how many drunken, ignorant,
superstitious, Profane Ministers, are crept into every corner of the land,
more abundantly, (I think) in Oxfordshire, than in any County again in the
Kingdom: where (to the aggravation of this misery) they are in diverse places
on a sudden turned constant Preachers, which seldom or never preached
before; but yet continue Drunkards still. For the turn of the times has
frighted them into a form of Preaching, to save their livings; but are as
scandalous as ever in their lives: and surely till the baseness and poverty of
the provision set out for them be reformed, this mischief will not be capable
of redress. For you cannot cast unworthy Teachers out of the Church, until
you have introduced more worthy subsistence into the Church; if you do, you
may lock up the Church doors; for what men of any gifts will supply the
cures? It is co^puted that there are in the Kingdom nine thousand two hundred
Parish Churches, and upward, whereof near four thousand are impropriate
Churches. Besides many Parsonages are poor, and unable to give entertainment
to a godly and diligent teacher, as being abridged and spoiled under pretense
of long Leases, and rate Tithes, in stead of Tithes in kind. In some places,
ten pound, eight pound, six pound, five pound ten shillings, per annum, is the
Pastors entertainment for himself and family. This is better known in the
Country, then it is here laid to heart. Yea in this famous City, which God
has even miraculously preserved from the common calamity, as a little Zoar to
hide his righteous Lots in; how have we repayed the loving kindness of the
Lord? There are at this present (as I am very credibly informed) two and thirty
Parish Churches in this City, utterly destitute of any Pastors, to break the
bread of life to the people; and this defect is given in, chiefly to arise
from the scant and tenaceous subsistence which the places yield to the
respective Ministers thereof. To instance in Buttolph Aldersgate, where the
allowance for the Minister is but 16. l. per annum (saving 7. l. more, or
thereabouts, given by Edward the sixth, (very hardly paid,) and did not the
vicinity of of other Churches in this Populous City, hold forth some ease and
accommodation to supply the want of the deserted Churches aforesaid, the
Inhabitants there must necessarily have been reduced into as sad a strait as
those in the Country, who through the persecution of these times have lost
their Teachers.

Now if things must stand at this stay, what will become of us, and where shall
we see the fruit of our Reformation? We give God good words with our mouths,
but if we acknowledge him our Lord, where is his honor? Oh that we would sit
down a while, and reflect into our selves, forget our swelling thoughts, and
look a little back to the days of our Calamity. How did our Pulses beat three
years since, what Prayers, and Cries, and Tears did we then send up to
heaven, in that our low condition? and how did we then lift up our hands and
hearts to the most high God, and swear, and engage, that we would endeavor a
Reformation, as in Religion, so in Discipline and Government also: but what
Reformation in Religion and Government, are we or our Posterities like to joy
in, if no effectual care or course should be taken, (as yet I humbly conceive
it is not) for the advancement of godliness, and godly Preachers throughout
the Kingdom. But we thinks I hear some reply, there is no cause of this
complaint, for the Honorable houses of Parliament have already made provision
for augmentation of small livings out of Deane and Chapter Lands, and
Delinquent Impropriations. To this I humbly answer, that how plausible soever
this provision may seem at first sight, yet I suppose it will stand at a great
distance from a full supply. For the first of these, namely Dean and Chapter
Lands: These are in part already disposed of another way: as for instance, in
the County of Oxon, the Deane and Chapter in Christ-Church is comprehended
under the Articles for Oxford: And the Deane and Chapter at Westminster, and
that at Windsor, provision is made out of them still, (as I am credibly
informed) for diverse persons, that were settled in those houses, and had not
slewed any disaffection to the Cause. And this being agreeable to common equity
and justice, I believe the same rule is observed in all other such places also.
So that the Deane and Chapter Lands are not all disposed of, at least for the
present, to the said intended use.

Besides all this, diverse Counties there are in the Kingdom, which have no
Deane and Chapter peculiarly belonging to them: and where there are some small
Proportions of these Lands, lying scattered in several Counties, this is no
way considerable to so great a want. Now for Impropriations, since the benefit
that shall arise from them to this use, must issue only from those that are
settled in the hands of Delinquents, it cannot be conceived, that these should
hold forth any great benefit or succor to the Church: most of your
Impropriations doubtless being in the hands of Colleges, and Hospitalls or of
such persons as are well-affected to the Cause.

But that which is also a maine obstruction and Remora to this great Work, is,
(let it be supposed, but not granted) that these Provisions before specified,
could possibly raise the maintenance of the Church to some reasonable
Competencie: yet how shall the Remedy be applied? how, or by what means shall
it be transferred to those that want it? Will you suffer Malignant Parishes to
lie destitute of the means of their salvation, till they feel their misery,
and find hearts to complain above. Or can you imagine, that such Parishes, as
have for this twenty, thirty, forty years together been nusled up under an
unpreaching Ministry, will all on a sudden hunt about from one County to
another for Dean and Chapter Lands; or make inquisition after Delinquent
Impropriations, that out of them, or either of them, they may extract some
considerable sustenance for a godly Minister? Surely, you may as well suppose
the Pillars of a Church may hap to walk, or that dead bones will stir, or
that a man in a swoone will call for a Cordial, as conceive, that men of
unregenerate hearts, and that are alienated from the life of grace, through the
ignorance that is in them, will ever seek out for an able and sufficient
Pastor, and means for his support. Leave such poor souls to the unhappy
guidance of their own corrupt hearts, and do nothing for them, till
themselves complain, and then the Lord have mercy on them. Where Vision fails
the people must needs perish; but what will follow? surely it will fall heavy
somewhere in the end. Oh think of this, I beseech you, (I relate to those whom
this great business does most properly concern) for plainness is most
becoming in the Cause of God) think of this, whilst the LORD vouchsafes an
opportunity in your hands for th eredresse hereof, Ye cannot now suffer the
Laborers in Christ's Vineyard to be meanly provided for upon so cheap terms as
formerly: For these things now cry so much louder in the ears of God, by how
much your engagements have been deeper to reform them. Alas, do not your
hearts yearne, and the bowels of your compassions role within you, when you,
living here by an especial providence, under the droppings of heaven, under
the plentiful Preaching of the Word, do understand of the soule-afflictions of
your brethren in your respective Counties? How would they rejoice in some
places to glean after your Harvest? to hear one of those Sermons once in a
month, which you have, or might partake of, (if your leisure would permit)
every day. The Lord direct your spirits that ye may no less speedily than
carefully provide that due honor and reward be given to them that labor in
the Word and Doctrine: and that ye may not expose poor senseless souls to
everlasting ruin, by susspending your help, and leaving of them to seek for
that which they care not to find; nay, which they extremely decline, to wit
the means of their salvation; but that you would be pleased rather to command
the Committees of each County, to look into the state of the Ministry, and to
certify the defects in that particular.

And for the remedy of this great sicknessein the Land, the poverty of the
Clergy; I think there cannot be a more effectual expedient than the buying in
of Impropriations. I doubt not, but every man who has any thing of Christ in
him, his hand will be enlarged, and heart inflamed to so worthy a work.

And in truth, Free-willl Offerings are the most accepttable Sacrifices to God.
Where we give what is our own, and costs us something, surely is more pleasing
to the Almighty, then where we bestow that wherein we have no interest,
farther forth than as the iniquity of the times does cast it into our hands,
though that may come in to help also.

Add to this, that some comfort and encouragement would arise to the dejected
spirits of the poor Clergy in diverse parts of the Kingdom; if such Vicarages
and Parsonages as are exceeding small, as fifty pound per annum, or under,
might be freed in these pinching times, from having any Contributions or
Quarterings laid upon them. And here (although it may seem a digression from
the business in hand) yet I cannot but vent my troubled thoughts for the
spiritual bondage and affliction this whole Nation in all the parts thereof,
groans under in these distempered times, for want of that care and conscience
should be had, to instruct the ignorant in the maine grounds and principles of
Religion. Catechizing is now grown almost quite out of use amongst us. Hence
it is, so many strange, abhorred unheard of opinions have lately sprung up in
diverse quarters of the Land; for men's fancies are busy things, and will set
themselves on work where they are not wrought on; and where the understanding
is left like fallow ground until'd, and has no seeds of Gods word cast into
it, no marvel if the Devil sow his tares O that the Honorable Houses of
Parliament would be pleased to take this into their deep and serious
consideration, that some Directory for Catechizing may speedily be sent into
all Churches of the Kingdom, lest in the room of formality and superstition,
(for the purging out whereof such care is taken) Atheism and palpable
profaneness creep not in amongst them. I say no more, he that is wise will
ponder these things, and the man of understanding will lay them to heart.

FINIS.

