THE REAL PRESENCE AND Spiritual OF CHRIST IN THE Blessed Sacrament PROVED
Against the DOCTRINE of TRANSUBSTANTIATION.

By Jer. Tailor, D. D.

Oportuit enim certe ut non solum anima per Spiritum Sanctum in beatam vitam
ascenderet, verumetiam ut rude, atque terrestre hoc corpus cognato sibi gustu,
tactu, and cibo ad immortalitatem reduceretur. S. Cyril. in Joh. l. 4. c. 14.
Literam sequi, and signa pro rebus accipere servilis infirmitatis est. S.
August. l. 3. de doct. Christ. LONDON, Printed by James Flesher, for Richard
Royston at Angel in Ivie-lane. 1654.

To the R. R. D. WARNER L. B. R.
Right Reverend Father,
I Am against my Resolution and proper disposition by the overruling power of
the divine providence which wisely disposes all things, accidentally engaged in
the Question of Transubstantiation, which has already so many times passed by
the Fire and under the Saw of Contention: that it might seem, nothing could
remain which had not been already considered, and sifted to the bran. I had
been by chance engaged in a conference with a person of another persuasion, the
man not unlearned nor unwary, but much more confident then I perceived the
strength of his argument could warrant; and yet he had some few of the best
which their Schools did furnish out and ordinarily minister to their (...),
their Emissaries and ministers of temptation to our people. I then began to
consider whether there we not much more in the secret of the Question which
might not have persuaded him more fiercely then I could then see cause for, or
others at least, from whom upon the strength of education he might have derived
his confidence; and searching into all the secrets of it, I found infinite
reason to reprove the boldness of those men, who in the sum of affairs and
upon examination will be found to think men damned, if they will not speak
nonsense, and disbelieve their eyes and ears, and defy their own reason, and
recede from antiquity, and believe them in whatsoever they dream, or list to
obtrude upon the world who has been too long credulous, or it could never have
suffered such a proposition to be believed by so many men against all the
demonstration in the world. And certainly, it is no small matter of wonder,
that those men of the Roman Church should pretend learning, and yet rest their
new articles of faith upon propositions against all learning; that they should
engage their scholars to read and believe Aristotle, and yet destroy his
philosophy, and reason by their article; that they should think all the world
fools but themselves, and yet talk and preach such things which if men had
spoken before this new device arose, they would have been thought mad. But if
these men had by chance or interest fallen upon the other opinion which we
maintain against them, they would have filled the world with declamations
against the impossible propositions and the (...) of their adversaries; They
would have called us dunces, idiots, men without souls, without philosophy,
without Sense, without Reason, without Logic, destroyers of the very first
notions of mankind. But now that they are engaged upon the impossible side,
they proceed with a prodigious boldness, and seem to wonder that mankind does
not receive from them all their first principles and credit the wildness and
new notions of their Cataphysicks (for Metaphysics it is not) their
affirmatives and negatives are neither natural, nor above, nor besides nature,
but against it in those first principles which are primely credible. For that I
may use S. Austins words: Nemo enim huic evidentiae contradicet, nisi quem plus
defensare delectat quod sentit, quam quid sentiendum sit invenire. But I see it
is possible for a man to believe any thing that he has a mind to; and this to
me seems to have been permitted to reprove the vanity of man's imagination, and
the confidence of opinion, to make us humble, apt to learn, inquisitive, and
charitable: for if it be possible for so great a company of men of all sorts
and capacities to believe such impossible things and to wonder that others do
not eandem insaniam insanire, it will concern the wisest man alive, to be
inquisitive in the articles of his fierce persuasion, to be diligent in his
search, modest in his sentences, to prejudge no man, to reprove the adversaries
with meekness, and a spirit conscious of humane weakness and aptness to be
abused. But if we remember that Pere Coton Confessor to Henry the IV. of France
was wont to say, that he could do any thing when he had his God in his hand and
his King at his feet, meaning him at confession, and the other in effigy of
the Crucifix or in the Host, we may well perceive that they are not such fools
but they will consider the advantages that come to their persons and calling,
if they can be supposed to make, with pronouncing four words, bread to become
God. Upon the reputation of this great thing the Priests were exempt from from
secular Jurisdiction, and violence, in the Council in Dalmatia held by the
Legates of Pope Innocent the third A. D. 1199. Can. 5. upon this account Pope
Urban the second in a Council which he held at Rome (1097) against the Emperor
Henry the fourth, took from secular Princes the investiture of Benefices, and
advanced the Clergy above Kings, because their hands create God their Creator,
as Simeon Dunelmensis reports Lib. 2. Chron. apud Vigner. Hist. Eccles. And the
same horrible words are used in the famous book called Stella Clericorum: where
the Priest is called the creator of his Creator; and thence also infers his
privilege and immunity from being condemned. I will not with any envy and
reproach object to them that saying of a Bohemian Priest against which John Hus
wrote a book on purpose, that before the Priest said his first Mass, he was but
the son of God, but afterward he was the Father of God, and the Creator of his
body; It was a rude kind of blasphemy, but not much more then that which their
severest men do say, and were never corrected by their expurgatory indices, and
is to be seen in Biel on Canon of the Mass, Lection. 4. and Pere de Besse in
his Royal Priesthood; l. 1. c. 3. where the Priest upon the stock of his power
is advanced above Angels, and the blessed Virgin her self; which is the biggest
expression which they can devise, unless they advance him above God himself.
The consequent of this is a double honor, that is, an honor and maintenance
in such a manner as may serve the design of ambition, and fill the belly of
covetousness.

This was enough to make them willing to introduce it, and (as to them) the
wonder ceases, but it is strange the world could receive it; For though men
might be willing to believe a thing that would make for their profit and
reputation, yet that they should entertain it to their prejudice, as the other
part must do, that at so great a price, and with so great a diminution of their
rights, they should suffer themselves to be cousen'd of their reason, is the
stranger thing of the two. But to this also, there were many concurrent causes;
For, 1. This doctrine entered upon the world in the most barbarous, most
ignorant, and most vicious ages of the world; for we know when it began, by
what steps and progressions it prevailed, and by what instruments. It began in
the ninth age, and in the tenth was suckled with little arguments and imperfect
pleadings, in the eleventh it grew up with illusions and pretense of miracles,
and was christened and confirmed in the twelfth, and afterward lived upon
blood, and craft, and violence; But when it was disputed by Paschasius Ratbert
the Deacon in the 9th Century, the first collateral device by which they
attempted to set up their fancy was to devise miracles, which we find done
accordingly in the same Paschasius telling a tale of Plegilus seeing upon the
altar a babe like that which was pictured in the arms of Simeon: in Joannes
Diaconus telling a story of something in the days of S. Gregory the great, but
never told by any before him, viz. in the year 873, that is 270 years after the
death of S. Gregory; and extracted from the Archives of Rome or Italy out of
England, where it seems they could better tell what so long before done at
Rome, by Damianus in the year 1060 who tells two more; by Guitmond writing
against Berengarius out of the Vitae P P. by Lanfranck, who served his end upon
the report of strange apparitions, and from him Alexander of Hales also tells a
pretty tale. For they then observed that the common people did not only then
believe all reports of miracles, but desired them passionately, and with them
would swallow any thing; But how vainly and falsely the world was then abused,
we need no greater witness then the learned bishop of the Canaries, Melchier
Canus. And yet even one of these authors, though possible apt enough to credit
or report any such fine device, for the promotion of his new opinion, yet it is
vehemently suspected, that even the tale which was reported out of Paschasius,
was a long time after his death thrust in by some Monk in a place to which it
relates not, and which without that tale would be more united and more
coherent: and yet if this and the other miracles pretended, had not been
illusions or directly fabulous, it had made very much against the present
doctrine of the Roman Church, for they represent the body in such manner as by
their explications it is not, and it cannot be: they represent it broken, a
finger or a piece of flesh or bloody or bleeding, or in the form of an infant;
and then when it is in the species of bread; for if as they say Christ's body is
present no longer then the form of bread remained, how can it be Christ's body
in the miracle, when the species being gone it is no longer a Sacrament? But
the dull inventors of miracles in those ages, considered nothing of this; the
article it self was then gross and rude, and so were the instruments of
probation. I noted this, not only to show at what door so incredible a
persuasion entered, but that the zeal of prevailing in it has so blinded the
refiners of it in this age, that they still urge these miracles for proof, when
if they do any thing at all, they reprove the present doctrine.

But besides this device, they enticed the people forward by institution of the
solemn feast of Corpus Christi day, entertained their fancies by solemn and
pompous processions and rewarded their worshippings and attendances on the
blessed Sacrament with indulgences granted by Pope Urban the 4th inserted in
the Clementines and enlarged by John the 22d and Martin the 5th, and for their
worshipping of the consecrated water they had authentic precedents, even the
example of Bonaventure's Lamb, S. Francis his Mule, S. Anthony of Padoa's Ass;
and if these things were not enough to persuade the People to all this matter,
they must needs have weak hearts, and hard heads; and because they met with
opponents at all hands, they proceeded to a more vigorous way of arguing: they
armed legions against their adversaries, they confuted at one time in the Town
of Beziers 60000 persons, and in one battle disputed so prosperously and
acutely, that they killed about 10000 men that were Sacramentaries: and this
Bellarmine gives as an instance of the marks of his Church; This way of arguing
was used in almost all the countries of Christendom, till by Crusado's
massacres and battles, burnings and the constant Carnificia, and butchery of
the inquisition, which is the main prop of the Papacy, and does more then Tu^es
Petrus, they prevailed far and near; and men durst not oppose the evidence
whereby they fought. And now the wonder is out, it is not strange that the
article has been so readily entertained. But in the Greek Churches it could
not prevail, as appears not only in Cyrils book of late, dogmatically
affirming the article in our sense, but in the answer of Cardinal Humbert to
Nicetas who maintained the receiving the holy Sacrament does break the fast,
which it could not do if it were not, when it seems, bread and wine, as well as
what we believe it to be, the body and blood of Christ.

And now in prosecution of their strange improbable success they proceed to
persuade all People that they are fools, and do not know the measures of sense,
nor understand the words of Scripture, nor can tell when any of the Fathers
speak affirmatively or negatively; and after many attempts made by diverse
unprosperously enough (as the thing did constrain and urge them) a great wit
Cardinal Perron has undertaken the Qu. and has spun his thread so fine and
twisted it so intricately, and adorned it so sprucely with language and
sophismes, that although he connot resist the evidence of truth, yet he is too
subtle for most men's discerning; and though he has been contested by potent
adversaries, and wise men, in a better cause then his own, yet he will always
make his reader believe that he prevails; which puts me in mind of what
Thucydides told Archidamus the King of Sparta as king him whether he or
Pericles were the better wrastler? he told him that when he threw Pericles on
his back he would with fine words persuade the people that he was not down at
all, and so he got the better. So does he; and is to all considering men a
great argument of the danger that articles of religion are in, and consequently
men's persuasions, and final interest, when they fall into the hands of a witty
man and a sophister, and one who is resolved to prevail by all means. But truth
is stronger then wit, and can endure when the other cannot, and I hope, it will
appear so in this Qu. which although it is managed by weak hands, that is, by
mine, yet to all impartial persons it must be certain and prevailing upon the
stock of his own sincerity and derivation from God.

And now (R. R.) though this Qu. has so often been disputed and some things so
often said, yet I was willing to bring it once more upon the stage, hoping to
add some clearness to it, and by fitting it with a good instrument, and clear
conveyance, and representment, by saying something new, and very many which are
not generally known, and less generally noted; and I thought there was a
present necessity of it, because the Emissaries of the Church of Rome are busy
now to disturb the peace of consciences by troubling the persecuted, and
injecting scruples into the unfortunate, who suspect every thing, and being
weary of all, are most ready to change from the present. They have got a trick
to ask, where is our Church now! what is become of your articles, of your
religion? We cannot answer them as they can be answered; for nothing satisfies
them, but being prosperous, and that we cannot pretend to, but upon the
accounts of the Cross, and so we may indeed rejoice and be exceeding glad,
because we hope that great is our reward in heaven. But although they are
pleased to use an argument that like Jonas Gourd or Sparagus is in season only
at some times, yet we according to the nature of truth, inquire after the truth
of their religion upon the account of proper and theological objections; Our
Church may be a beloved Church and dear to God though she be persecuted when
theirs is in an evil condition by obtruding upon the Christian world articles
of religion against all that which ought to be the instruments of credibility
and persuasion, by distorting and abusing the Sacraments, by making error to be
an art, and that a man must be witty to make himself capable of being abused,
by out-facing all sense and reason, by damning their brethren for not making
their understanding servile and sottish, by burning them they can get, and
cursing them that they cannot get, by doing so much violence to their own
reasons, and forcing themselves to believe that no man ever spoke against their
new device, by making a prodigious error to be necessary to salvation, as if
they were Lords of the Faith of Christendom.

But these men are grown to that strange triumphal gayety upon their joy that
the Church of England as they think is destroyed, that they tread upon her
grave which themselves have dug for her who lives and pities them; and they
wonder that any man should speak in her behalf, and suppose men do it out of
spite and indignation, and call the duty of her sons who are by persecution
made more confident, pious, and zealous in defending those truths for which she
suffers on all hands, by the name of anger, and suspect it of malicious, vile
purposes, I wondered when I saw something of this folly in one that was her son
once, but is run away from her sorrow, and disinherited himself because she was
not able to give him a temporal portion, and thinks he has found out reasons
enough to depart from the miserable. I will not trouble him or so much as name
him, because if his words are as noted as they are public every good man will
scorn them, if they be private I am not willing to publish his shame, but leave
him to consideration and repentance; But for our dear afflicted Mother she is
under the portion of a child, in the state of discipline, her government indeed
hindered, but her worshippings the same, the articles as true and those of the
Church of Rome as false as ever, of which I hope the following book will be one
great instance. But I wish that all tempted persons would consider the
illogical deductions by which these men would impose upon their consciences; If
the Church of England be destroyed, then Transubstantiation is true; which
indeed had concluded well if that article had been only pretended false,
because the Church of England was prosperous. But put case the Turk should
invade Italy, and set up the Alcoran in S. Peter's Church, would it be endured
that we should conclude, that Rome was Antichristian because her temporal glory
is defaced? The Apostle in this case argued otherwise; The Church of the Jews
was cut off for their sins; be not highminded o ye Gentiles, but fear lest he
also cut thee off; it was counsel given to the Romans. But though (blessed be
God) our afflictions are great, yet we can, and do enjoy the same religion as
the good Christians in the first three hundred years did theirs; we can serve
God in our houses, and sometimes in Churches; and our faith which was not built
upon temporal foundations, cannot be shaken by the convulsions of war and the
changes of state. But they who make our afflictions an objection against us,
unless they have a promise that they shall never be afflicted, might do weil
to remember, that if they ever fall into trouble they have nothing left to
represent or make their condition tolerable; for by pretending, religion is
destroyed when it is persecuted they take away all that which can support their
own Spirits and sweeten persecution: However, let our Church be where it
pleases God it shall, it is certain that Transubstantiation is an evil
doctrine, false and dangerous and I know not any Church in Christendom which
has any article more impossible or apt to render the Communion dangerous, then
this in the Church of Rome: and since they command us to believe all or will
accept none, I hope the just reproof of this one will establish the minds of
those who can be tempted to communicate with them in others. I have now given
account of the reasons of my present engagement; and though it may be enquired
also why I presented it to you, I fear I shall not give so perfect an account
of it; because those excellent reasons which invited me to this signification
of my gratitude, are such which although they ought to be made public, yet I
know not whether your humility will permit it: for you had rather oblige others
then be noted by them. Your predecessor in the Sea of Rochester, who was almost
a Cardinal when he was almost dead, did publicly in those evil times appear
against the truth defended in this book, and yet he was more moderate and
better tempered then the rest: but because God has put the truth into the
hearts and mouths of his successors, it is not improper that to you should be
offered the opportunities of owning that which is the belief and honor of that
See, since the religion was reformed. But lest it be thought that this is an
excuse, rather then a reason of my address to you, I must crave pardon of your
humility, and serve the end of glorification of God in it, by acknowledging
publicly that you have assisted my condition by the emanations of that grace
which is the Crown of Marytyrdome: expending the remains of your lessened
fortunes, and increasing charity, upon your brethren who are dear to you not
only by the band of the same Ministry, but the fellowship of the same
sufferings. But indeed the cause in which these papers are engaged, is such
that it ought to be owned by them that can best defend it; and since the
defense is not with secular arts and aids, but by Spiritual; the diminution of
your outward circumstances cannot render you a person unfit to patronize this
Book, because where I fail, your wisdom learning, and experience can supply,
and therefore if you will pardon my drawing your name from the privacy of your
retirement into a public view: you will singularly oblige and increase those
favors by which you have already endeared the thankfulness and service of

R. R. Your most affectionate and endeared servant in the Lord Jesus JER.
TAILOR.

The Contents.
SECT. I. State of the Question. Page 1 SECT. II. Transubstantiation not
warrantable by Scripture. p. 22 SECT. III. Of the sixth Chapter of Saint John's
Gospel. p. 28 SECT. IV. Of the words of Institution. p. 65 SECT. V. Hoc, This.
p. 78 SECT. VI. Est corpus meum. p. 107 SECT. VII. Considerations of the manner
and circumstances and annexes of the Institution. p. 124 SECT. VIII. Of the
arguments of the Romanists from Scripture. p. 140 SECT. IX. Arguments from
other Scriptures, proving Christ's real presence in the Sacrament, to be only
Spiritual, not Natural. p. 146 SECT. X. The doctrine of Transubstantiation is
against sense. p. 163 SECT. XI. The doctrine of Transubstantiation is wholly
without and against reason. p. 189 SECT. XII. Transubstantiation was not the
doctrine of the Primitive Church. p. 264 SECT. XIII. Of adoration of the
Sacrament. p. 333
A DISCOURSE OF THE REAL PRESENCE OF CHRIST In the Holy Sacrament.
SECT. I. State of the Question.
THe tree of Knowledge became the tree of Death to us, And yet if men would but
do reason, there were in all religion no article which might more easily
excuse us from meddling with questions about it, then this of the holy
Sacrament. For as the man in Phadrus, that being asked what he carried hidden
under his Cloak, Answered, it was hidden under his Cloak: meaning that he would
not have hidden it, but that he intended it should be secret: so we may say in
this mystery to them that curiously ask, what, or how it is? Mysterium est; it
is a Sacrament, and a Mystery: by sensible instruments it consigns spiritual
graces; by the creatures it brings us to God; by the body it ministers to the
spirit. And that things of this nature are undiscernible secrets, we may learn
by the experience of those men who have in cases not unlike vainly labored to
tell us, how the material fire of hell should torment an immaterial soul, and
how baptismal water should cleanse the spirit, and how a Sacrament should
nourish a body, and make it sure of the resurrection.

It was happy with Christendom, curiously; and there was peace in this article
for almost a thousand years together, and yet that Transubstantiation was not
determined, I hope to make very evident; In synaxitransubstantiatione^ sero
definivit ecclesia; diu satis erat credere, sive sub pane consecrato, sive
quocunque modo adesse verum corpus Christi, so said the great Erasmus. 1 Cor.
c. 7.
It was late before the Church defined Transubstantiation; for a long time
together it did suffice to believe, that the true body of Christ was present,
whether under the consecrated bread or any other way: so the thing was
believed, the manner was not stood upon. And it is a famous saying of Durandus,
Verbum audimus, Neand. synops. Chron. pa. 203.
motum sentimus, modum nescimus, praesentiam credimus. We hear the Word, we
perceive the Motion, we know not the Manner, but we believe the presence: and
Ferus, In Mat. 26 Biblioth. Sixth. Senensis l. 4. tit. Johannes Ferus.
of whom Sixtus Senensis affirms that he was vir nobiliter doctus, pius and
eruditus, has these words: Cum certum sit ibi esse corpus Christi, quid opus
est disputare, number panis substantia maneat, vel non? When it is certain that
Christ's body is there, what need we dispute whether the substance of bread
remain or no? Tonstal de Eucharist. l. 1. pa. 46.
and therefore Cutbert Tonstal Bishop of Duresme would have every one left to
his conjecture, concerning the manner. De modo quo id fieret satius erat
curiosum quemque relinquere suae conjecturae, sicut liberum fuit ante Concilium
Lateranum. Before the Lateran council, it was free for every one to opine as
they please, and it were better it were so now. Cyrill in Joh. l. 4. c. 13.
But S. Cyril would not allow so much liberty; not that he would have the
manner determined, but not so much as thought upon. Firmam fidem mysteriis
adhibentes, nunquam in tam sublimibus rebus, illud [Quomodo] aut cogitemus aut
proferamus. For if we go about to think it or understand it, we lose ourlabour.
Quomodo enim id siat, ne in mente intelligere, nec lingua dicere possumus, sed
silentio and firma fide id suscipimus: we can perceive the thing by faith, but
cannot express it in words, Epist. 77.
nor understand it with our mind, said S. Bernard. Oportet igitur (it is at
last after the steps of the former progress come to be a duty) nos in
sumptionibus Divinorum mysteriorum, indubitatam retinere fidem, and non
quaerere quo pacto. The sum is this; The manner was defined but very lately;
there is no need at all to dispute it; no advantages by it, and therefore it
were better it were left at liberty, to every man to think as he please; for so
it was in the Church for above a thousand years together; and yet it were
better men would not at all trouble themselves concerning it, for it is a thing
impossible to be understood; and therefore it is not fit to be inquired after.
This was their sense: and I suppose we do in no sense prevaricate their so
pious and prudent counsel by saying, the presence of Christ is real and
spiritual; because this account does still leave the article in his deepest
mystery: not only because spiritual formalities and perfections are
undiscernible and incommensurable by natural proportions and the measures of
our usual notices of things, but also because the word spiritual is so general
a term, and the operations so various and many by which the Spirit of God
brings his purposes to pass, and does his work upon the soul, that we are in
this specific term very far from limiting the article to a minute and special
manner. Our word of spiritual presence is particular in nothing, but that it
excludes the corporal and natural manner; we say it is not this, but it is to
be understood figuratively, that is, not naturally, but to the purposes and in
the manner of the Spirit and spiritual things; which how they operate or are
effected, we know no more then we know how a Cherubin sings or thinks, or by
what private conveyances a lost notion returns suddenly into our memory and
stands placed in the eye of reason. Christ is present spiritually, that is by
effect and blessing; which in true speaking is rather the consequent of his
presence, then the formality. For though we are taught and feel that, yet this
we profess we cannot understand; and therefore curiously inquire not. (...),
said Justin Martyr, it is a manifest argument of infidelity to inquire
concerning the things of God, How, or after what manner? And in this it was
that many of the Fathers of the Church laid their hands upon their mouths, and
revered the mystery, but like the remains of the sacrifice, they burnt it; that
is, as themselves expound the allegory, it was to be adored by Faith, and not
to be discussed with reason; knowing that, as Solomon said, Scrutator
Majestatis opprimetur a gloria. He that pries too far into the Majesty, shall
be confounded with the Glory.

So far it was very well; Majesty and Secrecy indiscriminately mixed together,
we had kneeled before the same Altars, and adored the same mystery, and
communicated in the same rites, to this day. For in the thing it self there is
no difference amongst wise and sober persons, nor ever was till the manner
became an article, and declared or supposed to be of the substance of the
thing. But now the state of the question is this.

The doctrine of the Church of England, ritely prayed, and blessed or
consecrated the bread and the wine, the symboles become changed into the body
and blood of Christ, after a Sacramental, that is, in a spiritual, real manner:
so that all that worthily communicate, do by faith receive Christ really,
effectually, to all the purposes of his passion: The wicked receive not Christ,
but the bare symboles only; but yet to their hurt, Dum enim sacramenta
violantur, ipse cujus sunt sacramenta violatur, S. Hieron. in 1 Mala.
because the offer of Christ is rejected, and they pollute the blood of the
Covenant, by using it as an unholy thing. The result of which doctrine is this:
It is bread, and it is Christ's body. It is bread in substance, Christ in the
Sacrament; and Christ is as really given to all that are truly disposed, as
the symboles are; each as they can; Christ as Christ can be given; the bread
and wine as they can; and to the same real purposes, to which they are
designed; and Christ does as really nourish and fanctifie the soul, as the
elements do the body. It is here as in the other Sacrament; for as, there,
natural water becomes the laver of regeneration; so, here, bread and wine
become the body, and blood of Christ; but there and here too, the first
substance is changed by grace, but remains the same in nature.

That this is the doctrine of the Church of England, to be [The body and blood
of Christ which are verily and indeed taken and received of the faithful in the
Lords Supper;] and the benefit of it to be, the strengthening and refreshing of
our souls by the body and blood of Christ, as our bodies are by the bread and
wine: and the same is repeated severally in the exhortation, and in the prayer
of the address before the consecration, in the Canon of our Communion; verily
and indeed is reipsa, that is really enough; that is our sense of the real
presence; and Calvin affirms as much, saying, Li. 4. Inst. c. 7.. 32.
In the Supper Christ Jesus, viz. his body and blood, is truly given under the
signs of bread and wine. De Missae Sacrific.
And Gregory de Valentia gives this account of the doctrine of the Protestants,
that although Christ be corporally in heaven, yet is he received of the
faithful communicants in this Sacrament truly, both spiritually by the mouth of
the mind, through a most near conjunction of Christ with the soul of the
receiver by faith, and also sacramentally with the bodily mouth etc. And which
is the greatest testimony of all, we who best know our own minds, declare it to
be so.

Now that the spiritual is also a real presence, and that they are hugely
consistent, real graces, and a Spirit is a proper substance: and (...) are
amongst the Hellenists (...), intelligible things, or things discerned by the
mind of a man are more truly and really such, and of a more excellent substance
and reality, then things only sensible. And therefore when things spiritual
are signified by materials, the thing under the figure is called true, and the
material part is opposed to it, as less true or real. The examples of this are
not infrequent in Scripture [The Tabernacle] into which the high Priest entered,
was a type or figure of heaven. Heaven it self is called (...), the true
Tabernacle, Heb. 8.2.
and yet the other was the material part. And when they are joined together,
that is, when a thing is expressed by a figure [(...), True] is spoken of such
things though they are spoken figuratively: 1 John 2.^.
Christ the true light that lightneth every man that comes into the world; He
is also the true vine, Joh. 15.1. Joh. 6.55. 6.32.
and vere cibus truly or really meat, and Panis verus e coelo the true bread
from Heaven; and spiritual goods are called the true riches: Luke 16.12
and in the same Analogy, the spiritual presence of Christ is the most true,
real, and effective; the other can be but the image and shadow of it, something
in order to this: for if it were in the Sacrament naturally or corporeally, it
could be but in order to this spiritual, celestial and effective presence, as
appears beyond exception in this; that the faithful and pious communicants
receive the ultimate end of his presence, Council. Trident. sess. 4. sub Julio
3. 1551. Can. 8.
that is, spiritual blessings; The wicked (who by the affirmation of the Roman
Doctors do receive Christ's body and blood in the natural and corporal manner)
fall short of that for which this is given, that is, of the blessings and
benefits.

So that (as saint Paul said) He is not a Jew, Romans 2.28
(...), and (...), that is the real Jew, and the true circumcision that which is
of the heart, and in the spirit; and in this sense it is that Nathanael is said
to be (...), Joh. 1.47.
really and truly an Israelite: so we may say of the blessed Sacrament, Christ
is more truly and really present in spiritual presence, then in corporal, in
the heavenly effect, then in the natural being; this if it were at all, can be
but the less perfect, and therefore we are to the most real purposes, and in
the proper sense of Scripture the more real defenders of the real presence of
Christ in the Sacrament; for the spiritual sense is the most real, and most
true, and most agreeable to the Analogy and style of Scripture, and right
reason, and common manner of speaking. For every degree of excellency is a
degree of being, of reality, and truth: and therefore spiritual things, being
more excellent then corporal and natural, have the advantage both in truth and
reality. And this is fully the sense of the Christians who use the Egyptian
Liturgy. Sanctifica nos Domine noster, sicut sanctificasti has oblationes
propositas, sed fecisti illas non sictas, (that is for real,) and quicquid
apparet est mysterium tuum spiritale, (that is for spiritual.) To all which I
add the testimony of Bellarmine concerning Saint Austin, Apud Augustinum
saepissime, Li. 1. Eucha. c. 14. respondeo apud.
illud solum dici tale, and vere tale, quod habet effectum suum conjunctum: res
enim ex fructu aestimatur: itaque illos dicit vere comedere corpus Christi, qui
utiliter comedunt: They only truly eat Christ's body that eat it with effect;
for then a thing is really or truly such, when it is not to no purpose; when it
has his effect. And in his eleventh Book against Faustus the Manichee, Chap.
7. he shows, that in Scripture the words are often so taken, as to signify,
not the substance, but the and effect of a thing. So when it is said, Flesh and
blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, that is, corruption shall not
inherit: and in the resurrection our bodies are said to be spiritual, that is,
not in substance, but in effect and operation: and in the same manner, he often
speaks concerning the blessed Sacrament; and Clemens Romanus affirms
expressly, (...). This is to drink the blood of Jesus, to partake of the Lords
immortality.

This may suffice for the word [real] which the English Papists much use,
England: and when the real presence is denied, the word real is taken for
Natural; and does not signify transcendenter, or in his just and most proper
signification. But the word substantialiter is also used by Protestants in this
question: which I suppose may be the same with that which is in the article of
Trent; Decretum de SS. Euchar. Sacra. Can. 1.
Sacramentaliter praesens Salvator substantia sua nobis adest, In substance,
but after a sacramental manner: which words if they might be understood in the
sense in which the Protestants use them, that is, really, truly, without
fiction or the help of fancy, but in rei veritate, so, as Philo calls spiritual
things (...), most necessary, useful and material substances, it might become
an instrument of an united confession; And this is the manner of speaking which
S. Bernard used in his Sermon of S. Martin, where he affirms, in sacramento
exhiberi nobis veram carnis substantiam, sed spiritualiter, non carnaliter; In
the Sacrament is given us the true substance of Christ's body or flesh, but not
carnally, but spiritually; that is, not to our mouths, but to our hearts, not
to be chewed by teeth, but to be eaten by faith. But they mean it otherwise, as
I shall demonstrate by and by. In the mean time it is remarkable that
Bellarmine when he is stating this question, seems to say the same thing, for
which he quotes the words of S. Bernard now mentioned; L 1. Euchar. c. 2. Reg.
3.
for he says, that Christ's body is there truly, substantially, really; but not
corporally; Nay you may say spiritually: and now a man would think we had him
sure; but his nature is labile and slippery, you are never the nearer for this;
for first he says, it is not safe to use the word spiritually, nor yet safe to
say, he is not there corporally, lest it be understood not of the manner of his
presence, but to the exclusion of the nature. For he intends not (for all these
fine words) that Christ's body is present spiritually, as the word is used in
Scripture, and in all common notices of usual speaking; but spiritually, with
him signifies after the manner of spirits, which, besides that it is a
cousening the world in the manner of expression, is also a direct folly and
contradiction, that a body should be substantially present, that is, with the
nature of a body, naturally, and yet be not as a body but as a spirit, with
that manner of being with which a spirit is distinguished from a body. In vain
therefore it is that he denies the carnal manner, and admits a spiritual, and
ever after requires that we believe a carnal presence, even in the very manner.
But this caution and exactness in the use of the word [spiritual] is therefore
carefully to be observed, lest the contention of both parties should seem
trifling and to be for nothing. We say that Christ's body is in the Sacrament
really, but spiritually. They say it is there really, but spiritually. For so
Bellarmine is bold to say, that the word may be allowed in this question. Where
now is the difference? Here, by [spiritually] they mean present after the
manner of a spirit; by [spiritually] we mean, present to our spirits only;
that is, so as Christ is not present to any other sense but that of faith, or
spiritual susception; but their way makes his body to be present no way but
that which is impossible and implies a contradiction; a body not after the
manner of a body, a body like a spirit; a body without a body; and a sacrifice
of body and blood, without blood: corpus incorporeum, cruor incruentus. They
say that Christ's body is truly present there as it was upon the Cross, but not
after the manner of all or any body, but after that manner of being as an Angel
is in a place. That Is their spiritually. But we by the real spiritual presence
of Christ do understand, Christ to be present, as the Spirit of God is present
in the hearts of the Faithful, by blessing and grace; and this is all which we
mean besides the tropical and figurative presence.

That which seems of hardest explication is the word corporaliter, Melanchthon
used; saying, corporaliter quoque communicatione carnis Christi Christum in
nobis habitare; which manner of speaking I have heard he avoided after he had
conversed with Oecolampadius, who was able then to teach him, and most men in
that question; but the expression may become warrantable, and consonant to our
doctrine; and means no more then really and without fiction, or beyond a
figure: like that of Saint Paul, Col. 2.9.
[in Christ] dwells the fullness of the God head bodily: upon which S. Austin
says, Col. 2.17.
In ipso inhabitat plenitudo Divinitatis corpor aliter, quia in Templo
habitaver at umbr aliter; and in Saint Paul (...) are opposed, which are a
shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ, that is, the substance,
the reality, the correlative of the type and figure, the thing signified: and
among the Greeks (...) signifies solidare, to make firm, real and consistent,
but among the Fathers, (...) or body signifies (...), every thing that is
produced from nothing, says Phavorinus; that is, every thing that is real
extra non ens, that has a proper being; so that we receiving Christ in the
Sacrament corporally or bodily, understand that we do it really, by the
ministry of our bodies receiving him unto our souls. And thus we affirm
Christ's body to be present in the Sacrament: not only in type or figure, but
in blessing and real effect; that is, more then in the types of the Law; the
shadows were of the Law, Col. 2.17.
but the body is of Christ. And besides this; the word corporally may be very
well used when by it is only understood a corporal sign. So S. Cyril of
Jerusalem in his third Catechism, says that the holy Ghost did descend
corporally in the likeness of a Dove, that is, in a type or representment of a
Doves body, (for so he and many of the Ancients did suppose) and so he Dial de
incar. unig.
again uses the word; Jesus Christ as a man did inspire the holy Spirit
corporally into his Apostles; where by [corporally] it is plain he means [by a
corporal or material sign or symbol, viz. by breathing upon them and saying,
Receive ye the holy Ghost.] Ineither of these senses if the word be taken, it
may indifferently be used in this question.

Poissy, where it was propounded in these words, Credimus in usu coenae
Dominicae vere, reipsa, substantialiter, seu in substantia verumcorpus, and
sanguinem Christi spirituali and ineffabili modo esse, exhiberi, sumi a
fidelibus communicantibus. Beza and Gallasius for the Reformed, Eccles. hist,
Eccles. Gallic. l. 4. p. 604, 605. and Comment. de statu relig. and reip. sub
Carolo 9. A. D. 1561. and Thuanum, hist. l. 28. ad eundum annum.
and Espensaeus and Monlucius for the Romanists undertook to propound it to
their parties. But both rejected it: for though the words were not disliked,
yet they suspected each others sense. But now that I have declared what is
meant by us in these words, they are made useful in the explicating the
question. 2. But because the words do perfectly declare our sense, and are
owned publicly in our doctrine, and manner of speaking, it will be in vain to
object against us those sayings of the Fathers which use the same expressions:
for if by virtue of those words, really, subst antially, corporally, verily,
and indeed, and Christ's body and blood, the Fathers shall be supposed to speak
for transubstantiation, they may as well suppose it to be our doctrine too, for
we use the same words; and therefore those authorities must signify nothing
against us, unless these words can be proved in them to signify more then our
sense of them does import: and by this truth many, very many of their pretenses
are evacuated.

really in the Sacrament, we mean, that body, that flesh that was born of the
Virgin Mary, that was crucified, dead and buried? I answer, I know none else
that he had, or has: There is but one body of Christ natural and glorified;
but he that says that body is glorified which was crucified, says it is the
same body, but not after the same manner See Bp. Ridley's answer to Curtops
first argument in his disp. at Oxford Fox Martyrol. p. 1451. vet. edit.
: and so it is in the Sacrament; we eat and drink the body and blood of Christ
that was broken, and powered forth; for there is no other body, no other blood
of Christ; but though it is the same which we eat and drink, yet it is in
another manner: And therefore when any of the Protestant Divines, or any of the
Fathers deny that body which was born of the Virgin Mary, that which was
crucified, Vide insra Sect. 12.
to be eaten in the Sacrament, as Bertram, as S. Hierom Dupliciter vero sanguis
Christi and caro intelligitur, spiritualis illa, atque Divina, de qua ipse
dixit, Caro mea vere est cibus etc. vel caro and sanguis, quae crucifixa est,
and qui militis effusus est lancea: In Epist. Ephesians. c. 1.
, as Clemens Alexandrinus expressly affirm; the meaning is easy, they intend
that it is not eaten in a natural sense, and then calling it corpus spirituale,
the word spiritual is not a substantial predication, but is an affirmation of
the manner, though in disputation it be made the predicate of a proposition,
and the opposite member of a distinction. That body which was crucified is not
that body that is eaten in the Sacrament, if the intention of the proposition
be to speak of the eating it in the same manner of being; but that body which
was crucified, the same body we do eat, if the intention be to speak of the
same thing in several manners of being and operating: and this I noted, that we
may not be prejudiced by words, when the notion is certain and easy: And thus
far is the sense of our doctrine in this Article.

On the other side, Rome uses the same words we do, but wholly to other
purposes, affirming, 1. That after the words of consecration, on the Altar,
there is no bread; in the Chalice there is no wine. 2. Council. Trid. decretum
de SS. Euchar. Sacram.
That the accidents, that is, the color, the shape, the bigness, the weight,
the smell, the nourishing qualities of bread and wine do remain; but neither in
the bread, nor in the body of Christ, but by themselves, that is, so that there
is whiteness, and nothing white; sweetness, and nothing sweet, etc. 3. That
in the place of the substance of bread and wine, there is brought the natural
body of Christ, and his blood that was shed upon the Cross. 4. That the flesh
of Christ is eaten by every Communicant, good and bad, worthy and unworthy. 5.
That this is conveniently, properly and most aptly called Transubstantiation,
that is, a conversion of the whole substance of bread into the substance of
Christ's natural body, of the whole substance of the wine into his blood. In the
process of which doctrine, Can. 8. Anathematis.
they oppose spiritualiter to sacramentaliter and realiter, supposing the
spiritual manducation, though done in the Sacrament by a worthy receiver, not
to be sacramental and real.

So that now the question is not, Sacramental and figurative? or, whether it be
natural and bodily? Nor is it, whether Christ be really taken, but whether he
be taken in a spiritual, or in a natural manner? We say the conversion is
figurative, my sterious, and Sacramental; they say it is proper, natural, and
corporal: we affirm that Christ is really taken by faith, by the Spirit, to all
real effects of his passion; they say, he is taken by the mouth, and that the
spiritual and the virtual taking him in virtue or effect is not sufficient,
though done also in the Sacrament. Hic Rhodus, hic saltus. This thing I will
try by Scripture, by Reason, by Sense, and by Tradition.

SECT. II. Transubst antiation not war antable by Scripture.
THe Scriptures pretended for it, Joh. 6. and the words of institution;
recorded by three Evangelists, and S. Paul. Concerning which, I shall first lay
this prejudice; that by the confession of the Romanists themselves, men learned
and famous in their generations, nor these places, nor any else in Scripture
are sufficient to prove Transubstantiation Cardinal Cajetan affirms that there
is in Scripture nothing of force or necessity to infer Transubstantiation out
of the words of institution, and that the words, seclusa Ecclesiae authoritate,
setting aside the decree of the Church, are not sufficient. This is reported by
Suarez, Tom. 3. disp. 46.. 3.
but he says that the words of Cajetan by the command of Pius 5 were left out
of the Roman edition, and he adds that Cajetanus solus ex catholicis hoc
docuit, He only of their side taught it; which is carelessely affirmed by the
Jesuit; for, another Cardinal, Cap. 1. contr. captiv. Babylon.
Bishop of Rochester, John Fisher affirmed the same thing; for speaking of the
words of institution recorded by S. Matthew, he says; Neque ullum hic verbum
positum est quo probetur in nostra missa veram fieri carnis and sanguinis
Christi praesentiam. There are no words set down here [ viz. in the words of
institution] by which it may be proved, that in our Mass there is a true
presence of the flesh and blood of Christ. To this I add a third Cardinal, In
4. Sent. q. 6. lit. f.
Bishop of Cambray de Aliaco, who though he likes the opinion, because it was
then more common, that the substance of bread does not remain after
consecration; yet ea non sequitur evidenter ex Scripturis, it does not follow
evidently from Scripture.

To these three Cardinals, Johannes Duns Scotus, who for his rare wit and
learning became a Father of a Scholastical faction in the Schools of Rome;
affirms, Veritas Eucharistiae sine Transubstantiatione salvari potest. Scotus
in 4. did. 11. q. 3.
non extare locum ullum Scripturae, tam expressum, ut sine Ecclesiae
declaratione evidenter cogat Transubstantiatione^ admittere. There is no place
of Scripture so express, that without the declaration of the Church it can
evidently compel us to admit Transubstantiation. And Bellarmine himself says,
Bellarmin de Euch. l. 3 c. 23. Sect. Secundo dicir.
that it is not altogether improbable, since it is affirmed a doctissimis and
acutissimis hominibus, by most learned and most acute men. The Bishop of
Eureux, who was afterward Cardinal Richelieu, not being well pleased with
Scotus in this question, said that Scotus had only considered the testimonies
of the Fathers cited by Gratian, Peter Lombard, Aquinas and the Schoolmen
before him; Suppose that. But these testimonies are not few, and the witty man
was as able to understand their opinion by their words as any man since; and
therefore we have the income of so many Fathers as are cited by the Canon Law,
the Master of the sentences and his Scholars, to be partly a warrant, and none
of them to contradict the opinion of Scotus; who neither believed it to be
taught evidently in Scripture, Vide infra. 11. n. 19.
nor by the Fathers.

Gabriel ^iel. Lect. 40. in Can. Missae
Quomodo ibi sit corpus Christi, an per conversionem alicujus in ipsum, an sinc
conversione incipiat esse corpus Christi cum pane, manentibus substantia and
accidentibus panis, non invenitur expressum in Canone Bibliae. How the body of
Christ is there, whether by conversion of any thing into it, or without
conversion it begin to be the body of Christ with the bread, the accidents and
the substance of the bread still remaining, is not found expressed in the Canon
of the Bible. Hither I could add the concurrent Testimony of Ocham in 4. q. 6.
of Johannes de Bassolis who is called Doctor Ordinatissimus, but that so much
to the same Purpose is needless, and the thing is confessed to be the opinion
of many writers of their own party; as appears in Salmeron. Tom. 9. tractat. 16.
And Melchior Canus Bishop of the Canaries, Loc. com. l. 3. c. 3. fund. 2.
amongst the things not expressed in Scripture reckons the conversion of the
bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ.

If it be said, Transubstantiation, they did not submit themselves and their
writings to the Church. But if the Church had not in their times done it, and
has done it since, that is another consideration, and we are left to remember
that till Cajetans time, that is, till Luthers time, the Church had not
declared that Scripture did prove Transubstantiation; and since that time we
know who has; but not the Church Catholic.

And indeed it had been strange, Cambray, de Sancto vio and of Rochester, that
Scotus and Biel should never have heard that the Church had declared that the
words of Scripture did infer Transubstantiation. And it is observable that
all these lived long after the article it self was said to be decreed in the
Lateran; where if the article it self was declared, yet it was not declared as
from Scripture; or if it was, they did not believe it. But it is an usual
device amongst their writers to stifle their reason, or to secure themselves
with a submitting to the authority of their Church, even against their
argument: and if any one speaks a bold truth, he cannot escape the Inquisition
unless he complement the Church, and with a civility tell her that she knows
better; which in plain English is no otherwise then the fellow that did penance
for saying the Priest lay with his wife; he was forced to say, Tongue thou
lie, though he was sure his eyne did not lie. And this is that which Scotus
said; Transubstantiation without the determination of the Church is not
evidently inferred from Scripture. This I say is a complement, and was only to
secure the Friar from the Inquisitors; or else was a direct stifling of his
reason; for it contains in it a great error, or a worse danger; For if the
article be not contained so in Scripture as that we are bound to believe it by
his being there, then the Church must make a new article, or it must remain as
it was; that is, obscure; and we uncompeld and still at liberty. For she cannot
declare unless it be so; she declares what is, or what is not: If what is not,
she declares a lie; if what is, then it is in Scripture before, and then we are
compelled, that is, we ought to have believed it. If it be said it was there,
but in it self obscurely; I answer, then so it is still; for if it was
obscurely there, and not only quoad nos, or by defect on our part, she cannot
say it is plain there; neither can she alter it, for if she sees it plain, then
it was plain: if it be obscure, then she sees it obscurely; for she sees it as
it is, or else she sees it not at all; and therefore must declare it to be so;
that is, probably, obscurely, peradventure, but not evidently, compellingly,
necessarily.

So that if according to the Casuists, good men and true, besides Ocham,
Bassolis, and Melchior Canus, to acquit us from our search after this question
in Scripture. But because this, although it satisfies me, will not satisfy
them that follow the decree of Trent; we will try whether this doctrine be to
be found in Scripture. Pede pes.

SECT. III. Of the sixth Chapter of Saint John's Gospel.
IN this Chapter it is earnestly pretended that our blessed Savior taught the
mystery of Transubstantiation; Bellarmine I understand not; who says, Lib. 1.
de Euchar. cap. 5.
Constat, it is known that the Eucharist is not handled in the whole chapter:
for Christ there discourses of Natural bread the miracle of the loaves, of
Faith, and of the Incarnation in a great part of the chapter; Solum igitur
quaestio est de illis verbis, [Fanis quem ego dabo, caro mea est pro mundivita]
and de sequentibus, fere ad finem capitis. The question only is concerning
those words verse 51. The bread which I will give is my flesh which I will give
for the life of the world] and so forward almost until the end of the chapter.
The reason which is pretended for it, is, because Christ speaks in the future,
and therefore probably relates to the institution which was to be next year:
but this is a trifle; for the same thing in effect is before spoken in the
future tense, and by way of promise; Verse. 27.
Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that meat that endures to
everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you. The same also is
affirmed by Christ under the expression of water, S. John 4.14. He that
drinks the water which I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water
which I shall give him shall be a fountain of water springing up to life
eternal; The places are exactly parallel; and yet as this is not meant of
Baptism, so neither is the other of the Eucharist; but both of them of
spiritual sumption of Christ. And both of them being promises to them that
shall come to Christ and be united to him, it were strange if they were not
expressed in the future; for although they always did signify in present, and
in sensu currenti, yet because they are of never failing truth, to express
them in the future is most proper, that the expectation of them may appertain
to all,

Ad natos natorum and qui nascentur ab illis. But then, because Christ said,
[The bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
World] to suppose this must be meant of a corporal manducation of his flesh in
the holy Sacrament, is as frivolous as if it were said that nothing that is
spoken in the future can be figurative; and if so, then let it be considered
what is meant by these; Rev. 2.7. and 17.
[To him that overcomes I will give to eat of the tree of life:] and [To him
that overcomes I will give to eat of the hidden Manna:] These promises are
future, but certainly figurative; and therefore why it may not be so here, and
be understood of eating Christ spiritually or by faith, I am certain there is
no cause sufficient in this excuse. For if eating Christ by faith, be a thing
of all times, then it is also of the future; and no difference of time is so
apt to express an Eternal truth as is the future, which is always in flux and
potential signification. But the secret of the thing was this, the arguments
against the sacramental sense of these words drawn from the following verses
between this and the 51 verse could not so well be answered, L. 1. Euch. c. 7..
respondeo verba.
and therefore Bellarmine found out the trick of confessing all till you come
thither, as appears in his answer to the ninth argument: that of some
Catholics. How ever; as to the Article I am to say these things.

1. That very many of the most learned Romanists affirm that in this chapter
Christ does not speak of sacramental or oral manducation, or of the Sacrament
at all. De Communione sub utraque specie.
Johannes de Ragusio, Biel In Canon.
, Cusanus Ep. 7. ad Bohem.
, Ruard Tapper Artic. 15.
, Cajetan part 3. q. 80. art. 8.
, Hessels Lib. de commun. sub una specie.
, Jansenius Concord. Evang. c. 59.
, Waldensis Tom. 2. de sacram. c. 91.
, Armachanus Li. 9. c. 8. Ejusdem sententiae sunt Aeneas Sylvius dial. contr.
Tabor. Alensis part. 4. q. 11. mem. 2. a. 4. Lindanus, Gaspar Sagerus and alii.
, save only that Bellarmine going to excuse it, says in effect that that they
did not do it very honestly; for he affirms that they did it, that they might
confute the Hussites and the Lutherans about the communion under both kinds:
and if it be so, and be not so, as it may serve a turn, It is so for
Transubstantiation, and it is not so for the half communion, we have but little
reason to rely upon their Judgment or candor in any exposition of Scripture.
But it is no new thing for some sort of men to do so. The Heretic Severus in
Anastasius Sinaita, maintained it lawful, and even necessary [(...),] according
to occasions and emergent heresies to alter and change the doctrines of Christ:
and the Cardinal of Cusa Epist. 2. ad Bohem.
affirmed it lawful, diversely to expound the Scriptures according to the
times. So that we know what precedents and authorities they can urge for so
doing: and I doubt not but it is practiced too often since it was offered to be
justified by Dureus against Whitaker.

2. Verse 53.
Unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you. It is therefore as necessary to drink the chalice as to eat the
bread, and we perish if we omit either. And their new whimsie of Concomitancy
will not serve the turn because there it is sanguis effusus, that is
sacramentally powered forth; blood that is powered forth, not that is in the
body. 2. If it were in the body, yet a man by no concomitancy can be said to
drink what he only eats. 3. If in the sacramental body, Christ gave the blood
by concomitancy, then he gave the blood twice; which to what purpose it might
be done is not yet revealed. 4. If the blood be by concomitancy in the body,
then so is the body with the blood; and then it will be sufficient to drink the
chalice without the host, as to eat the host without the chalice; and then we
must drink his flesh as well as eat his blood; which if we could suppose to be
possible, yet the precept of eating his flesh, and drinking his blood, were not
observed by drinking that which is to be eaten, and eating that which is to be
drunk. But certainly they are fine propositions which cannot be true, unless
we can eat our drink, and drink our meat, unless bread be wine and wine be
bread, or to speak in their style, unless the body be the blood, and the blood
the body; that is, unless each of the two symboles be the other as much as it
self; as much that which it is not, as that which it is. And this thing their
own Pope Innocentius lib. 4. de Miss. myster. c. 21.
the third, and from him Vasquez in 3. t. 3. disp. 216. n. 50.
noted, and Salmeron Tom. 8. tr. 24.
, who affirmed that Christ commanded the manner as well as the thing, and that
without eating and drinking the precept of Christ is not obeyed.

3. But what ever can come of this, Clem: Rom: l. 8. c. 20. constit: Apost:
Eccles: hierarch cap: ult. Gennadius cap: 52. de dogmat. Eccles: cap. de
Sabbatho Sancto Paschatis. S. Cyprian. Ep: 59. ad Fiduc: Council: Tolet: 2. c.
11.8. August: Ep. 93. and 106. Innocentius papa ibid. Paulinus Episc: Nolanus
A.D. 353. Epist: 12. ad Severum. Paulinus de infantibus ai^ Pura salutiferis
imbuit ora cibis. Hic mos duravit ad tempora Ludovici Pii, and Lotharii, ait
Beat: Rhenan: in Tertul: de Cor: Milit.
they believed themselves bound by the same necessity to give the Eucharist to
Infants, as to give them baptism; and did for above seven ages together
practice it; And let these men that will have these words spoken of the
Eucharist, answer the argument; Bellarmine is troubled with it, and in stead of
answering, increases the difficulty, and concludes firmly against himself,
saying; if the words be understood of eating Christ's body spiritually, or by
faith, it will be more impossible to Infants, for it is easier to give them
intinctum panem bread dipped in the chalice, then to make them believe. To this I
reply, that therefore it is spoken to Infants in neither sense, neither is any
law at all given to them; and no laws can be understood as obligatory to them
in that capacity. But then although I have answered the argument because I
believe it not to be meant in the Sacramental sense to any; nor in the
Spiritual sense to them; yet Bellarmine has not answered the pressure that
lies upon his cause. l. 1. Euchar c. 7. respondco communem.
For since it is certain (and he confesses it) that it is easier, that is, it
is possible to give infants the Sacrament; it follows that if here the
Sacrament be meant, Infants are obliged; that is, the Church is obliged to
minister it, as well as Baptism: there being in virtue of these words the same
necessity, and in the nature of the thing the same possibility of their
receiving it. But then on the other side no inconvenience can press our
interpretation of spiritual eating Christ by faith, because it being naturally
impossible that Infants should believe they cannot be concerned in an
impossible commandment. So that we can answer S. Austins and Innocentius his
arguments for communicating of Infants, but they cannot.

4. unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you; if it be answered that the Holy Sacrament must be eaten in act or
in desire; I reply that is not true; because if a Catechumen desires baptism
only in the article of his death, it is sufficient to salvation, and they dare
not deny it. 2. Fools, young persons, they that are surprised with sudden death
cannot be thought to perish for want of the actual susception or desire. 3.
There is nothing in the words that can warrant or excuse the actual omission of
the Sacrament, and it is a strange deception that these men suffer by
misunderstanding this distinction of receiving the Sacrament either in act or
desire. For, they are not opposite, but subordinate members, differ only as act
and disposition; and this disposition is not at all required but as it is in
order to the act, and therefore is nothing of it self, and is only the
imperfection of, or passage to the act; if therefore the act were not
necessary, neither were the disposition; but if the act be necessary, then the
desire which is but the disposition to the act is not sufficient. As if it be
necessary, to go from Oxford to London, then it is necessary that you go to
Henly, or Uxbridge; but if it be necessary to be at London, it is not
sufficient to go to Uxbridge; but if it be not necessary to be at London,
neither is it necessary to go so far. But this distinction as it is commonly
used is made to serve ends, and is grown to that inconvenience, that repentance
it self is said to be sufficient, if it be only in desire; for so they must,
that affirm repentance in the article of death after a wicked life to be
sufficient; when it is certain there can be nothing actual but ineffective
desires; and all the real and most material events of it cannot be performed,
but desired only. But whosoever can be excused from the actual susception of a
Sacrament, can also in an equal necessity be excused from the desire; and no
man can be tied to an absolute, irrespective desire of that which cannot be
had; and if it can, the desire alone will not serve the turn. And indeed a
desire of a thing when we know it cannot be had, is a temptation either to
impatience, or a scruple; and why, or how can a man be obliged to desire that
to be done, which in all his circumstances is not necessary it should be done.
A preparation of mind to obey in those circumstances in which it is possible,
that is, in which he is obliged, is the duty of every man; but this is not an
explicit desire of the actual susception, which in his case, is not
obligatory, because it is impossible; And lastly, such a desire of a thing, is
wholly needless, because in the present case, the thing it self is not
necessary; therefore neither is the desire; neither did God ever require it but
in order to the act. But however if we find by discourse that for all these
decretory words, the desire can suffice, I demand by what instrument is that
accepted; whether by faith, or no? I suppose it will not be denied. But if it
be not denied, then a spiritual manducation can perform the duty of those
words: for susception of the Sacrament in desire is at the most but a spiritual
manducation. Beda in 1 Cor. 10. citat Augustini Sermon: ad Infantes.
And S. Austin affirms that Baptism can perform the duty of those words, if
Beda quotes him right; for in his Sermon to Infants and in his third book de
peccatorum meritis and remissione, he affirms that in Baptism Infants receive
the Body of Christ; So that these words may as well be understood of Baptism,
as of the Eucharist, and of faith better then either.

5. Capernaum understood Christ to speak these words of his natural flesh and
blood, and were scandalized at it; and Christ reproved their folly by telling
them his words were to be understood in a spiritual sense; So that if men would
believe him, that knew best the sense of his own words, there need be no
scruple of the sense; I do not understand these words in a fleshly sense, but
in a spiritual, says Christ: the flesh profits nothing; S. John. 6.63.
the words that I have spoken they are spirit, and they are life. Now besides
that the natural sense of the words has in it too much of the sense of the
offended disciples, the reproof and consultation of it is equally against the
Romanists, as against the Capernaites. For we contend it is spiritual; so
Christ affirmed it: they that deny the Spiritual sense, and affirm the
Natural, are to remember that Christ reproved all senses of these words that
were not spiritual. And by the way let me observe, that the expression of some
chief men among the Romanists are so rude and crasse, that it will be
impossible to excuse them from the understanding the words in the sense of the
men of Capernaum; for as they understood Christ to mean his true flesh natural
and proper, so do they; as they thought Christ intended they should tear him
with their teeth and suck his blood, for which they were offended, so do these
men not only think so, but say so, and are not offended. l. 3. de Euchar. c.
37.
So said Alanus; apertissime loquimur, corpus Christi vere a nobis contrectari,
manducari, circumgestari, dentibus teri, sensibiliter sacrificari, non minus
quam ante consecrationem panis. And they frequently quote those Metaphors of S.
Chrysostom, which he preaches in the height of his Rhetoric, as Testimonies of
his opinion in the doctrinal part: and Berengarius was forced by Pope Nicholas
to recant in those very words, affirming that Christ's body, sensualiter non
solum Sacramento, sed in veritate manibus Sacerdotum tractari, frangi, and
fidelium dentibus atteri, that Christ's flesh was sensually not only in the
Sacrament, but in truth of the thing to be handled by the Priests hands, to be
broken and grinded by the teeth of the faithful: In so much that the gloss on
the Canon, de Consecratione did. 2. cap. Ego Berengarius, affirms it to be a
worse heresy, then that of Berengarius, unless it be soberly understood; to
which also Cassander assents; and indeed I thought that the Romanists had been
glad to separate their own opinion from the carnal conceit of the men of
Capernaum, and the offended disciples, supposing it to be a great objection
against their doctrine, that it was the same with the men of Capernaum, and is
only finer dressed: But I find that Bellarmine ownes it, even in them, in
their rude circumstances; l. 1. Eucha. cap. 6. 2. ex dubitatione.
for he affirms that Christ corrected them not for supposing so, but reproved
them for not beleiving it to be so. And indeed himself says as much, Corpus
Christi vere ac proprie manducari etiam corpore in eucharistia; the body of
Christ is truly and properly manducated or chewed with the body in the
Eucharist: and to take off the foulness of the expression by avoiding a worse
he is pleased to speak nonsense. Nam ad rationem manducationis non est mera
attritio, ibid cap. 11 resp. ad 5mm. arg.
sed satis est sumptio and transmissio ab ore ad stomachum per instrumenta
humana. A thing may be manducated or chewed though it be not attrite or broken:
If he had said it might be swallowed and not chewed, he had said true; but to
say it may be chewed, without chewing or breaking, is a riddle fit to spring
from the miraculous doctrine of Transubstantiation: and indeed it is a pretty
device, that we take the flesh, and swallow down flesh, and yet manducate or
chew no flesh, and yet we swallow down only what we manducate; Accipite,
manducate, were the words in the institution. And indeed according to this
device there were no difference between eating and drinking; and the Whale
might have been said to have eaten Jonas, when she swallowed him without
manducation or breaking him, and yet no man does speak so; but in the
description of that accident reckon the Whale to be fasting for all that
morsel; Invasusque cibus ejuna vixit in alvo, said Alcimus Avitus; Jejuni,
plenique tamen vate intemerato, said Sidonius Apollinaris; vivente jejunus
cibo, so Paulinus; the fish was full and fasting, that is, she swallowed Jonas,
but eat nothing. As a man does not eat bullets or quicksilver against the
Iliacal passion, but swallows them; and we do not eat our pills; The Greek
Physicians therefore call a pill (...), a thing to be swallowed; and that this
is distinct from eating, Aristotle tells us, speaking of the Elephant, (...), he
eats the earth, but swallows the stones. In Levit. l. 2. c. 1.
And Hesychius determined this thing, Non comedet ex eo quisquam, i. e. non
dividetur, quia dentium est dividere, and partiri cibos, cum aliter mandi non
possint. To chew is but a circumstance of nourishment, but the essence of
manducation. But Bellarmine adds, that if you will not allow him to say so,
then he grants it in plain terms, that Christ's body is chewed, is attrite or
broken with the teeth, and that not tropically but properly, which is the
crasse doctrine which Christ reproved in the men of Capernaum. To lessen and
sweeten this expression he tells us, it is indeed broken; but how? under the
species of bread and invisibly; well so it is, though we see it not; and it
matters not under what; if it be broken, and we bound to believe it, then we
cannot avoid the being that, which they so detested, devourers of Man's flesh.
See Theophylact in number 15. of this section.

6. the bread or the meat indeed of which Christ speaks, Verse 54.
he also affirms that whosoever eats it has life abiding in him: But this is
not true of the Sacrament; for the wicked eating it, receive to themselves
damnation. It cannot therefore be understood of oral manducation, but of
spiritual, and of eating Christ by faith: that is, receiving him by any
instrument or action Evangelical. For receiving Christ by faith includes any
way of communicating with his body; By baptism, by holy desires, by obedience,
by love, by worthy receiving of the Holy Sacrament; and it signifies no
otherwise, but as if Christ had said; To all that believe in me and obey, I
will become the author of life and salvation: Now because this is not done by
all that receive the Sacrament, not by unworthy communicants, who yet eat the
symboles (according to us) and eat Christ's body (according to their doctrine)
it is unanswerably certain, that Christ here spoke of Spiritual manducation,
not of Sacramental. Bellarmine (he that answers all things, whether he can or
no) says that words of this nature are conditional; meaning, that he who eats
Christ's flesh worthily shall live for ever; and therefore this effects nothing
upon vicious persons, yet it may be meant of the Sacrament, because without his
proper condition it is not prevalent. I reply, that it is true it is not, it
cannot; and that this condition is spiritual manducation; but then without this
condition the man does not eat Christ's flesh, that which himself calls the true
bread, for he that eats this, (...), he has life in him, that is, he is
united to me, he is in the state of grace at present. For it ought to be
observed, that although promises de futuro possibili are to be understood with
a condition appendant; yet propositions affirmative at present, are
declarations of a thing in being, and suppose it actually existent: and the
different parts of this observation are observeable in the several parts of the
54. verse. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life;
that is an affirmation of a thing in being, and therefore implies no other
condition but the connection of the predicate with the subject. He that eats
has life. But it follows, (...), and I will raise him up at the last day,
that is de futuro possibili; and therefore implies a condition besides the
affirmation of the antecedent, viz. si permanserit, if he remains in this
condition, and does not unravel his first interest and forfeit his life. And so
the argument remains unharm'd, Tract. 26. in Johan.
and is no other then what I learned from S. Austin, Hujus rei Sacramentum etc.
de mensa Dominica sumitur quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium; Res vero
ipsa cujus Sacramentum est, omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium, quicunque
ejus particeps fuerit. And it is remarkable that the context and design of
this place takes off this evasion from the adversary: For here Christ opposes
this eating of his flesh, to the Israelites eating of Manna, and prefers it
infinitely; because they who did eat Manna might die, viz. spiritually and
eternally; but they that eat his flesh, shall never die, meaning, they shall
not die eternally; and therefore this eating cannot be a thing which can
possibly be done unworthily. For if Manna, as it was Sacramental, had been
eaten worthily, they had not died who eat it; and what privilege then is in
this above Manna, save only that the eating of this, supposes the man to do it
worthily, and to be a worthy person; which the other did not? Cajetan in Joh. 6.
Upon which consideration Cajetan says, that this eating is not common to
worthily and unworthily, and that it is not spoken of eating the Sacrament, but
of eating and drinking [that is, communicating with] the death of Jesus. The
argument therefore lies thus. There is something which Christ has promised us,
which whosoever receives, he receives life and not death; but this is not the
Sacrament: for of them that communicate, some receive to life, and some to
death, says S. Austin, and a greater then S. Austin, 1 Cor. 11.
Saint Paul; and yet this which is life to all that receive it, is Christ's
flesh (said Christ himself) therefore Christ's flesh here spoken of is not
Sacramental.

7. Tertullian has these words. Etsi carnem ait nihil prodesse, Materia dicti
dirigendus est sensus. Nam quia durum and intolerabilem existimaverunt semonem
ejus, quasi vere carnem suam illis edendam determinasset, Tertul. de refur.
carn. c. 37.
ut in spiritu disponeret statum salutis, praemisit, Spiritus est qui
vivificat; atque ita subjunxit, Caro nihil prodest, ad vivificandum scil:
Because they thought his saying hard and intolerable, as if he had determined
his flesh to be eaten by them; that he might dispose the state of salvation in
the spirit, he premised, It is the Spirit that gives life: and then subjoyns,
The flesh profits nothing, meaning, nothing to the giving of life. So that
here we have, besides his authority, an excellent argument for us: Christ said,
he that eats my flesh has life, but the flesh, that is, the fleshly sense of
it profits nothing to life; but the Spirit, that is, the spiritual sense does;
therefore these words are to be understood in a spiritual sense.

And because it is here opportune by occasion of this discourse, Paul, and the
sense of the Church, and the confession of all sides, the natural eating of
Christ's flesh, (if it were there, or could so be eaten) alone or of it self
does no good, does not give life; but the spiritual eating of him is the
instrument of life to us; and this may be done without their Transubstantiated
flesh; it may be done in Baptism, by faith, and charity, by hearing, and
understanding, and therefore it may also in the Blessed Eucharist, although
there also according to our doctrine he be eaten only Sacramentally, Ser. 6.4.
temp. Septembr. post consecrat.
and Spiritually. And hence it is that in the Mass book anciently it is prayed
after consecration, Quaesumus Omnipotens Deus, ut de perceptis muneribus
gratias exhibentes beneficia potiora sumamus] We beseech thee Almighty God,
that we giving thanks for these gifts received may receive greater gifts] which
besides that it concludes against the Natural presence of Christ's body, (for
what greater thing can we receive, if we receive that?) it also declares that
the grace and effect of the Sacramental communion is the thing designed beyond
all corporal sumption: In Miss. vol. pro quacunque necessitate.
and as it is more fully expres'd in another collect [ut terrenis affectibus
expiati ad superni plenitudinem Sacramenti, cujus libavimus sancta, tendamus]
that being redeemed from all earthly affections we may tend to the fullness of
the heavenly Sacrament, the Holy things of which we have now begun to taste. And
therefore to multiply so many miracles and contradictions and impossibilities
to no purpose, is an insuperable prejudice against any pretense, less then a
plain declaration from God. Add to this, that this bodily presence of Christ's
body is either for corporal nourishment, or for spiritual: Not for Corporal;
for Natural food is more proper for it; and to work a miracle to do that, for
which so many Natural means are already appointed, is to no purpose, and
therefore cannot be supposed to be done by God; neither is it done for
spiritual nourishment: because to the spiritual nourishment, virtues and
graces, the word and the efficacious signs, faith and the inward actions, and
all the emanations of the Spirit are as proportioned, as meat and drink are to
natural nourishment; and therefore there can be no need of a Corporal presence.
2. Corporal manducation of Christ's body is apparently inconsistent with the
nature and condition of the body. 1. Because that which is after the manner of
a spirit, and not of a body, cannot be eaten and drunk after the manner of a
body, but of a spirit; as no man can eat a Cherubin with his mouth, if he were
made apt to nourish the soul: but by the confession of the Roman Doctors,
Christ's body is present in the Eucharist after the manner of a spirit,
therefore without proportions to our body, or bodily actions. 2. That which
neither can feel, or be felt, see or be seen, move or be moved, change or be
changed, neither do nor suffer corporally, cannot certainly be eaten
corporally; but so they affirm concerning the body of our Blessed Lord; it
cannot do or suffer corporally in the Sacrament, therefore it cannot be eaten
corporally, any more then a man can chew a spirit, or eat a meditation, or
swallow a syllogism into his belly. This would be so far from being credible,
that God should work so many miracles in placing Christ's Natural body for
spiritual nourishment, that in case it were revealed, to be placed there to
that purpose, it self must need one great miracle more to verify it, and reduce
it to act; and it would still be as difficult to explain, as it is to tell how
the material fire of hell should torment spirits and souls. And Socrates in
Plato's banquet said well; Wisdom is not a thing that can be communicated by
local or corporal contiguity. 3. That the corporal presence does not nourish
spiritually, appears; because some are nourished spiritually, who do not
receive the Sacrament at all, and some that do receive, yet fall short of being
spiritually nourished, and so do all unworthy communicants. This therefore is
to no purpose; and therefore cannot be supposed to be done by the wise God of
all the world, especially with so great a pomp of miracles. 4. Del' Euchar.
page 265. Gallic:
Card. Perron affirms that the Real Natural presence of Christ in the
Sacrament is to greatest purpose, because the residence of Christ's natural body
in our bodies does really and substantially join us unto God, establishing a
true and real Unity between God and Men. And Bellarmine speaks something like
this de Euchar. l. 3. c. 9. But concerning this besides that every faithful
soul is actually united to Christ without the actual residence of Christ's body
in our bodies, since every one that is regenerated and born anew of water and
of the spirit is (...) the same plant with Christ, as S. Paul cal's him Romans
6.5. He has put on Christ, he is bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh,
Galat. 3.27. Ephesians. 5.30. and all this by faith by baptism, by regeneration of
the spirit; besides this (I say) this corporal union of our bodies to the body
of God incarnate which these great and witty dreamers dream of, would make man
to be God. For that which has a real and substantial unity with God, is
consubstantial with the true God, that is, he is really, substantially, and
truly God; which to affirm were highest blasphemy. 5. One device more there is
to pretend an usefulness of the doctrine of Christ's Natural presence. viz.
that by his contact and conjunction it becomes the cause and seed of the
resurrection. But besides that this is condemned by Tom. 3. in 3. disp. 204. n.
3.
Vasquez as groundless, and by Ibid. disp. 64. sect. 1.
Suarez as improbable and a novel temerity; it is highly confuted by their own
doctrine: For how can the contact or touch of Christ's body have that or any
effect on ours, when it can neither be touched, nor seen, nor understood but by
faith? which Lib. 3. de Euchar. c. 9.
Bellarmine expressly affirms. But to return from whence I am digressed.

Tertullian adds in the same place. Quia and sermo caro erat factus, proinde in
causam vitae appetendus, and devorandus auditu, and ruminandus intellectu, and
fide digerendus. Nam and paulo ante, carnem suam panem quoque caelestem
pronunciarat, urgens usquequaque per allegoriam necessariorum pabulorum
memoriam Patrum, qui panes and carnes Egyptiorum praeverterant divinae
vocationi. Because the Word was made flesh, therefore he was desired for life,
to be devoured by hearing, to be ruminated or chewed by the understanding, to
be digested by faith. For a little before he called his flesh also celestial
bread, still, or all the way, urging by an an allegory of necessary food, the
memory of their Fathers who preferred the bread and flesh of Egypt before the
Divine calling.

S. Athanasius, Quicunque dixerit verbum in filium hominis, in his works,
says, (...). i. e. The things which he speaks are not carnal, but spiritual:
For to how many might his body suffice for meat, that it should become the
nourishment of the whole world? But for this it was that he put them in mind of
the ascension of the Son of man into heaven, that he might draw them off from
carnal, and corporal senses, and that he might learn that his flesh which he
called meat, was from above heavenly and spiritual nourishment. For says he,
the things that I have spoken, they are spirit and they are life.

But Origin is yet more decretory in this affair. Origin. in Levit. c. 10.
hom. 7.
Est and in novo Testamento litera quae occidit eum, qui non spiritualiter ea
quae dicuntur adverterit; si enim secundum literam sequaris hoc ipsum quod
dictum est, Nisi manducaveritis carnem meam, and biberitis sanguinem meum,
occidit haec litera: If we understand these words of Christ, Unless ye eat
the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, literally, this letter kills.
For there is in the new Testament a letter that kills him who does not
spiritually understand those things which are spoken.

S. Ambrose not only expounds it in a spiritual sense, but plainly denies the
proper and natural. Non iste panis est, De Sacrament. l. 5. c. 4.
qui vadit in corpus, sed ille panis vitae aeternae qui animae nostrae
substantiam fulcit. That is not the bread of life, which goes into the body,
but that which supports the substance of the soul; And, fide tangitur, fide
videtur, I^ Lucam. l. 6. c. 8.
non tangitur corpore, non oculis comprehenditur, this bread is touched by
faith, it is seen by faith: and without all peradventure that this is to be
understood of eating and drinking Christ by faith, is apparent from Christ's own
words, verse 35. I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall not hunger,
and he that beleiveth on me shall not thirst: coming to Christ is eating him,
beleiving him is drinking his blood. It is not touched by the body, it is not
seen with the eyes. S. Chrysostom in his 47. homily upon this chapter of S.
John, expounds these words in a spiritual sense; for these things (says he)
are (...), such as have in them nothing carnal, nor any carnal consequence.

S. Austin gave the same exposition, Ut quid paras dentes and ventrem? Tract.
25. in Joh. Tract. 26.
creed and manducasti: and again, Credere in eum, hoc est manducare panem
vivum. Qui credit in eum manducat.

Theophylact makes the spiritual sense to be the only answer in behalf of our
not being Canibals, In Joh. 6.
or devourers of man's flesh, as the men of Capernaum began to dream, and the
men of Rome, though in better circumstances, to this day dream on. Putabant
isti quod Deus cogeret (...), quia enim nos hoc spiritualiter intelligimus,
neque carnium voratores sumus, imo sanctificamur per talem cibum, non sumus
carnis voratores. The men of Capernaum thought Christ would compel them to
devour man's flesh. But because we understand this spiritually, therefore we
are not devourers of man's flesh, but are sanctified by this meat. Perfectly to
the same sense, and almost in the very words Theodorus Bp. of Heraclea is
quoted in the Greek Catena upon John.

It were easy to add that Eusebius cal's the words of Christ his flesh and
blood, L. 3. Eccles. Theol. contra Marcel: Ancyran: M. S.
(...); that so also does S. Hierome, saying that although it may be understood
in mystery; S. Hieron. psalm. 147.
tamen verius corpus Christi and sanguis ejus sermo scripturarum est; Clem.
Alex. l. 1. paedag. c. 6.
that so does Clemens Alexandrinus; that (...). S. Basil in psalm. 33.
S. Basil says that his doctrine and his mystical coming is his flesh and
blood; that S. Bernard says to imitate his life and communicate with his
passion is to eat his flesh; but I decline (for the present) to insist upon
these; because all of them, excepting S. Hierome only, may be supposed to be
mystical expositions, which may be true, and yet another exposition may be true
too. It may suffice that it is the direct sense of Tertullian, Origin,
Athanasius, S. Ambrose, S. Austin, and Theophylact, that these words of Christ
in the sixth of S. John are not to be understood in the natural or proper, but
in the spiritual sense. The spiritual they declare not to be the mystical, but
the literal sense; and therefore their testimonies cannot be eluded by any such
pretense.

And yet after all this, of any other mystery, of this amongst others; that is
of all the ways of taking him, is to me highly probable: Christ is the food of
our souls; this food we receive in at our ears, our mouth, our hearts; and the
allusion is plainer in the Sacrament then in any other external rite, because
of the similitude of bread, and eating which Christ used upon occasion of the
miracle of the loaves, which introduced all that discourse. But then this comes
in only as it is an act of faith; for the meat which Christ gives is to be
taken by faith, himself being the expounder. Verse 47. and 29. and 64.
Now the Sacraments of Baptism and the Eucharist being acts and symboles and
consignations of faith, and effects of beleiving, that is of the first, and
principal receiving him by faith in his words, and submission to his doctrine,
may well be meant here, not by virtue of the words; for the whole form of
expression is Metaphorical, not at all proper; but by the proportion of reason
and nature of his effect; it is an act or manner of receiving Christ, and an
issue of faith and therefore is included in the mystery. The food that Christ
said he would give is his flesh, Verse 51.
which he would give for the life of the world, viz. to be crucified and
killed. And from that verse forward he does more particularly refer to his
death; for he speaks of bread only before, or meat, (...), but now he speaks
of flesh and blood (...) bread and drink, and therefore by Analogy he may
allude to the Sacrament, which is his similitude and representation; but this
is but the meaning of the second or third remove; if here Christ begins to
change the particulars of his discourse, it can primarily relate to nothing,
but his death upon the cross; at which time he gave his flesh for the life of
the world; and so giving it, it became meat; the receiving this gift was a
receiving of life, for it was given for the life of the world. The manner of
receiving it is by faith, and hearing the word of God, submitting our
understanding; the digesting this meat is imitating the life of Christ,
conforming to his doctrine and example; and as the Sacraments are instruments
or acts of this manducation, so they come under this discourse, and no
otherwise.

But to return: the word of God to be called meat, and particularly Manna,
which in this chapter Christ particularly alludes to, is not unusual in the old
Testament. In Allegoriis.
(...) (says Philo) (...). Moses said unto them, This is the bread which the
Lord has given us to eat. This is the word which the Lord has ordained, you
see what is the food of the soul, even the eternal word of God etc. (...), The
word of God, the most honorable and eldest of things is called Manna; In
libro, Pejorem in sidiarimeliori.
and (...). The soul is nourished by the word -- qui pastus pulcherrimus est
animorum. Allegoriis.


And therefore now I will resume those testimonies of Clemens Alexandrinus,
Eusebius, S. Basil, S. Hierome and S. Bernard which I waved before, all
agreeing upon this exposition, Supra.
that the word of God, Christ's doctrine is the flesh he speaks of, and the
receiving it and practicing it are the eating his flesh; for this sense is the
literal and proper; and S. Hierome is express to affirm that the other
exposition is mystical, and that this is the more true and proper; De Euchar.
l. 1. c. 7. and ad alios patres.
and therefore the saying of Bellarmine that they only give the mystical
sense, is one of his confident sayings without reason, or pretense of proof:
and whereas he adds that they do not deny that these words are also understood
literally of the Sacrament; I answer, it is sufficient, that they agree in this
sense: and the other Fathers do so expound it with an exclusion to the natural
sense of eating Christ in the Sacrament; particularly this appears in the
testimonies of Origin and S. Ambrose above quoted: to which I add the words of
Eusebius in the 3d. book of his Theologia Ecclesiastica, expounding the 63.
verse of the 6. of John; he brings in Christ speaking thus. Think not that I
speak of this flesh which I bear; and do not imagine that I appoint you to
drink this sensible and corporal blood. But know ye, that the words which I
have spoken are spirit and life. Nothing can be fuller to exclude their
interpretation, and to affirm ours: though to do so be not usual, unless they
were to expound Scripture in opposition to an adversary; and to require such
hard conditions in the sayings of men, that when they speak against Titius they
shall be concluded not to speak against Cajus, if they do not clap their
contrary negative to their positive affirmative, though Titius and Cajus be
against one another in the cause, is a device to escape rather then to intend
truth and reality in the discourses of men. I conclude; It is notorious and
evident what Erasmus notes upon this place, Hunc locum veteres interpretantur
de doctrina coelesti: sic enim dicit panem suum, ut frequenter dixit sermonem
suum. The Ancient Fathers expound this place of the heavenly doctrine: So he
calls the bread his own as he said often the word to be his. And if the
concurrent testimonies of Origin, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, S. Basil,
Athanasius, Eusebius, S. Hierom, S. Ambrose, S. Austin, Theophylact, and S.
Bernard are a good security for the sense of a place of Scripture, we have read
their evidence, and may proceed to sentence.

But it was impossible, flesh is meat indeed, however it be taken, if it be
taken spiritually, but not however it be taken, if it be taken carnally; He is
nutritive in all the ways of spiritual manducation, but not in all the ways of
natural eating, by their own confession, nor in any, by ours. And therefore it
is a vain confidence to run away with the conclusion, if they should gain one
of the premises; But the truth is this: It is neither properly spoken of the
Sacrament, neither if it were, would it prove any thing of Transubstantiation.

I will not be alone in my assertion, Austin says the same; Aug. in psalm. 98.
Spiritualiter intelligite quod loquutus sum vobis] Non hoc corpus quod videtis
manducaturi estis: Sacramentum aliquod commendavi vobis, spiritualiter
intellectum vivificabit nos. That which I have spoken is to be understood
spiritually, ye are not to eat that body which ye see; I have commended a
Sacrament to you, which being understood spiritually will give you life; where
besides that he gives testimony to the main question on our behalf, he also
makes sacramentally and spiritually to be all one. And again; ut quia jam
similitudinem mortis ejus in baptismo accipimus, similitudinem quoque sanguinis
and carnis sumamus, ita ut and veritas non desit in sacramento, and ridiculum
nullum fiat in Paganis, Gratianus ex Augustino de consecrat. did. 2. utrum.
Lugduni 1541.
quod cruorem occisi hominis bibamus: that as we receive the similitude of his
death in Baptism, so we may also receive the likeness of his flesh and blood,
so that neither truth be wanting in the Sacrament, nor the Pagans ridiculously
affirm, that we should drink the blood of the crucified Man. Nothing could be
spoken more plain in this Question; we receive Christ's body in the Eucharist,
as we are baptized into his death; that is, by figure and likeness. In the
Sacrament there is a verity or truth of Christ's body: and yet no drinking of
blood or eating of flesh, so as the heathen may calumniate us by saying we do
that which the men of Capernaum thought Christ taught them they should. So that
though these words were spoken of sacramental manducation (as sometimes it is
expounded) yet there is reality enough in the spiritual sumption to verify
these words of Christ, without a thought of any bodily eating his flesh. And
that we may not think this doctrine dropped from S. Prosper Sent. 339. sed verba
sunt S. Augustini.
Austin by chance, he again affirms dogmatically, Qui discordat a Christo, nec
carnem ejus manducat, nec sanguinem bibit, etiamsi tantae rei sacramentum ad
judicium suae praesumptionis quotidie indifferenter accipiat. He that disagrees
from Christ (that is, disobeyes him) neither eats his flesh nor drinks his
blood, although, to his condemnation, he every day receive the Sacrament of so
great a thing. The consequent of which words is plainly this; that there is no
eating of Christ's flesh or drinking his blood, but by a moral instrument,
faith and subordination to Christ; the sacramental external eating alone being
no eating of Christ's flesh, but the Symboles and Sacrament of it.

Lastly, panis est corpus Christi, The bread is the body of Christ. Now I
demand whether this proposition will be owned. It follows inevitably from this
doctrine, If these words be spoken of the Sacrament. De consecrat. did. 2. c.
55. Gloss. panis est in altari. De ^uchar l. 3. c. 19.
But it is disavowed by the Princes of the party against us. Hoc tamen est
impossible, quod panis sit corpus Christi, It is impossible that the bread
should be Christ's body, says the Gloss of Gratian; and Bellarmine says it
cannot be a true proposition, in qua subjectum supponit pro pane, praedicatum
autem pro corpore Christi; Panis enim and corpus Domini res diversissimae sunt.
The thing that these men dread, is, lest it be called bread and Christ's body
too, as we affirm it unanimously to be; and as this argument upon their own
grounds evinces it. Now then how they can serve both ends, I cannot understand.
If they will have the bread or the meat which Christ promised to give to be his
flesh, then so it came to pass; and then it is bread and flesh too. If it did
not so come to pass, and that it is impossible that bread should be Christ's
flesh; then, when Christ said the bread which he would give should be his
flesh, he was not to be understood properly of the Sacrament; But either
figuratively in the Sacrament, or in the Sacrament not at all; either of which
will serve the end of truth in this question. But of this hereafter.

By this time I hope I may conclude, that Transubstantiation is not taught by
our Blessed Lord in the sixth chapter of S. John. Johannes de tertia and
Eucharistica coena nihil quidem scribit, eo quod caeteri tres Evangelistae ante
illum eam plene descripsissent. They are the words of Prompt. Cathol. ser. 3.
heb. sanct.
Stapleton, and are good evidence against them.

SECT. IV. Of the words of Institution.
MUlta mala oportet interpretari eos quiunum non recte intelligere volunt, said
Irenaeus: 1. Contr. haeres. l. 5.
they must needs speak many false things who will not rightly understand one.
The words of consecration are praecipuum fundamentum totius controversiae,
atque adeo totius hujus altissimi mysterii, said Bellarmine, I. 1. c. 8.
Euchar.. sequitue argumentum.
the greatest ground of the whole question; and by adhering to the letter the
Mystery is lost, and the whole party wanders in eternal intricacies, and
inextricable riddles; which because themselves cannot untie, they torment their
sense and their reason, and many places of Scripture, whilst they
pertinaciously stick to the impossible letter, and refute the spirit of these
words.

The words of Institution are these:

S. Math. 26.26. Jesus took bread and blessed it and brake it and gave it to
the Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my body: And he took the cup and
gave thanks and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it, for this is my
blood of the New Testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins.

S. Luke 22.19. And he took bread and gave thanks and brake it and gave to
them, saying, This is my body which is given for you, this do in remembrance of
me. Likewise also the cup after Supper, saying, This cup is the New Testament
in my blood Which is shed for you.

S. Mark 14.22. Jesus took bread and blessed it and gave to them, and said:
Take, eat, this is my body. And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks
he gave it to them, and they all drank of it; and he said to them, This is my
blood of the New Testament which is shed for many.

1 Cor. 11.23. The Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took
bread. And when he had given thanks he brake it, and said, Take, eat, This is
my body which is broken for you, this do in remembrance of me. After the same
manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the New
Testament in my blood, This do ye as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me.

These words contain the Institution, [Hoc est corpus meum] This is my body,]
and say that these words pronounced by the Priest with due intention, do
effect this change of the bread into Christ's body, which change they call
Transubstantiation. But if these words do not effect any such change, then it
may be Christ's body before the words, and these may only declare what is
already done by the prayers of the Holy man; or else it may become Christ's body
only in the use and manducation: and as it will be uncertain when the change
is, so also it cannot be known what it is. If it be Christ's body before those
words, then the literal sense of these words will prove nothing, it is so as it
will be before these words, and made so by other words which refer wholly to
use; and then the praecipuum fundamentum the pillar and ground of
Transubstantiation is supplanted. And if it be only after the words and not
effected by the words, it will be Christ's body only in the reception. Now
concerning this I have these things to say:

1 By what argument can it be proved that these words [Take, and eat] are not
as effective of the change, as [Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body?] If they
be, then the taking and eating does consecrate: and it is not Christ's body till
it be taken and eaten, and then when that is done it is so no more; and besides,
that reservation, circumgestation, adoration, elevation of it must of
themselves fall to the ground; it will also follow that it is Christ's body only
in a mystical, spiritual and sacramental manner.

2 By what argument will it so much as probably be concluded that these words
[This is my body] should be the words effective of conversion and consecration?
De Spir. S. c. 27.
Basil affirms that it is not delivered to us, (...); etc. The words of
Invocation in the manifestation or opening the Eucharistical bread and cup of
blessing, which of all the Saints has left us? for we are not content with
these which the Apostles and the Evangelists mention, but before and after we
say other things which have great efficacy to this mystery. L. 7. ep. 63.
But it is more material which S. Gregory affirms-concerning the Apostles, Mos
Apostolorum fuit ut ad ipsam solummodo orationem Dominicam oblationis hostiam
consecrarent, The Apostles consecrated the Eucharist only by saying the Lords
Prayer. To which I add this consideration, that it is certain, Christ
interposed no command in this case, nor the Apostles; neither did they for
ought appears intend the recitation of those words to be the sacramental
consecration, and operative of the change, because themselves recited several
forms of institution in S. Matthew and S. Mark for one, and S. Luke and S. Paul
for the other, in the matter of the Chalice especially; and by this difference
declared, there is no necessity of one, and therefore no efficacy in any as to
this purpose.

3 If they make these words to signify properly and not figuratively, [est]
does not signify [is] but it shall be; because the conversion is future to the
pronunciation; and by the confession of the Roman Doctors the bread is not
transubstantiated till the [um] in meum be quite out, Bellar. l. 1. de Euch. c.
11.. respondeo cum.
till the last syllable be spoken; But yet I suppose they cannot show any
example, or reason, or precedent, or Grammar, or any thing for it, that est
should be an active word. And they may remember, how confidently they use to
argue against them that affirm men to be justified by a fiducia and persuasion
that their sins are pardoned: saying, that faith must suppose the thing done,
or their belief is false: and if it be done before, then to believe it does not
do it at all, because it is done already. The case is here the same: They
affirm that it is made Christ's body, by saying, it is Christ's body; but their
saying so must suppose the thing done, or else their saying so is false; and if
it be done before, then to say it, does not do it at all, because it is done
already.

4 When our blessed Lord took bread, said S. Luke and S. Paul; he blessed it,
said S. Matthew and S. Mark; (...), making it Eucharisticall; (...), that was,
consecrating or making it holy; it was common bread, unholy when he blessed it,
and made it Eucharistical, for (...) was the same with (...). is the word in
Justin, and (...) bread and wine, food made Eucharistical, or on which Christ
had given thanks, Eucharistia sanguinis and corporis Christi, so Irenaeus and
others; 1 Cor. 14, 15, 16, 17.
and S. Paul does promiscuously use (...) and (...), and (...); and in the same
place the Vulgar Latin renders (...) by benedictionem, 1 Cor. 10.
and therefore S. Paul calls it the cup of blessing; and in this very place of
S. Matthew S. Basil reads (...) in stead of (...), In regulis moralibus.
either in this following the old Greek copies who so read this place, or else
by interpretation so rendering it, as being the same; Epist. 2d Caecilium.
and on the other side S. Cyprian renders (...) (the word used in the blessing
the Chalice) by benedixit. Against this Respons. ad Nod. Gordium.
Smiglecius the Jesuit with some litttle scorn says, it is very absurd to say
that Christ gave thanks to the bread, and so it should be if (...) and (...),
blessing and giving of thanks were all one. But in this he showed his anger or
want of skill, not knowing or not remembering that the Hebrews and Hellenist
Jews love abbreviature of speech; and in the Epistle to the Hebrews S. Paul
uses (...), to appease or propitiate our sins, in stead of (...), to propitiate
or appease God concerning our sins; and so is (...), that is, (...), only that
by this means God also makes the bread holy, blessed, and eucharistical. Now I
demand, what did Christ's blessing effect upon the bread and the chalice? any
thing, or nothing? if no change was consequent, it was an ineffective blessing,
a blessing that blessed not: if any change was consequent, it was a blessing of
the thing in order to what was intended, that is, that it might be
Eucharistical, and then the following words [this is my body] this is the blood
of the New Testament, or the New Testament in my blood, were, as Cabasilas
affirms, (...), by way of history and narration; and so the Syriac Interpreter
puts them together in the place of S. Matthew, (...) and (...), blessing and
giving of thanks, when he did bless it he made it Eucharistical.

5 The Greek Church universally taught that the Consecration was made by the
prayers of the ministering man. Apol. 2.
Justin Martyr calls it (...), Nourishment made Eucharisticall by prayer; and
Origin calls it (...), L. 8. contr. Celsum.
bread made a body, a holy thing by prayer; (...), L. 4. de fide, cap. 14.
so Damascen, by the invocation and illumination of the holy Ghost (...), they
are changed into the body and blood of Christ. But for the Greek Church the
case is evident and confessed. For the ancient Latin Church, Vide Amb^osium
Catharinuns in integro que scripsit libro hac dear.
S. Hierome reproving certain pert Deacons for insulting over Priests, uses
this expression for the honor of Priests above the other, ad quorum preces
Christi corpus sanguisque conficitur, by their prayers the body and blood of
Christ is in the Sacrament. And S. L. 3. de Trin. c. 4.
Austin calls the Sacrament prece mystica consecratum. But concerning this, I
have largely discoursed in another The Divine Instit. of the office
ministerial.. 7.
place. But the effect of the consideration in order to the present Question is
this; that since the change that is made is made not naturally, or by a certain
number of syllables in the manner of a charm, but solemnly, sacredly, morally,
and by prayer, it becomes also the body of our Lord to moral effects, as a
consequent of a moral instrument.

6 And it is considerable, way of prayer, morally, and therefore wholly to
moral purposes; to which the instrument is made proportionable. And if these
words which are called the words of Consecration be exegetical, and enunciative
of the change that is made by prayers, and other mystical words; it cannot be
possibly inferred from these words that there is any other change made then
what refers to the whole mystery and action: and therefore, Take, eat, and
this do, are as necessary to the Sacrament as [Hoc est corpus] and declare
that it is Christ's body only in the use and administration; and therefore not
natural but spiritual. And this is yet more plain by the words in the Hebrew
Text of S. Matthew, Take, eat this which is my body, plainly supposing the
thing to be done already; not by the exegetical words, but by the precedents,
the mystic prayer, and the words of institution and use; and to this I never
saw any thing pretended in answer. But the force of the Argument upon
supposition of the premises is acknowledged to be convincing by an Archbishop
of their own, Archiep. Caesar. Tractat. varii disp. de neces. correct. Theol.
Schol.
Si Christus dando consecravit, etc. If Christ giving the Eucharist did
consecrate (as Scotus affirmed) then the Lutherans will carry the victory, who
maintain that the body of Christ is in the Eucharist only, while it is used,
while it was taken and eaten. And yet on the other side, if it was consecrated,
when Christ said, Take, eat, then he commanded them to take bread, and to eat
bread, which is to destroy the Article of Transubstantiation. So that in
effect, whether it was consecrated by those words or not by those words, their
new Doctrine is destroyed. If it was not consecrated when Christ said, Take,
eat, then Christ bid them take bread, and eat bread, and they did so: But if it
was consecrated by those words, Take, eat, then the words of consecration refer
wholly to use, and it is Christ's body only in the Taking and eating, which is
the thing we contend for. And into the concession of this Bellarmine is thrust
by the force of our argument. De Euch. l. 1. c. 11.
For to avoid Christ's giving the Apostles that which he took, and brake, and
blessed, that is, bread, the same case being governed by all these words; he
answers, Dominum accepisse, and benedixisse panem, sed dedisse panem non
vulgarem, sed benedictum and benedictione mutatum: The Lord took bread and
blessed it, but he gave not common bread, but bread blessed and changed by
blessing; and yet it is certain he gave it them before the words, which he
calls the words of Consecration. To which I add this consideration: that all
words spoken in the person of another are only declarative and exegetical, not
operative and practical; for in particular, if these words, Hoc est corpus meum
were otherwise, then the Priest should turn it into his own, not into the body
of Christ. Neither will it be easy to have an answer, not only because the
Greeks and Latins are divided in the ground of their argument concerning the
mystical instrument of consecration: But the Latins themselves have seven
several opinions, Tractat. varii.
as the Archbishop of Caesarea de capite fontium, has enumerated them in his
nuncupatory Epistle to Pope Sixtus Quintus before his book of diverse treatises:
and that the consecration is made by [this is my body] though it be now the
prevailing opinion, yet that by them Christ did not consecrate the elements,
was the express sentence of Pope Innocent 3. and Innocent 4. and of many
ancient Fathers, as the same Archbishop of Caesarea testifies in the book now
quoted; and the Scholasticks are hugely divided upon this point, viz. Whether
these words are to be taken materially or significatively; the expression is
barbarous and rude, but they mean, whether they be consecratory or declarative.
Aquinas makes them consecratory, and his authority brought that opinion into
credit; and yet Scotus and his followers are against it; and they that affirm
them to be taken significatively, that is, to be consecratory, are divided into
so many opinions that they are not easy to be reckoned; only In 4. Sentent.
Guido Brianson reckons nine, and his own makes the tenth. This I take upon the
credit of one of their own Archbishops.

But I proceed to follow them in their own way; [Hoc est corpus meum] do effect
or signify the change; yet the change is not natural and proper, but
figurative, sacramental, and spiritual; exhibiting what it signifies, being
real to all intents and purposes of the Spirit: and this I shall first show by
discussing the words of institution; first those which they suppose to be the
consecratory words, and then the other.

Hoc est corpus meum] Concerning which form of words we must know, sacramental
already in use among the Jews, for the major domo to break bread and distribute
wine at the Passover after supper to the eldest according to his age, to the
youngest according to his youth, as it is notorious and known in the practice
of the Jews: so also were the very words which Christ spoke in this changed
subject, an imitation of the words which were then used, This is the bread of
sorrow which our Fathers eat in Egypt; Scaliger de emendatione tempor. l. 6
This is the Passover: and this Passover was called, The body of the Paschal
Lamb: nay it was called the body of our Savior, and our Savior himself;
(...), said Justin Martyr dial. cum Tryph. And Esdras said to the Jews, This
Passover is our Savior, and This is the body of our Savior, as it is noted
by others. So that here the words were made ready for Christ, and made his by
appropriation, by meum: he was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world,
he is the true passover; which he then affirming called that which was the
Antitype of the Passover, the Lamb of God, [His body] the body of the true
Passover, to wit, in the same sacramental sense in which the like words were
affirmed in the Mosaical Passover.

SECT. V. 5.

HOC, this bread is my body, this cup, or the wine in the cup, is my blood:
concerning the chalice, there can be nodoubt; it is, (...), hic calix, this
chalice; and as little of the other. The Fathers refer the Pronoune
demonstrative to bread, saying, that, of bread it was Christ affirmed, This is
my body; which I shall have in the sequel more occasion to prove: for the
present, these may suffice; Christus panem corpus suum appellat, says Lib.
adv. Judaeos.
Tertullian. Nos audiamus panem quem fregit Dominus esse corpus salvatoris: so
Ep. ad Hebidiam.
S. Hierome. (...), so In Joh. 12.
S. Cyril of Alexandria, he called bread his flesh. Dial. 1. cap. 8.
Theodoret says that to the body he gave the name of the symbol, and to the
symbol the name of his body. (...)] therefore signifies this bread; and it
matters not that bread in the Greek is of the masculine gender; for the
substantive being understood not expressed, by the rule of Grammar, the
adjective must be the neuter gender, and is taken substantively. Neither is
there any inconvenience in this, L. 1. de Euch. cap. 10. porro 4.
as Bellarmine weakly dreams upon as weak suggestions. For when he had said
that hoc is either taken adjectively or substantively, he proceeds, not
adjectively, for then it must agree with the substantive, which in this case is
masculine; bread being so both in Greek and in Latin. But if you say it is
taken substantively (as we contend it is) he confutes you thus; If it be taken
substantively, so that hoc signifies this thing, and so be referred to bread,
then it is most absurd, because it cannot be spoken of any thing seen; that is,
of a substantive, unless it agrees with it, and be of the same gender; that is
in plain English, It is neither taken adjectively, nor substantively: not
adjectively, because it is not of the same gender: not substantively, because
it is not of the same gender; that is, because substantively it is not
adjectively. But the reason he adds is as frivolous; because no man pointing
to his brother will say, hoc est frater meus, but hic est frater meus, I grant
it. But if it be a thing without life you may affirm it in the neuter gender,
because it being of neither sex, the subject is supplied by [thing] so that you
may say hoc est aqua, this is water; so in Pet. 2.19
S. Peter, (...), this is grace, and Exodus 8.19.
(...). But of a person present you cannot say so, because he is present, and
there is nothing distinct from him, neither re nor ratione, in the thing nor in
the understanding; and therefore you must say hic, not hoc; because there is no
subject to be supposed distinct from the predicate. But when you see an image
or figure of your brother, you may then say, hoc est frater meus, because here
is something to make a subject distinct from the predicate. This thing, or this
picture, this figure, or this any thing, that can be understood and not
expressed, may make a neuter gender; and every Schole boy knows it: so it is in
the blessed Sacrament, there is a Subject or a thing distinct from Corpus: This
bread, this which you see is my body; and therefore is in Hoc no improprietie,
though bread be understood.

To which I add this, sacramental bread; that is, bread so used, broken,
given, eaten, as it is in the institution and use: (...), this is my body; and
(...) refers to the whole action about the bread and wine, and so (...) may be
easily understood without an impropriety. [And indeed it is necessary that
(...) this] should take in the whole action on all sides: because the bread
neither is the natural body of Christ, nor yet is it alone a sufficient symbol
or representment of it. But the bread broken, blessed, given, distributed,
taken, eaten; this is Christ's body, viz. as Origens expression is, In c. 15.
Mat.
typicum symbolicumque corpus. By the way give me leave to express some little
indignation against those words of Bellarmine, which cannot easily be excused
from blasphemy; saying, that if our Lord had said of the bread which the
Apostles saw and knew to be bread, This is my body, absurdissima esset locutio,
it had been a most absurd speech. So careless are these opiniators of what
they say, that rather then their own fond opinions should be confuted, they
care not to impute nonsense to the eternal Wisdom of the Father. And yet that
Christ did say this of bread so ordered and to be used, Hoc est corpus meum,
besides that the thing is notorious, I shall prove most evidently.

1 That which Christ broke, his body. What gave he but what he broke? what did
he break, but that which he took? what did he take? accepit panem (says the
Scripture) he took bread, therefore of bread it was that he affirmed, It was
his body. Now the Roman Doctors will by no means endure this; for if of bread
he affirmed it to be his body; then we have cleared the Question, for it is
bread and Christ's body too; that is, it is bread naturally, and Christ's body
spiritually; for that it cannot be both naturally, they unanimously affirm. And
we are sure upon this Article: for disparatum de disparato non praedicatur
proprie; It is a rule of nature and essential reason, If it be bread it is not
a stone, if it be a Mouse it is not a Mule; and therefore when there is any
praedication made of one diverse thing by another, the proposition must needs
be improper and figurative. De consecrat. did. 2. c. quia.
And the Gloss of Gratian disputes it well, If bread be the body of Christ (
viz. properly and naturally) then something that is not born of the Virgin Mary
is the body of Christ; and the body of Christ should be both alive and dead.
Now that [Hoc, This] points to bread, besides the notoriousness of the thing in
the story of the Gospels, in the matter of fact, and S. Paul calling it bread
so often, (as I shall show in the sequel) it ought to be certain to the Roman
Doctors, and confessed, because by their doctrines when Christ said Hoc, This]
and a while after, it was bread; because it was not consecrated till the last
syllable was spoken. To avoid this therefore, they turn themselves into all the
opinions and disguises that can be devised. E^us^em sententiae sunt, Ocbam,
Petrus de Aliaco, Ca^e^^^ensis, Antisiodorensis in 4. l. sent. did. 13.
Rossensis cap. 4. contrae captiv. Babyl. Maldonat. Barradius in Evangel.
Stapleton says, that [Hoc, This] does only signify the predicate, and is
referred to the body, so as Adam said, This is flesh of my flesh and bone of my
bone, Hoc] not this rib, but this thing, this praedicate; So, Hic est filius
meus, hic est sangu^s Testament^. Now this is confuted before; for it can only
be true when there is no difference of subject and predicate, as in all figures
and sacraments and artificial representments there are. Some others say, This
is, that is, this shall be my body; So that is demonstrates not what is, but
what shall be. But this prevailed not amongst them: Others say, that This,
signifies Nothing; So Innocentius the third, Major, the Count of Mirandula, De
capite Fontium, and Catharinus. Others yet affirm, that [This] signifies, these
accidents. So Ruard Tapper, and others whom Suarez reckons and confutes. Thomas
Aquinas and his Scholars affirm that This] demonstrates neither bread nor the
body, nor nothing, nor the accidents, but a substance indefinitely, which is
under the accidents of bread; as when Christ turned the water into wine, he
might have said Hoc est vinum, not meaning that water is wine, but this which
is here, or this which is in the vessel is wine, which is an instance in which
Bellarmine pleases himself very much and uses it more then once, not at all
considering that in this form of speech, there is the same mistake as in the
former: for in this example there are not two things, as we contend there are
in the Sacrament; and that to make up the proposition, the understanding is
forced to make an artificial subject; and [this] refers to wine, and is
determined by his imaginary subject, and makes not an essential or physical,
but a logical praedication; This which is in the vessel is wine: and the
proposition is identical, if it be reduced to a substantial. But when Christ
said [Hoc est corpus meum] hoc] first, neither points to corpus as the other
does to vinum, even by their own confession; nor yet, secondly, to an
artificial subject, whereby it can by imagination become demonstrative, and
determinate; for then it were no real affirmative, not at all significative,
much less effective of a change: nor yet, thirdly, will they allow that it
points to that subject which is really there, viz. bread; but what then? It
demonstrates something real, that either 1. is not the predicate, and then
there would be two things disparate signified by it, two distinct substances,
which in this case could be nothing but bread and the body of Christ: or 2. it
demonstrates nothing but the predicate, and then the proposition were
identical, viz. this body of Christ is the body of Christ; which is an absurd
praedication: or else 3. it demonstrates something that is indemonstrable,
pointing at something that is nothing certain, and then it cannot be pointed at
or demonstrated; for if by this which is under the species, they mean any
certain substance, it must be bread or the body of Christ, either of which
undoes their cause.

But if it be inquired, Pronounce demons;trative should signify
indeterminately, that is, an individuum vagum: They tell us, no; it does not:
but it signifies an individual, determinate substance under the accidents of
bread, not according to the formality of the bread, L. 2. exam. mist. Calvin.
c. 1. 4. Objectio.
but secundum rationent substantiae communem and individuam vage per ordinem ad
accidentia, but according to the formality of a substance common and
individual, indefinitely or indeterminately by order to those accidents. So
Gregory de Valentia; which is as good and perfect nonsense as ever was spoken.
It is determinate and not determinate, it is a substance in order to accidents,
individual and yet common, universal and particular, it is limited, but after
an unlimited manner; that is, it is and it is not; that is, it is the Logic,
and the Grammar, and the proper sense of Transubstantiation, which is not to be
understood but by them that know the new and secret way: to reconcile
contradictories. Bellarmine sweetens the sense of this as well as he may, and
says that the Pronoune demonstrative does point out and demonstrate the
species, that is, the accidents of bread; these accidents are certain and
determinate; L. 1. Euch. c. 11.. ad id vero.
so that the Pronoune demonstrative is on the side of the species or accidents,
not of the substance. But yet so as to mean not the accidents, but the
substance, and not the substance which is, but which shall be; for it is not
the same yet: which indeed is the same nonsense with the former, abused or set
off with a distinction, the parts of which contradict each other. The Pronoune
demonstrative does only point to the accidents, and yet does not mean the
accidents, but the substance under them; and yet it does not mean the substance
that is under them, but that which shall be; for the substance which is meant
is not yet: and it does not point at the substance, but yet it means it: For
the substance indeed is meant by the Pronoune demonstrative, but that it does
not at all demonstrate it, but the accidents only. And indeed this is a fine
secret: The substance is pointed at before it is, and the demonstration is upon
the accidents, but means the substance, in obliquo, but not in recto; not
directly, but as by the by; just as a man can see a thing before it be made,
and by pointing at a thing which you see, demonstrates or shows you a thing
which shall never be seen. But then if you desire to know how it was pointed at
before it was, that is the secret not yet revealed. But finally this is the
doctrine that has prevailed at least in the Jesuits Schools. This] points
out something under the accidents of bread, meaning, This which is contained
under the accidents of bread is my body: there it rests. But before it go any
further I shall disturb his rest with this Syllogism: When Christ said, Hoc,
this is my body; by This] he meant this which is contained under the accidents
of bread, is my body. But at that instant, that which was contained under the
accidents of bread, was the substance of bread; Therefore to the substance of
bread Christ pointed, that he related to by the Pronoune demonstrative, and of
that he affirmed, it was his body. The Major is that the Jesuits contend for:
the Minor is affirmed by Bellarmine, Quando dicitur [Hoc] tum non est praesens
substantia corporis Christi: therefore the conclusion ought to be his and owned
by them. However I will make bold to call it a. demonstration upon their own
grounds, and conclude that it is bread and Christ's body too; and that is the
doctrine of the Protestants. And I add this also, that it seems a great folly
to declaim against us for denying the literal, natural sense, and yet that
themselves should expound it in a sense which suffers a violence and a most
unnatural, ungrammatical torture; for if they may change the words from the
right sense and case to the oblique and indirect, why may not we? And it is
less violence to say [Hoc est corpus meum] i. e. hic panis est corpus meum;
viz. spiritualiter: then to say, hoc est, that is, sub his speciebus est corpus
meum. And this was the sense of In 4. qu 6
Ocham the Father of the Nominalists: It may be held that under the species of
bread, there remains also the substance; because this is neither against reason
nor any authority of the Bible; and of all the manners this is most reasonable,
and more easy to maintain, and from thence follow fewer inconveniences then
from any other. Yet because of the determination of the Church ( viz. of Rome)
all the Doctors commonly hold the contrary. By the way observe that their
Church has determined against that, against which neither Scripture nor Reason
has determined.

2 The case is clearer in the other kind, as in transition I noted above Numb.
1.. 5. Vide Picherel. Doct. Sorbon. in 26. Matthew.
(...), hic calix. I demand to what [(...), Hic, This] does refer? what it
demonstrates and points at? The text sets the substantive down, (...), this
cup; that is, the wine in this cup; of this it is that he affirmed it to be the
blood of the New Testament, or the New Testament in his blood: that is, this is
the sanction of the everlasting Testament, I make it in my blood, this is the
Symbol, what I do now in sign, I will do to morrow in substance, and you shall
for ever after remember and represent it thus in Sacrament. I cannot devise
what to say plainer then that this (...) points at the chalice. -- Hoc potate
merum Lib. 4. Evang. hist. verse. 456.
-- So Juvencus a Priest of Spain in the reign of Constantine, Atque ait, hic
sanguis populi^^clicta remitres, Hanc potate meum in stead of Hoc potate merum:
nam veris crtedite dictis, Posthac non^^quam vitis gustabo liquorem, Donec
regn^ patris melioris munera vita ^n nova me rursus concedent suygere vina.
Drink this wine, [But by the way, this troubled some body, and therefore an
order was taken to corrupt the words by changing them into, Hunc potate meum;
but that the cheat was too apparent] And if it be so of one kind, it is so in
both, that is beyond all question. Against this Bellarmine brings argumentum
robustissimum, a most robustious argument: By (...), or cup, cannot be meant
the wine in the cup, because it follows, (...), L. 1. c. 10. de Euchar.. sed
addo arg.
This Cup [is the New Testament in my bloud] which was shed for you; referring
to the cup, for the word can agree with nothing but the cup; therefore by the
cup is meant not wine, but blood, for that was poured out. To this I oppose
these things; 1. Though it does not agree with (...), yet it must refer to it,
and is an ordinary (...) of case called (...): and it is not unusual in the
best masters of Language: (...), for (...), in Demosthenes: so also Goclenius
in his Grammatical problems observes another out of Cicero. Been autem dicere,
quod est perite loqui, non habet definitam aliquam regionem, cujus terminis
septa teneatur; Many more he cites out of Plato, Homer, and Virgil; and me
thinks these men should least of all object this, since in their Latin Bible
Sixtus Senensis confesses, and all the world knows, L. 8. Biblioth.
there are innumerable barbarisms and improprieties, hyperbata and Antiptoses.
But in the present case it is easily supplied by (...), which is frequently
understood, and employed in the article (...), that is, (...), that is, in my
blood which is shed for you. 2 If it were referred to [cup] then the figure
were more strong and violent, and the expression less literal; and therefore
it makes much against them, who are undone if you admit figurative expressions
in the institution of this Sacrament. 3 To what can (...) refer, but to (...),
This cup, and let what sense soever be affixed to it afterward, if it do not
suppose a figure, then there is no such things as figures, or words, or truth,
or things. 4. Vide Beza in Annot. in hunc locum.
That (...) must refer to (...), appears by S. Matthew and S. Mark, where the
word is directly applied to blood; S. Paul uses not the word, and Bellarmine
himself gives the rule, verba Domini rectius exposita a Marce, etc. when one
Evangelist is plain, by him we are to expound another that is not plain: and S.
Basil in his reading of the words, either following some ancienter Greek copy,
or else mending it out of the other Evangelists, Regul. moral. 21.
changes the case into perfect Grammat, and good Divinity, (...).

3 The symboles of the blessed Sacrament are called bread and the cup, 1 Cor.
10.16.
Paul, The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communication (so it
should be read) of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the
communication of the body of Christ? as if he had said, This bread is Christ's
body; though there be also this mystery in it, This bread is the communication
of Christ's body, that is, the exhibition and donation of it, not Christ's body
formally, but virtually, and effectively, it makes us communicate with Christ's
body in all the effects and benefits: A like expression we have in Valerius
Maximus, where Scipio in the feast of Jupiter is said Graccho communicasse
concordiam, that is, consignasse, he communicated concord; he consigned it with
the sacrifice giving him peace and friendship, the benefit of that
communication: and so is the cup of benediction, that is, when the cup is
blessed, it communicates Christ's blood, and so does the blessed bread; for to
eat the bread, in the New Testament is the sacrifice of Christians; they are
the words of L. 17. de Civ. Dei cap. 5.
S. Austin, Omnes de unto pane participamus; so S. Paul, we all partake of this
one bread. Hence the argument is plain; That which is broken is the
communication of Christ's body; But that which is broken is bread, therefore
bread is the communication of Christ's body. The bread which we break, those are
the words.

4 The other place of S. Paul is plainer yet, Let a man examine himself, 1 Cor.
11.28. and 26.
and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup. And, so often as ye
eat this bread and drink this cup, ye declare the Lords death till he come; and
the same also verse. 27. three times in this chapter he calls the Eucharist,
Bread. It is bread, sacramentalbread when the communicant eats it: But he that
in the Church of Rome should call to the Priest to give him a piece of bread,
would quickly find that in stead of bread he should have a stone or something
as bad. But S. Paul had a little of the Macedonian simplicity, calling things
by their own plain names.

5 Against this some little things are pretended in answer by the Roman
Doctors. it is made of bread; as Eve is called of Adam, bone of his bone; and
the rods changed into serpents are still called rods; or else because it
sometimes was bread, therefore so it is called after: just as we say, The blind
see, the lame walk, the harlots enter into the kingdom of heaven. L. 1. c. 14.
de Euchar.
Which answer although Bellarmine mislikes, yet lest any others should be
pleased with it, I have this certain confutation of it; that by the Roman
doctrine the bread is wholly annihilated, and nothing of the bread becomes any
thing of the holy body; and the holy body never was bread, not so much as the
matter of bread remaining in the change. It cannot therefore be called bread,
unless it be bread; at least not for this reason. For if the body of Christ be
not bread then, neither ever was it bread, neither was it made of bread; and
therefore these cannot be the reasons, because they are not true. But in the
instances alleged, the denomination still remains, because the change was made
in the same remaining matter, or in the same person, or they were to be so
again as they were before; nothing of which can be affirmed of the Eucharist,
by their doctrine, therefore these instances are not pertinent. 2. Others
answer, that the holy Body is called Bread, because it seems to be so: just as
the effigies and forms of Pomegranates, of Bulls, of Serpents, of Cherubims, are
called by the names of those creatures whom they do resemble. I reply, that
well they may, because there is there no danger of being deceived by such
appellations, no man will suppose them other then the pictures, and so to speak
is usual and common. But in the matter of the holy Eucharist it ought not to be
called bread for the likeness to bread, unless it were bread indeed; because
such likeness and such appellation are both of them a temptation against that
which these men call an article of faith: but rather because it is like bread,
and all the world are apt to take it for such, it ought to have been described
with caution, and affirmed to be Christ and God, and not to be bread though it
seem so. But when it is often called Bread in Scripture, which name the Church
of Rome does not at all use in the mystery, and is never called in Scripture,
the Son of God, or God, or Christ; which words the Church of Rome does often use
in the mystery; it is certain that it is called bread, not because it is like
bread, but because it is so indeed. * And indeed upon such an answer as this,
it is easy to affirm an apple to be a Pigeon, and no apple; for if it be urged
that all the world calls it an apple, it may be replied then as now, It is true
they call it an apple, because it is like an apple, but indeed it is a Pigeon.
3. Some of them say when it is called bread, is not meant that particular kind
of nourishment; but in general it means any food; and so only represents
Christ's body as a celestial divine thing intended some way to be our food.
Just, as in S. Joh. 6. Christ is called the bread that came down from heaven,
not meaning material bread, but divine nourishment. But this is the weakest of
all, because this which is called bread is broken, is eaten, has the accidents
of bread, and all the signs of his proper nature; and it were a strange
violence that it should here signify any manner of food to which it is not
like, and not signify that to which it is so like. * Besides this, bread here
signifies, as wine or chalice does in the following words; now that did
signify the fruit of the Vine, that special manner of drink (Christ himself
being the Interpreter) and therefore so must this mean that special manner of
food.

6 If after the blessing the bread does not remain, Suidas, verb. (...). When
God blesses, he confirms his words with deeds, and gives all sorts of good to
that which he blesses. And certain it is, that although blessing can change it,
it must yet change it to the better; and so we affirm he does: for the bread
besides the natural being, by being blessed becomes the body of Christ in a
sacramental manner; but then it must remain bread still, or else it receives
not that increase and change; but if it be annihilated and becomes nothing, it
is not Christ's body in any sense, nor in any sense can pretend to be blessed.
To which add the words of S. Austin, L. 83. Quaest. 21.
Ille ad quem non esse non pertinet non est causa deficiendi, id est, tendendi
ad non esse. He that is the fountain of all being, is not the cause of not
being, much less can his blessing cause any thing not to be. It follows
therefore, that by blessing the bread becomes better, but therefore it still
remains.

7 In Trullo at Constantinople, decreeing thus against the Aquarii, In Sanctis
nihil plus quam corpus Christi offeratur, ut ipse Dominus tradidit, hoc est,
panis and vinum aqua mixtum, In the holy places or offices] let nothing more be
offered but the body of Christ, as the Lord himself delivered, that is, bread
and wine mingled with water. So Justin Martyr, Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
(...). We are taught that the food made Eucharistical, the food which by
change nourishes our flesh and-bloud, is the flesh and blood of Jesus
incarnate, (...), we do not receive it as common bread: No, for it is (...), it
is made Sacramental and Eucharistical, and so it is sublimed to become the body
of Christ. But it is natural food still, and that for two reasons. 1. Because
still he calls it bread, not common bread, but extraordinary, yet bread still.
Card. Perron says, it follows not to say, it is not common bread, therefore it
is bread; so as of those which appeared as men to Abraham, we might say they
were not common men; but it follows not that they were men at all. So the holy
Ghost descending like a Dove upon the blessed Jesus, was no common Dove; and
yet it follows not it was a Dove at all. I reply to this, that of whatsoever
you can say, it is extraordinary in his kind, of that you may also affirm it to
be of that kind: as concerning the richest scarlet, if you say this is no
ordinary color, you suppose it to be a color: so the Corinthian brass was no
common brass, and the Colossus was no common Statue, and Christmas day is no
common day, yet these negatives suppose the affirmative of their proper
subject; Corinthian brass is brass, Colossus is a statue, and Christmas day
is a day. But if you affirm of a counterfeit, or of an image or a picture, by
saying it is no common thing, you deny to it the ordinary nature by diminution;
but if it have the nature of the thing, then to say it is not common, denies
the ordinary nature by addition and eminency; the first says it is not so at
all, the second says it is more then so; and this is taught to every man by
common reason, and he could have observed it if he had pleased; for it is
plain, Justin said this of that, which before the Consecration was known to be
natural bread, and therefore now to say it was not common bread, is to say it
is bread and something more. 2. The second reason from the words of Justin to
prove it to be natural food still, is because it is that by which our blood and
our flesh is nourished by change. Bellarmine says, that these words, by which
our flesh and blood is nourished, mean by which they use to be nourished; not
meaning that they are nourished by this bread when it is Eucharistical. But
besides that this is gratis dictum without any color or pretense from the
words of Justin, but by a presumption taken from his own opinion, as if it were
impossible that Justin should mean any thing against his doctrine: besides this
I say the interpretation is insolent, Nutriuntur, i.e. solent nutriri; as also
because both the verbs are of the present tense, (...) and (...), The flesh and
blood are nourished by bread, and it is the body of Christ; that is, both in
conjunction; so that he says not, as Bellarmine would have him, Cibus ille ex
quo carnes nostrae ali solent cum prece mystica consecratur, efficitur corpus
Christi; but, Cibus ille quo carnes nostrae aluntur, est corpus Christi. The
difference is material, and the matter is apparent: but upon this alone I rely
not. To the same purpose are the words of Irenaeus, L. 4. c. 57.
Dominus accipiens panem, suum corpus esse confitebatur, and temperamentum
calicis, suum sanguinem confirmavit; Our Lord taking bread confessed it to be
his body, and the mixture of the cup he confirmed to be his blood. Here
Irenaeus affirms to be true what De Euch. l. 3. c. 19.
Bellarmine says, non potest fieri, cannot be done; that in the same
proposition bread should be the subject, and body should be the praedicate;
Irenaeus says that Christ said it to be so, and him we follow. But most
plainly in his fifth Book, Quando ergo and mixtus calix, and fractus panis
percipit verhum Dei, fit Eucharistia sanguinis and corporis Christi; ex quibus
augetur and consistit carnis nostrae substantia: Quomodo carnem negant capacem
esse donationis Dei qui est vita aeterna, quae sanguine and corpore Christi
nutritur? and a little after he affirms that we are flesh of his flesh and bone
of his bones; and that this is not understood of the spiritual man, but of the
natural disposition or temper; quae de calice qui est sanguis ejus nutritur,
and de pane qui est corpus ejus augetur; and again, eum calicem qui est
creatura suum sanguinem qui effusus est ex quo auget nostrum sanguinem, and eum
panem etc. qui est creatura, suum corpus confirmavit ex quo nostra auget
corpora; it is made the Eucharist of the bread, and the body of Christ out of
that, of which the substance of our flesh consists and is increased: by the
bread which he confirmed to be his body, he increases our bodies, by the blood
which was poured out he increases our blood; that is the sense of Irenaeus so
often repeated. And to the same purpose is that of Origin, L. 8. adv. Ceisum.
(...). The bread, which is called the Eucharist, is to us the symbol of
thanksgiving or Eucharist to God. So also Tertullian Tertul. adv. Marcion. l.
4. c. 40.
, acceptum panem and distributum discipulis suis corpus suum fecit, He made the
bread which he took and distributed to his disciples to be his body. But more
plainly in his book De Corona militis, Calicis aut panis nostri aliquid decuti
in terram anxie patimur; we cannot endure that any of the cup or any thing of
the bread be thrown to the ground. The Eucharist he plainly calls bread; and
that he speaks of the Eucharist is certain, Bellar. l. 4. Euch. c. 14. si
rursus objicias.
and Bellarmine quotes the words to the purpose of showing how reverently the
Eucharist was handled and regarded. The like is in S. Cyprian, Cyprian. ep. 76.
Dominus corpus suum panem vocat, and sanguinem suum vinum appellat; Our Lord
calls bread his body, and wine his blood. So John Maxentius in the time of Pope
Hormisda, Dial. 2. contr. Nestor.
The bread which the whole Church receives in memory of the Passion, is the
body of Christ. Carech. mystag. 4.
And S. Cyril of Jerusalem is earnest in this affair; since our Lord has
declared and said to us of bread, This is my body, who shall dare to doubt it?
which words I the rather note, because Cardinal Perron brings them, as if they
made for his cause, which they most evidently destroy. For if of bread Christ
made this affirmation, that it is his body, then it is both bread and Christ's
body too, and that is it which we contend for. In the Dialogues against the
Marcionites, Maximus.
collected out of Maximus, Origin is brought in proving the reality of Christ's
flesh and blood in his incarnation, by this argument. If as these men say, he
be without flesh and blood, (...), etc. of what body and of what blood did he
command the images or figures giving the bread and cup to his Disciples, that
by these a remembrance of him should be made? Acacius in Genet. 2. Graec.
caten. in pentateuch.
But Acacius the successor of Eusebius in his Bishopric, calls it bread and
wine even in the very use and sanctification of us. Panis vinumque ex hac
materia vescentes sanctificat, the bread and wine sanctifies them that are fed
with this matter. In typo sanguinis sui non obtulit aquam sed vinum, so S. L.
2. adv. Ievin.
Hierome, he offered wine not water in the type [representment or sacrament] of
his blood. To the same purpose, but most plain are the words of Theodoret,
Dial. 1. (...).
(...), In the exhibition of the mysteries he called bread his body, and the
mixture in the chalice he called blood. So also S. Austin Sermon. 9. De diversis;
The Euoharist is our daily bread, but we receive it so that we are not only
nourished by the belly, but also by the understanding. And I cannot understand
the meaning of plain Latin, if the same thing be not affirmed in the little
Masse-book published by Paulus 5. for the English Priests, Deus qui humani
generis utramque substantiam praesentium munerum alimento, tribue quaesumus, ut
eorum and corporibus nostris subsidium non desit and mentibus, The present
gifts were appointed for the nourishment both of soul and body. Who please may
see more in Macarius 27 homily, and Ammonius in his Evangelical Harmony in the
Bibliotheca PP. and this though it be decryed now adays in the Roman Schools,
yet was the doctrine of Sent. 4. did 11. q. 3.
Scotus, of Ibid. q. 1.
Durandus, Ibid. q. 6. and Centilog. Theol. con. l. 4. q. 6.
Ocham, Ibid. q. 6. ar. 1.
Cameracensis, and Canon. missae lect. 40. H.
Biel, and those men were for Consubstantiation; that Christ's natural body was
together with natural bread, which although I do not approve, yet the use that
I now make of them cannot be denied me; it was their doctrine, that after
consecration bread still remains; after this let what can follow. But that I
may leave the ground of this argument secure, I add this, that in the
Primitive Church eating the Eucharistical bread was esteemed a breaking the
fast, which is not imaginable any man can admit, but he that believes bread to
remain after consecration, and to be nutritive as before: but so it was that in
the second age of the Church it was advised that either they should end their
station (or fast) at the communion, or defer the communion to the end of the
station; as appears in Tertullian, de Oratione cap. 14. which unanswerably
proves that then it was thought to be bread and nutritive, even then when it
was Eucharistical: and Apol. 4.6.
Picus Mirandula affirms that if a Jew or a Christian should eat the Sacrament
for refection, it breaks his fast. The same also is the doctrine of all those
Churches who use the Liturgies of S. James, S. Mark, and S. Chrysostom, who
hold that receiving the holy Communion breaks the fast, as appears in the
disputation of Cardinal Humbert with Nicetas about 600 years ago. The sum of
all is this; If of bread Christ said this is my body, because it cannot be true
in a proper natural sense, it implying a contradiction that it should be
properly bread, and properly Christ's body; it must follow, That it is Christ's
body in a figurative improper sense. But if the bread does not remain bread,
but be changed by blessing into our Lords body; this also is impossible to be
in any sense true, but by affirming the change to be only in use, virtue and
condition, with which change the natural being of bread may remain. For, he
that supposes that by the blessing, the bread ceases so to be, that nothing of
it remains, must also necessarily suppose that the bread being no more, it
neither can be the body of Christ, nor any thing else. For it is impossible
that what is taken absolutely from all being, should yet abide under a certain
difference of being, and that that thing which is not at all, should yet be
after a certain manner. Since therefore (as I have proved) the bread remains,
and of bread it was affirmed [This is my body] it follows inevitably that it is
figuratively, not properly and naturally spoken of bread, That it is the flesh
or body of our Lord.

SECT. VI. [Est corpus meum.]
THe next words to be considered are [Est corpus] This is my body;] and here
begins the first Tropical expression; [Est,] that is, significat or
repraesentat, and exhibet corpus meum, say some. This is my body, it is to all
real effects the same to your particulars, which my body is to all the Church:
it signifies the breaking of my body, the effusion of my blood for you, and
applies my passion to you, and conveyes to you all the benefits; as this
nourishes your bodies, so my body nourishes your souls to life eternal, and
consigns your bodies to immortality. Others make the trope in Corpus; so that
Est shall signify properly, but Corpus is taken in a spiritual sense,
sacramental and mysterious; not a natural and praesential: whether the figure
be in Est or in Corpus, is but a quaestion of Rhetoric, and of no effect. That
the proposition is tropical and figurative is the thing, and that Christ's
natural body is now in heaven definitively, and no where else; and that he is
in the Sacrament as he can be in a Sacrament, in the hearts of faithful
receivers, as he has promised to be there; that is, in the Sacrament
mystically, operatively, as in a moral and divine instrument, in the hearts of
receivers by faith and blessing; this is the truth and the faith of which we
are to give a reason and account to them that disagree. But this which is to
all the purpose which any one pretends can be in the sumption of Christ's body
naturally, yet will not please the Romanists, unless [Est, Is] signify
properly without trope or metonymie, and corpus be corpus natural. Here then I
join issue; It is not Christ's body properly, or naturally: for though it
signifies a real effect, yet it fignifies the body figuratively, or the effects
and real benefits.

Now concerning this, significat, but they use the word Is; the Hebrews and the
Syrians always join the names of the signs with the things signified; and since
the very essence of a sign is to signify, it is not an improper elegancy in
those languages to use [Est] for significat. 2. It is usual in the Old
Testament, Genesis 41.26, 27. and 40.12, 18. and 17.10. Exodus 12.11.
as may appear, to understand est when the meaning is for the present, and not
to express it: but when it signifies the future then to express it; the seven
fat cowes, seven years; the seven withered ears shall be seven years of famine.
3 The Greek Interpreters of the Bible supply the word est in the present tense
which is omitted in the Hebrew, as in the places above quoted: but although
their Language can very well express [signifies] yet they follow the Hebrew
Idiom. 4 In the New Testament the same manner of speaking is retained, to
declare that the nature and being of signs is to signify they have no other
esse but significare, and therefore they use est for significat. The Seed is
the Word, the Field is the World, the Reapers are the Angels, the Harvest is
the End of the world; the Rock is Christ; I am the Door; I am the Vine, my
Father is the husbandman; I am the way, the truth, and the life; Sarah and Agar
are the two Testaments; the Stars are the Angels of the Churches, the
Candlesticks are the Churches; and many more of this kind; we have therefore
great and fair, and frequent precedents for expounding this est by significat,
for it is the style of both the Testaments to speak in signs and
representments, where one disparate speaks of another; as it does here: the
body of Christ, of the bread, which is the Sacrament; especially since the very
institution of it is representative, significative, and commemorative: For so
said our blessed Savior, Do this in memorial of me Nemo recordatur nisi quod
in praesentia non est positum, S. August. in Psalm. 37.
; and this doing, ye show forth the Lords death till he come, says S. Paul.

Haec n. Sacramenta sunt, in quibus non quid sint, sed quid ostendant semper
attenditur, quoniam signa sunt rerum aliud existentia, aliud significantia.
August. l. 3. contr. Max. c. 22. Sacramentum dicitur sacrum signum, sive sacrum
secretum. Bern. Sermon. de coen. Dom.
Sacrament: For mysterious and tropical expressions are very frequently, almost
regularly and universally used in Sacripture in Sacraments and sacramentals.
And therefore it is but a vain discourse of Bellarmine to contend that this
must be a proper speaking, because it is a Sacrament. For that were all one as
to say, he speaks mystically, therefore he speaks properly. (...) is the Greek
for a Sacrament, and all the Greek that is for it in the New Testament: and
when S. Paul tells of a man praying in the spirit, but so as not to be
understood, he expresses it by, speaking mysteries 1 Cor. 14.2.
. The mysterious and sacramental speaking is secret and dark. But so it is in
the sacrament or covenant of circumcision. (...), Genesis 17.10.
This is my Covenant, and yet it was but the seal of the Covenant, (if you
believe S. Romans 4.11
Paul) it was a Sacrament and a consignation of it, but it is spoken of it
affirmatively; and the same words are used there as in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist; it is (...) in both places.

Covenant and a Testament, it ought to be expressed without a figure) are
dissolved. For here is a Covenant and a Testament and a Sacrament all in one,
and yet the expression of them is figurative; and the being a Testament is so
far from supposing all expression in it to be proper and free from figure, that
it self, the very word Testament in the institution of the holy Sacrament is
tropical or figurative: est Testamentum, that is, est signum Testamenti, it is,
that is, it signifies. And why they should say that a Testament must have in it
all plain words and no figures or hard sayings, that contend that both the
Testaments New and Old, are very full of hard sayings, and upon that account
forbid the people to read them, I confess I cannot understand. Besides this,
though it be fit in temporal Testaments all should be plain, yet we see all are
not plain; and from thence come so many suits of Law; yet there is not the same
reason in spiritual or divine, and in humane Testaments; for in humane, there
is nothing but legacies and express commands, both which it is necessary that
we understand plainly; but in divine Testaments there are mysteries to exercise
our industry and our faith, our patience and inquiry, some things for us to
hope, some things for us to admire, some things to pry into, some things to
act, some things for the present, some things for the future, some things
pertaining to this life, some things pertaining to the life to come, some
things we are to see in a glass darkly, some things reserved till the vision
of Gods face. And after all this, in humane Testaments men ought to speak
plainly, because they can speak no more when they are dead. But Christ can, for
he being dead, yet speaks; and he can by his Spirit make the Church
understand as much as he please; and he will as much as is necessary: and it
might be remembered, that in Scripture there is extant a record of Jacobs
Testament, and of Moses, Genesis 49. Deuteronomy. 33.
which we may observe to be an allegory all the way. I have heard also of an
Athenian that had two sons, and being asked on his deathbed to which of his
two sons he would give his goods, to Leon or Pantaleon, which were the names of
his two sons; he only said, (...), but whether he meant to give all (...) to
Leon, or to Pantaleon, is not yet known. And in the Civil Law it is noted that
Testaments have figurative expressions very often; and therefore decreed, Non
n. in causa Testamentorum ad definitionem, (strictam, sive propriam verborum
significationem, says the Gloss) utique descendendum est, cum plerunque
abusive loquantur, nec propriis vocabulis ac nominibus semper utantur
Testatores, l. non aliter. Titius F. de legate. and fidei com. And there are in
Law certain measures for presumption of the Testators meaning. These therefore
are trifling arrests; even a commandment may be given with a figurative
expression, and yet be plain enough: such was that of Jesus, Pray ye the Lord
of the Harvest, that he would send Laborers into his Harvest; and that, Jesus
commanded his Disciples to prepare the Passover; and some others: so, Rent
your hearts, and not your garments, etc. And an article of faith may be
expressed figuratively; so is that of Christ sitting at the right hand of his
Father. And therefore much more may there be figurative expressions in the
institution of a mystery, and yet be plain enough; Tropica loquutio cum fit
ubi fieri solet, sine labor sequitur intellectus; said S. Austin, l. 3. de
doct. Christ. c. 37. Certain it is the Church understood this well enough for a
thousand years together, and yet admitted of figures in the institution: and
since these new men had the handling of it, and excluded the figurative sense,
they have made it so hard, that themselves cannot understand it, nor tell one
another meaning. But it suffices as to this particular, that in Scripture,
doctrines and promises, and precepts and prophecies, and histories, are
expressed sometimes figuratively; Dabo tibi claves; and, Semen mulieris
conteret caput serpentis; and The dragon drew the third part of the Stars with
his tail; and, Fight the good fight of faith, Put on the armor of
righteousness; and very many more.

3 nature, those of a mystery; these speak properly, they are figurative: such
as this, Unless a man be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of Heaven. The proposition is sacramental, mystical, and
figurative: Go and baptize, that is a precept; therefore the rather is it
literal and proper. So it is in the blessed Sacrament, the institution is in
[Jesus took bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave to his disciples,
saying, Take, eat] In these also there is a a precept, and in the last words:
Hoc facite, this do in remembrance of me; But the sacramental proposition or
the mystical, which explicates the Sacrament, is, [Hoc est corpus meum] and
either this is, or there is no sacramental proposition in this whole affair to
explicate the mystery, or the being a sacrament. But this is very usual in
sacramental propositions. For so baptism is called regeneration, and it is
called a burial by S. Paul, for we are buried with him in Baptism; then baptism
is either sepulchrum or sepultura, the grave or the burial, but either of them
is a figure, and it is so much used in sacramental and mystic propositions,
that they are all so, or may be so; ut baptismus sepulchrum, Lib. 20. cont.
Faustum Manich. c. 21.
sic hoc est corpus meum, says S. Austin. And this is also observed in Gentile
rites: -- (...)
(...) -- So Homer:
The slain Lambs and the wine were the Sacrament, the faithful oaths, that is,
the rite and mystery of their sanction; they were oaths figuratively.

4 Austin has made the observation, and himself gives in a list of
particulars: solet autem res quae significat ejus rei nomine quam significat
nuncupari; septem spicae, In Levit. q. 57.
septem anni sunt (non enim dixit septem annos significant) and multa
hujusmodi. Hinc est quod dictum erat, Petra erat Christus, non enim dixit,
Petra significat Christum, sed tanquam hoc esset quod utique per substantiam
non erat, sed per significationem. The thing which signifies is wont to be
called by that which it signifies: the seven ears of corn are seven years; he
did not say they signified seven years, but are; and many like this. Hence it
is said, the rock was Christ, for he said not, the rock signifies Christ; but
as if the thing were that, not which it were in his own substance, but in
signification. Pervulgatum est in Scriptura, In Apoc. c. 14.
ut res figurata nomen habeat figurae, says Ribera. That this is no unusual
thing is confessed on all hands.

So is that of Exodus, the Lamb is the Passover; and this does so verify S.
Austins words, that in the New Testament the Apostles asked our Lord, Where
will thou that we prepare to eat the Passover? that is, the Lamb which was the
remembrance of the Passover, as the blessed Eucharist is of the death of
Christ. L. 1. Euch. c. 11.6. Quaedam citantur.
To this instance Bellarmine speaks nothing to purpose, for he denies the Lamb
to signify the Passover, or the passing of the Angel over the houses of
Israel, because there is no likelihood between the Lamb and the Passover; and
to make the business up, he says, the Lamb was the Passover: By some
straining, the Lamb slain might signify the slaying the Egyptians, and
remember their own escape at the time when they first eat the Lamb: But by no
straining could the Lamb be the thing; especially, if for the dissimilitude it
could not so much as signify it, how could it be the very same, to which it
was so extremely unlike? but he always says something, though it be nothing
to the purpose: and yet it may be remembered that the eating the Lamb was as
proper an instrument of remembrance of that deliverance, as the eating
consecrated bread is of the Passion of our blessed Lord. But it seems the Lamb
is the very Passover, as the very festival day is called the Passover;so he.
And he says true, in the same manner; but that is but by a trope or figure,
for the feast is the feast of the Passover; if you speak properly, it is the
Passover by a Metonymie: and so is the Lamb. And this instance is so much the
more opposite, because it is the forerunner of the blessed Eucharist, which
succeeded that, as Baptism did Circumcision; and there is nothing of sense that
has been, or I think can be spoken to evade the force of this instance; nor of
the many other before reckoned.

5 And as it is usual in all Sacraments, cup taken for the thing contained in
it. 2. Testament, for the legacy bequeathed by the Testament. 3. This,] is not
in recto, but in obliquo. This] that is, not this which you see, but this which
you do not see. This which is under the species is my body. 4 My body, but not
bodily; my body without the forms and figure of my body, that is, my body, not
as it is in nature, not as it is in glory, but as it is in Sacrament; that is,
my body sacramentally. 5 Drink ye] that is also improper; for his blood is not
drunk properly, for blood has the same manner of existing in the chalice as it
has in the Paten, that is, is under the form of wine as it is under the form
of bread; and therefore it is in the veins, not separate, say they See Brerely
Liturg. Tract. 4. 8. Glossa in c. si per negligentiam did. 2. de consecrat. in
haec verba [De sanguine] ait. De sanguine, i. e. de sacramento sanguinis.
Sanguis n. Christi a corpore Christi separari non valet, ergo nec stillare nec
fluere potest.
, and yet it is in the bread, as it is in the chalice, and in both as upon the
Cross, that is poured out, so Christ said expressly; for else it were so far
from being his blood, that it were not so much as the Sacrament of what he
gave; so that the wine in the chalice is not drunk, because it is not separate
from the body; and in the bread it cannot be drunk, because there it is not in
the veins; or if it were, yet is made as a consistent thing by the continent,
but is not potable: now that which follows from hence is, that it is not drunk
at all properly, but figuratively: and so Mr. Brerely See Brercly Liturg.
Tract. 4.. 8.
confesses sometimes, and Jansenius Concord. in eum locum.
. There is also an impropriety in the word [ given, for shall be given; is
poured out, for shall be poured out Salmer. in 1 Cor. 11. Gregor. de Valent. l.
1 de Missa c. 3.. igitur. Tom. 3. disp. 47.. 4.. exempla tertiae. Ruard Tapper
in art. 13.
; in [ broken, for then it was not broken when Christ spoke it, and it cannot
be properly spoken since his glorification. Salmeron allows an Enallage in the
former, and Suarez a Metaphor in the latter. Frangi cum dicitur, est
Metaphorica locutio. And this is their excuse; why in the Roman Missal they
leave out the words [which is broken for you] for they do what they please,
they put in some words which Christ used not, and leave out something that he
did use, and yet they are all the words of institution. And upon the same
account, there is another trope in [eat] and yet with a strange confidence
these men wonder at us for saying the sacramental words are tropical or
figurative Dico quod figura co poris Christi est ibi, sed figura corporis
Christi, non est ibi figura corporis Christi. Holcot. in 4. sent. q. 3.
, when even by their own confession Anselm, Lombard, Thomas, Ly^an, Gorran,
Cajetan, Dion. Carth. Catharinus, Salmeron, Bened. Justinian, Sa, in 1 Cor. 11.
and innumeri alii.
and proper grounds, there is scarce any word in the whole institution but
admits an impropriety. And then concerning the main praedication; This is my
body, as Christ called bread his body, so he called his body bread, and both
these affirmatives are destructive of Transubstantiation; for if of bread
Christ affirmed, It is his body, by the rule of disparates it is figurative;
and if of his body he affirmed it to be bread, it is certain also and confessed
to be a figure. Now concerning this, besides that our blessed Savior affirmed
himself to be the bread that came down from heaven, calling himself bread, and
in the institution calling bread his body; we have the express words of
Theodoret, Dial. 1. c. 8.
(...); Christ gave to his body the name of the Symbol, and to the Symbol the
name of his body; and S. Cyprian speaks expressly to this purpose, as you may
see above,. 5. n. 9.

6 The strange inconveniences and impossibilities, the scandals and errors, of
the Capernaites, and the temptations to faith, arising from the literal sense
of these words, have been in other cases thought sufficient by all men to
expound words of Scripture by tropes and allegories. The heresy of the
Anthropomorphites and the Euchitae, and the doctrine of the Chiliasts, and
Origin gelding himself, proceeded from the literal sense of some texts of
Scripture, against which there is not the hundred part of so much presumption
as I shall in the sequel make to appear to lie against this. And yet no man
puts out his right eye literally, or cuts off his right hand to prevent a
scandal. Certain it is, there has been much greater inconvenience by following
the letter of these words of Institution, then of any other in Scripture: by so
much as the danger of Idolatry, and actual tyranny, and uncharitable damning
others, and schism, are worse then any temporal inconvenience, or an error in
a matter of speculation.

7 I argue out of S. Austins grounds thus: Tract. 26. in S. Johan.
so do we under a diverse Sacrament, and different symbols, but in all the
same reality; whatsoever we eat, the same they did eat; for the difference is
this only, they received Christ by faith in him that was to come, and we by
faith in him that is come already; but they had the same real benefit, Christ
as really as we, for they had salvation as well as we. But the Fathers could
not eat Christ's flesh in a natural manner, for it was not yet assumed: and
though it were as good an argument against our eating of it naturally, that it
is gone from us into heaven; yet that which I now insist upon is, that it was
cibus spiritualis which they eat under the Sacrament of Manna; therefore we
under the Sacrament of bread and wine eating the same meat, eat only Christ in
a spiritual sense, that is, our spiritual meat. And this is also true in the
other Sacraments of the Rock and the Cloud: Our Fathers eat of the same
spiritual meat, and drank of the same spiritual drink, that is, Christ; so he
afterward expounds it. Now if they did eat and drink Christ, that is, were by
him in sacrament and to all reality of effect nourished up to life eternal, why
cannot the same spiritual meat do the same thing for us, we receiving it also
in Sacrament and Mystery? 2 To which I add, that all they that do
communicate spiritually, do receive all the blessing of the Sacrament, which
could not be unless the mystery were only sacramental, mysterious, and
spiritual. In S. Joan. 6.49.
Maldonate speaking of something of this from the authority of S. Austin, is
of opinion that if S. Austin were now alive, in very spite to the Calvinists,
he would have expounded that of Manna otherwise then he did: It seems he lived
in a good time when malice and the spirit of contradiction was not so much in
fashion in the interpretations of Scripture.

Now let it be considered whether all that I have said be not abundantly
sufficient to outweigh their confidence of the literal sense of these
sacramental words. Rome may give sufficient account. In the mean time we have
reason not to admit of the literal sense of these words, not only by the
Analogy of other sacramental expressions in both Testaments, I mean that of
Circumcision and the Passover in the Old, and Baptism as Christ discoursed it
to Nicodemus in the New Testament; but also 2. because the literal sense of the
like words in this very article introduced the heresy of the Capernaites; and
3. because the subject and the praedicate in the words of institution are
diverse and disparate and cannot possibly be spoken of each other properly. 4
The words in the natural and proper sense seem to command an unnatural thing,
the eating of flesh. 5 They rush upon infinite impossibilities, they contradict
sense and reason, the principles and discourses of all mankind, and of all
Philosophy. 6 Our blessed Savior tells us that the flesh profits nothing,
and (as themselves pretend) even in this mystery, that his words were spirit
and life. 7 The literal sense cannot be explicated by themselves, nor by any
body for them. 8 It is against the Analogy of other Scriptures. 9 It is to no
purpose. 10 Upon the literal sense of the words, the Church could not confute
the Vide infra. 12. n. 22. and n. 32. etc. and. 10. n. 6.
Marcionites, Eutychians, Nestorians, the Aquarii. 11 It is against antiquity.
12 The whole form of words in every of the members is confessed to be
figurative by the opposite party. 13 It is not pretended to be verifiable
without an infinite company of miracles, all which being more then needs, and
none of them visible, but contestations against art and the notices of two or
three sciences, cannot be supposed to be done by God, who does nothing
superfluously. 14 It seems to contradict an article of faith, viz. of Christ's
sitting in heaven in a determinate place, and being contained there till his
second coming. Upon these considerations, and upon the account of all the
particular arguments which I have and shall bring against it, it is not
unreasonable, neither can it seem so, that we decline the letter, and adhere to
the spirit, in the sense of these words. But I have diverse things more to say
in this particular from the consideration of other words of the institution,
and the whole nature of the thing.

SECT. VII. Considerations of the manner and circumstances and annexes of the
institution.
THe blessed Sacrament is the same thing now as it was in the institution of
it: last supper, therefore neither does he now. The first proposition is,
beyond all dispute, certain, evident, and confessed; Hoc facite, convinces it:
This doe] what Christ did, his Disciples are to do. I assume: Christ did not
give his natural body properly in the last Supper, therefore neither does he
now; the assumption I prove by diverse arguments.

1 If then he gave his natural body, properly and naturally; and then they were
not true, because his body was yet whole, his blood still in the proper
channels; or else it was spoken in a figurative and sacramental sense, and so
it was true: (as were all the words which our blessed Savior spoke) for that
which he then ministered was the Sacrament of his Passion.

2 If Christ gave his body in the natural sense at the last Supper, was
redeemed before the Passion of our blessed Savior: which therefore would have
been needless and ineffective: so fearful are the consequents of this strange
doctrine.

3

4

5 Not as in the last Supper, for then it was frangible, but not broken; but
typically, by design, in figure and in Sacrament, as it is evident in matter of
fact. 2. Not as on the Cross, for there the body was frangible and broken too,
and the blood spilled; and if it were so now in the Sacrament, besides that it
were to make Christ's glorified body passible, and to crucify the Lord of life
again; it also were not the same body which Christ has now, for his body that
he has now is spiritual and incorruptible, and cannot be otherwise; much less
can it be so and not so at the same time properly, and yet be the same body. 3
Not as in heaven, where it is neither corruptible nor broken; for then in the
Sacrament there were given to us Christ's glorified body; and then neither were
the Sacrament a remembrance of Christ's death, neither were the words of
Institution verified, [This is my body which is broken;] besides, De Euch. l.
1. c. 13.. 1.
in this we have Bellarmines confession, neque enim ore corporali sumi potest
corpus Christi ut est in coelo. But then if it be remembered, that Christ has
no other body but that which is in heaven; and that can never be otherwise then
it is, and so it cannot be received otherwise properly; it unanswerably
follows, that if it be received in any other manner (as it must if it be at
all) it must be received (not naturally or corporally) but spiritually and
indeed. By a figure, or a sacramental, spiritual sense, all these difficulties
are easily assoiled, but by the natural never.

6 heri and cras, and therefore never to be naturally verified, but on the
Cross by a proper and natural presence, because then it was so and never else;
at that time it was future, and now it is past, and in both it is relative to
his death; therefore it could not be a real exhibition of his body in a natural
sense, for that as it could not be remembered then, so neither broken now; that
is, nothing of it is natural, but it is wholly ritual, mysterious, and
sacramental. For that this was the sacrament of his death, appears in the words
of Institution, and by the preceptive words, " Do this in remembrance of me.
And in the reason subjoined by S. Paul, (...), etc. 1 Cor. 11.26.
For so often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death,
till he come. Therefore when Christ said, This is my body given, or broken on
my part, taken, eaten on yours, it can be nothing else but the (...), the
sacramental image of his death; to effect which purpose it could not be
necessary or useful to bring his natural body, that so the substance should
become his own shadow; the natural presence be his own Sacrament, or rather the
image and representment of what he once suffered. His body given in the
Sacrament is the application and memory of his death and no more; that as
Christ in heaven represents his death in the way of intercession, so do we by
our ministry; but as in heaven it is wholly a representing of his body
crucified, a rememoration of his crucifixion, of his death and passion, by
which he reconciled God and man: so it is in the Sacrament after our manner,
This is my body given for you] that is, This is the Sacrament of my death, in
which my body was given for you. For as Aquinas said, in all sciences words
signify things, but it is proper to Theology, that things themselves
signified or expressed by voices should also signify something beyond it. This
is my body, are the sacramental words, or those words by which the mystery or
the thing is sacramental; it must therefore signify something beyond these
words, and so they do; for they signify the death which Christ suffered in
that body. It is but an imperfect conception of the mystery to say it is the
Sacrament of Christ's body only, or his blood; but it is ex part rei, a
Sacrament of the death of his body; and to us a participation, or an exhibition
of it, as it became beneficial to us, that is, as it was crucified, as it was
our sacrifice. And this is so wholly agreeable to the nature of the thing, and
the order of the words, and the body of the circumstances, that it is next to
that which is evident in it self, and needs no further light but the
considering the words and the design of the Institution; especially since it is
consonant to the style of Scripture in the Sacrament of the Passover, and very
many other instances; it wholly explicates the nature of the mystery, it
reconciles our duty with the secret, it is free of all inconvenience, it
prejudices no right, nor hinders any real effect it has or can have; and it
makes the mystery intelligible and prudent, fit to be discoursed of, and
inserred into the rituals of a wise Religion.

7 He that receives unworthily receives no benefit to his body or to his soul
by the holy Sacrament, this is agreed on all sides; Christ's body, and all that
eat not are not disintitled to the resurrection; the Spirit does the work
without the Sacrament, and in the Sacrament when it is done: The flesh profits
nothing] And this argument ought to prevail upon this account: Because, as is
the nutriment, so is the manducation. If the nourishment be wholly spiritual,
then so is the eating. But by the Roman doctrine the body of Christ does not
naturally nourish, therefore neither is it eaten naturally; but it does nourish
spiritually, and therefore it is eaten only spiritually. Opusc. Tom. 2. Tract.
2. de Euch. c. 5.
And this doctrine is also affirmed by Cajetan, though how they will endure it
I cannot understand; Manducatur verum corpus Christi in Sacramento, sed non
corporaliter sed spiritualiter. Spiritualis manducatio quae per animam fit ad
Christi carnem in Sacramento existentem perting it. The true body of Christ is
eaten in the Sacrament, but not corporally, but spiritually. The spiritual
manducation which is made by the soul, reaches to the flesh of Christ in the
Sacrament; which is very good Protestant doctrine. And if it be absurd to say
Christ's body does nourish corporally, why it should not be as absurd to say, we
eat it corporally, is a secret which I have not yet been taught. As is our
eating so is the nourishing, because that is in order to this; therefore if you
will suppose that natural eating of Christ's body does nourish spiritually, yet
it must also nourish corporally; let it do more if it may, but it must do so
much; just as the waters in baptism, although the waters are symbolical and
instrumental to the purifying of the soul, yet because the waters are material
and corporeal, they cleanse the body first and primarily: so it must be in this
Sacrament also; if Christ's body were eaten naturally, it must nourish
naturally, and then pass further: but that which is natural is first, and then
that which is spiritual.

8 the ancient Church, wicked men do not eat the body, nor drink the blood of
Christ. So Origin, I^ M^t. 15.
Si fieri potest ut qui malus adhuc perseveret edat verbum factum carnem, cum
sit verbum and panis vivus, nequaquam scriptum fuisset, Quisquis ederit panem
hunc vivet in aeternum. If it were possible for him that perseveres in
wickedness to eat the word made flesh, when it is the word and the living
bread, it had never been written, Whosoever shall eat this bread shall live for
ever. So S. Hilary, L 8. de Trinit.
Panis qui descendit de coelo non nisi ab eo accipitur qui Dominum habet, and
Christi membrum est: The bread that came down from heaven is not taken of any
but of him who has the Lord, De Coe^^ Dom. aut quicunque author est.
and is a member of Christ. Lambunt Petram, says S. Cyprian, They lick the
Rock, that is, eat not of the food, and drink not of the blood that issued from
thence when the Rock was smitten. They receive corticem sacramenti, and furfur
carnis, says S. Bernard, the skin of the Sacrament, and the bran of the flesh.
But Ven. Bid is plain without an allegory. Saper Exodus de agno Pasch.
Omnis infidelis non vescitur carne Christi: An unbelieving man is not fed with
the flesh of Christ; the reason of which could not be any thing but because
Christ is only eaten by faith. L. 21. de Civit. Dei c. 25.
But I reserved S. Austin for the last, So then these are no true receivers of
Christ's body in that they are none of his true members. For (to omit all other
allegations) they cannot be both the members of Christ and the members of an
harlot; and Christ himself saying, He that eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, dwells in me, and I in him, shows what it is to receive Christ, not
only sacramentally, but truly; for this is to dwell in Christ and Christ in
him. For thus he spoke, as if he had said; He that dwells not in me nor I in
him, cannot say, he eats my flesh or drinks my blood. In which words (if
the Roman Doctors will be judged by S. Austin for the sense of the Church in
this Question, and will allow him in this point to be a good Catholic) 1 He
dogmatically declares that the wicked man does not eat Christ's body truly. 2 He
does eat it sacramentally. 3 That to eat with effect is to eat Christ's body
truly: to which if they please to add this, 4 That to eat it spiritually is to
eat it with effect, it follows by S. Austins doctrine that spiritually is
really, and that there is no true and real body of Christ eaten in the
Sacrament, but by the faithful receiver: or if you please receive the
conclusion in the words of S. Austin, Tunc erit unicuique corpus and sanguis
Christi, Sermon. 2. de verb. Apost.
si quod in Sacramento sumitur, in ipsa veritate spiritualiter manducetur,
spiritualiter bibatur, then to each receiver it becomes the body and blood of
Christ, if that which is taken in the Sacrament, be in the very truth it self
spiritually eaten, and spiritually drunk: which words of S. Austin, Bellarmine,
upon another occasion being to answer, in stead of answering grants it, and
tells that this manner of speaking is very usual in S. L. 1. Euch. c. 14..
Respond. apud Augustinum.
Austin [the truest answer in all his books:] but whether it be for him or
against him he ought to have considered. Neither can this be put off with
saying, that the wicked do not truly eat Christ, that is, not to any benefit
or purpose, but that this does not mean they receive him not at all. Just as we
say when a man eats but a little, he does not eat: for as good never a jot, as
never the better. This I say is not a sufficient escape, I Because S. Austin
opposes sacramental receiving to the true and real, and says that the wicked
only receive it sacramentally; but not the thing whose Sacrament it is; so that
this is not a proposition of degrees, but there is a plain opposition of one to
the other. 2 It is true, S. Austin does not say that the wicked do not receive
Christ at all, for he says they receive him sacramentally; but he says, they
do not at all receive him truly, and the wicked man cannot say he does: and he
proves this by unanswerable arguments out of Scripture. 3 This excuse will not
with any pretense be fitted with the sayings of the other Fathers, nor to all
the words of S. Austin in this quotation, and much less in others which I have
De Sermon. de verb. Apost. Pauli supr.
and shall remark, particularly this; that he calls that which the wicked eat,
nothing but signum corporis and sanguinis. His words are these Tract. 26 in
Joh. vid. etiam Bellarmine (...) 1. Euch. c. 14.. respondeo S. August.
, Ac per hoc qui non manet in Christo, and in quo non manet Christus,
proculdubio non manducat spiritualiter carnem, non bibit sanguinem, licet
carnaliter and visibiliter premat dentibus signum corporis and sanguints: he
does not eat the body and drink the blood spiritually, although carnally and
visibly he presses with his teeth the sign of the body and blood. Plainly, all
the wicked do but eat the sign of Christ's body, all that is to be done beyond,
is to eat it spiritually. There is no other eating but these two; Tract. 59. in
Joh.
and from S. Austin it was that the Schools received that famous distinction of
Panis Dominus, and Panis Domini, Judas received the bread of the Lord against
the Lord: But the other Apostles received the bread which was the Lord, that
is, his body. But I have already spoken of the matter of this argument in the
third Paragraph, number. 7. which the Reader may please to add to this to make it
fuller.

9 Lastly, which relate to the consecrated wine are so different in the
Evangelists, and S. Paul respectively, as appears by comparing them together;
that 1. It does not appear which words were literally spoken by our blessed
Savior: for all of them could not be so spoken as they are set down. 2 That
they all regarded the sense and meaning of the mystery, not the letters and
the syllables. 3. It is not possible to be certain that Christ intended the
words of any one of them to be consecratory or effective of what they signify,
for every one of the relators differ in the words though all agree in the
things; as the Reader may observe in the beginning of the fourth Paragraph,
where the four forms are set by each other to be compared. 4 The Church of Rome
in the consecration of the Chalice uses a form of words, which Christ spoke not
at all, nor are related by S. Matthew, or S. Mark, or S. Luke, or S. Paul, but
she puts in some things and changes others; her form is this. Hic est enim
calix sanguinis mei novi and aeterni Testamenti, mysterium fidei, qui pro vobis
and pro multis effundetur in remissionem peccatorum. For this is the chalice of
my blood, of the New and eternal Testament, the mystery of faith, which shall
be shed for you and for many for the remission of sins: what is added is plain,
what is altered would be very material, if the words were consecratory; for
they are not so likely to be operative and effective as the words of Christ
recited by S. Matthew, and S. Mark, [this is my blood:] and if this had not
been the ancient form used in the Church of Rome long before the doctrine of
Transubstantiation was thought of; it is not to be imagined that they would
have refused the plainer words of Scripture to have made the article more
secret, the form less operative, the authority less warrantable, the words
less simple and natural. But the corollary which is natural and proper from
the particulars of this argument is, that the mystery was so wholly spiritual,
that it was no matter by what words it were expressed, so the spirit of it were
retained; and yet if it had been an historical, natural, proper sense that had
been intended, it ought also in all reason to have been declared, or (much
more) effected by a natural and proper, and constant affirmative. But that
there is nothing spoken properly, is therefore evident, because there are so
many praedications, and all mean the same mystery, Hic est sanguis meus N.
Testamenti; and, Hic calix est N. Testamentu^ in meo sanguine; and, Hic est
calix sanguinis mei in the Roman Missal; all this declares it is mysterium
fidei, and so to be taken in all senses: and those words are left in their
Canon, as if on purpose either to prevent the literal and natural understanding
of the other words, or for the reducing the communicants to the only
apprehensions of faith: It is mysterium fidei, not sanguis naturalis, a
mystery of faith, not natural blood. For supposing that both the forms used by
S. Matthew and S. Luke, respectively could be proper and without a figure; L.
1. de Euch. c. 11 ad tertiam dico.
and S. Matthews Hic est sanguis Testamenti, did signify, This is the divine
promise (for so Bellarmine dreams that Testament there signifies) and that in
S. Lukes words [This cup is the Testament] it signifies the instrument of the
Testament, (for so a Will or a Testament is taken; either for the thing willed
or the Parchment in which it is written) yet how are these or either of these
affirmative of the wine being transubstantiated into blood? it says nothing of
that, and so if this sense of those words does avoid a trope, it brings in a
distinct proposition; if it be spoken properly, it is more distant from giving
authority to their new doctrine; and if the same word have several senses, then
in the sacramental proposition as it is described by the several Evangelists,
there are several praedicates, and therefore it is impossible that all should
be proper. And yet besides this, although he thinks he may freely say any thing
if he covers it with a distinction, yet the very members of this distinction
conclude against his conclusion; for if Testament in one place be taken for the
instrument of his Testament, it is a tropical loquution; just as I say, my
bible (meaning my book) is the word of God; that is, contains the word of God,
it is a Metonymie of the thing containing for that which it contains. But this
was more then I needed, and therefore I am content it should pass for nothing.

SECT. VIII. Of the Arguments of the Romanists from Scripture.
THus I have by very many arguments taken from the words and circumstances,
Institution or Consecration proved, that the sense of this mystery is
mysterious, and spiritual, that Christ's body is eaten only sacramentally by the
body, but really and effectively only by faith, which is the mouth of the soul,
that the flesh profits nothing, but the words which Christ spoke are spirit
and life. And let it be considered, Whether besides a pertinacious resolution
that they will understand these words as they sound in the letter, not as they
are intended in the spirit, there be any thing, or indeed can be in the nature
of the thing, or circumstances of it, or usefulness, or in the different forms
of words, or the Analogy of the other discourses of Christ, that can give
color to their literal sense? against which so much reason and Scripture, and
arguments from Antiquity do contest. This only I observe, that they bring no
pretense of other Scriptures to warrant this interpretation, but such which I
have or shall wrest out of their hands; and which to all men's first
apprehensions, and at the very first sight do make against them, and which
without curious notion and devices cannot pretend on their side: as appears 1
in the tenth chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, verses 16, 17. V.
16, 17.


Out of which I have already proved,. 5. n. 6. L. 1. Euch. c. 12.
But when Bellarmine had out of the same words forced for himself three
arguments proving nothing; to save any man the labor of answering them, he
adds at the end of them these words;. sed tota difficultas.
Sed tota difficultas est an corporaliter, realiter, proprie sumatur sanguis
and caro, an solum significative and spiritualiter. Quod autem corporaliter and
proprie probari posset omnibus argumentis quibus supra probavimus proprie esse
intelligenda verba illa institutionis, Hoc est corpus meum. That is, after his
arguments out of the first Epistle to the Corinthians were ended, C. 10. v. 16
all the difficulty of the quaestion still remained; and that he was fain to
prove by Hoc est corpus meum, and the proper arguments of that; but brings
nothing from the words of S. Paul in this chapter. But to make up this also he
does corradere scrape together some things extrinsecal to the words of this
authority; as 1. That the literal sense is to be presumed unless the contrary
be proved; which is very true: but I have evidently proved the contrary
concerning the words of Institution; and for the words in this chapter, if the
literal sense be preferred, then the bread remains after Consecration, because
it is called bread. 2 So the Primitive Saints expounded it] which how true it
is, I shall consider in his own place. 3. The Apostle calling the Gentiles from
their sacrificed flesh proposes to them a more excellent banquet, but it were
not more excellent if it were only a figure of Christ's body; so Bellarmine;
which is a fit cover for such a dish: for 1 We do not say that in the Sacrament
we only receive the sign and figure of Christ's body; but all the real effects
and benefits of it. 2 If we had, yet it is not very much better then
blasphemy, to say that the Apostles had not prevailed upon that account. For
if the very figure and sacrament of Christ's body be better then sacrifices
offered to Devils, the Apostle had prevailed, though this sentence were true,
that in the Sacrament we receive only the figure. And thus I have (for all that
is said against it) made it apparent that there is nothing in that place for
their corporal presence.

There is one thing more which out of Scripture they urge for the corporal
presence, viz. 1 Cor. 11.29.27.
He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lords body: and, he shall be guilty of the body and
blood of Christ. Where they observe that they that eat unworthily do yet eat
Christ's body, because how else could they be guilty of it, and condemned for
not discerning it?

To this I answer many things. 1 S. Paul does not say, He that eats and
drinks Christ's body and blood unworthily, etc. but indefinitely, He that
eats and drinks etc. V. 29.
yet it is probable he would have said so, if it had been a proper form of
speech, because by so doing it would have laid a greater load upon them. 2
Where S. Paul does not speak indefinitely, he speaks most clearly against the
Article in the Roman sense; for he calls it (...), V. 27.
The cup of the Lord, and (...), this bread, and, he that eats this bread
unworthily is guilty of the body and blood of Christ: and now these comminatory
phrases are quitted from their pretense, but yet they have their proper
consideration: Therefore 3 Not discerning the Lords body, is, not separating it
from profane and common usages, not treating it with addresses proper to the
mystery. To which phrase Justin gives light in these words (...), we do not
receive it as common bread and common drink; but (...), etc. but nourishment
made Eucharistical or blessed by the word of Prayer; and so it is the body and
blood of the Lord. 4 It is the body of the Lord in the same sense here as in
the words of Institution, which I have evinced to be exegetical, sacramental,
and spiritual; and by despising the sacrament of it, we become guilty of the
body and blood of Christ. Reus erit corporis and sanguinis Christi qui tanti
mysterii sacramentu^ despexerit, In 1 Cor. 11.
says S. Hierome. And it is in this as Severianus said concerning the statues
of Theodosius broken in despite by the Antiochians, (...). If you abuse the
Kings Image, the affront relates to your Prince. 5. The unworthy receiver is
guilty of the body and blood of Christ, not naturally, for that cannot now be,
and nothing is a greater probation of the spiritual sense of the words in this
place, then this, which they would entice into their party; For Christ's body is
glorified, and not capable of natural injury: But the evil communicant is
guilty of the body and blood of Christ: just as relapsing Christians are said
by the same Apostles, to crucify the Lord of life again, and put him to an
open shame, which I suppose they cannot do naturally or corporally. One is as
the other, that is, both are tropical or figurative.

These are all that they pretend from Scripture;

SECT. IX. Arguments from other Scriptures, proving Christ's real presence in
the Sacrament, to be only Spiritual, not Natural.
1. THe first is taken from those words of our blessed Savior, Whatsoever
enters into the mouth goes into the belly, S. Mat. 15.17.
and is cast forth into the draught; meaning, that all food, that is taken by
the mouth, has for his share the fortune of the belly; and indeed manducation
and ejection are equally diminutions of any perfect thing; and because it
cannot without blasphemy be spoken, that the natural body of Christ ought or
can suffer ejection, neither can it suffer manducation. To this Bellarmine
weakly answers, that these words of Christ are only true, L. 1. Euch. c. 14..
Resp. cum Algero.
of that which is taken to nourish the body: which saying of his is not true;
for if it be taken to purge the body, or to make the body sick, or to make it
lean or to minister to lust, or to chastise the body, as those who in penances
have masticated aloes and other bitter gummes, yet still it is cast into the
draught. 2. But suppose his meaning true, yet this argument will not so be put
off; because although the end of receiving the blessed Sacrament, is not to
nourish the body; yet that it does nourish the body, it affirmed by Irenaeus,
Justin Martyr, and others;. 5. n. 9.
of which I have already given account To which I here add the plain words of
Rabanus, Illud [corpus Christi] in nos convertitur dum id manducamus and
bibimus. That body is changed into us when we eat it and drink it; and
therefore although it has a higher purpose, yet this also cannot be avoided.
3. Either we manducate the accidents only, or else the substance of bread, or
the substance of Christ's body. If we manducate only the accidents, (...).
Aristot. l. 3. de anim. cap. 12.
then how do we eat Christ's body? If we manducate bread, then it is capable of
all the natural alterations, and it cannot be denied. But if we manducate
Christ's body after a natural manner, what worse thing is it, that it descends
into the guts, then that it goes into the stomach; to be cast forth, then to be
torn in pieces with the teeth, as I have proved. 3. n. 6.
that it is by the Roman doctrine? Now I argue thus: if we eat Christ's natural
body, we eat it either Naturally or Spiritually: if it be eaten only
Spiritually then it is Spiritually digested, and is Spiritual nourishment, and
puts on accidents, and affections Spiritual. But if the natural body be eaten
naturally, then what hinders it from affections and transmutations natural? 4.
Although Algerus, and out of him Bellarmine, would have Christians stop their
ears against this argument, (and so would I against that doctrine of which
these fearful conclusions are unavoidable consequents) yet it is disputed in
the Summa Angelica, and an instance or case put which to my sense seems no
inconsiderable argument to reprove the folly of this doctrine: For (says he)
what if the Species pass indigested into the belly from the stomach? He
answers; that they were not meat if they did not nourish; and therefore it is
probable as Boethius says, that the body of our Lord does not go into the
draught, though the Species do. De consecrat. did. 2. c. Si per negligentiam.
Glos. ibid.
And yet it is determined by the Gloss on the Canon Law, that as long as the
Species remain uncorrupted, the holy body is there under those Species; and
therefore may be vomited; and consequently ejected all ways by which the
Species can pass unaltered. Eousque progreditur corpus quousque species; said
Harpsfield, in his disputation at Oxford. If these things be put together viz,
the body is there so long as the Species are uncorrupted: and the Species may
remain uncorrupted till they be cast upwards or downwards, as in case of
sickness: it follows that in this case, which is a case easily contingent, by
their doctrine, the holy body must pass in latrinam. And what then? it is to
be adored as a true Sacrament though it come from impure places, though it be
vomited. So said Vasquez in 3. t. 3. d. 195. n. 46.
and it is the prevailing opinion in their Church. Add to this, that if this
nourishment does not descend and cleave to the guts of the Priest, it is
certain that God does not hear his prayers: for he is enjoined by the Roman
Missal published by authority of the council of Trent, and the command of Pope
Pius the 4th, to pray, Corpus tuum Domine quod sumpsi, and sanguis quem potavi,
adhaereat visceribus meis, Let thy body O Lord which I have taken, and the
blood which I have drunk, cleave to my bowels. It seems indeed they would have
it go no further, to prevent the inconveniences of the present argument; but
certain it is that if they intended it for a figurative speech, it was a bold
one, and not so fitted for edification, as for an objection. But to return.
This also was the argument of Origin: In cap. 15. S Mat.
Quod si quicquid ingreditur in os, in ventrem abit, and in secessum ejicitur,
and ille cibus qui sanctificatur per verbum Dei perque obsecrationem juxta id
quod habet materiale in ventrem abit, and in secessum ejicitur -- and haec
quidem de typico symbolicoque corpore. He plainly distinguishes the material
part from the spiritual in the Sacrament, and affirms that according to the
material part, that meat that is sanctified by the word of God and prayer,
enters into the mouth, descends into the belly, and goes forth in the natural
ejection. And this is only true of the typical and symbolical body. Now besides
that it affirms the words of our blessed Savior S. Mat. 15.17.
to have effect in the Sacrament, he affirms that the material part, the type
and symbols are the body of Christ, that is, his body is present in a typical
and symbolical manner. This is the plain and natural sense of the words of
Origin. But he must not mean what he means, if he says any thing in an other
place that may make for the Roman opinion. And this is their way of answering
objections brought from the Fathers; they use to oppose words to words, and
conclude they must mean their meaning, or else they contradict themselves. And
this trick Bellarmine uses frequently, and especially Cardinal Perron and from
them the lesser Writers: And so it happens in this present argument: for other
words of Origin are brought to prove he inclined to the Roman opinion. But I
demand, are the words more contradictory if they be both drawn to a spiritual
sense, then if they be both drawn to a natural. 2. Though we have no need to
make use of it, yet it is no impossible thing that the Fathers should
contradict one another and themselves too; as you may see pretended violently
by Cardinal Perron in his answer to K. James. 3. But why must all sheavs bow to
their sheaf, and all words be wrested to their fancy, when there are no words
any where pretended from them, but with less wresting then these must suffer
for them, they will be brought by speak against them, or at least nothing for
them? But let us see what other words Origin has, by which we must expound
these. 4. Origin says that the Christian people drinks the blood of Christ,
and the flesh of the word of God is true food; What then? so say we too; but it
is Spiritual food, and we drink the blood Spiritually. He says nothing against
that, but very much for it; as I have in several places remarked already. 5 But
how can this expound the other words? Christian people eat Christ's flesh and
drink his blood; therefore when Origin says the material part the Symbolical
body of Christ is eaten naturally and cast into the draught, he means, not the
body of Christ in his material part, but the accidents of bread, the color,
the taste, the quantity, these are cast out by the belly. Verily a goodly
argument; if a man could guess in what mood and figure it could conclude. 6.
When a man speaks distinctly and particularly, it is certain he is easier to be
understood in his particular and minute meaning then when he speaks generally.
But here he distingnishes a part from a part, one sense from another, the body
in one sense from the body in another, therefore these words are to expound the
more general, and not they to expound these, unless the general be more
particular then that that is distinguished into kinds, that is, unless the
general be a particular, and the particular be a general. 7. Amalarius was so
amused with these words and discourse of Origin that his understanding grew
giddy, and he did not know whether the body of Christ were invisibly taken up
into heaven or kept till our death in the body, Ep. ad Guitard.
or expired at letting of blood, or exhaled in air, or spit out, or breathed
forth, our Lord saying, That which enters into the mouth, descends into the
belly, and so goes forth into the draught: The man was willing to be of the new
opinion of the real presence, because it began to be the mode of the Age. But
his folly was soberly reproved by a Synod at Carisiacum, about the time of Pope
Gregory the 4th. where the difficulty of Origens argument was better answered,
and the article determined, that the bread and wine are spiritually made the
body of Christ, which being a meat of the mind and not of the belly, is not
corrupted, but remains unto everlasting life. 8. To expound these words of
the accidents of bread only, and say that they enter into the belly and go
forth in the draught, is a device of them that care not what they say; for 1.
It makes that the eject amentum or excrement of the body should consist of
color and quantity, without any substance. 2. It makes a man to be nourished
by accidents, and so not only one substance to be changed into another, but
that accidents are changed into substances, which must be, if they nourish the
body and pass in latrinam, and then beyond the device of Transubstantiation we
have another production from Africa, a transaccidentisubstantiation a (...). 3.
It makes accidents to have all the affections of substances, as motion,
substantial corruption, alteration, that is, not to be accidents but
substances. For matter and form are substances, and those that integrate all
physical and compound substances: but till yesterday it was never heard that
accidents could. Yea but magnitude is a material quality, and ground or subject
of the accidents. So it is said; but it is nonsense. For besides that magnitude
is not a quality, but a quantiy, neither can it be properly or truly said to be
material but imperfectly; because it is an affection of matter; and however, it
is a contradiction to say, that it is the ground of qualities; for an accident
cannot be the fundamentum, the ground or subject of an accident; that is the
formality and definition of a substance, as every young scholar has read in
Aristotle's Categories: so that to say that it is the ground of accidents is to
say that accidents are subjected in magnitude, that is, that magnitude is
neither a quantity nor quality, but a substance. (...). An accident always
subsists in a subject, says Porphyrie. 9. This answer cannot be fitted to the
words of Origin; for that which he calls the quid materiale or the material
part in the Sacrament, he calls it the Symbolical body, which cannot be
affirmed of accidents, because there is no likeness between the accidents, the
color, the shape, the figure, the roundnesse, the weight, the magnitude of the
host, or wafer, and Christ's body: and therefore to call the accidents a
Symbolical body, is to call it an unsymbolical Symbol, un unlike similitude, a
representment without analogy: But if he means the consecrated bread, the whole
action of consecration, distribution, sumption, manducation, this is the
Symbolical body, according to the words of S. Paul, He that drinks this cup,
and eats this bread, represents the Lords death; it is the figure of Christ's
crucified body, of his passion and our redemption. 10. It is a strange
expression to call accidents a body; (...), says Aristotle, Categor. cap. 5.
a body may be called white, but the definition or reason of the accident, can
never be affirmed of a body. I conclude, that this argument out of the words of
our blessed Savior, urged also and affirmed by Origin, do prove that Christ's
body is in the Sacrament only to be eaten in a Spiritual sense, not at all in a
Natural, lest that consequent be the event of it; which to affirm of Christ's
glorified body in the natural and proper sense were very blasphemy.

2. The next argument from Scripture is taken from Christ's departing from this
world; his going from us, the ascension of his body and soul into heaven; his
not being with us, his being contained in the heavens: So said our blessed
Savior, S. Ioh. 16.7.14.2. Mat. 26.11. Act. 3.21. Philip 3.20.
Unless I go hence, the Comforter cannot come: and I go to prepare a place
for you: The poor ye have always, but me ye have not always. S. Peter
affirms of him that the heavens must receive him, till the time of restitution
of all things. Now how these things can be true of Christ according to his
humane nature, that is a circumscribed body, and a definite soul, is the
question. And to this the answer is the same in effect which is given by the
Roman Doctors, and by the Ubiquitaries, whom they call Heretics. These men say
Christ's humane nature is every where actually, by reason of his hypostatical
union with the Deity which is every where; the Romanists say no: it is not
actually every where, but it may be where, and is in as many places as he
please: for although he be in heaven, yet so is God too, and yet God is upon
earth: eodem modo, says Bellarmine, Lib. 1. Euch. c. 14.. Respondeo Argumentum.
in the same manner, the Man Christ although he be in heaven, yet also he can
be out of heaven, where he please; he can be in heaven and out of heaven. Now
these two opinions are concentred in the main impossibility; that is, that
Christ's body can be in more places then one: if in two, it may be in 2000, and
then it may be every where; for it is not limited, and therefore is illimited
and potentially infinite. Against this so seemingly impossible at the veryfirst
sight, and relying upon a similitude and analogy that is not far from
blasphemy, viz. that as God is in heaven and yet on earth, eodem modo after the
same manner is Christ's body; which words it cannot be easy to excuse: against
this (I say) (although for the reasons alleged, it be unnecessary to be
disproved, yet) I have these things to oppose, 1. The words of Scripture, that
affirm Christ to be in heaven, affirm also that he is gone from hence S. John
16.28.
. Now if Christ's body not only could, but must be every day in innumerable
places on earth, it would have been said that Christ is in heaven, but not that
he is not here, or that he is gone from hence. 2. Surrexit, non est hic, was
the Angels discourse to the inquiring woman at the Sepulcher, he is risen, he
is not here: but if they had been taught the new doctrine of the Roman
Schools, they would have denied the consequent; he is risen and gone from
hence, but he may be here too. And this indeed might have put the Angels to a
distinction: but the women's ignorance rendered them secure. However S. Epist. ad
Dardan.
Austin is dogmatical in this article, saying, Christum ubique totum esse
tanquam Deum and in eodem tanquam inhabitante Deum, and in loco aliquo caeli
propter very corporis modum. Christ as God is every where, but in respect of
his body he is determined to a particular residence in heaven, viz. at the
right hand of God, that is in the best seat, and in the greatest eminency. And
in 30th Treatise of S. John, It behooves that the body of our Lord since it is
raised again should be in one place alone, but the truth is spread over all.
But concerning these words of S. Austin they have taken a course in all their
editions to corrupt the place; And in stead of [oportet] have clapped in
[potest] in stead of [must be] have foysted in [may be] against the faith of
the ancient Canonists and Scholastics; particularly, Lombard, Gratian, Ivo
Carnotensis, Algerus, Thomas, Bonaventure, Richardus, Durand, Biel, Scotus,
Cassander, and diverse others. To this purpose is that of S. Cyril Alex. Lib.
11. in John c. 3.
He could not converse with his Disciples in the flesh being ascended to his
Father. So Cassian Lib. 4. de incarnat. c. 8.
, Jesus Christ speaking on earth, cannot be in heaven but by the infinity of
his Godhead: and Lib. 2. ad Thrasimundum c. 7. Apol. p. 65.
Fulgentius argues it strongly; If the body of Christ be a true body, it must
be contained in a particular place: but this place is just so corrupted in
their editions, as is that of S. Austin, potest being substituted in stead of
oportet; but this doctrine, viz. that to be in several places is impossible to
a body, and proper to God, was affirmed by the University of Paris in a synod
under William their Bishop 1340, and Johannes Picus Mirandula maintained in
Rome it self that it could not be by the power of God that one body should at
once be in diverse places.

3. an Antithesis; the heavens till then shall retain him; but then he shall
come from thence, which were needless if he might be here and stay there too.

4. When Christ said, Me ye have not always, and at another time, Lo, I am
with you always to the end of the World; It is necessary that we distinguish
the parts of a seeming contradiction. Christ is with us by his Spirit, but
Christ is not with us in body; but if his body be here too, then there is no
way of Substantial, real presence, in which those words can be true [me ye have
not always.] The Rhemists in their note upon this place, say, that when Christ
said, me ye have not always, he means, ye have not me in the manner of a poor
man, needing relief; that is, not me so as you have the poor. But this is a
trifle; because our Blessed Savior did not receive that ministry of Mary
Magdalen as a poor man, for it was a present for a Prince, not a relief to
necessity, but a Regalo fit for so great a person; and therefore if he were
here at all after his departure, he was capable of as noble an usage and an
address fit to represent a Majesty, or at least to express a love. It was
also done for his burying, so Christ accepted it, and that signified and
plainly related to a change of his state and abode. But besides this, if this
could be the interpretation of those words, then they did not at all signify
Christ's leaving this world, but only his changing his circumstance of fortune,
his outward dress and appendages of person; which were a strange commentary
upon [me ye have not always;] that is, I shall be with you still, but in a
better condition; but S. Austin has given sentence concerning the sense of
these words of Christ [loquebatur de praesentia corporis etc.] Tract. 50. in
Johan.
he spoke of the presence of his body, ye shall have me according to my
providence, according to Majesty, and invisible grace, but according to the
flesh which the word assumed, according to that which was born of the Virgin
Mary, ye shall not have me, therefore because he conversed with his disciples
forty days he is ascended up into heaven and is not here; If he be here in
person, what need he to have sent his Vicar, his holy Spirit in substitution?
especially since by this doctrine he is more now with his Church then he was in
the days of his conversation in Palestine; for then he was but in one assembly
at once; now he is in thousands every day. If it be said, because although he
be here yet we see him not. This is not sufficient, for what matter is it
whether we see him or no, if we know him to be here, if we feel him, if we eat
him, if we worship him in presence natural and proper? There wants nothing but
some accidents of color and shape. A friend in the dark, behind a curtain, or
to a blind man, is as certainly present as if he were in the light in open
conversation, or beheld with the eyes. And then also the office of the holy
Spirit would only be to supply the sight of his person, which might possibly be
true if he had no greater offices, and we no greater needs, and if he himself
also were visible and glorious to our eyes; for if the effect of his
substitution is spiritual, secret, and invisible, our eyes are still without
comfort; and if the Spirits secret effect does supply it and makes it not
necessary that we should see him, then so does our faith do the same thing;
for if we believe him there, the want of bodily sight is supplied by the eye of
faith, and the Spirit is pretended to do no more in this particular, and then
his presence also will be less necessary, because supplied by our own act.
Add to this; That if after Christ's ascension into heaven, he still would have
been upon earth, in the Eucharist, and received properly into our mouths, and
in all that manner which these men dream; how ready it had been and easy to
have comforted them who were troubled for want of his bodily presence; by
telling them [Although I go to heaven yet fear not to be deprived of the
presence of my body, for you shall have it more then before, and much better;
for I will be with you, and in you; I was with you in a state of humility and
mortality, now I will be with you with a daily and mighty miracle; I before
gave you promises of grace and glory, but now I will become to your bodies a
seed of immortality. And though you will not see me, but under a vail, yet it
is certain, I will be there, in your churches, in your pixes, in your mouths,
in your stomachs, and you shall believe and worship.] Had not this been a
certain, clear, and proportionable comfort to their complaint, and present
necessity, if any such thing were intended? It had been so certain, so clear,
so proportionable, that it is more then probable, that if it had been true, it
had not been omitted. But that such sacred things as these may not be exposed
to contempt, by such weak propositions and their trifling consequents, the case
is plain, that Christ being to depart hence sent his holy Spirit in
substitution to supply to his church the office of a Teacher, which he on earth
in person was to his disciples; when he went from hence, he was to come no more
in person, and therefore he sent his substitute; and therefore to pretend him
to be here in person though under a disguise which we see thorough with the eye
of Faith, Heb. 9.24. 2 Cor. 5.6.8. Phil. 1.23. and 3.20. Coloss. 3.1.2. S. Ioh.
14.16. and 16.7.
and converse with him by presential adoration of his humanity, is in effect to
undervalue the real purposes and sense of all the sayings of Christ concerning
his departure hence, and the deputation of the holy Spirit. But for this,
because it is naturally impossible, they have recourse to the divine
omnipotency: God can do it, therefore he does. But of this I shall give
particular account in the Sect. of Reason; as also the other arguments of
Scripture I shall reduce to their heads of proper matter.

SECT. X. The doctrine of Transubstantiation is against sense.
1. (...). Arist. 1.8. Phys. r. 22.

(...). S. Basil. ep. 45.


and all religion must be in danger. Now besides that all our notices of things
proceed from sense, and our understanding receives his proper objects, by the
mediation of material and sensible phantasmes, and the soul in all her
operations during this life is served by the ministeries of the body, and the
body works upon the soul only by sense; besides this, 1 S. Ioh. 1. v. 1, 2, 3.
S. John has placed the whole religion of a Christian upon the certainty and
evidence of sense as upon one unmovable foundation. That which was from the
beginning, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have beheld and our hands
have handled of the word of life. And the life was made manifest, and we have
seen it, and bear witness and declare unto you eternal life, which was with
the Father and was manifested to us, which we have seen and heard, we declare
unto you. Tertullian, in his book de Anima, uses this very argument against the
Marcionites, Recita Johannis testationem; quod vidimus (inquit) quod audivimus,
oculis nostris vidimus, and manus nostrae contrect averunt, de Sermon vitae.
Falsa utique testatio, si oculorum, and aurium, and manuum sensus natura
mentitur; his testimony was false, if eyes, and ears, and hands be deceived.
In Nature there is not a greater argument then to have heard, and seen, and
handled.

Sed quia profunda non licet luctarier
Ratione tecum, Supplic. Romani Martyr. Prudent.
consulamus proxima:
Interrogetur ipsa nature alium
Simplex sine art sensuum sententia.
And by what means can an assent be naturally produced, but by those
instruments, by which God conveyes all notices to us, that is by seeing, and
hearing? Faith comes by hearing, and evidence comes by seeing; and if a man in
his wits, and in his health, can be deceived in these things, how can we come
to believe?

Corpus enim per se communis deliquat esse
Sensus: Lucret. l. 1.
quo nisi prima fides fundata valebit
Haud erit occultis de rebus quo referentes
Confirmare animi quicquam ratione queamus.
For if a Man or an Angel declares Gods will to us, if we may not trust our
hearing, we cannot trust him: for we know not whether indeed he says what we
think he says; and if God confirms the proposition by a miracle, an ocular
demonstration, we are never the nearer to the believing him, because our eyes
are not to be trusted. But if feeling also may be abused, when a man is in all
other capacities perfectly healthy, then he must be governed by chance, and
walk in the dark, and live upon shadows, and converse with fantasmes and
illusions, as it happens; and then at last it will come to be doubted whether
there be any such man as himself; and whether he be awake when he is awake, or
not rather, then only awake when he himself and all the world thinks him to
have been asleep: Oculatae sunt nostrae manus, credunt quod vident.

Now then to apply this to the present question in the words of S. Austin, In
Sermon. apud Bed. in 1 Cor. 10. Sed haec verba citantur ab Algero l. 1. de
Sacram. c. 5. ex Sermon. de verbis Domini.
quod vobis etiam oculi vestri renunciant. That which our eyes have seen, that
which our hands have handled, is bread; we feel it, taste it, see it to be
bread, and we hear it called bread, that very substance which is called the
body of our Lord. Shall we now say, our eyes are deceived, our ears hear a
false sound, our taste is abused, our hands are mistaken? Bellarm. l. 1. Euch.
c. 14.. Jam ad Petrum Martyrem.
It is answered, Nay; our senses are not mistaken; For our senses in health and
due circumstances cannot be abused in their proper object, but they may be
deceived about that which is under the object of their senses; they are not
deceived in color, and shape, and taste, and magnitude, which are the proper
objects of our senses; but they may be deceived in substances which are covered
by these accidents; and so it is not the outward sense so much as the inward
sense that is abused. For so Abraham, when he saw an Angel in the shape of a
humane body, was not deceived in the shape of a man, for there was such a
shape; but yet it was not a man, and therefore if he thought it was, he was
abused; This is their answer: and if this will not serve the turn, nothing
will; This therefore must be examined.

Now this, true accidents indeed, but not belonging to that substance. But 2.
it is true that is pretended, that it is not so much the outward sense that is
abused, as the inward; that is, not so much the eye, as the Man; not the sight,
but the judgment: and this is it we complain of. For indeed, in proper
speaking, the eye, or the hand is not capable of being deceived; but the man by
the eye, or by the ear, or by his hand. The eye sees a color, or a figure, and
the inward sense apprehends it, to be the figure of such a substance, and the
understanding judges it to be the thing which is properly represented by the
accident: it is so, or it is not so: if it be, there is no deception; if it be
not so, then there is a cousenage: there is no lie till it comes to a
proposition either explicit, or implicit; a lie is not in the senses; but when
a man by the ministry of the senses is led into the apprehension of a wrong
object, or the belief of a false proposition: then he is made to believe a lie:
and this is our case, when accidents proper to one substance are made the cover
of another, to which they are not naturally communicable. And in the case of
the holy Sacrament, the matter, if it were as is pretended, were intolerable.
For in the cases wherein a man is commonly deceived, it is his own fault by
passing judgment too soon; as if he should judge glass to be Crystal, because
it looks like it; This is not any deception in the senses, nor any injury to
the man; because he ought to consider more things then the color to make his
judgment whether it be glass, or Crystal, or diamond, or ice; the hardness,
the weight, and other things are to be ingredients in the sentence. And if any
two things had all the same accidents, then although the senses were not
deceived, yet the man would certainly and inculpably mistake. If therefore in
the Eucharist (as is pretended) all the accidents of bread remain, then all
men must necessarily be deceived; If only one or two did remain, one sense
would help the other, and all together would rightly inform the understanding.
But when all the accidents remain, they cannot but represent that substance to
which those accidents are proper; and then the holy Sacrament would be a
constant, irresistible deception of all the world, in that which all men's
notices are most evident and most relied upon, I mean their senses. And then
the question will not be, whether our senses can be deceived or no. But whether
or no it can stand with the justice and goodness of God to be angry with us
for believing our senses, since himself has so ordered it that we cannot avoid
being deceived? there being in this case as much reason to believe a lie, as to
believe a truth, if things were so as they pretend. The result of which is
this: That as no one sense can be deceived about his proper object; but that a
man may, about the substance lying under those accidents which are the object
proper to that sense, because he gives sentence according to that representment
otherwise then he ought, and he ought to have considered other accidents proper
to other senses, in making the judgment; as the birds that took the picture of
grapes for very grapes; and he that took the picture of a curtain for a very
curtain, and desired the painter to draw it aside; they made judgment of the
grapes and the curtain, only by color and figure, but ought to have considered
the weight, the taste, the touch, and the smell: so on the other side, if all
the senses concur, then not only is it true that the senses cannot be deceived
about that object which is their own, but neither ought the man to be deceived
about that substance which lies under those accidents; because their ministry
is all that natural instrument of conveying notice to a man's understanding
which God has appointed. 4. Just upon this account it is, that S. John's
argument had been just nothing in behalf of the whole religion: for that God
was incarnate, that Jesus Christ did such miracles, that he was crucified, that
he rose again and ascended into heaven, that he preached these sermons, that he
gave such commandments, he was made to believe by sounds, by shapes, by
figures, by motions, by likenesses, and appearances of all the proper
accidents: and his senses could not be deceived about the accidents which were
the proper objects of the senses; but if they might be deceived about the
substance under these accidents, of what truth or substance could he be
ascertained by their ministry? for he indeed saw the shape of a humane body;
but it might so be, that not the body of a man, but an Angelical substance
might lie under it; and so the article of the assumption of humane nature is
made uncertain. And upon the same account so are all the other articles of our
faith which relied upon the verity of his body and nature: all which if they
are not sufficiently signified by their proper accidents, could not be ever the
more believed for being seen with the eyes, and heard with the ears, and
handled with our hands; but if they were sufficiently declared by their proper
accidents, then the understanding can no more be deceived in the substances
lying under the accidents, then the senses can in the accidents themselves.

To the same purpose it was that the Apostles were answered concerning the
article of the truth of Christ's resurrection. appearing, and thought it had
been a Spirit, Christ called them to feel his hands, S. Luke 24.39.
and to show that it was he; For a spirit has no flesh and bones as ye see me
have; plainly meaning, Quod videtur corpus est: quod palpatur corpus est. S.
Ambros. in S. Luc. 4.
that the accidents of a body were not communicable to a Spirit; but how easily
might they have been deceived, if it had pleased God to invest other substances
with new and stranger accidents? For though a Spirit has not flesh and bones,
they may represent to the eyes and hands the accidents of flesh and bones: and
if it could in the matter of faith stand with the goodness and wisdom of God
to suffer it, what certainty could there be of any article of our religion
relating to Christ's humanity, or any proposition proved by miracles? To this
instance the man that must answer all, I mean Bellarmine, L. 1. de Euch. c.
14.. Resp. ad Calvinum.
ventures something: saying it was a good argument of our blessed Savior,
Handle and see that I am no Spirit: That which is handled and seen is no
Spirit: But it is no good argument to say; This is not seen, not handled,
therefore it is no body: and therefore the body of Christ may be naturally in
the Sacrament, though it is not seen nor handled. To this I reply, 1. That
suppose it were true what he said; yet it would also follow by his own words.
This is seen-bread, and is handled, so therefore it is bread. Hoc enim
affirmative colligitur. This is the affirmative consequent made by our blessed
Lord, and here confessed to be certain. It being the same collection. It is I,
for by feeling and seeing you shall believe it to be so: and it is bread, for
by feeling, and seeing, and tasting, and smelling it you shall perceive it to
be so. To which let this be added: That in Scripture it is as plainly affirmed
to be bread, as it is called Christ's body. Now then because it cannot be both
in the proper and natural sense, but one of them must be figurative and
tropical; since both of the appellatives are equally affirmed, is it not
notorious that in this case we ought to give judgment on that side which we
are prompted to by common sense? If Christ had said only, This is my body, and
no Apostle had told us also that it is bread; we had reason to suspect our
senses to be deceived, if it were possible they should be: but when it is
equally affirmed to be bread, as to be our Lords body, and but one of them can
be naturally true and in the letter, shall the testimony of all our senses be
absolutely of no use in casting the balance? The two affirmatives are equal;
one must be expounded tropically, which will you choose? Is there in the world
any thing more certain and expedite then that what you see, and feel, and taste
natural and proper, should be judged to be that which you see, and feel, and
taste naturally and properly, and therefore that the other be expounded
tropically? since you must expound one of the words tropically, I think it is
not hard to determine whether you ought to do it against your sense, or with
it. But it is also remarkable that our blessed Lord did not only by feeling and
seeing prove it to be a body: but by proving it was his body, he proved it was
himself; that is, by these accidents representing my person, ye are not led
into an error of the person, any more then of the kind of substance; See my
hands and my feet, (...) that it is even I my self; this I noted, lest a silly
escape be made, by pretending these accidents only proved Christ to be no
Spirit, but a body; and so the accidents of bread declare a latent body,
meaning the body of Christ; For as the accidents of a body declare the
substance of a body, so the particular accidents of this kind declare this
kind, of this person declare this person. For so our blessed Savior proved it
to be himself in particular; and if it were not so, the deceit would pass from
one thing to another; and although it had not been a Spirit, yet it might be
John the Baptist risen from the dead, or Moses, or Elias, and not Jesus their
dear Lord. Besides, if this had been all that Jesus had intended, only to prove
he was no spectrum but a body, he had not done what was intended. For put case
it had been a Spirit, and had assumed a body, as Bellarmine in the very next
Paragraph forgetting himself, or else being entangled in the wildernesses of an
inconsistent discourse, affirms, that in Scriptures, the Israelites did
sometimes see; and then they were not deceived in touching or seeing a body;
for there was a body assumed, and so it seemed to Abraham and Lot; But then,
suppose Jesus. Christ had done so, and had been indeed a Spirit in an assumed
body, had not the Apostles been deceived by their feeling and seeing, as well
as the Israelites were in thinking those Angels to be men that came to them in
humane shapes? how had Christ's arguments been pertinent and material? how had
he proved that he was no Spirit, by showing a body, which might be the case of
a Spirit? but that it is not consistent with the wisdom and goodness of God
to suffer any illusion in any matter of sense relating to an article of faith.

2. of an article of the Creed. For the Valentinians and the Marcionites
thought Christ's body to be fantastical, and so denied the article of the
incarnation: and if arguments from sense were not enough to confute them, viz.
that the Apostles did see and feel a body, flesh and blood and bones, how could
they convince these misbelievers? for whatsoever answer can be brought against
the reality of bread, in the Eucharist, all that may be answered in behalf of
the Marcionites: for if you urge to them all those places of Scripture which
affirm Christ to have a body; they answer, it was in Scripture called a body,
because it seemed to be so; which is the answer Bellarmine gives to all those
places of Scripture which call it bread after consecration. And if you object,
that if it be not what it seems, then the senses are deceived; L. 1. de Euch.
c. 14. Respondent nonnulli.
They will answer (a Jesuit being by and prompting them) the senses were not
deceived, because they only saw color, shape, figure, and the other accidents,
but the inward sense and understanding, that is, the man was deceived when he
thought it to be the body of a man: for under those accidents and appearances
there was an Angel, or a divinity, but no man: and now upon the grounds of
Transubstantiation how can they be confuted, I would fain know.

But Tertullian disputing against them uses the argument of sense, L. de anima
cap. 17.
as the only instrument of concluding against them in fallibly: Non licet nobis
in dubium sensus istos revocare etc. It is not lawful to doubt of our senses,
lest the same doubt be made concerning Christ; lest peradventure it should be
said, he was deceived when he said, I saw Satan like lightning fall from
heaven; or when he heard the voice of his Father testifying concerning him; or
lest he should be deceived when he touched Peter's wives mother by the hand; or
that he smelt another breath of ointment, and not what was offered to his
burial, alium postea vini saporem quod in sanguinis sui memoriam consecravit,
or tasted another taste of wine which he consecrated to the memory of his blood.
And if the Catholic Christians had believed the substantial, natural presence
of Christ's body in the Sacrament, and consequently disbelieved the testimony of
four senses, as the Church of Rome at this day does, seeing, smelling, tasting,
feeling, it had been impudence in them to have reproved Marcion by the
testimony of two senses concerning the verity of Christ's body. And supposing
that our eyes could be deceived, and our taste and our smelling, yet our touch
cannot: for supposing the organs equally disposed, yet touch is the guardian of
truth, and his nearest natural instrument; all sensation is by touch, but the
other senses are more capable of being deceived; because though they finally
operate by touch variously affected, yet their objects are further removed from
the Organ, and therefore many intermedial things may intervene, and possibly
hinder the operation of the sense; that is, bring more diseases and
disturbances to the action: but in touch the object and the instrument join
close together, and therefore there can be no impediment if the instrument be
sound, and the object proper. And yet no sense can be deceived in that which it
always perceives alike; (...). Aristot. de anima. l. 3. t. 152.
The touch can never be deceived; and therefore a testimony from it, and three
senses more cannot possibly be refused: and therefore it were strange if all
the Christians for above 1600 years together should be deceived, as if the
Eucharist were a perpetual illusion, and a riddle to the senses for so many
ages together: and indeed the fault in this case could not be in the senses: L.
de anima c. 17. etc. S. Austin. c. 33. de vera religione.
and therefore Tertullian and S. Austin dispute wittily, and substantially,
that the senses could never be deceived, but the understanding ought to assent
to what they relate to it or represent: For if any man thinks the staff is
crooked that is set half way in the water, it is the fault of his judgment not
of his sense; for the air and the water being several mediums, the eye ought
to see otherwise in air, otherwise in water; but the understanding must not
conclude falsely from these true premises, which the eye ministers: For the
thicker medium makes a fraction of the species by incrassation and a shadow;
and when a man in the yellow jaundise thinks every thing yellow, it is not the
fault of his eye, but of his understanding; for the eye does his office right,
for it perceives just as is represented to it, the species are brought yellow;
but the fault is in the understanding, not perceiving that the species are
stained near the eye, not further off: When a man in a fever thinks every thing
bitter, his taste is not deceived, but judges rightly; for as a man that chews
bread and aloes together, tastes not false, if he tastes bitterness; so it is in
the sick man's case; the jucie of his meat is mingled with choler, and the taste
is acute, and exact by perceiving it such as it is so mingled. The purpose of
which discourse is this, that no notices are more evident and more certain
then the notices of sense; but if we conclude contrary to the true dictate of
senses, the fault is in the understanding, (...). Arist l. 3. de anim, l. 156.
(...) Id. ibid.
collecting false conclusions from right premises; It follows therefore that
in the matter of the Eucharist we ought to judge that which our senses tell us;
For whatsoever they say is true: for no deceit can come by them; but the deceit
is when we believe something besides or against what they tell us; especially
when the organ is perfect, and the object proper, and the medium regular, and
all things perfect, and the same always and to all men. For it is observable,
that in this case, the senses are competent judges of the natural being of what
they see, and taste, and smell and feel; and according to that all the men in
the world can swear that what they see is bread and wine; but it is not their
office to tell us what they become by the institution of our Savior; for that
we are to learn by faith, that what is bread and wine in nature is by Gods
ordinance the Sacrament of the body and blood of the Savior of the world; but
one cannot contradict another; and therefore they must be reconciled: both say
true, that which Faith teaches is certain, and that which the senses of all men
teach always, that also is certain and evident; for as the rule of the School
says excellently, Grace never destroys nature but perfects it, Aquin. part.
1. q. 1. a. 8. ad. 2.
and so it is in the consecration of bread and wine; in which although we are
more to regard their signification then their matter, their holy employment,
then their natural usage, what they are by grace rather, then what they are by
nature, that they are Sacramental rather then that they are nutritive, that
they are consecrated and exalted by religion, rather then that they are mean
and low in their natural beings, what they are to the spirit and understanding,
rather then what they are to the sense; yet this also is as true and as evident
as the other: and therefore though not so apt for our meditation, yet as
certain as that which is.

3. Egyptian Soothsayers have been too hard for Moses: for when they changed
rods into Serpents, they had some color to tell Pharaoh they were Serpents as
well as the rod of Moses; But if they had failed to turn the water into blood
they needed not to have been troubled, if they could have borne down Pharaoh
that though it looked like water, and tasted like water, yet by their
enchantment they had made it verily to be blood: And upon this ground of having
different substances, unproper and disproportioned accidents, what hinders them
but they might have said so? and if they had, how should they have been
confuted? But this manner of proceeding would be sufficient to evacuate all
reason, and all science, and all notices of things; and we may as well,
conclude snow to be black; and fire cold; and two and two, to make five and
twenty.

But (it is said) although the body of Christ be invested with unproper
accidents, Plegilus the Priest saw an Angel, showing Christ to him in form of a
child upon the altar, whom first he took in his arms and kissed; but did eat
him up presently in his other shape, in the shape of a Wafer; Speciosa certe
pax Nebulonis, ut qui oris praebuerat basium, Guil. Malmesbur. de Gestis Regum
Anglorum l. 3.
dentium inferres exitium, said Berengarius. It was but a Judas kiss to kiss
with the lip, and bite with the teeth. But if such stuff as this may go for
argument, we may be cloyed with them in those unanswerable Authors, Simeon
Metaphrastes for the Greeks, and Jacobus de Voragine for the Latin, who make it
a trade to lie for God and for the interest of the Catholic cause. But
however, I shall tell a piece of a true story. In the time of Soter Pope of
Rome, there was an Impostor called Mark; (...), that was his appellative:
Irenae l. 1. c. 9.
and he [(...)] pretending to make the chalice of wine and water eucharistical,
saying long prayers over it, made it look red or purple, that it might be
thought, that grace which is above all things, does drop the blood into the
chalice by invocation.] Such as these have been often done by humane artifice
or by operation of the Devil, said Alexander of Ales. Sum Theod. part. 4. q.
11. membr. 2. art. 4 3.
If such things as these were done regularly, it were pretense enough to say it
is flesh and blood that is in the Eucharist; but when nothing of this is done
by God; but heretics and knaves, Juglers and Impostors hoping to change the
Sacrament into a charm by abusing the spiritual sense into a gross and
carnal, against the authority of Scripture and the Church, reason or religion,
have made pretenses of those things, and still the Holy Sacrament in all the
times of ministration has the form and all the perceptibilities of bread and
wine: as we may believe those Impostors did more rely upon the pretenses of
sense then of other arguments, and distrusting them did fly to these as the
greater probation: so we rely upon that way of probation, which they would have
counterfeited, but which indeed Christ in his institution has still left in
the nature of the symbols, viz. that it is that which it seems to be, and that
the other superinduced predicate of the body of Christ is to be understood only
in that sense which may still consist with that substance, whose proper and
natural accidents remain, and are perceived by the mouth and hands and eyes of
all men. To which this may be added, that by the doctrine of the late Roman
Schools all those pretenses of real appearances of Christ's body or blood must
be necessarily concluded to be Impostures, or aerie phantasmes, and illusions;
because themselves teach that Christ's body is so in the Sacrament, that Christ's
own eyes cannot see his own body in the Sacrament: and in that manner by which
it is there, it cannot be made visible, no not by the absolute power of God.
Nay it can be neither seen, nor touched, nor tasted, nor felt, nor imagined. It
is the doctrine of Suarez in 3 Tho. disp. 53.. 3. and disp. 52.. 1. and of
Vasquez in 3. t. 3. disp. 191. n. 22. which besides that it reproves the whole
article, by making it incredible and impossible, it does also infinitely
convince all these apparitions (if ever there were any) of deceit, and fond
illusion. I had no more to say in this particular but that the Roman Doctors
pretend certain words out of S. Cyrils fourth mystagogique Catechism, against
the doctrine of this Paragraph: pro certissimo habeas etc. Be sure of this,
that this bread which is seen of us is not bread, although the taste perceives
it to be bread, but the body of Christ; For under the species of bread, the
body is given to thee; under the species of wine the blood is given to thee.
Here if we will trust S. Cyrils words, at least in Bellarmins and Brerely's
sense, and understand of them before you will believe your own eyes, you may.
For S. Cyril bids you not believe your sense. For taste and sight tells you it
is bread, but it is not. But here is no harm done. 2. For himself plainly
explains his meaning, in his next Catechism. Think not that you taste bread and
wine (says he) No, what then? (...), but the antitypes of the body and blood:
and in this very place, he calls bread (...), a type, (...), and therefore it is
very ill rendered by the Roman Priests by Species; which signifies accidental
forms: for (...). signifies no such thing, but (...); which is not S. Cyrils
word 3. He says it is not bread, though the taste feel; it so that is, it is
not mere bread, which is an usual expression among the Fathers, L. 4. contr.
haeres. c. 34. Psalm. 22. homil. 16.
Non est panis communis, says Irenaeus, (...), says Justin Martyr, just as S.
Chrysostom says of Baptismal water, it is not common water, and as S. Cyril
himself says of the Sacramental bread, (...), it is not mere bread, (...) but
the Lords body. For if it were not that, in some sense or other, it were still
mere bread, but that it is not. But this manner of speaking is not unusual in
the holy Scriptures, that restrained and modificated negatives be propounded in
simple and absolute forms. I have given them statutes which are not good. Ezekiel.
20.25. I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Hos. 6.6. They have not rejected
thee, but me: 1 Samuel 8.7. It is not you that speak, but the Spirit of my
Father. I came not to send peace, but a sword. S. Mat. 10.20. and 34. He that
believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me. And, If I hear
witness of my self my witness is not true. S. John 5.31. which is expressly
confronted by S. John 8.14. Though I bear record of my self, yet my record is
true; which shows manifestly that the simple and absolute negative in the
former place must in his signification be restrained. So S. Paul speaks
usually. Henceforth I know noman according to the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16. We have
no strife against flesh and blood, Ephesians. 6.12. And in the ancient Doctors
nothing more ordinary, then to express limited senses by unlimited words;
which is so known, that I should lose my time, and abuse the readers patience
if I should heap lip. instances. So Irenaeus. He that has received the Spirit,
is no more flesh and blood, but Spirit. And Epiphanius affirms the same of the
flesh of a temperate man; It is not flesh, but is changed into Spirit: so we
say of a drunken man, and a furious person; He is not a man, but a beast. And
they speak thus particularly in the matter of the holy Sacrament, as appears in
the instances above reckoned and in others respersed over this Treatise. But to
return to the present objection, it is observable that S. Cyril does not say it
is not bread, though the sense suppose it to be so, for that would have
supposed the taste to have been deceived, which he affirms not, and if he had,
we could not have believed him: but he says, [though the sense perceive it to
be bread] so that it is still bread, else the taste would not perceive it to be
so; but it is more, and the sense does not perceive it; for it is the body of
our Lord; here then is his own answer, plainly opposed to the objection; he
says, it is not bread, that is, it is not mere bread; and so say we: he says,
that it is the body of our Lord, (...), the antitype of the Lords body, and so
say we; He says, the sense perceives it to be bread; but it is more then the
sense perceives; so he implies, and so we affirm; and yet we may trust our
sense for all that it tells us, and our understanding too, for all it learns
besides. The like to this are the words of S. Chrysostom, 83 Homil. upon S.
Mat.
where he says [We cannot be deceived by his words, but our sense is often
deceived, look not at what is before us, but observe Christ's words. Nothing
sensible is given to us, but things insensible, by things sensible etc. This,
and many higher things then this, are in S. Chrysostom, not only relating to
this but to the other Sacrament also. Think not thou receivest the body from a
man, but fire from the tongue of a Seraphim; that for the Eucharist: and for
Baprisme this; The Priest baptizes thee not, but God holds thy head. In the
same sense that these admit, in the same sense we may understand his other
words; they are Tragical and high, but may have a sober sense; but literally
they sound a contradiction; that nothing sensible should be given us in the
Sacrament; and yet that nothing insensible should be given, but what is
conveyed by things sensible but it is not worth the while to stay here: Only
this, the words of S. Chrysostom are good counsel, and such as we follow; for
in this case we do not finally rely upon sense, or resolve all into it; but we
trust it only for so much as it ought to be trusted for; but we do not finally
rest upon it, but upon faith, and look not on the things proposed, but attend
to the words of Christ, and though we see it to be bread, we also believe it to
be his body, in that sense which he intended.

SECT. XI. The doctrine of Transubstantiation is wholly without and against
reason.
1. God has said it, therefore it is true. Now if God had expressly said,
This which seems to be bread is my body, in the natural sense, or to that
purpose, there had been no more to be said in the affair; all reasons against
it had been but sophismes: When Christ has said, This is my body, no man that
pretends to Christianity doubts of the truth of these words, all men submitting
their understanding to the obedience of Faith: but since Christ did not affirm
that he spoke it in the natural sense, but there are not only in Scripture many
prejudices, but in common sense much evidence against it, if reason also
protests against the article, it is the voice of God, and to be heard in this
question. For, Nunquam aliud natura; Juven. Sat. 14.2.
aliud sapientia dicit.

And this the rather, because there are so many ways to verify the words of
Christ without this strange and new doctrine of Transubstantiation, that in
vain will the words of Christ be pretended against reason, whereas the words of
Christ may be many ways verified, if Transubstantiation be condemned: as first
if Picus Mirandula's proposition be true, which in Rome he offered to dispute
publicly, that Paneitas possit suppositare corpus Domini, which I suppose if
it be expounded in sensible terms, means, that it may be bread and Christ's
body too; or 2ly if Luthers and the ancient Schoolmens way be true, that
Christ's body be present together with the bread. In that sense Christ's words
might be true, though no Transubstantiation; and this is the sense which is
followed by the Greek Church. 3. If Boquinus way be true, that between the
bread and Christ's body there were a communication of proprieties, as there is
between the Deity and humanity of our blessed Savior; then as we say, God gave
himself for us, and the blessed Virgin is (...) the mother of God, and God
suffered and rose again, meaning that God did it according to his assumed
humanity, so we may say, this is Christ's body, by the communication of the
Idioms or proprieties to the bread with which it is united. 4. If our way be
admitted, that Christ is there after a real, spiritual manner; the words of
Christ are true, without any need of admitting Transubstantiation. 5. I could
instance in the way of Johannes Longus in his Annotations upon the 2d Apology
of Justin Martyr, Hoc est corpus meum, that is, My body is this, that is, is
nourishment Spiritual, as this is Natural. 6. The way of Ioannes Campanus would
afford me a sixth instance, Hoc est corpus meum, that is, meum as it is mea
creatura. 7. Johannes a Lasco, Bucer and the Socinians refer hoc to the whole
ministry, and mean that to be representative of Christ's body. 8. If Rupertus
the Abbats way were admitted, which was confuted by Algerus and is almost like
that of Boquinus, that between Christ's body and the consecrate symbols there
was an hypostatical union, then both substances would remain, and yet it were a
true proposition to affirm of the whole hypostasis, this is the body of Christ.
Many more I could reckon; all which, or any of which if it were admitted, the
words of Christ stand true and uncontradicted: and therefore it is a huge folly
to quarrel at them that admit not Transubstantiation, and to say they deny the
words of Christ. And therefore it must not now be said, Reason is not to be
heard against an article of faith; for that this is an article of faith cannot
nakedly be inferred from the words of Christ, which are capable of so many
meanings. Therefore reason in this case is to be heard, by them that will give
a reason of their faith; as it is commanded in Scripture; much less is that to
be admitted which Fisher, or Flued the Jesuit was bold to say to King James;
that because Transubstantiation seems so much against reason, therefore it is
to be admitted, as if faith were more faith, for being against reason: Against
this for the present I shall oppose the excellent words of S. Austin ep. 7. Si
manifestissimae certaeque rationi velut Scripturarum Sanctarum objicitur
authoritas, non intelligit qui hoc facit, and non Scriptur arum illarum sensum
ad quem penetrare non potuit, sed suum potius objicit veritati: nec quod in
eis, sed quod in seipso velut pro eis invenit, opponit. He that opposes the
authority of the holy Scriptures against manifest and certain reason, does
neither understand himself nor the Scripture. Indeed when God has plainly
declared the particular, the more it seems against my reasons, the greater is
my obedience in submitting; but that is because my reasons are but Sophismes,
since truth it self has declared plainly against them: but if God has not
plainly declared against that which I call reason, my reason must not be
contested, by a pretense of faith but, upon some other account; Ratio cum
ratione concertet.

2. [If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out] Here are the plain words of
Christ; And [Some make themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven] Nothing
plainer in the Grammatical sense: and why do we not do it? because it is an
unnatural thing to mangle our body for a Spiritual cause, which may be supplied
by other more gentle instruments. Yea but reason is not to be heard against the
plainwords of Christ, and the greatery our reason is against it, the greater
excellency in your obedience; that as Abraham against hope believed in hope, so
we against reason may believe in the greatest reason, the Divine revelation:
and what can be spoken against this?

3. Prompt. Cath. fer. 3. hebd. Sanct.. 3. in haec verba. Hoc est corpus meum.
Stapleton confuting Luthers opinion of Consubsubstantiation pretends against
in many absurdities drawn from reason; and yet it would have been ill taken, if
it should have been answered that the doctrine ought the rather to be believed,
because it is so unreasonable; which answer is something like our new Preachers
discourse; who pretend that therefore they are Spiritual men, because they have
no learning, they are to confound the wise, because they are the weak things of
the world, and that they are to be heard the rather, because there is the less
reason they should, so crying stinking fish that men may buy it the more
greedily. But I will proceed to the particulars of reason in this article;
being contented with this, that if the adverse party shall refuse this way of
arguing, they may be reproved by saying, they refuse to hear reason, and it
will not be easy for them in despite of reason to pretend faith, for (...),
These. 3.2.
and (...), unreasonable men and they that have not faith, are equivalent in S.
Paul's expression.

1. the substance of bread into the body of Christ, but the same will infer the
conversion of the whole into the whole; and therefore of the accidents of the
bread into the accidents of the body. And in those little pretenses of
Philosophy which these men sometimes make to cosen fools into a belief of the
possibility, they pretend to no instance, but to such conversions in which if
the substance is changed, so also are the accidents: sometimes the accident is
changed in the same remaining substance; but if the substance be changed, the
accidents never remain the same individually; or in kind, unless they be
symbolical, that is, are common to both, as in the change of elements, of air
into fire, of water into earth. Thus when Christ changed water into wine, the
substances being changed, the accidents also were altered, and the wine did not
retain the color and taste of water; for then though it had been the stranger
miracle, that wine should be wine, and yet look and taste like water, yet it
would have obtained but little advantage to his doctrine and person, if he
should have offered to prove his mission by such a miracle. For if Christ had
said to the guests; To prove that I am come from God, I will change this water
into wine; well might this prove his mission: but if while the guests were
wondering at this, he should proceed and say, wonder ye not at this, for I will
do a stranger thing then it, for this water shall be changed into wine, and yet
I will so order it, that it shall look like water, and taste like it, so that
you shall not know one from the other: Certainly this would have made the whole
matter very ridiculous; and indeed it is a strange device of these men to
suppose God to work so many prodigious miracles as must be in
Transubstantiation, if it were at all, and yet that none of these should be
seen; for to what purpose is a miracle that cannot be perceived? It can prove
nothing, nor do any thing, when it self is not known whether it be or no. When
bread is turned into flesh, and wine into blood in the nourishment of our
bodies (which I have seen urged for the credibility of Transubstantiation) The
bread as it changes his nature, changes his accidents too, and is flesh in
color, and shape, and dimensions, and weight, and operation, as well as it is
in substance. Now let them rub their foreheads hard and tell us, it is so in
the holy Sacrament. For if it be not so, then no instance of the change of
Natural substances from one form to another can be pertinent: for 1. though it
be no more then is done in every operation of a body, yet it is always with
change of their proper accidents; and then 2. It can with no force of the words
of the institution be pretended, that one ought to be or can be without the
other. For he that says this is the body of a man, says that it has the
substance of a humane body, and all his consequents, that is, the accidents;
and he that says this is the body of Alexander, says (besides the substance)
that it has all the individuating conditions, which are the particular
accidents; and therefore Christ affirming this to be his body, did as much
affirm the change of accidents as the change of substance: because that change
is naturally and essentially consequent to this. Now if they say they therefore
do not believe the accidents of bread to be changed, because they see them
remain; I might reply, Why will they believe their sense against faith? since
there may be evidence, but here is certainty, and it cannot be deceived though
our eyes can: and it is certain, that Christ affirmed it without distinction of
one part from another, of substance from his usual accidents. This is my body.
Hoc, Hic, Nunc, and Sic. Now if they think their eyes may be credited for all
the words of our blessed Savior, why shall not their reason also? or is
nothing so certain to the understanding, as any thing is to the eye? If
therefore it be unreasonable to say that the accidents of bread are changed
against our sense, so it will be unreasonable to say, that the substance is
changed against our reason; Not but that God can, and does often change one
substance into another, and it is done in every natural production of a
substantial form; but that we say it is unreasonable that this should be
changed into flesh (not to flesh simply, for so it is when we eat it, nor into
Christ's flesh simply, for so it might have been, if he had, as it is probable
he did, eaten the Sacrament himself, But) into that body of Christ which is in
heaven he remaining there, and being whole and impassible, and unfrangible,
this we say is unreasonable and impossible: and that is now to be proved.

2. Transubstantiation, for it was the trick of the Monarchians, the
Eutichians, the Apollinarists, the Arrians when they were confuted by the
arguments of the Catholics, to fly to Gods omnipotency; (...) says Orat. 51.
Theodor. dial. (...). Tertull. contr. Praxeam. p. 10.
Nazianzen and it was very usually by the Fathers called the Sanctuary of
Heretics: potentia (inquiunt) ei haec est ut falsa sint vera: mendaois est ut
falsum dicat verum, 79 vet. and Nov. Testament.
quod Deo non competit, says S. Austin. They pretend it to belong to Gods
power to verify their doctrine, that is to make falsehood truth; that is not
power, but a lie, which cannot be in God, and this was an older then the
Arrians; it was the trick of the old Tragedians; So Plato told them; (...); De
nature. Deor. l. 1. Plato in Cratylo.
which Cicero rendering, says, cum explicare argumenti exitum non potestis,
confugitis ad Deum. When you cannot bring your argument about, you fly to the
power of God. But when we say this is impossible to be done, either we mean it
naturally or ordinarily impossible, that is, such a thing which cannot without
a miracle be done; as a child cannot with his hands break a giants arm, or a
man cannot eat a Millstone, or with his finger touch the Moon. Now in matters of
religion, although to show a thing to be thus impossible is not enough to prove
it was not at all, if God said it was; for although to man it be impossible,
yet to God all things are possible; yet when the question is of the sense of
the words of Scripture which are capable of various interpretations, he that
brings an argument ab impossibili against any one interpretation, showing that
it infers such an ordinary impossibility as cannot be done without a miracle,
has sufficiently concluded ( not against the words, for nothing ought to
prejudice them, but) against such an interpretation as infers that
impossibility. Thus when in Scripture we find it recorded that Christ was born
of a Virgin, to say this is impossible is no argument against it, because
although it be naturally impossible (which I think is demonstrable against the
Arabian Physicians) yet to him that said it, it is also possible to do it. But
then if from hence any man shall obtrude as an article of faith, that the
blessed Virgin Mother was so a Virgin that her holy Son came into the world
without any aperture of his mothers womb, I doubt not but an argument ab
impossibili is a sufficient conviction of the falsehood of it; though this
impossibility be only an ordinary and natural; because the words of Scripture
affirming Christ to be born of a virgin, say only that he was not begotten by
natural generation; not that his egression from his Mothers womb made a
Penetration of dimensions. To instance once more: The words of Scripture are
plain, That Christ is man, That Christ is God; Here are two natures and yet but
one Christ; No impossibility ought to be pretended against these plain words,
but they must be sophismes, because they dispute against truth it self. But now
if a Monothelite shall say that by this unity of nature, God has taught an
unity of wills in Christ, and that he had but one will, because he is but one
person; I do not doubt but an argument from an ordinary and natural
impossibility will be sufficient to convince him of his heresy; and in this
case the Monothelite has no reason to say that the orthodox Christian denies
Gods omnipotency, and says that God cannot unite the will of Christ's humanity
to the will of his Divinity. And this is true in every thing which is not
declared minutely, and in his particular sense. There is ordinarily no greater
argument in the world, and none better is commonly used, nor any better
required, then to reduce the opinion to an impossibility; for if this be not
true without a miracle, you must prove your extraordinary, and demonstrate your
miracle; which will be found to be a new impossibility. A sense that cannot be
true without a miracle to make it so, it is a miracle if it be true; and
therefore let the literal sense in any place be presumed and have the advantage
of the first offer or presumption; yet if it be ordinarily impossible to be so,
and without a miracle cannot be so, and the miracle no where affirmed, then to
affirm the literal sense is the hugest folly that can be in the interpretation
of any Scriptures.

But there is an impossibility which is absolute, God cannot do, therefore
because he is almighty; for to do them, were impotency and want of power; as
God cannot lie, he cannot be deceived, he cannot be mocked, he cannot dye, he
cannot deny himself, nor do unjustly: And I remember that Dionysius brings in
(by way of scorn) Elymas the Sorcerer finding fault with S. Paul for saying,
God could not deny himself; as if the saying so, were denying Gods omnipotency;
so Elymas objected; as is to be seen in the book de Divin. Nom. c. 8. And by
the consent of all the world it is agreed upon this expression, That God cannot
reconcile contradictions; that is, It is no part of the divine omnipotency to
make the same proposition true and false at the same time, in the same respect;
It is absolutely impossible that the same thing should be and not be at the
same time, that the same thing so constituted in his own formality should lose
the formality or essential affirmative; and yet remain the same thing. For it
is absolutely the first truth that can be affirmed in Metaphysical notices.
Nothing can be and not be. This is it in which all men and all Sciences, and
all religions are agreed upon as a prime truth in all senses, and without
distinctions. For if any thing could be and not be at the same time, then there
would be something whose being were not to be. Quest. in Phys. l. 3. q 4.
Nay Dominicus a Soto affirms expressly that not only those things cannot be
done by God which intrinsecally, formally, and expressly infer two
contradictories, but those also which the understanding at the first proposal,
does by his natural light dissent from, and can by no means admit; because that
which is so repugnant to the understanding, naturally does sua natura
repugnare, is impossible in the nature of things; and therefore when it is said
in S. Luke, nothing is impossible with God, it is meant; Nothing is impossible,
but that which naturally repugnes to the understanding.

Now to apply this to the present question; Our adversaries do not deny,
naturally and ordinarily; but by divine power they can be done; but that they
are done they have no warrant, but the plain literal sense of the words of Hoc
est corpus meum: Now this is so far from proving that God does work perpetual
miracles to verify their sense of it, that the working of miracles ought to
prove that to be the sense of it. Now the probation of a proposition by
miracles, is an open thing, clear as thunder, and being a matter of sense, and
consequently more known then the thing which they intend to prove, ought not to
be proved by that which is the thing in question. And therefore to say that God
will work a miracle rather then his words should be false, is certain but
impertinent: For concerning the words themselves there is no question, and
therefore now, no more need of miracles to confirm them; concerning the meaning
of them is the question; They say this is the meaning. Quest. How do you prove
it since there are so many impossibilities in it naturally and ordinarily? Ans.
Because God said it, therefore it is true: Resp. Yea, that God said the words
we doubt not, but that his words are to be understood in your sense, that I
doubt; because if I believe your sense I must admit many things ordinarily
impossible. Ans. Yea, but nothing is impossible to God. Resp. True, nothing
that can be done, exceeds his power; but supposing this absolutely possible,
yet how does it appear that God will do a miracle to verify your sense, which
otherwise cannot be true; when without a miracle the words may be true in many
other senses? I am dic Posthume: for it is hard that men by a continual effort
and violence should maintain a proposition against reason and his
unquestionable maxims, thinking it sufficient to oppose against it Gods
omnipotency; as if the crying out a miracle, were a sufficient guard against
all absurdity in the world: as if the wisdom of God did arm his power against
his truth, and that it were a finenesse of Spirit to be able to believe the two
parts of a contradiction; and all upon confidence of a miracle which they
cannot prove. And indeed it were something strange, that thousands and
thousands of times, every day for above 1500 years together, the same thing
should be done, and yet this should be called a miracle, that is, a daily
extraordinary; for by this time it would pass into nature and a rule, and so
become a supernatural natural event, an extraregular rule, an extraordinary
ordinary, a perpetual wonder, that is, a wonder and no wonder: and therefore I
may infer the proper corollaries of this argument, in the words of Scotus,
whose opinion it was pity it could be overborn by tyranny. 1. Sent. 4. did.
11. q. 3. tit. b.
That the truth of the Eucharist may be saved without Transubstantiation. And
this I have already proved. 2. The substance of bread under the accidents is
more a nourishment then the accidents themselves, and therefore more represents
Christ's body in the formality of Spiritual nourishment. And indeed, that I may
add some weight to these words of Scotus which are very true and very
reasonable; 1. It cannot be told why bread should be chosen for the symbol of
the body, but because of his nourishing faculty, and that the accidents should
nourish without substance, is like feeding a man with music, and quenching his
thirst with a Diagram. 2. It is fantastical and Mathematical bread not natural,
which by the doctrine of Transubstantiation is represented on the table, and
therefore unfit to nourish or to typifie that which can. 3. Painted bread might
as well be symbolical as the real, if the real bread become no bread: for then
that which remains is nothing but the accidents, as color and dimensions etc.
But Scotus proceeds. 3. That understanding of the words of institution that the
substance of bread is not there, seems harder to be maintained, and to it more
inconveniences are consequent, then by putting the substance of bread to be
there. 4. Lastly, it is a wonder why in one article which is not a principal
article of faith, such a sense should be affirmed, for which faith is exposed
to the contempt of all that follow reason: and all this is because in
Transubstantiation there are many natural and ordinary impossibilities. In hac
conversione sunt plura difficiliora quam in creatione, 3. q. 75. art. 2. ad 3.
said Aquinas, There are more difficulties in this conversion of the Sacrament,
then in the whole Creation.

what may be done by God, it ought to be considered that it is rash and
impudent to say that the body of Christ cannot by the power of God (who can do
all things) be really in the Sacrament without the natural conversion of bread
into him. God can make that the body of Christ should be de novo in the
Sacrament of the altar, without any change of it self, and without the change
of any thing into it self, yet some change being made about the bread, or
something else. They are the words of Durand Sent. 4. did. 11. q. 1.
. Cannot God in any sense make this proposition true; This bread is the body of
Christ, or this is bread and Christ's body too? If they say he cannot, then it
is a clear case, who it is that denies Gods omnipotency. If God can, then how
will they be able from the words of Scripture to prove Transubstantiation? This
also would be considered.

But now concerning impossibilities, contradictions, then it is not only an
intolerable prejudice against the doctrine, as is the ordinary and natural
impossibility; but it will be absolutely impossible to be true, and it
derogates from God to affirm such a proposition in religion, and much more to
adopt it into the body of faith. And therefore when S. Paul had quoted that
place of Scripture; He has put all things under him; he adds, It is evident,
that he is excepted who did put all things under him; for if this had not been
so understood, then he should have been under himself, and he that gave the
power should be lessened, and be inferior to him that received it; which
because they infer impossibilities, like those which are consequent to
Transubstantiation, S. Paul makes no more of it but to say, The contrary is
manifest against the unlimited literal sense of the words. Now for the eviction
of this, these two mediums are to be taken. The one, that this doctrine affirms
that of the essence, or existence of a thing which is contrary to the essence
or existence of it, and yet that the same thing remains; that is, that the
essence remains without the essence, that is, without it self. The other, that
this doctrine makes a thing to be and not to be at the same time: I shall use
them both but promiscuously, because they are reducible to one.

The doctrine of Transubstantiation, Lib. 3. Euch. c. 2.. ult.
Bellarmine seems afraid of this; for, immediately before, he goes about to
prevaricate about the being of a body in many places at once, he says, that if
the essence of things were evidently and particularly known, then we might know
what does, and what does not imply a contradiction; but, id non satis constat,
there is no certainty of that; by that pretended uncertainty making way as he
hopes to escape from all the pressure of contradictions that lie upon the
prodigious philosophy of this Article: But we shall make a shift so far to
understand the essence of a body, as to evince this doctrine to be full of
contradictions.

1. For Christ's body, Natural body is changed into a Spiritual body, and it is
not now a Natural body but a Spiritual; and therefore cannot be now in the
Sacrament after a natural manner, because it is so no where, and therefore not
there; It is sown a natural body, it is raised a Spiritual body. And therefore
though this Spirituality be not a change of one substance into another, yet it
is so a change of the same substance, that it has lost all those accidents
which were not perfective nor constitutive, but imperfect and separable from
the body; and therefore in no sense of nature can it be manducated. And here is
the first contradiction. The body of Christ is in the Sacrament. The same body
is in heaven. In heaven it cannot be broken naturally; In the Sacrament they
say it is broken naturally and properly; therefore the same body is and is not,
it can and it cannot be broken. To this they answer, that it is broken under
the Species of bread; Not in it self; Well! is it broken or is it not broken?
let it be broken under what it will, if it be broken, the thing is granted. For
if by being broken under the Species, it be meant that the Species be broken
alone, and not the body of Christ, then they take away in one hand what they
reach forth with the other. This being a better argument, The Species only are
broken, the Species are not Christ's body, therefore Christ's body is not broken:
better I say then this, The body of Christ is under the Species, the Species
alone are broken, therefore the body of Christ is broken. For how can the
breaking of Species or accidents, infer the breaking of Christ's body, unless
the accidents be Christ's body, or inseparable from it? or rather, How can the
breaking of the accidents infer the breaking of Christ's body when it cannot be
broken? To this I desire a clear and intelligible answer. Add to this, how can
Species, that is, accidents, be broken, but when a substance is broken? for an
accident properly, such as smell, color, taste, has of it self no solid, and
consistent, nor indeed any fluid parts, nothing whereby it can be broken, and
have a part divided from a part; but as the substance in which the accident is
subjected becomes divided, so do the inherent accidents; but no otherwise: and
if this cannot be admitted, men cannot know what one another say or mean, they
can have no notices of things or regular propositions.

2. But I demand,

But an accident is, that whose very essence is to be in another: Aristot. lib.
1. posterior. cap. 6. and lib. 2. cap. 10. Metaph. lib. 6. cap. 4.

Idem significatur per ipsum nomen (...) quod abit cum substantia, (...),
receptum scilicet in subjecto. Accidens quod accidit.


When they speak of a body and separate it from a Spirit, they mean that a
Spirit is that which has no material, divisible parts, physically; that which
has nothing of that which makes a body, that is, extension, limitation by
lines, and superficies and material measures. The very first notion and
conception of things teaches all men, that what is circumscribed and measured
by his proper place is there and no where else. For if it could be there and be
in another place, it were two and not one. A finite Spirit can be but in one
place, but it is there without circumscription; that is, it has no parts
measured by the parts of a place, but is there after another manner then a
body, that is, it is in every part of his definition or spiritual location. So
it is said, a soul is in the whole body; not that a part of it is in the hand,
and a part of it in the eye, but it is whole in the whole, and whole in every
part; and it is true that it is so, if it be wholly immaterial: because that
which is spiritual and immaterial, cannot have material parts. But when we
speak of a body, all the world means that, which has a finite quantity, and is
determined to one place. This was the philosophy of all the world, taught in
all the schools of the Christians and Heathens, even of all mankind, till the
doctrine of Transubstantiation was to be nursed and maintained, and even after
it was born, it could not be forgotten by them who were bound to keep it. And I
appeal to any man of the Roman persuasion, if they can show me any ancient
Philosopher, Greek, or Roman, or Christian of any Nation, who did not believe
it to be essential to the being of a body to be in one place: Plaut. Amphitr.
act. 2. sc. 1.
and Amphitruo in the old Comedy had reason to be angry with Sosia upon this
point. Tun' id dicere audes, quod nemo unquam homo antehac vidit, nec potest
fieri, tempore uno, Homo idem duobus locis ut simul sit? And therefore to make
the body of Christ to be in a 1000 places at once, and yet to be but one body,
To be in heaven and to be upon so many altars, to be on the altar in so many
round wafers, is to make a body to be a spirit, and to make a finite to be
infinite; for nothing can be so but an infinite Spirit.

Neither will it be sufficient to fly here to Gods omnipotency:
Categorematical, that is, positive substantial infinites? or can it be that a
finite should, remaining finite, yet not be finite, but indefinite and in
innumerable places at once (...). Plotin. l. de anim. apud Eusebius. praepar.
Evang. l. 15.
? God can new create the body and change it into a Spirit; But can a body,
remaining a body, be at the same time a Spirit? or can it be a body, and yet
not be in a place? is it not determined so, that remaining in a place it cannot
be out of it? if these things could be otherwise, then the same thing at the
same time could be a Body and a Spirit, limited and unlimited, wholly in a
place, and wholly out of it, finite and infinite, a body and yet no body, one
and yet many, the same and not the same, that is, it should not be it self. Now
although God can change any thing from being the thing it is, to become another
thing, yet is it not a contradiction to say, it should be the same it is, and
yet not the same? These are the essential, immediate consequents of supposing a
body remaining a body, whose essence it is to be finite and determined in one
place, can yet so remaining be in a thousand places.

3. The Socinians teach that our bodies at the resurrection shall be (as they
say Christ's body now is) changed substantially. For corruptible and
incorruptible, mortal and immortal, natural and spiritual, are substantial
differences: and now our bodies being natural, corruptible, and mortal, differ
substantially from bodies spiritual, immortal and incorruptible, as they shall
be hereafter, and as the body of our Lord now is. Now I am sure the Church of
Rome allows not of this doctrine in these; neither have they reason for it;
But do not they admit that in hypothesi which they deny in thesi? For is it not
a perfect change of substance that a body from finite is changed to be at least
potentially infinite, from being determined in one place to be indesinite and
indeterminable? To lose all his essential proprieties must needs infer a
substantial change Quomedo erit Sol splendore privatus? vel quomodo erit
splendour, nisi Sol sit a quo defluat? Ignis vero quomodo crit calore carens?
vel calor unde manabit nisi ab igne? Cyril. Alex. l. 1. in 1. c. Ioh.
; and that it is of the essence of a body to be in one place, at least an
essential propriety, they will not I suppose be so impudent as to deny, since
they fly to the divine omnipotency and a perpetual miracle to make it be
otherwise: which is a plain demonstration that naturally it is so; this
therefore they are to answer if they can.

But let us see what Christian philosophy teaches us in this particular. Austin
is a good probable Doctor, and may be trusted for a proposition in Natural
philosophy. These are his conclusions in this article. Sermon. Dom. monte. c. 9.
Corpora quae non possunt esse nisi in loco. Bodies cannot be but in their
place. In Psalm. 86.
Angustias omnipotentiae corpord patiuntur, nec ubique possunt esse, nec
semper; Divinitas autem ubique praesto est. The Divinity is present every
where, but not bodies, they are not omnipotent: meaning, it is a propriety of
God to be in many places, an effect of his omnipotence. But more plainly yet,
Ep. 57.
Spatia locorum toll corporibus, and nusquam erunt, and quia nusquam erunt,
nec erunt, if you take from bodies the spaces of place, they will be no where,
and if they be no where, they will not be at all: and to apply this to the
present question, he affirms, Tract. 31. in Johan.
Christus homo secundum corpus in loco est, and de loco migrat, and cum ad
alium locum venerit, in eo loco unde venit non est. Christ as man according to
the body is in a place and goes from a place, and when he comes to another
place is not in the place from whence he came. For besides that so to do is of
the verity of Christ's body, that it should have the same affections with ours;
according as it is insisted upon in diverse places of the Scripture,
particularly, S. Luke 24.39. it is also in the same place, and in the story
apparent, that the case was not altered after the resurrection, but Christ
moved finitely by dimensions, Dial. 2.
and change of places. So Theodoret, Dominicum corpus incorruptibile resurrexit
and impatibile and immortale, and divina gloria glorificatum est, and a
coelestibus adoratur potestatibus; corpus tamen est, priorem habens
circumscriptionem. Christ's body even after the resurrection is circumscribed as
it was before. And therefore as it is impious to deny God to be invisible: so
it is profane, not to believe and profess the son of God in his assumed
humanity to be visible, Lib. de essent. Divinit.
corporeal, and local after the resurrection: It is the saying of S. Austin.

And I would fain know how it will be answered, attribute of ubiquity, (...).
Stob. tit. 3.
either actually or potentially. For let them say; is it not an attribute of
God to be unlimited and to be undefined by places? S. Austin says it, and it
is affirmed by natural reason, and all the world attributes this to God, as a
propriety of his own. If it be not his own, then all the world has been
always deceived till this new generation arose. If it be let them fear the
horrid consequent of giving that to a creature which is the glory of the
Creator. And if they think to escape by saying, that they do not attribute to
it actual ubiquity, but potential, that is, that though he be not, yet he may
be every where; let it be considered; if the argument of the Fathers was good
(by which they proved the Divinity of the holy Ghost) This is every where,
therefore this is God; is it not also as good to say, This may be every where,
therefore this may be God? And then it will be altogether as bad as any thing
can be imagined, for it makes the incommunicable attribute of God, to be
communicable to a creature; and not only so, but it is worse, for it makes,
that an actual creature may be a potential God, that is, that there can be a
God which is not eternally a God, that is not a pure act, a God that is not
yet, but that shall have a beginning in time.

4 There was not in all School Divinity, circumscriptive, destinitive,
repletive. The body of Christ is not in the Sacrament circumscriptively,
because there he could be but in one altar, in one wafer. It is not there
definitively for the same reason, because to be definitely in a place is to be
in it so as to be there, and no where else. And both these are affirmed by
their own Turrecremata; Super Decret. 3. part. de consecrat. d. 2. cap. Quid
sit.
It remains, that it must be repletive in many places, which we use to
attribute to God only, and it is that manner of being in a place, by which God
is distinguished from his creatures; But now a fourth word must be invented,
and that is Sacramentaliter, Christ's body is Sacramentally in more places then
one: which is very true, that is, the Sacrament of Christ's body is: and so is
his body figuratively, tropically, representatively in being, and really in
effect and blessing. But this is not a natural, real being in a place, but a
relation to a person; the other three are all the manners of location which the
soul of Man could yet ever apprehend.

5 It is essential to a body to have partem extra partem, ears from the feet,
and the head from the belly. But in Transubstantiation the whole body is in a
point, in a minimum natural, in the least imaginable crumb of consecrated
bread: how then shall nose and eyes, and head and hands, be distinct? unless
the mutiny of the members be reconciled, and all parties pleased, because the
feet shall be the eyes, and the leg shall be the head, and possess each others
dimension and proper cells of dwelling. Quod ego non credo, In Decret. de
council. did. 2. ubi pars in Glossa.
said an ancient Gloss: I will not insist upon the unworthy questions which
this carnal doctrine introduces: viz. Whether Christ's whole body be so there,
that the prepuce is not wanting? Suarez supposing that as probable, In Thom.
tom. 3. disp. 51.
others denying it, but disputing it fiercely; Neither will I make scrutiny
concerning eating Christ's bones, guts, hair, and nails; nor suppose the Roman
Priests to be such (...), and to have such sawes in their mouths: these are
appendages of their persuasion, but to be abominated by all Christian and
modest persons, who use to eat not the bodies but the flesh of beasts, and not
to devour, but to worship the body of Christ in the exaltation, and much more
in the union with his divinity. But that which I now insist upon is, that in a
body there cannot be indistinction of parts, but each must possess his own
portion of place; and if it does not, a body cannot be a body, nor
distinguished from a Spirit.

6. When a body is broken into half,

Aquinas says that The body of Christ is not in the Sacrament, Well; suppose
that for a while: yet 1. Those substances which are whole in the whole, are by
his own doctrine neither divisible nor multiplicable, and how then can Christ's
body be supposed to be Corpus Christi est multiplicatum ad omne punctum
hostiae. Tho. Waldens. tom. 2. c. 55.

Multiplicatio. corporis Christi facta est substantialiter ad omne punctum
hostiae. Id.


multiplicable (for there are no other words to express my meaning, though no
words can speak sense according to their doctrine, words not signifying here as
every where else, and among them as they did always in all mankind) how can
it, I say, be multiplied by the breaking of the wafer or bread upon the account
of the likeness of it to a substance that cannot be broken, or if it could,
yet were not multipliable? But 2. If Christ's body be there according to the
manner of a substance, not of a body, I demand according to the nature of what
substance, whether of a material or an immaterial? If according to the nature
of a material substance, then it is commensurate by the dimensions of quantity,
which he is now endeavoring to avoid. If according to the nature of an
immaterial substance, then it is not a body, but a Spirit; or else the body may
have the being of a Spirit, whilst it remains a body, that is, be a body and
not a body at the same time. But 3. to say that a body is there, not according
to the nature of a body, but of a substance, is not sense: for besides that by
this answer, it is a body without the nature of a body, it says that it is
also there determined by a manner, and yet that manner is so far from
determining it, that it makes it yet more undetermined and general then it was.
For [Substance] is the highest Genus in that Category: and corpus or body is
under it, and made more special by a superadded difference. To say therefore
that a body is there after the manner of a substance, is to say, that by being
specificated, limited, and determined it becomes not a Species but a Genus,
that is, more unlimited by limitations, more generical by his specification,
more universal by being made more particular. So impossible it is for wise men
to make sense of this business. 3. But besides all this, to be in a place
after the manner of a substance, is not to be in a place at all; for substantia
has in it no relation to a place till it be specificated to a Body or a
Spirit; For substantia dicit solum formalitatem substandi accidentibus and
subsistendi per se; but the capacity of, or relation to a place is by the
specification of it by some substantial difference. 4. Lastly, to explicate the
being in a place, in the manner of a substance by being whole in the whole, and
whole in every part is to say, that every substance is so; which is notoriously
false: for corporal substances are not so; whether spiritual be, is a question
not proper for this place.

Aquinas has yet another device to make all whole, In 4 Sent. d. 44. q. 2.
art. 2. q. 3.
saying that one body cannot be in diverse places localiter, but
Sacramentaliter, not locally, but Sacramentally. But first I wish the words
were sense, and that I could tell the meaning of being in a place locally, and
not locally, unless a thing can be in a place and not in a place, that is, so
to be in, that it is also out: but so long as it is a distinction it is no
matter, it will amuse and make way to escape, if it will do nothing else. But
if by being Sacramentally in many places is meant figuratively (as before I
explicated it) then I grant Aquinas's affirmative; Christ's body is in many
places Sacramentally, that is, it is represented upon all the holy Tables or
Altars in the Christian Church. But if by Sacramentally he means naturally, and
properly, then he contradicts himself, for that is it he must mean by localiter
if he means any thing at all. But it matters not what he means, for it is
sufficient to me that he only says it and proves it not; and that it is not
sense; and lastly, Lib. 3. Euch. c. 3. Quidam tamen. Ibid. Add quod.
that Bellarmine confutes it as not being home enough to his purpose, but a
direct destruction of the fancy of Transubstantiation; Si non possit esse unum
corpus localiter in duobus locis, quia divideretur a seipso, profecto non esse
possit Sacramentaliter eademratione. I might make advantage of this
contestation between two so great patrons of Transubstantiation, if I did need
it. For Aquinas says, that a body cannot be in two places at once locally.
Bellarmine says then neither can it Sacramentally; it were easy then to infer
that Therefore it is in two places no way in the world. But I shall not need
this.

7. totalities; I mean of the body of Christ, which is one continual substance,
one in it self and divided from every thing else, as all unity is; and yet
every wafer consecrated is the whole body of Christ, and yet that body is but
one, and the wafers which are not one, are every one of them Christ's body. And
how is it possible that Christ's body should be in heaven, and between it and us
are many other bodies interposed, and his body is in none of the intermedials,
and that his body should be also here, and yet not joined to that, either by
continuity or contiguity, and the same body should be a thousand miles off, and
ten thousand bodies between them, and yet all this be but one: that is, How can
it be two and yet be one? For how shall any man reckon two? How can he know
that two glasses of wine are not one? We see them in two places, their
continuity divided, there is an intermedial distance and other bodies
interposed, and therefore we silly men usually say they are two; but it is
strange to see, a man may be consident and yet without reason when he has not
wit enough to tell two. But then there is not in nature any way for a man to
tell two, if this principle be taken from us.

It will also be an infinite, impossible contradiction which follows the being
of a body in two places at once; upon this account. For it will infer that the
same body is at the same time, in the same respect, in order to the same place,
both actually and potentially, that is, possessed and not possessed of it, and
may go to that place where it is already. For suppose a body at S. Omers, and
the same body at the same time at Doway, then that body which is actually at S.
Omers may yet at the same time be going from Doway thither, and then he is at
the same time there and not there, at his journeys end, and yet on the way
thither; that is, in disposition and tendency to that place where he is already
actually, and whether he is arrived before he set out and began his journey;
and goes away from Doway, before he leaves it.

Add to this, that to be in two places at once, makes the same thing which is
contained in diverse places to be contained in none. For as to be in a place
like a body, is to be contained in that place; so to be contained in that place
is to be terminated or bounded by that place; but whatsoever is bounded by a
thing, is not without or beyond that bounds; it follows therefore that if a
body can be entirely without or beyond that place in which it is contained,
that is without the bounds, then it is bounded and not bounded, it is contained
and not contained; that is, it is contained by diverse, and it is contained by
none.

But how can any thing be divided from it self wholly? Euch. l. 3. c. 3.. Sed
haec ratio etc. 4.. Sed media via.
But Bellarmine can; for he says there is a double indivision or unity or
being: an intrinsecal and an extrinsecal, a local, and an essential; Now of
these, one can be without the other: and though a body have but one unity
essential, because it can be but one body, yet it may have more extrinsecal or
local beings. This is the full sense of his device, if at least there be any
sense in it. But besides that this distinction is no where taught in any
Philosopy, a child of his own still born, not offered to be proved or made
credible; it is, if it be brought into open view from without the curtains of a
formal distinction, just as if he had said; Whereas you object that one thing
can be but in one place, for whatsoever is in two places is two bodies; you are
deceived; for it is true, that one body can be but one; but yet it may be two
in respect of place; that is, it is but one in nature, but it may be in two
places, and so you are confuted. But then if I should reply, This answer is but
to deny the conclusion, and affirms the thing in question; there were no more
to be said. For that one thing in nature cannot have two adequate places at the
same time, was the conclusion of my argument; and the answer is, It can have
two, and this is all is said. 2. But then I would fain know what warrant there
is for the real distinction of esse essentiale and esse locale of bodies,
Substantias enim facis, quibus loca assignas. Tertul. c. 41. contr. Hermog.
as if they were two distinct separable beings; whereas quantity is inseparable
from bodies, and measure from continual quantities, and to be in a place is
nothing but to have his quantity measured. 3. To be in a place, is the
termination or limit of a quantitative body, and makes it not to be infinite:
and if this can be separated by a distinction from a finite body, then
something is said; but if a finite body must be finite and not infinite, then
to be determined by a place, the proper determination or definition of a
quantitative body, is not separable from it. 4. If any man should say that one
person cannot be together in two several times, no more then in two several
places; This distinction would fetch him in, to be of two times together; for
there is a double indivision, one in respect of essence, the other, in respect
of duration, that intrinsecal, this extrinsecal; though one man or body has
but one being or essence intrinsecal and essential, yet he may have more
extrinsecal, accidental and temporary. And really the case, as to this
distinction, is all one, and so it is to the argument too: for as two times
cannot be together because of their successive nature, so neither can two
places be adapted at once to one body, because of their continual and united
nature: unity and quantity continual being as essential to quantitative bodies,
as succession is to them who are measured by time. 5. If one body may possess
and fill two places circumscriptively, that it is commensurate to both of them,
or to as many more as it shall chance to be in, then suppose a body of five
foot long, is in a place at Rome, at Valladolid, at Paris, and at London, in
each of these places it must fill a space of five foot long, because it is
always commensurate to his place: it will follow, that a body but of five foot
long shall fill up the room of twenty foot; which whether it implies not a
contradiction that the same body should be but five foot long, and yet at the
same time be twenty foot long of the same measure, let all the Geometricians
judge. This is such a device, that as one said of the witty drunkenness and
arts of the Symposiac among the Greeks, that amongst them a dunce could not be
drunk: So in this device a man had need be very cunning to speak such nonsense,
and make himself believe those things which are against the conceptions of all
men in the world, till this new doctrine turned their brains and make new
propositions and new affirmatives out of old impossibilities. But these people
in all this affair, deal with mankind, as if they were beasts, and not
reasonable creatures; or as if all their disciples were babies, or fools, and
that to them it is lawful to say any thing, and having no understanding of
their own, they are to efform them as they please.

But to this objection it is answered, So as the magnitude of such a body
should be commensurate to that place, and so a body of five foot cannot fill up
the spaces of twenty foot: but another way is, so as the magnitude of the body
should not be commensurate, but only to the space of five foot, but yet the
same magnitude may be twice, or thrice put to such a space, Euch. l. 3. c. 4..
Respondeo dupliciter potest intelligi etc.
and this may be done. This is Bellarmines answer; That is, If you consider a
body of five foot long, so as it can but fill five foot space, in that sense it
cannot fill twenty. But if you consider it so as it is commensurate to a space,
that is, twenty foot, so it cannot be, being but of five foot long. That this
is the sense of his answer, I appeal to all men that can understand common
sense. But though it be but of five foot long, yet it may be placed twice or
thrice in a space of five foot long, and what then? Then it fills still but a
place of five foot long. True in one place, but if it fills five foot at Rome,
and at the fame time five foot at Valladolid, and five foot at Paris, and five
foot at London, I pray are not four times five twenty? As although the Sun have
but force to drink up five measures of water in Egypt; and at the same time as
much in Arabia, and as much in Ethiopia, and as much in Greece, he at the same
time drinks up twenty measures, though his whole force in one place be but to
drink five, and yet still it is but one Sun. But besides all this, that the
same body be put twice or thrice into a space of five foot at the same time, is
that unreasonable thing, which all the natural and congenite notices of men cry
down, and therefore ought not to be said confidently, in a distinction without
proof; as if the putting it into a nonsense distinction, could oblige all the
world to believe it.

8. But I proceed: Valentia De vera Christi p^aesentia l. 1. c. 12.
affirms that the Fathers prove the divinity of the holy Ghost by his ubiquity:
and it is certain they do so, as appears in S. Athanasius Contr. Arium. disp.
inter opera S. Athanas.
, S. Basil De Spir. S. l. 1. c. 22.
, S. Ambrose De Spit. S. l. 1. c. 7.
, Didymus of Alexandria De Spir. S. l. 1.
, S. Cyril of Alexandria De Spir. S. Quod non sit creatura.
, S. Austin Contra Maxim. Arian. ep. l. 3. c. 31.
; and diverse others: and yet these men affirm that a body may be in many
places, and therefore may be in all, and that it is potentially infinite; is it
not evident that they take from the Fathers the force of the argument, because
ubiquity is communicable to something that is not God; or if it be not, why do
they give it to a creature? That which can be in many places, can be in all
places; for all the reason that forbids it to be in 2000 forbids it to be in
two; and if those cannot determine it to one place, it cannot be determined at
all; I mean, the nature of a body, his determination to places, his
circumscription, continuity, unity, quantity, dimensions. Nay, that which is
not determined by place, by continuity nor by his nature, but may be any where,
is in his own nature uncircumscrib'd, and indefinite, which is that attribute
of God upon which his omnipresence does rely; and that Christ's body is not
every where actually, as is the holy Ghost, it says nothing against this;
because he being a voluntary agent can restrain the measure of his presence, as
God himself does the many manners of his presence. However, that nature is
infinite that can be every where, and therefore if it can be communicated to a
body, to be so, is not proper to God, nor can it prove the holy Ghost so to be.
Of the same nature is that other argument used frequently by the primitive
Doctors, proving two natures to be in Christ, the Divine and the Humane, and
the difference between them is remarked in this, that the Divine is in many
places, and in all: but the Humane can be but in one at once. This is affirmed
by Origin In S. Matthew. hom. 33.
, S. Hilary Lib. 10. de Trinit.
, S. Hierome Ad Marcel. de 4 quaest.
, S. Austin Tract. 39. in Johan.
, Gelasius Disp. contr. Sab. Ar. Phot.
, Fulgentius Lib. 2. ad Thrasim. c. 17.
, and Ven. Bid Homil. invent. crucis.
. But this is but variety of the same dish; if both these can prevail together,
then either of them ought to prevail singly.

Against all this, Paul on earth, and to many other Saints, as to S. Peter, to
S. Antony, to S. Tharsilla, S. Gregory and I cannot tell who. To this I answer;
1. That in all this there is nothing certain, but that Christ appeared to S.
Paul; for it may be, he appeared to him in heaven, S. Paul being on earth: for
so he did to S. Stephen, as is recorded in the Acts of the Apostles: Acts 7.55.
and from heaven there might only come a voice and a light. 2. It may be S.
Paul saw Christ when he was wrapped up into the third heavens: for, that Christ
was seen by him, himself affirms; but he says not that he saw him at his
conversion; and all that he says he saw then, was that he saw a great light
and heard a voice. 3. That, in case Christ did appear corporally to Saul on
earth, Acts 9.3.22.6.
it follows not, his body was in two places at once. I have the warrant of him
that is willing enough otherwise that this argument should prevail: Bellar. de
Euch. l. 3. c. 3.. Confirmatur.
Quia non est improbabile Christum privatim and ad breve tempus descendisse de
coelopost ascensionem. It is not unlikely that Christ might privately and for a
short time descend from heaven after his ascension; For when it is said in
Scripture that the heavens must receive him till the day of restitution of all
things, it is to be meant, ordinarily and as his place of residence; but that
hinders not an extraordinary commigration; as a man may be said to dwell
continually in London, and yet sometimes to go into the country to take the
air. For the other instances of S. Peter and S. Antony, and the rest, if I
were sure they were true. I would say the same answer would also serve their
turn; but as they are, it is not material whether it does or no.

Another way of answering is taken from the examples of God and the reasonable
soul. The soul is whole in every part is not true positively, but negatively,
that is, the soul being immaterial, cannot be cantoniz'd into parts by the
division of the body; but positively it is not true. For the understanding is
not in the foot, nor the will in the hand; and something of the soul is not
arganical or depending upon the body: viz. The pure acts of volition, some
little glimpses of intuition, reflection, and the like. 3. If it were, yet to
allege this, is impertinent to their purpose: unless whatsoever is true
concerning a spirit, can also be affirmed of a body. 4. When the body is
divided into parts, the soul is not multiplied into fantastic or real numbers,
as it is pretended in Transubstantiation; and therefore, although the foul were
whole in every part it could do no service in this question; unless it were so
whole in each part as to be whole when each part is divided, for so it is said
to be in the Euchrist; which because we say is impossible, we require an
instance in something where it is so; but because it is not so in the soul,
this instance is not home to any of their purposes. L. 3. Euch. c. 3.. ad hoc
argumentum.
But Bellarmine says, God can make it to be so, that the soul shall remain in
the member that is discontinued and cut off. I answer that God ever did do so,
nor he nor any man else can pretend, unless he please to believe S. Winifreds
and S. Deny^'s walking with their heads in their hands after their decollation;
but since we never knew that God did so, and whether it implies a contradiction
or no, that it should be so, God has no where declared, it is sufficient to
the present purpose that it is as much a question, and of it self no more
evident, then that a body can be conserved in many places: and therefore being
as uncertain as the principal question, cannot give faith to it, or do any
service. But this is to amuse unwary persons, by seeming to say something,
which indeed is nothing to the purpose.

But that the Omnipresence of God should be brought to prove it possible that a
body may be in many places, locality, and place; and beings, and relations are
all from him: and therefore they cannot comprehend him. But then although this
immensity of God is beyond the capacity of place, and he can no more be in a
place, then all the world can be in the bottom of a well, yet if God could be
limited and determined, it were a contradiction to say that he could be in two
places; just as it is a contradiction to say there are two Gods. So that this
comparison of Bellarmines, as it is odious up to the neighborhood, and
similitude of a great impiety, so it is (...), it is against that Philosophy
whereby we understand any of the perfective notices of God. But these men would
fain prevail by all means, they care not how.

But why may we not believe as well the doctrine of Transubstantiation in
defiance of all the seeming impossibilities, Trinity in defiance of greater? To
this I answer many things. 1. Because the mystery of the Trinity is revealed
plainly in Scripture, but the doctrine of Transubstantiation is against it: as
I suppose my self to have plainly proved. So that if there were a plain
revelation of Transubstantiation then this argument were good; and if it were
possible for 10000 times more arguments to be brought against it, yet we are to
believe the revelation in despite of them all; but when so much of revelation
is against it, and nothing for it, it is but vain to say we may believe this,
as well as the doctrine of the Trinity; for so we may as well argue for the
heresy of the Manichees; why may we not as well believe the doctrine of the
Manichees in despite of all the arguments brought against it; when there are so
many seeming impossibilities brought against the holy Trinity? I suppose the
answer that I have given, would be thought reasonable to every such pretense.
2. As the doctrine of the holy Trinity is set down in Scripture, and in the
Apostles Creed and was taught by the Fathers of the first 300 years, I know no
difficulties it has; what it has met withal since, proceeds from the too
curious handling of that which we cannot understand. 3. The Schoolmen have so
pried into this secret, and have so confounded themselves and the articles,
that they have made it to be unintelligible, inexplicable, indefensible in all
their minuits and particularities; and it is too sadly apparent in the
arguments of the Antitrinitarians, whose sophisms against the article it self,
although they are most easily answered, yet as they bring them against the
minutiae and impertinences of the school, they are not so easily to be avoided.
But. 4. there is not the same reason; because concerning God we know but very
few things, and concerning the mysterious Trinity that which is revealed is
extremely little; and it is general, without descending to particulars: and the
difficulty of the seeming arguments against that, being taken from our
Philosophy, and the common manner of speaking, cannot be apportion'd and fitted
to so great a secret; neither can that at all be measured by any thing here
below. But I hope we may have leave to say we understand more concerning
bodies; and their nature then concerning the persons of the holy Trinity: and
therefore we may be sure in the matter of bodies to know what is, and what is
not possible; when we can know no measure of truth or error in all the
mysteriousnesses of so high and separate, superexalted secret, as is that of
the holy Trinity. 5. Because when the Church for the understanding of this
secret of the holy Trinity has taken words from Metaphysical learning, as
person, hypostasts, consubstantiality, (...) and such like, the words of
themselves were apt to change their signification, and to put on the sense of
the present school. But the Church was forced to use such words as she had, the
highest, the nearest, the most separate and mysterious. But when she still kept
these words to the same mystery, the words swelled or altered in their sense;
and were exacted according to what they did signify amongst men in their low
notices; this begat difficulty in the doctrine of the holy Trinity. For better
words she had none, and all that which they did signify in our Philosophy
could not be applied to this mystery, and therefore we have found difficulty;
and shall for ever, till in this article the Church returns to her ancient
simplicity of expression. For these reasons I conceive the case is wholly
different, and the difficulty and secret of one mystery, which is certainly
revealed, cannot warrant us to admit the impossibilities of that which is not
revealed. Let it appear that God has affirmed Transubstantiation, and I for my
part will burn all my arguments against it, and make public amends. The like
also is to be said in the matter of Incarnation.

But if two bodies may be in one place, In 4. did. 44. q. 2. ^. 2.
Aquinas denies the consequent of this argument; but I for my part am careless
whether it be true or no. But I shall oppose against it this, If two bodies
cannot be in one commensurate place, then one body cannot be in two places; Now
concerning this, it is certain it implies a contradiction that two bodies
should be in one place, or possess the place of another till that be cast
forth: Quod nisi inania sint; Lucr. l. 1.
qua possent corpora quaeque
Transire, haud ulla fieri ratione. videres.
And the great dispute between the Scholars of Epicurus and the Peripateticks
concerning vacuity, was wholly upon this account. Epicurus saying there could
be no motion unless the place were empty. All the other Sects saying that it
was enough that it was made empty by the coming of the new body; all agreeing
that two bodies could not be together, Arist. l. 4. (...).
(...). All agreed that two bodies could not be together, and that the first
body must be thrust forth by the intromission of the second.

-- Quae si non esset inane
Non tam sollicito motu privata carerent, Lucret. l. 1.

Quam genita omnino nulla ratione fuissent,
Undique materies quoniam stipata quiescet.
For the contrary says that two bodies are one. (...). S. Basil. Seleuc.
homil. in (...).
For the proper dimensions of a quantitative body are length, breadth, and
thickness: Now the extension of the body in these dimensions is measured by
the place: For the place is nothing else, but the measuring and limiting of the
thing so measured and limited by these measures and limitations of length,
breadth, and thickness. Now if two bodies could be in one place, then they
must both have one superficies, one length, one thickness; and then either the
other has none, or they are but one body and not two, or else though they be
two bodies, and have two superficies, yet these two superficies are but one,
all which are contradictions. De Euch. l. 3. c. 5. Secundo observandum.
Bellarmine says, that to be coextended to a place, is separable from a
magnitude or body, because it is a thing that is extrinsecal and consequent to
the intrinsecal extension of parts, and being later then it, is by divine power
separable. But this is as very a sophisme as all the rest. For if whatever in
nature is later then the substance, be separable from it, then fire may be
without heat, or Quod non possit alterum sine altero intelligi, quemadmodum
neque aqua sine humectatione, neque ignis sine calore. Irenae. lib. 2. c. 14.
water without moisture; a man can be without time, for that also is in nature
after his essence; and he may be without a faculty of will or understanding, or
of affections, or of growing to his state or being nourished; and then he will
be a strange man, who will neither have the power of will, or understanding, of
desiring, or avoiding, of nourishment, or growth, or any thing that can
distinguish him from a beast, or a tree, or a stone. For these are all later
then the essence, for they are essential emanations from it. Thus also quantity
can be separated from a substantial body, if every thing that is later then the
form can be separated from it. And therefore nothing of this can be avoided by
saying to fill a place is Bellar. de Euch. l. 3. c. 7.. Ad secundum Petri.
an act, but these other instances are faculties and powers, and therefore the
act may better be impeded by divine power, the thing remaining the same, then
by the ablation of faculties. This I say cannot justify the trick. 1. Because
to be extended into parts is as much an act as to be in a place; and yet that
is inseparable from magnitude, and so confessed by Bellarmine. 2. L. 3. Euch.
c. 5.. Secundo obser.
To be in a place is not an act at all, any more then to be created, to be
finite, to be limited; and it was never yet heard of, that esse locatum, or
esse in loco was reducible to the predicament of action. 3. An act is no more
separable then a faculty is, when the act is as essential as the faculty; now
for a body to be in a place, is as essential to a body as it is for a man to
have understanding; for this is Ibid. c. 7.. Deinde etiam.
confessed to be separable by divine power, and the other cannot be more; it
cannot be naturally. 4. If to be in a place be an act, it is no otherwise an
act, then it is an act, for a Father actually to have a son, and therefore is
no more separable this then that; and you may as well suppose a Father and no
child, as a body and no place. 5. It is a false proposition to say, that place
is extrinsecal to a quantitative body; and it relies upon the definition
Aristotle gives of it in the fourth book of his Physics, that place is the
superficies of the ambient body; which is as absurd in nature as any thing can
be imagined; for then a stone in the bottom of a river did change his place
(though it ly still) in every instant, because new water still washes it; and
by this rule it is necessary (against Aristotle's great grounds) that some
quantitative bodies should not be in a place, or else that quantitative bodies
were Categorematically infinite. For either there is no end, but body incloses
body for ever, or else the ultimate or outmost body, is not enclosed by any
thing, and so cannot be in a place. To which add this; that if Epicurus his
opinion were true, and that there were some spaces empty, which at least by a
divine power can become true, and he can take the air out from the enclosure
of four walls; In this case if you will suppose a man sitting in the midst of
that room, either that man were in no place at all, which were infinitely
absurd, or else (which indeed is true) circumscription or superficies were not
the essence of a place. Place therefore is nothing but the Space to which
quantitative bodies have essential relation and finition: that, where they
consist, and by which they are not infinite: and this is the definition of
place which S. Austin gives in his fourth book Exposit. of Genes. ad literam
chapt. 8.

God can do what he please, can be changed, the things remaining the same?
that is, whether they can be the same, when they are not the same? He that
says God can give to a body all the essential properties of a Spirit, says
true, and confesses Gods omnipotency; but he says also, that God can change a
body from being a body, to become a Spirit; but if he says, that remaining a
body it can receive the essentials of a Spirit, he does not confess Gods
omnipotency, but makes the article difficult to be believed, by making it not
to work wisely, and possibly. God can do all things, but, are they undone when
they are done? that is, are the things changed in their essentials, and yet
remain the same? then how are they changed, and then what has God done to them?

But as to the particular question. to be in no place, and to be in no time,
being alike possible Paschasias Diaconus Eccles. Romans A.D. 5^0. l. 1. de Spir.
S. cap. 12.
: and this intrinsecal extension of parts, is as inseparable from the
extrinsecal, as an intrinsecal duration is from time. Place and Time being
nothing but the essential manners of material complete substances, these cannot
be supposed such as they are, without time and place: because quantitative
bodies in their very formality suppose that; For place without a body in it, is
but a notion in Logic, but when it is a reality it is a Ubi, and time is
Quando; and a body supposed abstractedly from place, is not real but
intentional, and in notion only, and is in the Category of substance, but not
of quantity. But it is a strange thing that we are put to prove the very
principles of nature, and first rudiments of art, which are so plain that they
can be understood naturally, but by all devices of the world cannot be made
dubitable.

But against all the evidence of essential and natural reason, the doors being
shut; out of the grave, the stone not being rolled away; and ascended into
heaven, through the solid orbs of all the firmament. Concerning the first and
the last the Scripture speaks nothing, neither can any man tell whether the
orbs of heaven be solid or fluid, or which way Christ went in. But of the
heavens opening the Scripture sometimes makes mention. And the Prophet David
spoke in the Spirit saying, Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye
everlasting doors, and the King of Glory shall come in. The stone of the
Sepulcher was removed by an Angel, so says S. Matthew. S. Mat. 28.2.
But why should it be supposed the Angel rolled it away after Christ was risen,
or if he did, why Christ did not remove it himself, (who loosed all the bands
of death by which he was held) and there leave it when he was risen? or if he
had passed thorough and wrought a miracle, why it should not be told us, or why
it should not remain as a testimony to the soldiers and Jews and convince
them the more, when they should see the body gone, and yet their seals
unbroken? or if it were not, how we should come to fancy it was so, I
understand not; neither is there ground for it. There is only remaining that we
account concerning Jesus his entering into the assembly of the Apostles, the
doors being shut: To this I answer, that this infers not a penetration of
bodies, or that two bodies can be in one place. 1. Because there are so many
ways of effecting it without that impossibility. 2. The door might be made to
yield to his Creator as easily as water which is fluid be made firm under his
feet; for consistence or lability, are not essential to wood and water. For
water can naturally be made consistent as when it is turned to ice; and wood
that can naturally be petrified, can upon the efficiency of an equal agent be
made thin or labile or inconsistent. (...). Arist. l. 4. (...).
3. This was done on the same day in which the Sea yielded to the children of
Israel, that is, the seventh day after the Passover, and we may allow it to be
a miracle, though it be no more then that of the waters, that is, as these were
made consistent for a time.

Suppositumque rotis solidum mare. So the doors apt to yield to a solid body.
-- possint namque omnia reddi
Mollia, quae fiant, aer, aqua, terra, vapores
Quo pacto fiant and qua vi cunque gerantur.
4. How easy was it for Christ to pass his body thorough the pores of it, and
the natural apertures if he were pleased to unite them, and thrust the matter
into a greater consolidation? 5. Wood being reduced to ashes possesses but a
little room, that is, the crasse impenetrable parts are but few, the other apt
for cession, which could easily be disposed by God as he pleased. 6. The words
in the text are (...) in the past tense; the gates or doors having been shut;
but that they were shut in the instant of his entry, it says not; they might,
if Christ had so pleased, have been insensibly opened, and shut in like manner
again; and if the words be observed it will appear that S. Chap. 20.19.
John mentioned the shutting the doors in relation to the Apostles fear; not
to Christ's entering: he intended not (so far as appears) to declare a miracle.
7. But if he had, there are ways enough for him, to have entered strangely,
though he had not entered impossibly. Vain therefore is the fancy of those men
who think a weak conjecture able to contest against a perfect, natural
impossibility. For when a thing can be done without a penetration of
dimensions, and yet by a power great enough to beget admiration, though without
contesting against the unalterable laws of nature, to dream it must be this
way, is to challenge confidently, but to be careless of our warrant; I
conclude, that it has never yet been known that two bodies ever were at once,
in one place.

I find but one objection more pretended, Aristotle's definition of a place. But
besides; Number. 28.
I answer, that what the utmost heaven is, our Philosophy cannot tell or guess
at; But it is certain that beyond any thing that Philosophy ever dreamed of,
there are bodies. For Christ is ascended for above all heavens, and therefore
to say it is not in a place, or that there is not a place where Christ's body
is, is a ridiculous absurdity. But if there be places for bodies above the
highest heavens, then the highest heaven also is in a place, or may be for
ought any thing pretended against it. In my Fathers house are many mansions,
said Christ, many places of abode; and it is highly-probable, that that
pavement where the bodies of Saints shall tread to eternal ages, is
circumscribed, though by something we understand not. Many things more might be
said to this. But I am sorry that the series of a discourse must be interrupted
with such trifling considerations.

The sum is this; Vide Boeth. in Praedicam. Aristot.
no more can accidents, without the manner of accidents; quantities, after the
manner of quantities; qualities, as qualities; for to separate that from
either, by which we distinguish them from each other, is to separate that from
them, by which we understand them to be themselves. And four may as well cease
to be four and be reduced to unity, as a line cease to be a line, and a body a
body, and a place a place, and a quantum or extensum to be extended in his own
kind of quantity or extension: and if a man had talked otherwise, till this new
device arose, all sects of Philosophers of the world, would have thought him
mad; and I may here use the words of Cotta in Cicero l. 1. De natura Deorum:
Corpus quid sit, sanguis quid sit, intelligo, quasi corpus and quasi sanguis
quid sit, nullo prorsus modo intelligo. But concerning the nature of bodies and
quantities these may suffice in general. For if I should descend to particulars
and insist upon them, I could cloy the Reader with variety of one dish.

10. host, then in another; for the wafer is Christ's body, and yet one wafer is
bigger then another: therefore Christ's body is bigger then it self. The same
thing is above it self, and below it self, within it self, and without it self:
It stands wholly upon his own right side, and wholly at the same time upon his
own left side; it is as very a body as that which is most divisible, and yet it
is as indivisible as a Spirit; and it is not a Spirit but a body, and yet a
body is no way separated from a Spirit, but by being divisible. It is a perfect
body, in which the feet are further from the head, then the head from the
breast, and yet there is no space between head and feet at all; So that the
parts are further off and nearer, without any distance at all; being further
and not further, distant, and yet in every point. By this also, here is
magnitude without extension of parts; for if it be essential to magnitude to
have partem extra partem, that is, parts distinguished, and severally sited,
then where one part is, there another is not, and therefore the whole body of
Christ is not in every part of the consecrated wafer; and yet if it be not,
then it must be broken into parts when the wafer is broken, and then it must
fill his place by parts. But then it will not be possible that a bigger body,
with the conditions of a body should be contained in a thing less then it self,
that a man may throw the house out at the windows: and if it be impossible
that a magnitude should be in a point, and yet Christ's body be a magnitude and
yet in a point, then the same thing is in a point, and not in a point, extended
and not extended, great and not divisible, a quantity without dimension,
something and nothing.* By this doctrine the same thing lies still and yet
moves, it stays in a place and goes away from it, it removes from it self, and
yet abides close by it self, and in it self, and out of it self; It is removed
and yet cannot be moved, broken and cannot be divided; * passes from East to
West thorough a middle place, and yet stirs not. * It is brought from heaven to
earth, and yet is no where in the way, nor ever stirs out of heaven. * It
ceases to be where it was, and yet does not stir from thence, not yet cease
to be at all. * It is removed at the motion of the accidents, and yet does not
fall when the host falls: it changes his place but falls not, Bellarm. Euch. l.
3. c. 10.. respondeo corpus.
and yet the changing of place was by falling. * It supposes a body of Christ
which was made of bread, that is, Not born of the Virgin Mary; Suarez in 3.
Tho. 9. 76. art. 7. disp. 53.. 4.
* it says that Christ's body is there without power of moving, or seeing, or
hearing, or understanding, he can neither remember nor foresee, save himself
from robbers or vermin, corruption or rottenness; * it makes that which was
raised in power to be again sown in weakness; Quomodo potest Deus alibi esse
vivus, alibi mortuus? Lact. l. 1. c. 1.
* it gives to it the attribute of an idol, to have eyes and see not, ears and
hear not, a nose and not to smell, feet and yet cannot walk. * It makes a thing
contained, bigger then the continent, and all Christ's body, to go into a part
of his body; his whole head into his own mouth, if he did eat the Eucharist, as
it is probable he did, and certain that he might have done. These are the
certain consequents of this most unreasonable doctrine; in relation to motion
and quantity. I need not instance in those collateral absurdities which are
appendent to some of the foregoing particulars; as how it should be credible,
that Christ in his sumption of the last supper should eat his own flesh; (...),
said Simplicius In Categ. cap. de substant.
; Nothing can receive it self, nothing can really participate of it self, and
properly; figuratively and Sacramentally this may be done; but not in a natural
and physical sense; for as S. Cyril of Alexandria argues; In S. Joh. 9.
Si vere idem est quod participat and quod participatur, quid opus est
participatione? What need he partake of himself? what need he receive a part of
that which he is already whole? and if the partaker, and the thing partaken be
naturally the same, then the Sacrament did as much eat Christ, as Christ did
eat the Sacrament. In Categ. cap. de substant.
It would also follow from hence, that the soul of Christ should enter into his
body, though it were there before it entered; and yet it would now be there
twice, at the same time; for it is but one soul, and yet enters after it is
there, it never having gone forth. In Categ. cap. de substant.
Nay further yet, upon supposition that Christ did eat the Sacrament, as it is
most likely he did, and we are sure he might have done, then the soul of
Christ, which certainly wentalong with his body which surely was then alive,
should be in his body in two contrary and incompatible manners; by one of
which, he does operate freely, and exercise all the actions of life, by the
other he exercises none; by one he is visible, by the other invisible, by one
moveable, by the other immovable, by one after the manner of a body, by the
other after the manner of a Spirit. The one of these being evident in it self,
the other by their own affirmation. But these are by the by; there are whole
Categories of fond and impossible consequents from this doctrine.

11. i. e. the conversion of bread into Christ's body, and their rare stratagems
and devices in ridiculous affirmatives and negatives as to that particular, it
would afford a new heap of matter.

For this conversion is not generation, corruption, it is not creation, because
Christ's body already is, and cannot be produced again; it is not after the
manner of natural conversions, it differs from the supernatural: there is no
change of one form into another, the same first matter does not remain under
Sola enim mutari transformarique in se possunt quae habent unius materiae
commune subjectum. Boeth. de duab. not. Christi.
several forms, first of bread, then of Christ's body. It is turned into the
substance of Christ's body, and yet nothing of the bread becomes any thing of
the body of Christ. It is turned into Christ, and yet it is turned into
nothing: the substance is not annihilated, (for then it were not turned into
Christ's body) and yet it is annihilated or turned to nothing, for it does not
become Christ's body; it is determined upon Christ's body, and yet does not
become it, though it be changed into it: for if bread could become Christ's
body, then bread could receive a greater honor then any of the servants of
Christ; for it could be glorified with the biggest glorification, it would be
exalted far above all Angels, bread should reign for ever, and be King of all
the world, which are honors not communicable to mere man, and by no change can
be wrought upon him: and if they may upon bread, then bread is exalted higher
then the sons of men; and yet so it is if it be naturally and substantially
changed into the body of Christ. * I cannot insist upon any thing of this, the
absurdity being so vast, the labor would be as great, as needless: Only I
shall transcribe part of a disputation by which Tertullian proves the
resurrection of our bodies by such words which do certainly confute the Roman
fancies of Transubstantiation. Cap. 55. de resurrectione Carnis. Discernenda
est autem demutatio ab omni argumento perditionis etc. Change must be
distinguished from Perdition. But they are not distinguished if the flesh be so
changed that it perishes. As that which is lost is not changed, so that which
is changed is not lost, or perished. For it suffered change, not perdition; for
to perish is wholly not to be that which it was; but to be changed is only to
be otherwise: Moreover while it is otherwise, it can be the same thing, or it
self: for it has his being which did not perish. Now how it is possible that
these words should be reconciled with Transubstantiation, in which they affirm
the bread to be changed, and yet totally to have perished, that is, that
nothing of it remains, neither matter nor form, it concerns them to take care;
for my part, I am satisfied that it is impossible: and I choose to follow the
philosophy of Tertullian, by which he fairly confirms the article of the
resurrection; rather then the impossible speculations of these men, which
render all notices of men to be mere deceptions, and all articles of faith, in
many things uncertain; and nothing to be certain, but that which is impossible.
This consideration so moved Durand In 4. d. 11 q. 3.. 5.
, and their Doctor Fundatissimus Egidius Romanus Theor. 1.2.
, that they thought to change the word Transubstantiation, and instead of it
that they were obliged to use the word of Transformation simply, affirming that
other to be unintelligible. But I proceed. By this doctrine Christ's body is
there where it was not before, and yet not by change of place; for it descends
not: nor by production; for it was produced before: not by natural mutation;
for Christ himself is wholly immutable: and though the bread be mutable, it can
never become Christ. Bellar l. 3. de Euc. c. 4.
That which is now, and was always, begins to be, and yet it cannot begin,
which was so long before. And by this doctrine, is affirmed that which even
themselves Bellar l. 3. de Euc. c. 4.
judge to be simply and absolutely impossible. For if after a thing has his
being, and during the first being, it shall have every day many new beginnings,
without multiplying the beings, then the same thing is under two times at the
same time; it is but a day old, and yet was six days ago, and six ages, and
sixteen. Bellar l. 3. de Euc. c. 4.
The body of Christ obtains to be what it was not before, and yet it is wholly
the same without becoming what it was not. Bellar l. 3. de Euc. c. 4.
It obtains to be under the form of bread, and that which it is now and was not
before, is neither perfective of his being, nor destructive, nor alterative,
nor augmentative, nor diminutive, nor conservative. It is as, it were a
production, as it were a creation, as a conservation, as an adduction: that is,
it is as it were just nothing; for it is not a creation, not a generation, not
an adduction, not a conservation. It is not a conversion productive; for no new
individual is produced. It is not a conversion conservative; That Is a child of
Bellarmines: but it is perfect nonsense; for it is (as he says) a conversion
in which both the terms remain, in the same place; that is, in which there are
two things not converted, but not one that is: but it is a thing of which there
never was any example. But then if we ask what conversion it is? after a great
many fancies and devices, contradicting each other, at last it is found to be
adductive, and yet that adductive does not change the place, but signifies a
substantial change; and yet adduction is no substantial change, but accidental;
and yet this change is not accidental, but adductive ana substantial. O rem
ridiculam, Cato, Bellarm. de missa l. 1. c. 27.. 3. propositio. L. 3. de Euch.
c. ult.. ad tertiam.
and jocosam! It is a succession, not a conversion, and Transubstantiation; for
it is Corpus ex pane confectum, a body made of bread, and yet it was made
before the bread was made: but it is made of it as day of night, not tanquam ex
materia, but tanquam ex termino, not as of matter, but as of a term, from
whence, say they, but that is, a direct motion or succession, not a substantial
change. For that I may use the words of Faventinus; Scotus 4. did. 11. q. 3.
Faven. in 4. disp. 35. c. 6.
What is the formal term of this action of Transubstantiation, or conversion?
Not the body of Christ; for that is the material term: the formal term is, that
Christ's body should be contained under the Species of bread and wine: Hoc autem
totum est accidentale and nihil addit in re nisi praesentiam realem sub
speciebus. But all this is accidental, and nothing real, but that he becomes
present there. For since the body of Christ relates to the accidents only
accidentally, it cannot in respect of them, have any substantial manner of
being, different from that which it had before it was Eucharistical. And it is
no otherwise then if water on the ground were annihilated, or removed, or
corrupted, and some secret way changed from thence, and in the place of it Snow
should descend from heaven, or Honey, or Manna, it were hard to call this
Conversion, or Transubstantiation: Just as if we should say, that Augustus
Caesar was converted into his successor Tiberius, and Moses into Joshua, and
Elias into Elisha, or the Sentinel is substantially changed into him that
relieves him.

12. Lastly, (...). Arist. Metaph. lib. 4. cap. 4.1.
, for what they cannot be to themselves, they cannot be to others, in matter of
supply and subsistence; it being a contradiction to say, insubsistent
subsistencies. Besides this (I say) If Christ's body be not invested with these
accidents, how do they represent it, or to what purpose do they remain? If
they be the investiture of Christ's body, then the body is changed, by the
mutation of the accidents. But however, I would fain know whether an accident
can be sour, or be burnt, as In Lev. cap. 8.
Hesychius affirms they used in Jerusalem to do to the relics of the holy
Sacrament; or can accidents make a man drunk, as Aquinas supposes the
Sacramental wine did the Corinthians, of whom S. Paul says, One is hungry, and
another is drunken? I am sure if it can it is not the blood of Christ; for Mr.
Blands argument in Queen Maryes time, concluded well in this instance. That
which is in the chalice can make a man drunk; But Christ's blood cannot make a
man drunk: Therefore that which is in the chalice is not Christ's blood. To
avoid this they must answer to the major, and say that it does not supponere
universaliter, for every thing in the chalice does not make a man drunk, for in
it there are accidents of bread, and the body besides, and they do inebriate
not this; that is to say, a man may be drunk with color (...). Arist. l. 3. de
anim. c. 12.
and quantity, and a smell, when there is nothing that smells Est enim hic
co^^, and sapor qualitas and quantitas, cum nihil in alterutro sit coloratum,
and sapidum, quantum and quale. Innocent. 3. de offic. Missae l. 3. c. 21.
; for indeed if there were a substance to be smelt, it might; but that
accidents can do it alone, is not to be supposed; unless God should work a
miracle to make a man drunk, which to say I think were blasphemy. But again can
an accidental form kill a man? but the young Emperor of the house of Luxemburgh
was poisoned by a consecrated wafer, and Pope Victor the third had like to have
been, and the Archbishop of York was poisoned by the chalice, say Matthew
Paris and Malmesbury: and if the body be accidentally moved at the motion of
accidents, Bellar. l. 3. c. 10. de Euchar.. Respondeo corpus.
then by the same reason it may accidentally become moldy, or sour, or
poisonous; which me thinks to all Christian ears should strike horror to hear
it spoken. I will not heap up more instances of the same kind of absurdities,
and horrid consequences of this doctrine: or consider how a man, or a mouse can
live upon the consecrated wafers: (as Aimonius tells that Lewis the fair did
for forty days together live upon the Sacrament, and a Jew, or a Turk, could
live on it without a miracle, if he he had enough of it) and yet cannot live
upon accidents; it being a certain rule in philosophy, Ex iisdem nutriuntur
mixta ex quibus fiunt; and a man may as well be made of accidents, and be no
substance, as well as be nourished by accidents without substance: Neither will
I inquire how it is possible that we should eat Christ's body without touching
it; or how we can be said to touch Christ's body, when we only touch and taste
the accidents of bread; or lastly, how we can touch the accidents of bread,
without the substance, so to do, being impossible in nature: Tangere n. and
tangi nisi corpus nulla potest res, said Lucretius, and from him Tertullian in
his 5 chapt. of his book De anima. These and diverse other particulars, I will
not insist upon: But in stead of them, I argue thus from their own grounds; If
Christ be properly said to be touched, and to be eaten, because the accidents
are so, then by the same reason, he may be properly made hot, or cold, or
moldy, or dry, or wet, or venomous, by the proportionable mutation of
accidents: if Christ be not properly taken and manducated, to what purpose is
he properly there? so that on either hand there is a snare. But it is time to
be weary of all this, and inquire after the doctrine of the Church, in this
great question; for thither at last with some seeming confidence they do
appeal. Thither therefore we will follow.

SECT. XII. Transubstantiation was not the doctrine of the Primitive Church.
COncerning this Topic or Head of argument I have some things to premise.

1. Vincentius Lirinensis his rules and by the nature of the thing, that they
should all agree; yet to show it not to have been the established, resolved
doctrine of the Primitive Church, this (...) is not necessary. Because although
no argument can prove it Catholic, but a consent; yet if some, as learned, as
holy, as orthodox do dissent, it is enough to prove it not to be Catholic. As
a proposition is not universal if there be one, or three, or ten exceptions;
but to make it universal, it must be (...), it must take in all.

2. adversaries deny not, but say, it is not sufficient, but there ought to be
more. But their words do often exclude the way of the Church of Rome, and are
not so capable of an answer for them.

3. When the saying of a Father is brought, Doctor is not well to be
understood, or that he is not fit in those words to be an umpire; and of this
Cardinal Perron is a great example, who spends a volume in folio to prove S.
Austin to be of their side in this article, or rather not to be against them.

4. the body and blood of Christ, that there is the body of our Lord, that
before consecration it is (...) mere bread, but after consecration it is verily
the body of Christ, truly his flesh, truly his blood, these and the like
sayings, are no more then the words of Christ, This is my body, and are only
true in the same sense of which I have all this while been giving an account:
that is, by a change of condition, of sanctification, and usage. We believe
that after consecration, and blessing, it is really Christ's body, which is
verily and indeed taken of the faithful in the Lords supper; And upon this
account, we shall find that many, very many of the authorities of the Fathers
commonly alleged by the Roman Doctors in this question will come to nothing.
For we speak their sense, and in their own words, the Church of England See
article 28. of the Church of England.
expressing this mystery frequently in the same forms of words; and we are so
certain that to eat Christ's body Spiritually is to eat him really, that there
is no other way for him to be eaten really, then by Spiritual manducation.

5. (...) Suid. (...). Georg. Alex. vit. Chrysostom c. 55. (...). Chrysostom. vit. Author
Onon. Id. in (...), and reliquis observare est (...) Suidas. (...). Suidas.
(...). Author vitae Chrysostom anon. c. 52. and de corpore Chrysostomi dixit,
(...). Oecumen. in 1. Pet. 1. (...). Clem. Alex. strom. 4. Idem. l. 3. Paedag.
c. 2. (...).
When the Fathers in this question speak of the change of the symbols in the
holy Sacrament, they sometimes use the words of (...) in the Greek Church:
conversion, mutation, transition, migration, transfiguration, and the like in
the Latin; but they by these do understand accidental and Sacramental
conversions, not proper, natural and substantial. Concerning which although I
might refer the Reader to see it highly verified in David Blondels familiar
elucidations of the Eucharistical controversy; Chapt. 5.
yet a shorter course I can take to warrant it, without my trouble or his; and
that is, by the confession of a Jesuit, and of no mean fame or learning amongst
them. The words of Suarez, whom I mean, are these; In 3. disp. 50.. 3.
Licet antiqui Pp. etc. Although the ancient Fathers have used diverse names,
yet all they are either general, as the names of conversion, mutation,
transition; or else they are more accommodated to an accidental change, as the
name of Transfiguration, and the like: only the name of Transelementation,
which Theophylact did use, seems to approach nearer to signify the propriety of
this mystery, because it signifies a change even of the first elements; yet
that word is harder, and not sufficiently accommodate: For it may signify the
resolution of one element into another, or the resolution of a mixed body into
the elements. He might have added another sense of (...) or Transelementation.
Theoph. in S. Luc. 24. and in S. Joh. 6.
For Theophylact uses the same words to express the change of our bodies to
the state of incorruption, and the change that is made in the faithful when
they are united unto Christ. But Suarez proceeds: But Transubstantiation does
most properly and appositely signify the passage and conversion of the whole
substance, into the whole substance. So that by this discourse we are quitted,
and made free from the pressure of all those authorities of the Fathers which
speak of the mutation, conversion, transition, or passage, or
transelementation, transiguration, and the like, of the bread into the body of
Christ; these do or may only signify an accidental change; and come not home
to their purpose of Transubstantiation; and it is as if Suarez had said [the
words which the Fathers use in this question, make not for us, and therefore we
have made a new word for our selves, and obtruded it upon all the world.] But
against it, I shall only object an observation of Bellarmine, De Sacramentis
in. genere. c. 7.. ex quibus.
that is not ill. The liberty of new words is dangerous in the Church, because
out of new words, by little and little, new things arise, while it is lawful to
coin new words, in divine affairs.

6. Fathers had more unitedly affirmed the conversion of the bread into Christ's
body, then they have done, and had not explicated their meaning as they have
done indeed, yet this word would so little have helped the Roman cause, that it
would directly have overthrown it. For in their Transubstantiation there is no
conversion of one thing into another, but a local succession of Christ's body
into the place of bread. A change of the Ubi was not used to be called a
substantial conversion. But they understood nothing of our present (...); they
were not used to such curious nothings, and intricate falsehoods, and artificial
nonsense, with which the Roman Doctors trouble the world in this question. But
they spoke wholly another thing, and either they did affirm a substantial
change or they did not; If they did not, then it makes nothing for them, or
against us. But if they did mean a proper substantial change, then, for so much
as it comes to, it makes against us, but not for them; for they must mean a
change of one substance into another, by conversion, or a change of substances,
by substitution of one in the place of another. If they meant the latter, then
it was no conversion of one into another; and then they expressed not what they
meant; for conversion which was their word, could signify nothing of that: but
if they meant the change of substance into substance, properly by conversion,
then they have confuted the present doctrine of Transubstantiation; which
though they call a substantial change, yet an accident is the terminus
mutationis, that is, it is by their explication of it, wholly an accidental
change, as I have before discoursed; for nothing is produced but Ubiquity or
Presentiality, Vide. 11. n. 34.
that is, it is only made present where it was not before. And it is to be
observed, that there is a vast difference between Conversion, and
Transubstantiation; the first is not denied; meaning by it a change of use, of
condition, of sanctification; as a Table is changed into an Altar; a House,
into a Church; a Man, into a Priest; Matthias, into an Apostle; the Water of
the River, into the Laver of Regeneration; but this is not any thing of
Transubstantiation. For in this new device, there are three strange
affirmatives, of which the Fathers never dreamed. 1. That the natural being of
bread is wholly ceased, and is not at all, neither the matter nor the form. 2.
That the accidents of bread and wine remain without a subject, their proper
subject being annihilated, and they not subjected in the holy body. 3. That the
body of Christ is brought into the place of the bread, which is not changed
into it, but is succeeded by it. These are the constituent propositions of
Transubstantiation, without the proof of which, all the affirmations of
conversion sigfie nothing to their purpose, or against ours.

7. Nature in this question, sometimes saying the Nature is changed, sometimes
that the Nature remains, it is evident that they either contradicted each
other, or that the word Nature has amongst them diverse significations. Now in
order to this, I suppose, if men will be determined by the reasonableness of
the things themselves, and the usual manners of speech, and not by prejudices,
and prepossessions, it will be evident, that when they speak of the change of
Nature, saying that bread changes his nature, it may be understood of an
accidental change: for that the word Nature is used for a change of accidents,
is by the Roman Doctors contended for, when it is to serve their turns,
(particularly in their answer to the words of Pope Gelasius:) and it is evident
in the thing; for we say, a man of a good nature, that is, of a loving
disposition. It is natural to me to love, or hate, this, or that; and it is
against my nature, that is, my custom, or my affection. But then, as it may
signify accidents, and a Natural change, may yet be accidental, as when water
is changed into ice, wine into vinegar; yet it is also certain that Nature may
mean substance: and if it can by the analogy of the place or the circumstances
of speech, or by any thing be declared, when it is that they mean a substance
by using the word, nature; it must be certain, that then, substance is meant,
when the word nature is used distinctly, from, and in opposition to accidents:
or when it is explicated by and in conjunction with substance; which
observation is reducible to practice, in the following testimonies of
Theodoret, Gelasius and others; Immortalitatem dedit, Ad Dardanum.
naturam non abstulit. says S. Austin.

8. substantial change, cannot serve their interest, that now most desire it;
because themselves being pressed with the words of Natura and Substantia
against them, answer, that the Fathers using these words, mean them not (...),
but (...) not naturally, but Theologically, that is, as I suppose, not properly
but Sacramentally: by the same account when they speak of the change of the
bread into the substance of Christ's body, they may mean the change of substance
not naturally, but sacramentally; so that this ought to invalidate the greatest
testimony which can be alleged by them; because themselves have taken from the
words that sense which only must have done them advantage; for if Substantia
and Natura always mean naturally, then their sentence is oftentimes positively
condemned by the Fathers: if this may mean Sacramentally, then they can never
without a just answer, pretend from their words to prove a Natural, Substantial
change.

9. Sacramentally and Mystically, we have sufficient warrant from themselves,
affirming frequently that the name of the thing signified is given to the
sign. S. Cyprian affirms ut significantia and significata eisdem vocabulis
censeantur, Sermon. de Unit.
the same words represent the sign and the thing signified. Vide infra n. 30.
The same is affirmed by S. Austin in his Epistle ad Bonifacium. Now upon this
declaration of themselves, and of Scripture, whatsoever attributes either of
them give to bread after consecration, we are by themselves warranted against
the force of the words by a metaphorical sense; for if they call the sign by
the name of the thing signified, and the thing intended is called by the name
of a figure, and the figure by the name of the thing, then no affirmative of
the Fathers can conclude against them, that have reason to believe the sense of
the words of institution to be figurative; for their answer is ready; the
Fathers, and the Scriptures too, call the figure, by the name of the thing
figurated; the bread by the name of flesh, or the body of Christ, which it
figures, and represents.

10. Roman pretension. Hom. 83. in S. Mat. Hom. 60. and 6. ad Antioch. pop.
Such are the words of S. Chrysostom. Thou see him, thou touchest him, thou
eatest him, and thy tongue is made bloody, by this admirable blood, thy teeth
are fastened in his flesh, they teeth are made red with his blood: and the
Author of the book de coena Domini, attributed to S. Cyprian, Cruci haeremus
etc. We stick close to the cross, we suck his blood, and fasten our tongue
between the very wounds of our Redeemer: and under this head may be reduced
very many other testimonies; now how far these go beyond the just positive
limit, it will be in the power of any man to say, and to take into this
account, as many as he please, even all that go beyond his own sense and
opinion, without all possibility of being confuted.

11. Roman Doctors to allege the words of the Fathers proving the conversion of
bread into Christ's body or flesh, and of the wine into his blood; since they
say the same thing of us, that we also are turned into Christ's flesh, and body
and blood. So S. Chrysostom, Homil. 88. in S. Mat. Ad Cler. Constable.
He reduces us into the same mass, or lump, neque id fide solum sedreipsa; and
in very deed makes us to be his body. So Pope Leo. In mystica distributione
Spiritualis alimoniae, hoc impartitur and sumitur, ut accipientes virtutem
coelestis cibi in carnem ipsius, qui caro nostra factus est, transcamus. And in
his 24 sermon of the Passion. Non alia igitur participatio corporis quam ut in
id quod sumimus transeamus. There is no other participation of the body then
that we should pass into that which we receive. In the mystical distribution
of the Spiritual nourishment this is given and taken, that we receiving the
virtue of the heavenly food, may pass into his flesh who became our flesh. De
instit. Cler. l. 1. c. 31.
And Rabanus makes the analogy fit to this question. Sicut illud in nos
convertitur dum id manducamus and bibimus: sic and nos in corpus Christi
convertimur dum obedienter and pie vivimus. As that [Christs body] is converted
into us while we eat it, and drink it, so are we converted into the body of
Christ while we live obediently and piously. Orat. Catech. 37.
So Gregory Nyssen (...) (...) The immortal body being in the receiver, changes
him wholly into his own nature; and Theophylact uses the same word. He that
eats me, lives by me, whilst he is in a certain manner mingled with me, and
is transelementated (...) or changed into me. Now let men of all sides do
reason, and let one expound the other, and it will easily be granted, that as
we are turned into Christ's body, so is that into us, and so is the bread into
that.

12. Sacrament, and of the Sacramentals, or rituals of the Church. It is a
known similitude used by S. Cyril of Alexandria. As the bread of the Eucharist
after the invocation of the holy Ghost is no longer common bread, but it is the
body of Christ: so this holy unguent is no longer mere and common ointment, but
it is (...) the grace of Christ [(...) it uses to be mistaken, the Chrisme for
the Grace or gift of Christ] and yet this is not spoken properly, as is
apparent; but it is in this, as in the Eucharist; so says the comparison. Thus
S. Chrysostom says, that the Table, or Altar is as the manger in which Christ
was laid; that the Priest is a Seraphim, and his hands are the tongs taking the
coal from the Altar. But that which I instance in, is that 1. They say that
they that hear the word of Christ eat the flesh of Christ: of which I have
already given account in Sect. 3. number. 10. etc. As hearing is eating, as the
word is his flesh, so is the bread after consecration, in a Spiritual sense. 2.
That which comes most fully home to this, is their affirmative concerning
Baptism, to the same purposes, and in many of the same expressions which they
use in this other Sacrament. S. Ambrose L. 4. de Sacram. and lib. de iis qui
initiantur myster. c. 9.
speaking of the baptismal waters affirms naturam mutari per benedictionem, the
nature of them is changed by blessing; and S. Cyril of Alexandria Lib. 2. in
Johan. c. 42.
says. By the operation of the holy Spirit, the waters are reformed to a
divine nature, by which the baptized cleanse their body. For in these, the
ground of all their great expressions is, that which S. Ambrose expressed in
these words: Non agnosco usum naturae, nullus est hic naturae ordo, ubi est
excellentia gratiae: Where grace is the chief ingredient, there the use, and
the order of nature, is not at all considered. But this whole mystery is most
clear in S. Austin Ad infantes apud Bedam in 1 Cor. 10.
, affirming; That we are made partakers of the body and blood of Christ, when
in Baptism we are made members of Christ; and are not estranged from the
followship of that bread and chalice, although we die before we eat that bread
and drink that cup. Lib. de Bapt.
Tingimur in passione Domini; We are baptized into the passion of our Lord;
says Tertullian; into the death of Christ, says S. Paul: for by both
Sacraments we show the Lords death.

13. Transubstantiation; for either they speak that which we acknowledge, as
that it is Christ's body, that it is not common bread, that it is a divine
thing, that we eat Christ's flesh, that we drink his blood, and the like; all
which we acknowledge and explicate, as we do the words of institution; or else
they speak more then both sides allow to be literally true; or speak as great
things of other mysteries which must not, cannot be expounded literally; that
is, they speak more, or less, or diverse from them, or the same with us: and I
think there is hardly one testimony in Bellarmine, in Coccius, and Perron, that
is pertinent to this question, but may be made invalid, by one, or more of the
former considerations. But of those, if there be any, of which there may be a
material doubt, beyond the cure of these observations, I shall give particular
account in the sequel.

But then for the testimonies which I shall allege against the Roman doctrine
in this article, they will not be so easily avoided. 1. Because many of them
are not only affirmative in the Spiritual sense, but exclusive of the natural
and proper. 2. Because it is easy to suppose they may speak hyperboles, but
never that they would undervalue the blessed Sacrament: for an hyperbole is
usual, not a (...) or the lessening a mystery; that may be true, this never;
that may be capable of fair interpretations, this can admit of none; that may
breed reverence, this contempt. To which I add this, that the heathens
slandering the Christians to be worshippers of Ceres or Liber, because of the
holy bread and chalice (as appears in S. Austins 20 book and 13 chapter against
Faustus the Manichee) had reason to advance the reputation of Sacramental
signs to be above common bread and wine, not only so to explicate the truth of
the mystery, but to stop the mouth of their calumny: and therefore for higher
expressions there might be cause, but not such cause for any lower then the
severest truth; and yet let me observe this by the way: S. Austin answered only
thus: We are far from doing so, Quamvis panis and calicis Sacramentum ritu
nostro amplectamur. S. Austin might have further removed the calumny, if he had
been of the Roman persuasion; who adore not the bread, nor eat it at all in
their Synaxes until it be no bread, but changed into the body of our Lord. But
he knew nothing of that. Neither was there ever any scandal of Christians upon
any mistake that could be a probable excuse for them to lessen their
expressions in the matter Eucharistical. Indeed Mr. Brerely has got an
ignorant fancy by the end, which I am now to note, and wipe off. He says that
the Primitive Christians were scandalized by the Heathen to be eaters of the
flesh of a child, which in all reason must be occasioned by their doctrine of
the manducation of Christ's flesh in the Sacrament; and if this be true, then we
may suspect that they to wipe off this scandal might remove their doctrine as
far from the objection as they could, and therefore might use some lessening
expressions. To this I answer, that the occasions of the report were the sects
of the Gnostics, and the Peputians. The Gnostics, as Epiphanius reports,
bruised a new born infant in a mortar, and all of them did communicate by
eating portions of it; and the Montanists having sprinkled a little child with
meal let him blood, and of that made their Eucharistical bread; and these
stories the Jews published to disrepute, if they could, the whole religion;
but nothing of this related to the doctrine of the Christian Eucharist, though
the bell always must tinkle as they are pleased to think. But this turned to
advantage of the truth, and to the clearing of this article. For when the
scandal got foot, and run abroad, the Heathens spared not to call the
Christians Cannibals, and to impute to them anthropophagy, or the devouring
humane flesh, and that they made Thyestes Feast, who by the procurement of
Atreus eat his own children. Against this the Christian Apologists betook
themselves to a defense. Justin Martyr says the false devils had set on work
some vile persons, to kill some one or other, to give color to the report.
Legate. pro Christian.
Athenagoras in a high defiance of the infamy, asks, Do you think we are
murderers? for there is no way to eat man's flesh, unless we first kill him.
Octavius in Minutius Felix confutes it, upon this account: We dee not receive
the blood of beasts, into our food or beverage; therefore we are infinitely
distant from drinking man's blood. And this same, Cap. 9.
Tertullian in his Apologetick presses further, affirming that to discover
Christians, they use to offer them a black pudding, or something in which blood
remained, and they chose rather to die, then do it; and of this we may see
instances in the story of Sanctus and Blandina in the ecclesiastical histories.
Concerning which it is remarkable, what Oecumenius in his Catena upon the 2
chap. of the first Epistle of S. Peter reports out of Irenaeus; the Greeks
having taken some servants of Christians, pressing to learn something secret of
the Christians, and they having nothing in their notice, to please the
inquisitors, except that they had heard of their Masters, that the divine
communion is the blood, and body of Christ; they supposing it true, according
to their rude natural apprehensions, tortured Sanctus and Blandina, to confess
it. But Blandina answered them thus: How can they suffer any such thing in the
exercise of their Religion, who do not nourish themselves with flesh that is
permitted? All this trouble came upon the act of the forementioned heretics;
the report was only concerning the blood of an infant, not of a man, as it must
have been if it had been occasioned by the Sacrament; but the Sacrament was not
so much as thought of in this scrutiny, till the examination of the servants
gave the hint in the torture of Blandina. Cardinal Perron perceiving much
detriment likely to come to their doctrine by these Apologies of the primitive
Christians upon the 11. anathematisme of S. Cyril, says, that they deny
anthropophagy, but did not deny The anthropophagy, saying, that they did not
eat the flesh, or drink the blood of a mere man, but of Christ who was God and
Man; which is so strange a device as I wonder it could drop from the pen of so
great a wit. For this would have been a worse, and more intolerable scandal, to
affirm that Christians eat their God, and sucked his blood, and were devourers
not only of a man, but of an immortal God. But however let his fancy be
confronted with the extracts of the several apologies which I have now cited,
and it will appear, that nothing of the Cardinals fancy can come near their
sense, or words: for all the business was upon the blood of a child which the
Gnostics had killed, or the Montanists tormented; and the matter of the
Sacrament, was not in the whole rumor so much as thought upon.

Lastly, Bellarmine, in all his dreams; or Perron in all his laborious excuses;
if we be allowed to be in our wits, and to understand Latin, or Greek, or
common sense; unless the Fathers must all be understood according to their new
nonsense answers, which the Primitive Doctors were so far from understanding or
thinking of, that besides, that it is next to impudence to suppose they could
mean them, their own Doctors in a few ages last past, did not know them, but
opposed, and spoke some things contrary, and many things diverse from them: I
say unless we have neither sense, nor reason, nor souls like other men, it is
certain, that not one, nor two, but very many of the Fathers, taught our
doctrine most expressly in this article, and against theirs. * And after all,
whether the testimonies of the Doctors be ancient, or modern, it is advantage
to us, and inconvenient for them: For if it be ancient, it shows their
doctrine not to be from the beginning; if it be modern, it does it more; for it
declares plainly, the doctrine to be but of yesterday: now I am very certain, I
can make it appear, not to have been the doctrine of the Church, not of any
Church whose records we have, for above a thousand years together.

But now in my entry upon the testimonies of Fathers, Roman Doctors in this
business. And the first I shall name, is Bellarmine himself, who was the most
wary of giving advantage against himself; L. 2. Euch. c. 25.. Hic vero.
but yet he says; Non esse mirandum etc. It is not to be wondered at, if S.
Austin, Theodoret, and others of the ancients, spoke some things which in show
seem to favor the heretics, when even from Jodocus some things did fall,
which by the adversaries were drawn to their cause. Now though he lessens the
matter by quaedam and videantur and in speciem, seemingly, and in show and some
things] yet it was as much as we could expect from him; with whom visibiliter,
if it be on our side, must mean invisibiliter, and statuimus must be abrogamus.
But I rest not here: De haer. l. 8. v. Indulgentia.
Alphonsus a Castro says more. De transubstantiatione panis in corpus Christi
rara est in antiquis Scriptoribus mentio. The ancient Writers seldom mention
the change of the substance of bread into the body of Christ. And yet these men
would make us believe that all the world's their own. But Scotus does directly
deny the doctrine of Conversion or Transubstantiation to be ancient, so says
Henriquez. Sum. l. 8. c. 23. De Euch. l. 3. c. 23.. Unum tamen.
Ante Concilium Lateranense Transubstantiatio non fuit dogma fidei. So said
Scotus himself, as Bellarmine cites him; and some of the Fathers of the Society
in England in their prison affirmed Rem Transubstantiationis Patres ne
attigisse quidem; Discourse modest. p. 13.
that the Fathers did not so much as touch the matter of Transubstantiation:
and it was likely so, because Peter Lombard, whose design it was, Lib. 4.
Sent. did. 11. lit. a.
to collect the sentences of the Fathers into heads of articles, found in them
something to the purpose of Transubstantiation, that he professed he was not
able to define, whether the conversion of the Eucharistical bread were formal
or substantial, or of another kind. To some it seems to be substantial, saying,
the substance is changed into the substance. Quibusdam, and videtur, it seems,
and that not to all neither, but to some; for his part he knows not whether
they are right or wrong, therefore in his days the doctrine was not Catholic.
And me thinks it was an odd saying of Vasquez and much to this purpose; In 3.
Tho. to. 3. disp. 183. c. 1. n. 1.
that as soon as ever the later Schoolmen heard the name of Transubstantiation,
such a controversy did arise concerning the nature of it (he says not, of the
meaning of the word, but the nature of the thing,) that by how much the more
they did endeavor to extricate themselves, by so much the more they were
entangled in difficulties. It seems it was news to them, to hear talk of it,
and they were as much strangers to the nature of it, as to the name; it begat
quarrels, and became a riddle which they could not resolve; but like Achelous
his horn sent forth a river of more difficulty, to be waded thorough, then the
horn was to be broken. And amongst these Schoolmen Durandus maintained an
heretical opinion (says Bellarmine) saying that the form of bread was changed
into Christ's body: Lib. 3. de Euch. c. 1.
but that the matter of bread remained still; by which also it is apparent that
then this doctrine was but in the forge; it was once stamped upon, at the
Lateran Council, but the form was rude, and it was fain to be cast again, and
polished at Trent; the Jesuit order being the chief masters of the mint. But
now I proceed to the trial of this Topic.

I shall not need to arrest the Reader, Roman Doctors, out of the passions of
the Apostles, which all men condemn for spurious and Apocryphal; particularly
the passion of S. S. Andrew. Annal. to. 1. A. D. 44. number. 42.
Andrew said to be written by the Priests, and Deacons of Achaia. For it is
sufficient that they are so esteemed by Baronius, censured for such by
Gelasius, by Philastrius, and Innocentius; they were corrupted also by the
Manichees by additions, and detractions; and yet if they were genuine, and
uncorrupted, they say nothing, but what we profess: Vide etiam Whitum Diacos.
Martyr. fol. 3.
[although the holy Lamb truly sacrificed, and his flesh eaten by the people,
does nevertheless persevere whole and alive] for no man, that I know of,
pretends that Christ is so eaten in the Sacrament, that he dies for it; for his
flesh is eaten spiritually and by faith, and that is the most true manducation
of Christ's body, the flesh of the holy Lamb: and this manducation breaks not a
bone of him; but then how he can be torn by the teeth of the communicants and
yet remain whole, is a harder matter to tell; and therefore these words are
very far from their sense; they are nearer to an objection: But I shall not be
troubled with this any more; save that I shall observe that one White of the
Roman persuasion quoting part of these words which Bellarmine, Diacosion Mart.
fol. 3.
and from him the under-writers object; [Ego omnipotenti Deo omni die
immaculatum agnum sacrifico] of these words in particular affirms that without
all controversy they are apocryphal.

Next to him is S. Ignatius who is cited to have said something of this
question in his epistle ad Smyrnenses, S. Ignatius.
speaking of certain heretics [They do not admit of Eucharists, and oblations,
because they do not confess the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior,
which flesh suffered for us.] They that do not confess it, let them be
anathema: for sure it is, as sure as Christ is truth: but quomodo is the
question, and of this S. Ignatius says nothing. But the understanding of these
words perfectly, depends upon the story of that time. Concerning which, we
learn out of Tertullian and Irenaeus that the Marcosians, the Valentinians and
Marcionites, who denied the incarnation of the son of God, did nevertheless
use the Eucharistical Symbols, though, I say, they denied Christ to have a
body. Now because this usage of theirs did confute their grand heresy, (for to
what purpose should they celebrate the Sacrament of Christ's body, if he had
none?) therefore it is that S. Ignatius might say: They did not admit the
Eucharist, because they did not confess it to be the flesh of Christ: for
though in practice they did admit it, yet in theory they denied it, because it
could be nothing, as they handled the matter. For how could it be Christ's flesh
Sacramentally, if he had no flesh really? And therefore they did not admit the
Euchcharist, as the Church did, for in no sense would they grant it to be the
flesh of Christ; not the figure, not the Sacrament of it; lest admitting the
figure they should also confess the substance: But besides, if these words had
been against us, it had signified nothing; because these words are not in S.
Ignatius; they are in no Greek copy of him; but they are reported by Theodoret.
But in these there is nothing else material, then what I have accounted: for I
only took them in by the by, because they are great names, and are objected
sometimes.

But I shall descend to more material testimonies, and consider those
objections that are incident to the mention of the several Fathers supposing
that the others are invalid, upon the account of the premises; or if they were
not, yet they can but pass for single opinions, against which themselves, and
others, are opposed at other times.

Tertullian is affirmative in that sense of the article which we teach.
Tertullian. adv. Marcion. l. 4. c. 40.
Acceptum panem and distributum discipulis suis, Christus corpus suum meum
fecit, dicendo, Hoc est corpus i.e. figura corporis mei. He proves against the
Marcionites that Christ had a true real body in his incarnation, by this
argument; because in the Sacrament he gave bread, as the figure of his body,
saying, This is my body, that is, the figure of my body. Fisher in his answer
to the 9th. question propounded by K. James, and he from Card. Perron say it is
an (...), and answers to this place, that Figura corporis mei, refers after
Tertullians odd manner of speaking, to Hoc, not to corpus meum, which are the
words immediately preceding, and so most proper for the relation; and that the
sense is: This figure of my body, is my body: that is, this which was a figure
in the old Testament, is now a substance. To this I reply, 1. It must mean,
this which is present is my body, not this figure of my body which was in the
old Testament, but this which we mean in the words of consecration; and then it
is no hyperbaton, which is to be supplied with quod erat; This, which was; for
the nature of a hyperbaton is, to make all right, by a mere transposition of
the words; as, Christus mortuus est, i. e. unctus; place unctus before mortuus
and the sentence is perfect; but it is not so here: without the addition of two
words, it cannot be; and if two words may be added, we may make what sense we
please. But 2. suppose that figura corporis does refer to Hoc, yet it is to be
remembered that Hoc, in that place, is one of the words of the institution, or
consecration, and then it can have no sense to evacuate the pressure of his
words. 3. Suppose this reference of the words to be intended, then the sense
will be; This figure of my body, is my body, the consequent of which, is that
which we contend for: that the same which is called his body, is the figure of
his body: the one is, the subject; the other, the predicate: and then it
affirms all that is pleaded for: as if we say: Haec effigies est homo, we mean
it is the effigies of a man; and so in this, This figure of my body, is my
body, by the rule of denominatives, signifies, This is the figure of my body.
4. In the preceding words; Tertullian says, the Pascha was the type of his
passion: this Pascha he desired to eat; This Pascha was not the lamb (for he
was betrayed the night before it was to be eaten) professus se concupiscentia
concupisse edere pascha ut suum (indignum enim ut quid alienum concupisceret
Deus) he would eat the Passover of his own, figuram sanguinis sui salutaris
implere concupiscebat, he desired to fulfill the figure, that is, to produce the
last of all the figures of his healing blood: Now this was by eating the
Paschal lamb, that is, himself; for the other was not to be eaten that night.
Now then if the eating, or delivering himself to be eaten that night, was
implere figuram sanguinis sui, he then did fulfill the figure of his blood,
therefore figura corporis mei in the following words, must relate to what he
did that night; that therefore was the figure, but the more excellent, because
the nearest to the substance, which was given really the next day: this
therefore as S. Gregory Nazianzen affirms was the most excellent figure, the
Paschal lamb it self being figura figurae, the figure of a figure, as I have
quoted him in the sequel. And it is not disagreeing from the expression of
Scripture, saying, Heb. 1. v. 1.
that the law had (...); a shadow, but not the very image: that was in the
ceremonies of the law, this in the Sacraments of the Gospel: Christ himself was
the (...) the thing it self; but the image was more then the shadow, though
less then the substance; (...) was the word by which the Fathers expressed
this nearer configuration. 5. Whereas it is added, it had not been a figure
nisi veritatis esset corpus, to my sense clears the question; for therefore
Christ's body, which he was clothed withal, was a true body, else this could not
be a figure of it; But therefore this which was also a figure, could not be the
true body, of which it was a figure. 6. That which Fisher adds, that
Tertullians drift was to show, that whereas, in the old Testament, bread was
the figure of the body of Christ (as appears by the words of the Prophet,
Mittamus lignum in panem ejus, i. e. crucem in corpus ejus) Christ in the new
Testament made this figure really to be his body; This I conceive to make very
much against Tertullians design. For he proves that therefore Christ might
well call bread his body; that was no new thing, for it was so also in the old
figure; and therefore may be so now: but that this was no more then a figure,
he adds, If therefore he made bread to be his body, because he wanted a true
body, then bread was delivered for us; and it would advance the vanity of
Marcion, that bread was crucified. No, this could not be; but therefore he must
mean, that as of old in the Prophet and in the Passover, so now in the last
supper, he gave the same figure, and therefore that which was figured was real,
viz. his crucified body. Now suppose we should frame this argument out of
Tertullians medium, and suppose it to be made by Marcion. The body of Christ,
was delivered for the sins of the world, etc. you Catholics say that bread is
the body of Christ, therefore you say, that bread was delivered for the sins of
the whole world, and that bread was crucified for you, and that bread is the
son of God; what answer could be made to this out of Tertullian, but by
expounding the minor proposition figuratively? we Catholics say that the
Eucharistical bread, is the body of Christ in a figurative sense, it is
completio or consummatio figurarum, the last and most excellent of all figures.
But if he should have said according to the Roman fancy, that it is the natural
body of Christ, it would have made rare triumphs in the Schools of Marcion. But
that there may be no doubt in this particular, hear himself summing up his own
discourses in this question. Lib. 5. cont. Marcion. c. 8.
Proinde panis and calicis Sacramento jam in Evangelio probavimus corporis and
sanguinis Dominici veritatem adversus phantasma Marcionis. Against the
phantasme of Marcion we have proved the verity of Christ's body, and blood by
the Sacrament of bread and wine. 7. This very answer I find to be Tertullians
own explication of this affair: Lib. 3. c. 19.
for speaking of the same figurative speech of the prophet Jeremy, and why
bread should be called his body; he gives this account: Hoc lignum and Ieremias
tibi insinuat dicturis praedicans Iudaeis, Venite mittamus lignum in panem
ejus, utique in corpus; fic enim Deus in Evangelio quoque vestro revelavit,
panem corpus suum appellans, ut and hinc jam eum intelligas corporis sui
figuram pani dedisse, cujus retro corpus in panem prophets figuravit ipso
Domino hoc Sacramentum postea interpretaturo. For so God revealed in your
Gospel, calling bread his body, that hence thou may understand that he gave
to bread the figure of his body, whose body anciently the Prophet figured by
bread, afterward the Lord himself expounding the Sacrament. Nothing needs to
be plainer. By the way, let me observe this, that the words cited by Tertullian
out of Jeremy are expounded, and recited too, but by allusion. For there are no
such words in the Hebrew text: which is thus to be rendered. Corrumpamus veneno
cibum ejus, and so cannot be referred to the Sacrament, unless you will
suppose that he foresignified the poisoning the Emperor, by a consecrated
wafer. But as to the figure, this is often said by him; for in the first book
against Marcion he has these words again [nec reprobavit] panem quo ipsum
corpus suum repraesentat, etiam in Sacramentis propriis egens mendicitatibus
creatoris. He refused not bread by which he represents his own body, wanting or
using in the Sacraments the meanest things of the Creator. For it is not to be
imagined that Tertullian should attempt to persuade Marcion, that the bread was
really and properly Christ's body; but that he really delivered his body on the
cross, that both in the old Testament, and here, himself gave a figure of it
in bread and wine, for that was it which the Marcionites denied, saying, on the
cross no real humanity did suffer; and he confutes them by saying these are
figures, and therefore denote a truth. 8 However these men are resolved that
this new answer shall please them, and serve their turn, yet some of their
fellows, great Clerks as themselves, did shrink under the pressure of it, as
not being able to be pleased with so labored and improbable an answer. Art.
12. S. 9.
For Harding against Iuel has these words speaking of this place [which
interpretation is not according to the true sense of Christ's words, although
his meaning swerve not from the truth] And B. Rhenanus the author of the
admonition to the Reader, De quibusdam Tertulliani dogmatis, seems to confess
this to be Tertullians error. Error putantium corpus Christi in Eucharistia
tantum esse sub figura, jam olim condemnatus, The error of them that think the
body of Christ is in the Eucharist only in a figure, is now long since
condemned. But Garetius De vera praes. clas. 1. p. 19.
, Bellarmine Lib. 3. Euch. c. 20.
, Justinian In 1 Cor. 11.
, Coton Du Sacr. de la Mes. c. 17.
, Fevardentius In Irenae. l. 4. c. 34.
, Valentia De Transub. l. 2. c. 3.
, and Vasquez T. 3. in 3 disp. 180. n. 21.
, in the recitation of this passage of Tertullian, very fairly leave out the
words that pinch them, and which clears the article: and bring the former words
for themselves, without the interpretation of id est, figura corporis mei. I
may therefore without scruple reckon Tertullian on our side, against whose
plain words no real exception can lie, himself expounding his own meaning in
the pursuance of the figurative sense of this mystery.

Concerning Origin I have already given an account in the ninth Paragraph,
Origin.
and other places casually, and made it appear that he is a direct opposite to
the doctrine of Transubstantiation. Justin M.
And the same also of Justin Martyr Paragraph the fifth, number 9. Where also I
have enumerated diverse others who speak upon parts of this question, on which
the whole depends, whither I refer the Reader. Only concerning Justin Martyr, I
shall recite these words of his against Tryphon. Figura fuit panis Eucharistiae
quem in recordationem passionis -- facere praecepit. The bread of the Eucharist
was a figure, which Christ the Lord commanded to do in remembrance of his
passion.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, The blood of Christ is twofold; Clemens
Alexandrinus paed. l. 2. c. 2.
the one is carnal, by which we are redeemed from death; the other spiritual,
viz. by which we are anointed. And this is to drink the blood of Jesus, to be
partakers of the incorruption of our Lord. But the power of the word is the
Spirit, as blood is of the flesh. Therefore in a moderated proportion, and
convenience, wine is mingled with water, as the Spirit with a man. And he
receivs in the Feast [viz. Eucharistical] tempered wine unto faith. But the
Spirit leads to incorruption, but the mixture of both, viz. of drink, and the
word, is called the Eucharist, which is praised, and is a good gift or [grace]
of which they who are partakers by faith, are sanctified in body and soul. Here
plainly he calls that which is in the Eucharist, Spiritual blood; and without
repeating, the whole discourse is easy and clear. And that you may be certain
of S. Clement his meaning, he disputes in the same chapter, against the
Encratites, who thought it not lawful to drink wine. (...) etc. For be ye sure
he also did drink wine, for he also was a man, and he blessed wine when he
said, Take drink (...), This is my blood, the blood of the vine, for that word
[that was shed for many for the remission of sins] it signifies allegorically a
holy stream of gladness; (...), but that the thing which had been blessed was
wine, he showed again, saying to his disciples, I will not drink of the fruit
of this vine, till I drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom. Now S.
Clement proving by Christ's sumption of the Eucharist, that he did drink wine,
must mean, the Sacramental symbol to be truly wine, and Christ's blood
allegorically, that holy stream of gladness, or else he had not concluded by
that argument against the Encratites. Upon which account these words are much
to be valued, because by our doctrine in this article, he only could confute
the Encratites; as by the same doctrine explicated, as we explicate it,
Tertullian confuted the Marcionites, and Theodoret and Gelasius confuted the
Nestorians, and Eutychians; if the doctrine of Transubstantiation had been
true, these four heresies had by them, as to their particular arguments
relating to this matter, been unconfuted.

S. Cyprian in his Tractate de unctione which Canisius, Harding, Bellarmine, S.
Cyprian.
and Lindan cite, has these words, Dedit itaque Dominus noster etc. Therefore
our Lord in his table in which he did partake his last banquet with his
disciples, with his own hands gave bread and wine, but on the cross, he gave
to the soldiers his body to be wounded, that in the Apostles the sincere
truth, and the true sincerity being more secretly imprinted, he might expound
to the Gentiles how wine and bread should be his flesh and blood, and by what
reasons causes might agree with effects, and diverse names, and kinds (viz.
bread and wine) might be reduced to one essence, and the signifying, and the
signified, might be reckoned by the same words: and in his third Epistle he
has these words, Vinum quo Christi sanguis ostenditur, wine by which Christ's
blood is shown or declared: Here I might cry out as Bellarmine upon a much
slighter ground, Quid clarius dici potuit? But I forbear; being content to
enjoy the real benefits of these words without a triumph. But I will use it
thus far, that it shall outweigh the words cited out of the tract de coena
Domini, by Bellarmine, by the Rhemists, by the Roman Catechism, by Perron, and
by Gregory de Valentia. The words are these, Panis iste quem Dominus discipulis
porrigebat non effigy sed natura mutatus omnipotentia verbi factus est caro,
and sicut in persona Christi etc. The bread which the Lord gave to his
disciples is changed, not in shape, but in nature, being made flesh by the
omnipotency of the word; and as in the person of Christ the humanity was seen,
and the divinity lay hid, so in the visible Sacrament, the divine essence,
after an ineffable manner, poures it self forth, that devotion about the
Sacraments might be religion, and that a more sincere entrance may be opened to
the truth whereof the body and blood are Sacraments, even unto the
participation of the Spirit, not unto the consubstantiality of Christ. This
testimony (as Bellarmine says) admits of no answer. But by his favor, it
admits of many: 1. Bellarmine cites but half of those words, and leaves out
that which gives him answer. 2. The words affirm, that that body and blood are
but a Sacrament of a reality and truth; but if it were really, and naturally,
Christ's body, then it were it self, veritas and corpus, and not only a
Sacrament. 3. The truth [of which these are Sacramental] is the participation
of the Spirit; that is, a Spiritual communication. 4. This does not arrive ad
consubstantialitatem Christi, to a participation or communion of the substance
of Christ, which it must needs do, if bread were so changed in nature, as that
it were substantially the body of Christ. 5. These sermons of S. Cyprians title
and name are under the name also of Arnoldus Abbat of Bonavilla in the time of
S. Bernard, as appears in a M.S. in the Library of All souls College of which
I had the honor sometime to be a Fellow. However, it is confessed on all sides
that this Tractate is not S. Cyprians, and who is the Father of it, if Arnoldus
be not, cannot be known; neither his age nor reputation. His style sounds like
the eloquence of the Monastery, being direct Friars latin, as appears by his
honorificare, amaricare, injuriare, demembrare, sequestrare, attitulare,
spiritalitas, te supplico, and some false latin besides, and therefore he ought
to pass for nothing; which I confess I am sorry for, as to this question;
because to my sense he gives us great advantage in it. But I am content to lose
what our cause needs not. I am certain they can get nothing by him. For if the
authority were not incompetent; the words were impertinent to their purpose,
but very much against them: only let me add out of the same sermon these
words. Panis iste communis in carnem and sanguinem mutatus procurat vitam and
incrementum corporibus, ideoque ex consueto effectu fidei nostra adjuta
infirmitas, sensibili argumento educt a and visibilibus sacr amentis inesse
vitae aeternae effectum and non tam corporali quam spiritualt transitione nos
cum Christo uniri. That common bread being changed into flesh and blood,
procures life and increment to our bodies; therefore our infirmity being helped
with the usual effect of faith is taught by a sensible argument, that the
effect of eternal life, is in visible Sacraments, and that we are united to
Christ, not so much by a corporal, as by a Spiritual change. If both these
discourses be put together let the authority of the writer be what it will, the
greater, the better.

In the dialogues against the Marcionites collected out of Maximus in the time
of Commodus or Severus, or thereabouts, A. D. 190. Maximus.
Origin is brought in speaking thus: (...); If, as the Marcionites say, Christ
had neither flesh nor blood, of what flesh or of what blood did he, giving
bread and the chalice as images, command his disciples, that by these a
remembrance of him should be made?

To the same purpose are the words of Eusebius: Eusebius. Lib. 8. de monst.
evang. c. 1. Lib. 1. c. ult.
He gave to his disciples the symbols of divine aeconomie, commanding the image
or type of his own body to be made: and again, (...). They received a command
according to the constitution of the new Testament, to make a memory of this
sacrifice upon the table by the symbols of his body, and healthful blood.

S. Ephrem the Syrian, Patriarch of Antioch, S. Ephrem. De sacris Antioch.
legibus apud Phot. l. 1. co. 229. Scotus Jesuita exponit (...) cognoscitur,
contra sensum loci.
is dogmatical and decretory in this question, (...). The body of Christ
received by the faithful departs not from his sensible substance, and is
undivided from a spiritual grace. He adds the similitude and parity of baptism
to this mystery; for even baptism being wholly made Spiritual, and being that
which is the same and proper of the sensible substance, I mean of water, saves,
and that which is born does not perish. I will not descant upon these or any
other words of the Fathers I allege, for if of their own natural intent they
do not teach our doctrine, I am content they should pass for nothing.

S. Epiphanius affirming man to be like God (...), S. Epiphan. in Ancorato.
in some image or similitude, not according to Nature, illustrates it by the
similitude of the blessed Sacrament; We see that our Savior took into his
hands as the Evangelist has it, that he arose from supper, and took those
things, and when he had given thanks he said, This is mine, and this; we see it
is not equal, it is not like, not to the image in the flesh, not to the
invisible Deity, not to the proportion of members, for this is a round form,
(...), and cannot perceive any thing, or [is insensible according to power or
faculty] and he would by grace say, This is mine, and this, and every man
believes the word that is spoken, for he that believes not him to be true, is
fallen from grace, and salvation. Now the force of Epiphanius his argument,
consisting in this, that we are like to God after his image, but yet not
according to nature, as the Sacramental bread is like the body of Christ, it is
plain that the Sacramental species are the body of Christ, and his blood, (...)
according to the image or representment, not according to Nature, but according
to Grace.

Macarius his words are plain enough, Macarius. homil. 27.
In the Church is offered bread and wine the antitype of his flesh and of his
blood, and they that partake of the bread that appears do spiritually eat the
flesh of Christ.

S. Gregory Nazianzen speaking of the Pascha says, S. Gregoy Naz. orat. 2. in
Pasc.
I am potestatis participes erimus etc. Now we shall be partakers of the
Paschal supper, but still in figure though more clear then in the old law. For
the legal Passover (I will not be a fraid to speak it) was a more obscure
figure, of a figure.

S. S. Ambros. lib. 4. de Sacram. cap. 5.
Ambrose is of the same persuasion. Fac nobis hanc oblationem ascriptam,
rationabilem, acceptabilem, quod est figura corporis and sanguinis Domini
nostri Jesus Christi. Make this ascribed oblation, reasonable, and acceptable,
which is the figure of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. C. 4. ibid.
And again, Mira potentia etc. it is a wonderful power of God which makes that
the bread should remain what it is, and yet be changed into another thing. And
again, How much more operative is the word of Christ that the things be what
they were, and yet be changed into another? and so that which was bread before
consecration now is the body of Christ] Hoc tamen impossible est ut panis sit
corpus Christi; Sed haec verba ad sanum intellectum sunt intelligenda, De
consecdist. 2. panis est.
ita solvit Hugo, says the Gloss in Gratian; which is an open defiance of the
doctrine of S. Ambrose affirming it to be impossible. But because these words
pinch severely; they have retrenched the decisive words; and leave out, [and
sint] and make them to run thus [that the things be -- changed into another]
which corruption is discovered by the citation of these words in Paschasius,
Guitmond, Bertram, Algerus, Ivo Carnotensis, Gratian and Lombard. But in
another place he calls the mystical chalice The type of the blood; In 1 Cor. 11.
and that Christ is offered here, in imagine, in type, image, or
representation; in coelo, in veritate, the truth, De offic. l. 1. c. 48. Lib.
de initiat. c. 9.
the substance is in heaven. And again, This therefore truly is the Sacrament
of his flesh. Our Lord Jesus himself says, this is my body. Before the
blessing by the words it was named another species (or kind;) after the
consecration, the body of Christ is signified.

S. Chrysostom is brought on both sides, S. Chrysostom.
and his rhetoric has cast him on the Roman side, but it also bears him
beyond it; and his divinity, and sober opinions have fixed him on ours. How to
answer the expressions hyperbolical which he often uses, is easy, by the use
of rhetoric and customs of the words: Ep. ad Caesar. cont. haeres.
Apollinarii citat. per Damascen. and per. collect. sent. pp. contra Severianos
edit. per Turrian.
But I know not how any man can sensibly answer these words [For as before the
bread is sanctified we name it bread, but the divine grace sanctifying it by
the means of the Priest it is freed from the name of bread, but it is esteemed
worthy to be called the Lords body, although the nature of bread remains in it.
To the same purpose are those words on the 22d Psalm published amongst his
works, though possibly they were of some other of that time, or before, or
after; it matters not to us, but much to them: for if he be later and yet
esteemed a Catholic, (as it is certain he was and the man a while supposed to
be S. Chrysostom) it is the greater evidence that it was long before the
Church received their doctrine. The words are these: That table has he
prepared to his servants and his maidens in their sight, that he might every
day show us in the Sacrament according to the order of Melchisedec bread and
wine to the likeness of the body and blood of Christ. To the same purpose is
that saying in the homilyes of whoever is the author of that opus imperfectum
upon S. Hom. 11. in S. Mat.
Mat. Si igitur haec vasa etc. If therefore these vessels being sanctified it
be so dangerous to transfer them to private uses in which the body of Christ is
not, but the mystery of his body is contained; how much more concerning the
vessels of our bodies etc. Now against these testimonies, they make an outcry
that they are not S. Chrysostomes works, and for this last, the book is
corrupted, and they think in this place by some one of Berengarius's scholars;
for they cannot tell. Fain they would believe it; but this kind of talk is a
resolution not to yield, but to proceed against all evidence; for that this
place is not corrupted, but was originally the sense of the Author of the
homilies, is highly credible by the faith of all the old MS. and there is in
the public Library of Oxford an excellent MS. very ancient that makes faith in
this particular; but that some one of their scholars might have left these
words out of some of their copies, were no great wonder, though I do not find
they did, but that they foysted in a marginal note, affirming that these words
are not in all old copies: an affirmation very confident, but as the case
stands, to very little purpose. But upon this account nothing can be proved
from sayings of Fathers. For either they are not their own works but made by
another, or 2. They are capable of another sense, or 3. The places are
corrupted by heretics, or 4. It is not in some old copies; which pretenses I
am content to let alone, if they upon this account will but transact the
question wholly by Scripture and common sense. 5. It matters not at all what he
is, so he was not esteemed a heretic; and that he was not, it is certain,
since by themselves these books are put among the works of S. Chrysostom, and
themselves can quote them when they seem to do them service. All that I infer
from hence is this, that whenever these books were writ, some man esteemed a
good Catholic was not of the Roman persuasion in the matter of the Sacrament;
therefore their opinion is not Catholic. But that S. Chrysostom may not be
drawn from his right of giving testimony and interpretation of his words in
other places; in his 23 homily upon the first of the Corinthians, which are
undoubtedly his own; he says [ As thou eatest the body of the Lord, so they
(viz. the faithful in the old Testament) did eat Manna: as thou drinkest blood,
so they the water of the rock. For though the things which are made be
sensible, yet they are given spiritually, not according to the consequence of
nature, but according to the grace of a gift, and with the body they also
nourish the soul, leading unto faith.

S. August.
is S. Austin, concerning whom it is so evident that he was a Protestant in
this article, that truly it is a strange boldness to deny it; and upon equal
terms no man's mind in the world can be known; for if all that he says in this
question shall be reconcilable to Transubstantiation, I know no reason but it
may be possible, but a witty man may pretend when I am dead, that in this
discourse I have pleaded for the doctrine of the Roman Church. I will set his
words down nakedly without any Gloss upon them, and let them do by themselves
as much as they can. Ep. ad Bonifac.
Si enim Sacramenta quandam similitudinem etc. For if the Sacraments had not a
certain similitude of those things whereof they are Sacraments, they were no
Sacraments at all. But from this similitude, for the most part they receive the
things themselves. As therefore according to a certain manner the Sacrament of
the body of Christ, is the body of Christ, the Sacrament of the blood of
Christ, is the blood of Christ: so the Sacrament of faith is. Now suppose a
stranger to the tricks of the Roman doctors, a wise and a discerning man should
read these words in S. Austin and weigh them diligently, and compare them with
all the adjacent words and circumstances of the place, I would desire
reasonably to be answered on which side he would conclude S. Austin to be of?
if in any other place he speaks words contrary; that is his fault or
forgetfulness: but if the contrary had been the doctrine of the Church he
could never have so forgotten his religion and communion, as so openly to have
declared a contrary sense to the same article. In Psalm, 98.
Non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturiestis etc. you are not to eat this body
which you see (so he brings in Christ speaking to his disciples) or to drink
that blood which my crucifyers shall power forth; I have commended to you a
Sacrament which being spiritually understood shall quicken you;* In Psalm.
and Christ] brought them to a banquet in which he commended to his disciples
the figure of his body and blood* For he did not doubt to say Cont. Adimant. c.
12.
, This is my body when he gave the sign of his body.* Quod ab omnibus
sacrificium appellatur Lib. 10. contr. Faustum Manich. c. 2.
etc. That which by all men is called a sacrifice, is the sign of the true
sacrifice, in which the flesh of Christ, after his assumption is celebrated by
the Sacrament of remembrances. But concerning S. Austins doctrine, I shall
refer him that desires to be further satisfied, to no other record then their
own Canon law. De consecrat. d. 2.
Which not only from S. Austin but from diverse others produces testimonies so
many, so pertinent, so full for our doctrine and against the dream of
Transubstantiation, that it is to me a wonder why it is not clapped into the
Indices expurgatorii, for it speaks very many truths beyond the cure of their
Glosses: which they have changed and altered several times. But that this
matter concerning S. Austin may be yet clearer, his own third book de doctrina
Christiana is so plain for us in this question, that when Frudegardus in the
time of Charles the bald had upon occasion of the dispute which then began to
be hot and interested in this question, read this book of S. Austin he was
changed to the opinion of a Spiritual and mysterious presence, and upon
occasion of that his being persuaded so by S. Austin, Paschasius Ratherdus
wrote to him, as of a question then doubted of by many persons, as is to be
seen in his epistle to Frudegardus. I end this of S. Austin with those words of
his which he intends by way of rule for expounding these and the like words of
Scripture taken out of this book of Christian doctrine; Locutio praeceptiva
etc. Lib. 3. c. 15, 16.
A preceptive speech forbidding a crime or commanding something good or
profitable is not figurative; but if it seems to command a crime, or forbid a
good, then it is figurative. Unless ye eat the flesh of the son of man etc.
Seems to command a wickedness, it is therefore a figure commanding us to
communicate with the Passion of our Lord, and sweetly and profitably to lay it
up in our memory that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. I shall not
need to urge that this holy Sacrament is called Eucharistia carnis and
sanguinis, the Eucharist of the body and blood, by Irenaeus; corpus symbolicum
and typicum, by Origin; In typo sanguis, by S. Jerome; similitudo, figura,
typus, (...), images, aenigmaes, representations, expressions, exemplars of the
Passion by diverse others: that which I shall note here is this; A. D. 754. of
338. B. B.
that in the council of Constantinople it was publicly professed that the
Sacrament is not the body of Christ (...), but (...), not by nature but by
representment; for so it is expounded. (...), the holy image of it, Vide
Council. general. tom. 3. p. 599. edit. Romans
and (...), the Eucharistical bread is the true image of the natural flesh, and
(...) and (...). A figure or image delivered by God, of his flesh; and a true
image of the incarnate dispensation of Christ. These things are found in the 3
tom. of the 6. action of the second Nicene council where a pert Deacon ignorant
and confident had boldly said that none of the Apostles or Fathers had ever
called the Sacrament the image of Christ's body; that they were called (...),
antitypes, before consecration, he grants; but after consecration, they are
called, and are, and are believed to be the body and blood of Christ properly:
which I suppose he might have learned of Damascene who in opposition to the
Iconoclasts would not endure the word Type, or Image to be used concerning the
holy Sacrament; for they would admit no other Image but that: he in defiance of
them who had excommunicated him for a worshipper of images, and a half-Sarazin,
would admit any image but that; but denied that to be an image or type of
Christ [ de fide l. 4. c. 14.] For Christ said not, this is the type of my
body, but it is it. But however this new question began to brand the words of
Type and Antitype, and the manner of speaking began to be changed, yet the
article as yet was not changed. For the Fathers used the words of Type and
Antitype, and Image etc. to exclude the natural sense of the Sacramental body;
and Damascen, and Anastasius Sinaita, and some others of that age began to
refuse those words, lest the Sacrament be thought to be nothing of reality,
nothing but an image. And that this really was the sense of Damascen, appears
by his words recited in the acts of the second council of Nice, affirming that
the divine bread is made Christ's body by assumption and inhabitation of the
Spirit of Christ, in the same manner as water is made the laver of
regeneration. But however they were pleased to speak in the Nicene assembly,
yet in the Roman edition of the Councels, the Publishers and Collectors were
wiser, and put on this marginal note: (...). The holy gifts are oftentimes
called types and figures even after consecration; particularly by In Apolog.
and orat. funebr. pro Gorg.
Greg. Naz. and Mystag. Catech 5.
S. Cyril of Jerusalem. I remember only one thing objected to this testimony
of so many bishops, that they were Iconoclasts or breakers of images, and
therefore not to be trusted in any other article. So Bellarmine (as I remember)
But this is just as if I should say that I ought to refuse the Lateran Council
because they were worshippers of Images, or defenders of Purgatory. Surely if I
should, I had much more reason to refuse their sentence, then there is that the
Greeks should be rejected upon so slight a pretense; nay for doing that which
for ought appears was in all their circumstances their duty in a high measure:
so that in effect they are refused for being good Christians. But after this,
it happened again that the words of type and image were disliked in the
question of the holy Sacrament, by the Emperor Charles the great, his Tutor
Alcuinus, and the assembly at Franckfort; but it was in opposition to the
Council of Constantinople that called it the true image of Christ's body, and of
the Nicene Council who decreed the worship of images; for if the Sacrament were
an image, as they of CP. said, then it might be lawful to give reverence and
worship to some images; for although these two Synods were enemies to each
other, yet the proposition of one, might serve the design of the other; but
therefore the Western doctors of that age, speaking against the decree of this,
did also mislike the expression of that: meaning that the Sacrament is not a
type or image, as a type is taken for a prefiguration, a shadow of things to
come, like the legal ceremonies, but in opposition to that is a body, and a
truth; yet still it is a Sacrament of the body, a mystery which is the same in
effect with that which the Fathers taught in their so frequent using these
words of Type etc. for 750 years together. And concerning this I only note the
words of Charles the Emperor Ep. ad Alcuinum after the Synod, Our Lord has
given the bread and the chalice in figura corporis sui and sui sanguinis, in
the figure of his body and blood. But setting the authority aside, for if these
men of CP. be not allowed, yet the others are, and it is notorious that the
Greek Fathers did frequently call the bread and wine (...), and the Latin
Fathers call them signs, similitudes, figures, types, images, therefore there
must be something pretended to stop this great outcry, and insupportable
prejudice of so great, so clear authority. After many trials; as that by
antitypes they mean exemplars, that it is only before consecration, not after,
and such other little devices, of which they themselves quickly grew weary; at
last the craftiest of them came to this, that the body of Christ under the
Species might well be said to be the sign of the same body and blood, as it
was on the cross; De Euch. l. 2. c. 15.
so Bellarmine; That Is the answer; and that they are hard put to it, you may
guess by the meannesse of the answer. For besides that nothing can be like it
self, Idem non est simile; the body, as it is under the Species, is glorified,
immortal, invisible, impassible, indivisible, insensible; and this is it which
he affirms to be the sign, Nemo est sui ipsius imago. S. Hilar. lib. de Synod.
Quod simile est non est illud cui est simile. S. Athanas. lib. contr. hypocr.
Meleti.
that is, which is appointed to signify and represent a body that was humbled,
tormented, visible, mortal, sensible, torn, bleeding, and dying; So that here
is a sign nothing like the thing signified, and an invisible sign of a
visible body, which is the greatest absurdity in nature, and in the use of
things, which is imaginable; but besides this, this answer, if it were a proper
and sensible account of any thing, yet it is besides the mark; for that the
Fathers in these allegations affirm that the Species are the signs, that is,
that bread and wine, or the whole Sacrament is a sign of that body, which is
exhibited in effect and Spiritual power: they dreamt not this dream; it was
long before themselves did dream it: they that were but the day before them,
having, as I noted before, other fancies. I deny not but the Sacramental body
is the sign of the true body crucified: but that the body glorified, should be
but a sign of the true body crucified, is a device fit for themselves to
fancy. To this sense are those words cited by Lombard and Gratian out of S.
Austin in the sentences of Prosper. Caro ejus est quam forma panis opertam in
Sacramento accipimus, sanguis quem sub specie vini potamus: Caro viz. carnis,
and sanguis sacramentum est sanguinis, carne and sanguine utroque invisibili
and intelligibili and spirituali significatur corpus Christi visibile plenum
gratiae and divinae majestatis. That is, It is his flesh which under the form
of bread we receive in the Sacrament, and under the form of wine we drink his
blood: Now that you may understand his meaning, he tells you this is true in
the Sacramental or Spiritual sense only; for he adds, flesh is the Sacrament of
flesh, and blood of blood; by both flesh and blood which are invisible,
intelligible, and Spiritual, is signified the visible body of Christ full of
grace and divine majesty. In which words here is a plain confutation of their
main article, and of this whimsy of theirs. For as to the particular, Ubi supra.
whereas Bellarmine says, that Christ's body real and natural is the type of
the body as it was crucified, S. Austin says, that the natural body is a type
of that body which is glorified, not the glorified body of the crucified. 2.
That which is a type, is flesh in a spiritual sense, not in a natural; and
therefore it can mean nothing but this, that the Sacramental body is a figure
and type of the real: De consecrat. d. 2. c. Hoc est quod.
(...). And this thing is noted by the Gloss of Gratian. Caro, i. e. species
carnis, sub qua latet corpus Christi etc. The flesh, that is, the Species of it
under which it lies are the Sacrament of the flesh. So that the being of a
Sacrament of Christ's body, is wholly relative to the Symbols, not to the body;
as if the body were his own sign and his own Sacrament.

Next to this heap of testimonies, Theodoret and Gelasius, Theodoret.
which though known in this whole question, yet being plain, certain and
unanswerable, relying upon a great article of the religion, even the union of
the two natures of Christ into one person without the change of substances,
must be as sacred and untouched by any trifling answer, as the article it self
ought to be preserved. The case was this: The Eutychian heretics denied the
natures of Christ to be united in one person, that is, they denied him to be
both God and Man, saying, Alphons. a Castro de haeres. Eutych.
his humanity was taken into his divinity after his ascension. The Fathers
disputing against them, say, the substances remain entire, though joined in the
person. The Eutychians said this was impossible. But as in the Sacrament the
bread was changed into Christ's body, so in the ascension was the humanity
turned into the divinity. To this Theodoret answers in a dialogue between the
Eutychians under the name of Eranistes and himself the Orthodox: Dial. 1. c. 8.
Christ honored the symbols and signs which are seen with the title of his
body and blood, not changing the nature, but to nature adding grace. The words
are not capable of an answer if we observe that he says there is no change
made, but only grace superadded; in all things else the things are the same.
And again: Dial. 2. c. 24.
For neither do the mystical signs recede from their nature; for they abide in
their proper substance, figure and form, and may be seen and touched etc. So
the humanity of Christ: and a little after: So that body of Christ has the
ancient form, figure, superscription, and (to speak the sum of all) the
substance of the body, although after the resurrection it be immortal and free
from all corruption: Now these words spoken upon this occasion, to this
purpose, in direct opposition to a contradicting person, but casting his
article wholly upon supposition of a substantial change, and opposing to him a
ground contrary to his, upon which only he builds his answer, cannot be eluded
by any little pretense. Bellarmine and the lesser people from him, answer, that
by nature he understands the exterior qualities of nature, such as color,
taste, weight, smell, etc. 1. I suppose this, but does he mean so by Substantia
too? (...)] Does he by substance mean accidents? but suppose that a while, yet
2. If he had answered thus, how had Theodoret confuted the Eutychians? For thus
says Eranistes, As the bread is changed in substance into the body of Christ,
so is the humanity into the divinity: yea but, says Theodoret according to
Bellarmine; The substance of bread is not changed; for the color, the shape,
the bigness and the smell remain: or thus, the accidents remain which I call
substance; for there are two sorts of substances; substances and accidents; and
this latter sort of substances remain; but not the former; and so you are
confuted, Eranistes. But what if Eranistes should reply, if you say all of
bread is changed excepting the accidents, then my argument holds: for I only
contend that the substance of the humanity is changed, as you say the substance
of bread is: To this nothing can be said, unless Theodoret may have leave to
answer as other wise men must. But now Theodoret answered, that the substance
of bread is not changed, but remains still, and by substance, he did mean
substance, and not the accidents; for if he had, he had not spoken sense.
Either therefore the testimony of Theodoret remains unsatisfied by our
adversaries, or the argument of the Eutychians is unanswered by Theodoret. 3.
Theodoret in these places opposes Nature to Grace, and says, all remains
without any change but of Grace. 4. He also explicates Nature by Substance, so
that it is a Substantial Nature he must mean. 5. He distinguishes substance
from form and figure, and therefore by substance cannot mean form and figure,
as Bellarmine dreams. 6 He affirms concerning the body of Christ, that in the
resurrection it is changed in accidents, being made incorruptible and immortal,
but affirms that the substance remains; therefore by substance, he must mean as
he speaks without any prodigious sense affixed to the word. 7. Let me observe
this by the way, that the doctrine of the substantial change of bread into the
body of Christ was the persuasion of the heretic, the Eutychian Eranistes, but
denied by the Catholic Theodoret; So that if they will pretend to antiquity in
this doctrine, their plea is made ready and framed by the Eutychian, from whom
they may, if they please, derive the original of their doctrine, or if they
please, from the elder Marcosites; but it will be but vain to think the
Eutychian did argue from thence, as if it had been a Catholic ground; reason
we might have had to suppose it, if the Catholic had not denied it. But the
case is plain: as the Sadduces disputed with Christ about the article of no
Spirits, no resurrection, though in the Church of the Jews the contrary was
the more prevailing opinion: so did the Eutychians upon a pretense of a
Substantial conversion in the Sacrament, which was then their fancy, and
devised to illustrate their other opinion: But it was disavowed by the
Catholics.

Gelasius was engaged against the same persons in the same cause, 31. Gelasius
de duabus naturis cont. Eutychetem and Nestorium.
and therefore it will be needful to say nothing but to describe his words For
they must have the same efficacy with the former, and prevail equally. Certe
Sacramenta etc. Truly the Sacraments of the body and blood of Christ which we
receive are a divine thing, for that by them we are made partakers of the
divine nature, and yet it ceases not to be the substance or nature of bread and
wine. And truly an image and similitude of the body and blood of Christ are
celebrated in the action of the mysteries. These are his words; concerning
which this only is to be considered, beyond what I suggested concerning
Theodoret; that although the word (...) in the Greek which we render
substantia, might be apt to receive diverse interpretations, though in his
discourse he confined it to his proper meaning (as appears above) yet in
Gelasius who was a Latin Author the word substantia is not capable of it: and I
think there is no example where substantia is taken for an accidental nature.
It may, as all other words can, suffer alterations by tropes and figures, but
never signify grammatically any thing but it self, and his usual
significations: and if there be among us any use of Lexicons or Vocabularies,
if there be any notices conveyed to men by forms of speech, then we are sure in
these things: and there is no reason we should suffer our selves to be outfaced
out of the use of our senses and our reason, and our language. It is usually
here replied, that Gelasius was an obscurer person, bishop of Caesarea and not
Pope of Rome, as is supposed. I answer, that he was bishop of Rome that writ
the book out of which these words are taken, is affirmed in the Bibliotheca PP.
approved by the Theological faculty in Paris 1576: and Massonius de Episcopis
urbis Rome, in the life of Pope Gelasius, says, that Pope John cited the book
de duabus naturis, and by Fulgentius it is so too. 2. But suppose he was not
Pope, that he was a Catholic bishop is not denied; and that he lived above a
1000 years ago; which is all I require in this business. For any other bishop
may speak truth, as well as the bishop of Rome; and his truth shall be of equal
interest and persuasion. But so strange a resolution men have taken to defend
their own opinions that they will, in despite of all sense and reason, say
something to every thing, and that shall be an answer whether it can or no.

After all this, Facundus bishop of Hermian in Africa in the year 552. in his
9th. book and last chapter written in defense of Theod. Mopsuest. etc. has
these words, The Sacrament of his body and blood, we call his body and blood:
not that bread is properly his body, or the cup his blood, but that they
contain in them the mystery of his body and blood. Isidore bishop of Sevil
says, Isidorus Hisp. l. 1. de offic. c. 18.
Panis quem frangimus etc. The bread which we break is the body of Christ, who
says, I am the living bread. But the wine is his blood, and that is it which
is written, I am the true vine. But bread, because it strengthens our body,
therefore it is called the body of Christ, but wine because it makes blood in
our flesh, therefore it is reduced or referred to the blood of Christ. But these
visible things sanctified by the holy Ghost pass into the Sacrament of the
divine body. Suidas in the word (...). Christ calls the Church his body; and by
her as a man he ministers; but as he is God he receives what is offered. But
the Church offers the symbols of his body and blood, sanctifying the whole
mass by the first fruits. Symbola, i. e. Signa, says the Latin version. The
bread and wine are the signs of his body and his blood. (...); so Suidas.
Hesychius speaking of this mystery affirms, L. 20. in Levit. c. 8.
Quod simul panis and caro est, It is both bread and flesh too. Fulgentius
says, Fulgentius.
Hic calix est novum Testamentum, i.e. Hic calix quem vobis trado, novum
Testamentum significat. This cup is the new Testament, that is, it signifies
it. (...) said Procopius of Gaza. In Genesis 49.
He gave to his disciples the image of his own body; (...), said the scholiast
upon Dionysius the Areopagite; In Eccles. hier. c. 3.
These things are symbols, and not the truth, or verity; and he said it upon
occasion of the same doctrine which his author (whom he explicates) taught in
that chapter; Dionys. Eccl. hier. c. 3.
(...) The divine symbols being placed upon the altar by which Christ is
signified and participated. But this only I shall remark, that
Transubstantiation is so far from having been the Primitive doctrine, that it
was among Catholics fiercely disputed in the time of Charles the bald, about
the year 880. Paschasius wrote for the Substantial conversion; Rabanus
maintained the contrary in his answer to Heribaldus, A.D. 880.
and in his writing to Abbat Egilo. There lived in the same time in the court
of Charles the Emperor, a countreyman of ours John Scot, called by some
Ioannes Erigena, who wrote a book against the substantial change in the
Sacrament; He lived also sometimes in England with King Alfred, and was
surnamed the wise, Apparat: tit. Johannes cognimento Sapiens.
and was a martyr says Possevinus, and was in the Roman Calender; his day was
the fourth of the Ides of November, as is to be seen in the Martyrologe
published at Antwerp 1586. But when the controversy grew public and noted,
Charles the bald commanded Bertram or Ratran to write upon the question, being
of the Monastery of Corbey: he did so, and defended our doctrine against
Paschasius: the book is extant, and may be read by him that desires it; but it
is so entire and dogmatical against the substantial change which was the new
doctrine of Paschasius, that Turrian gives this account of it, To cite Bertram,
1599. A D. 1571 Antwerp.
what is it else, but to say that Calvin's heresy is not new? and the Belgic
expurgatory Index professes to use it with the same equity which it uses to
other catholic writers, in whom they tolerate many errors and extenuate or
excuse them, and sometimes by inventing some device they do deny it and put
some fit sense to them when they are opposed in disputation, and this they do
lest the heretics should talk that they forbid and burn books that make
against them. You see the honesty of the men; and the justness of their
proceedings; But the Spanish expurgatory Index forbids the book wholly, with a
penitus auferatur.

I shall only add this, that in the Church of England, Bertrams doctrine
prevailed longer; and till Lanfrancks time it was permitted to follow Bertram
or Paschasius. And when Osbern wrote the lives of Odo Archbishop of Canterbury,
Dunstan, Osbernus vita Odonis.
and Elphege by the command of Lanfranck, he says, that in Odo's time, some
Clergy men affirmed in the Sacrament bread and wine to remain in substance, and
to be Christ's body only in figure; and tells how the Archbishop prayed, and
blood dropped out of the host over the chalice, and so his Clerks which then
assisted at Mass, and were of another opinion, were convinced. This though he
writes to please Lansranck (who first gave authority to this opinion in
England) and according to the opinion which then prevailed, yet it is an
irrefragable testimony that it was but a disputed article in Odo's time; no
Catholic doctrine, no article of faith, nor of a good while after: for however
these Clerks were fabulously reported to be changed at Odo's miracle who could
not convince them by the Law and the Prophets, by the Gospels and Epistles; yet
his successor, he that was the fourth after him, I mean Aelfrick Abbat of S.
Albans Capgrave calls him Abbat of S. Albans Malmesb. says, he was of
Malmesbury. A.D. 996.
and afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, in his Saxon homily written above
600 years since, disputes the question and determines in the words of Bertram
only for a Spiritual presence, not natural, or substantial. The book was
printed at London by John Day, and with it a letter of Aelfrick to Wulfin
bishop of Schirburn to the same purpose. His words are these: That housel,
(that is, the blessed Sacrament) is Christ's body, not bodily, but spiritually,
not the body which he suffered in, but the body of which he spoke, when he
blessed bread and wine to housel the night before his suffering, and said by
the blessed bread, This is my body. And in a writing to the Archbishop of York
he said, The Lord] halloweth daily by the hand of the Priest, bread to his
body, and wine to his blood in spiritual mystery as we read in books. And yet
notwithstanding that lively bread is not bodily so, nor the self same body that
Christ suffered in. I end this with the words of the Gloss upon the Canon law,
De consecrat. d. 2. Hoc est. Lugduni. 1518.
Coeleste Sacramentum quod vere repraesentat Christi carnem dicitur corpus
Christi, sed improprie, unde dicitur suo modo scil. non rei veritate, sed
significatimysterio, ut sit sensus, vocatur Christi corpus, i.e. significatur;
The heavenly Sacrament which truly represents the flesh of Christ, is called
the body of Christ; but improperly, therefore it is said (meaning in the Canon
taken out of S. Austin) after the manner, to wit, not in the truth of the
thing, but in the mystery of that which is signified; so that the meaning is,
it is called Christ's body, that is, Christ's body is signified; which the Church
of Rome well expresses in an ancient hymn: Sub duabus speciebus
Signis tantum and non rebus
Latent res eximiae.
Excellent things lie under the two species of bread and wine which are only
signs, not the things whereof they are signs. But the Lateran Council struck
all dead: before which, Transubstantio non fuit dogma fidei, said Scotus, it
was no article of faith; and how it can be afterward since Christ is only the
Author and finisher of our faith, and therefore all faith was delivered from
the beginning, is a matter of highest danger and consideration. But yet this
also I shall interpose, if it may do any service in the question or help to
remove a prejudice from our adversaries, who are borne up by the authority of
that Council; That the doctrine of Transubstantiation was not determined by the
great Lateran Council. The word was first invented by Stephen bishop of
Augustodunum, about the year 1100 or a little after, in his book De Sacramento
Altaris; and the word did so please Pope Innocentius 3. that he inserted it
into one of the 70 Canons which he proposed to the Lateran Council A. D. 1215.
which Canons they heard read, but determined nothing concerning them, as
Matthew Paris, Platina, and Nauclerus witness. But they got reputation by
being inserted by Gregory 9. into his Decretals, which yet he did not in the
name of the Council, but of Innocentius to the Council. But the first that ever
published these Canons under the name of the Lateran Council was Joannes
Cochlaeus A. D. 1538. But the article was determined at Rome 36 years after
that Council, by a general Council of 54 Prelates and no more. And this was the
first authority or countenance it had; Stephen christened the article, and gave
the name, and this Congregation confirmed it.

SECT. XIII. Of adoration of the Sacrament.
WHen a proposition goes no further then the head and the tongue, it can carry
nothing with it but his own appendages, viz. to be right or to be wrong, and
the man to be deceived or not deceived in his judgment: But when it has
influence upon practice, it puts on a new investiture, and is tolerable or
intolerable, according as it leads to actions good or bad. Now in all the
questions of Christendom nothing is of greater effect or more material event,
then this. For since by the decree of the Council of Trent Sess. 13. c. 5.
, they are bound to exhibit to the Sacrament the same worship which they give
to the true God, either this Sacrament is Jesus Christ, or else they are very
Idolaters; I mean materially such even while in their purposes they decline it.
I will not quarrel with the words of the decree commanding to give divine
worship to the Sacrament; Tantum ergo Sacramentum adoremus cernui. Hymn. in
Miss.
which by the definition of their own Schools is an outward visible sign of an
inward Spiritual grace, and so they worship the sign and the grace with the
worship due to God: But that which I insist upon, is this. That if they be
deceived in this difficult question, against which there lie such infinite
presumptions and evidence of sense, and invincible reason, and grounds of
Scripture, * and in which they are condemned by the primitive Church, * and by
the common principles of all Philosophy, and the nature of things, * and the
analogy of the Sacrament, * for which they had no warrant ever, till they made
one of their own, * which themselves so little understand, that they know not
how to explicateit, * nor agree in their own meaning, nor cannot tell well what
they mean * If I say, they be deceived in their own strict article, besides the
strict sense of which there are so many ways of verifying the words of Christ,
upon which all sides do rely; then it is certain they commit an act of Idolatry
in giving divine honor to a mere creature, which is the image, the Sacrament,
and representment of the body of Christ: and at least, it is not certain that
they are right; there are certainly very great probabilities against them which
ought to abate their confidence in the article; and though I am persuaded that
the arguments against them are unanswerable; for if I did not think so, then I
should be able to answer them, and if I were able to answer, I would not seek
to persuade others by that which does not persuade me; yet all indifferent
persons, that is, all those who will suffer themselves to be determined by
something besides interest and education, must needs say they cannot be certain
they are right, against whom there are so many arguments that they are in the
wrong: The Commandment to worship God alone is so express; The distance
between God and bread dedicated to the service of God is so vast, the danger of
worshipping that which is not God, or of not worshipping that which is God, is
so formidable, that it is infinitely to be presumed, that if it had been
intended that we should have worshipped the holy Sacrament, the holy Scripture
would have called it, God, or Jesus Christ, or have bidden us in express
terms to have adored it; that either by the first, as by a reason indicative,
or by the second as by a reason imperative we might have have had sufficient
warrant direct or consequent to have paid a divine worship. Now that there is
no implicit warrant in the Sacramental words of [This is my body] I have given
very many reasons to evince, by proving the words to be Sacramental and
figurative. Add to this; that supposing Christ present in their senses, yet as
they have ordered the business, they have made it superstitious and
Idololatrical; for they declare that the divine worship does belong also to the
symbols of bread and wine, as being one with Christ; they are the words of
Bellarmine; L. 4. de Euch. c. 29. Tom. 3. in 3. Thom. disp. 65. Sect. 1.
That even the Species also with Christ are to be adored; So Suarez: which
doctrine might upon the supposal of their grounds be excused; if, as Claudius
de Saints dreamed, they and the body of Christ had but one existence; but
this themselves admit not of, but he is confuted by Suarez. But then let it be
considered, that since those species or accidents are not inherent in the holy
body, nor have their existence from it, but wholly subsist by themselves, (as
they dream) since between them and the holy body there is no substantial, no
personal union, it is not imaginable how they can pass divine worship to those
accidents which are not in the body, nor the same with the body, but by an
impossible supposition subsist of themselves, and were proper to bread, and now
not communicable to Christ, and yet not commit idolatry: especially since the
Nestorians were by the Fathers called (...), or worshippers of a man, because
they worshipped the humanity of Christ, which they supposed, not to be
personally, but habitually united to the divinity.

But 2. thesi, and that the bread in consecration was changed as they suppose;
yet it is to be considered that that which is practicable in this article, is
yet made as uncertain and dangerous as before. For by many defects secret and
insensible, by many notorious and evident, the change may be hindered, and the
symbols still remain as very bread and wine as ever, and rob God of his honor.
For if the Priest erres in reciting the words of consecration, by addition, or
diminution, or alteration, or longer interruption; if he do but say, Hoc est
corpus meum, for corpus meum, or meum corpus for corpus meum, or if he do but
as the Priest that Agrippa tells of, that said, De vanit. Scient. c. 3.
Haec sunt corpora mea, lest consecrating many hosts he should speak false
Latin: if either the Priest be timorous surprised, or intemperate, in all these
cases the Priest and the People too, worship nothing but bread. And some of
these are the more considerable, I mean, those defectibilities in pronunciation
because the Priest always speaking the words of consecration in a secret voice
not to be heard. Council. Trid. Sess. 22. can. 9. Ledesmo ait Sacerdotem isto
Canone prohiberi clara voce eloqui verba consecrationis descriptor: quavis
lingua non legendis --
None of the people can have any notice whether he speaks the words so
sufficiently as to secure them from worshipping a piece of bread. If none of
all these happen, yet if he do not intend to consecrate all, but some and yet
know not which to omit, * if he do intend but to mock, * if he be a secret
atheist, * a Moor, * or a Jew, * if he be an impious person and laugh at the
Sacrament, * if he do not intend to do as the Church does, * that is, if his
intention be neither actual, nor real: then in all these cases the people give
divine worship to that which is nothing but bread; * But if none of all this
happen, yet if he be not a Priest, quod saepe accidit, says Pope Adrianus VI.
in quaest. quodlib. q. 3. it often happens that the Priest feigns himself to
celebrate, and does not celebrate, or feigns himself to celebrate and is no
Priest, * if he be not baptized rightly, * if there was in his person, as by
being Simoniac, or irregular, a bastard, or bigamus, or any other thing which
he can or cannot know of; if there was any defect in his baptism, or
ordinations, or in the baptism and ordination of him that ordained him, or in
all the succession from the head of the (...), from the Apostles that first
began the Series, in all these cases it cannot but be acknowledged by their own
doctrine, that the consecration is invalid and ineffective, the product is
nothing, but a piece of bread is made the object of the divine worship. Well!
suppose that none of all this happens, yet there are many defects in respect of
the matter also: as if the bread be corrupted, * or the wine be vinegar, * if
it be mingled with any other substance but water, * or if the water be the
prevailing ingredient, or if the bread be not wheat, or the wine be of sour or
be of unripe grapes, in all these cases nothing is changed; but bread remains
still, (...), mere bread and mere wine, and yet they are worshipped by divine
adoration.

3. Jesuits were to dye by the Laws of England in the beginning of King James
his reign; it was asked them, whether if they might have leave to say Mass,
they would to the people standing by, for the confirmation of their doubt and
to convert them, say these words, [unlesse this whole Species you see in the
chalice be the same blood which did flow out of the side of the Crucifix, or of
Christ hanging on the Cross, let there be no part for me in the blood of
Christ, or in Christ himself to eternal ages] and so with these words in their
mouths yield to death; They all denied it, none of them would take such a
Sacrament upon them. And when Garnet that unhappy man was tempted to the same
sense; he answered, that a man might well doubt of the particular. Vide
Bonavent. in 3. did. 24. a. 1. q. 1,
No man was bound to believe that any one Priest in particular, now, or at any
one certain time does consecrate effectively; But that the bread is
transubstantiated some where or other, at some time or other, Bishop Andrews
Resp. ad apolog. Bellar. p. 7.
by some Priest or other. This I receive from the relation of a wise Prelat, a
great and a good man, whose memory is precious, and is had in honor. But the
effect of this is, that Transubstantiation, supposing the doctrine true, (as it
is most false) yet in practice is uncertain; but the giving it divine worship
is certain; the change is believed only in general, but it is worshipped in
particular; concerning which, whether it be any thing more then bread, it is
impossible without a revelation they should know. These then are very ill; and
deeply to be considered; for certain it is, God is a jealous God, and therefore
will be impatient of every incroachment upon his peculiar. And then for us; as
we must pray with faith, and without doubting, so it is fit we should worship;
and yet in this case and upon these premises, no man can choose but doubt; and
therefore he cannot, he ought not to worship; Quod dubitas ne feceris.

4. I will not censure concerning the men that do it, or consider concerning
the action, whether it be formal idolatry or no. God is their Judge and mine,
and I beg he would be pleased to have mercy upon us all; but yet they that are
interested, for their own particulars ought to fear and consider these things.
1. That no man without his own fault, can mistake a creature so far, as to
suppose him to be a God. 2. That when the heathens worshipped the Sun and Moon,
they did it upon their confidence that they were Gods, and would not have given
to them divine honors if they had thought otherwise. 3. That the distinction
of material and formal idolatry though it have a place in Philosophy, because
the understanding can consider an act with his error, and yet separate the
parts of the consideration; yet it has no place in Divinity; because in things
of so great concernment it cannot but be supposed highly agreeable to the
goodness and justice of God, that every man be sufficiently instructed in his
duty and convenient notices. 4. That no man in the world upon these grounds,
except he that is malicious and spightful, can be an Idolater; for if he have
an ignorance great enough to excuse him, he can be no Idolater; if he have not,
he is spightful and malicious; and then all the heathens are also excused as
well as they. 5. That if good intent and ignorance in such cases can take off
the crime, then the persecutors that killed the Apostles thinking they did God
good service, and Saul in blaspheming the religion and persecuting the servants
of Jesus, and the Jews themselves in crucifying the Lord of life, who did it
ignorantly as did also their Rulers, have met with their excuse upon the same
account. And therefore it is not safe for the men of the Roman communion to
take anodyne medicines and narcotics to make them insensible of the pain; for
it will not cure their disease. Their doing it upon the stock of error and
ignorance I hope will dispose them to receive a pardon: But yet that also
supposes them criminal; And though I would not for all the world be their
accuser, or the aggravator of the crime, yet I am not unwilling to be their
remembrancer, that themselves may avoid the danger. For though Jacob was
innocent in lying with Leah in stead of Rachel, because he had no cause to
suspect the deception; yet if Penelope who had not seen Ulysses in 20 years
should see one come to her nothing like Ulysses, but saying he were her
husband, she should give but an ill account of her chastity if she should
actually admit him to her bed, only saying, if you be Ulysses, or upon
supposition that you are Ulysses, I admit you. For if she certainly admits him,
of whom she is uncertain if he be her husband, she certainly is an adulteress:
Because she having reason to doubt, ought first to be satisfied of her
question. Since therefore besides the insuperable doubts of the main article it
self, in the practice and the particulars there are acknowledged so many ways
of deception, and confessed that the actual failings are frequent (as I showed
before out of Pope Adrian) it will be but a weak excuse to say, I worship thee
if thou be the Son of God, but I do not worship thee, if thou be not
consecrated, and in the mean time, the divine worship is actually exhibited to
what is set before us. At the best we may say to these men, as our blessed
Savior to the woman of Samaria, Ye worship ye know not what; but we know what
we worship. For concerning the action of adoration, this I am to say, That it
is a fit address in the day of solemnity with a Sursum corda with our hearts
lift up to heaven, where Christ sits (we are sure) at the right hand of the
Father, for Nemo digne manducat nisi prius adoraverit, said S. Austin No man
eats Christ's body worthily, but he that first adores Christ. But to terminate
the divine worship to the Sacrament, to that which we eat, is so unreasonable
Vide Theodoret quaest. 55. in Genes. and q. 11. in Levit.
and unnatural, and withal so scandalous, that Averroes observing it to be
used among the Christians with whom he had the ill fortune to converse, said
these words. (...). Theodoret q. in Genesis q. 55.
Quandoquidem Christiani adorant quod comedunt, sit anima mea cum Philosophis.
Since Christians worship what they eat, let my soul be with the Philosophers.
If the man had conversed with those who better understood the article, and were
more religious and wise in their worshippings, possibly he might have been
invited by the excellency of the institution to become a Christian. But they
that give scandal to Jews by their Images, and leaving out the second
Commandment from their Catechismes, give offense to the Turks by worshipping
the Sacrament, and to all reasonable men by striving against two or three
Sciences and the notices of all mankind. We worship the flesh of Christ in the
mysteries (says S. Ambrose) as the Apostles did worship it in our Savior. De
Spir. S. l. 3. c. 12.
For we receive the mysteries as representing and exhibiting to our souls the
flesh and blood of Christ; So that we worship it in the sumption, and venerable
usages of the signs of his body. But we give no divine honor to the signs:
We do not call the Sacrament our God. And let it be considered; whether if the
Primitive Church had ever done or taught that the divine worship ought to be
given to the Sacrament, it had not been certain that the heathen would have
retorted most of the arguments upon their heads by which the Christians
reproved their worshipping of Images. The Christians upbraided them with
worshipping the works of their hands, to which themselves gave what figure they
pleased, and then by certain forms consecrated them and made by invocation (as
they supposed) a divinity to dwell there. They objected to them that they
worshipped that which could neither see, nor hear, nor smell, nor taste, nor
move, nor understand: that which could grow old and perish, that could be
broken and burned, that was subject to the injury of Rats, and Mice, of Worms
and creeping things, that can be taken by enemies, and carried away, that is
kept under lock and key for fear of Thieves and sacrilegious persons. Now if the
Church of those ages had thought and practiced as they have done at Rome in
these last ages, might not they have said, Why may not we as well as you? do
not you worship that with divine honors, and call it your God which can be
burnt, and broken, which your selves form into a round or a square figure,
which the Oven first hardens, and then your Priests consecrate and by
invocation make to be your God, which can see no more, nor hear, nor smell,
then the silver and gold upon our Images? Do not you adore that which Rats and
Mice eat, which can grow moldy, and sour, which you keep under locks and
bars, for fear your God be stolen? Did not Lewis the ninth pawn your God to the
Sultan of Egypt, insomuch that to this day the Egyptian escutcheons by way of
triumph bear upon them a pix with a wafer in it: True it is, that if we are
beaten from our cities, we carry our Gods with us; but did not the Jesuits
carry your Host (which you call God) about their necks from Venice in the time
of the Interdict? And now why do you reprove that in us which you do in your
selves? What could have been answered to them if the doctrine and accidents of
our time had furnished them with these or the like instances? In vain it would
have been to have replied; Yea but ours is the true God, and yours are false
gods. For they would easily have made a rejoinder; and said, that this is to be
proved by some other argument; in the mean time all your objections. against
our worshipping of Images, return violently upon you. Upon this account, since
none of the witty and subtle adversaries of Christianity ever did, or could
make this defense by way of recrimination, it is certain there was no occasion
given; and therefore those trifling pretenses made out of some sayings of the
Fathers pretending the practice of worshipping the Sacrament, must needs be
Sophistry, and illusion, and can need no particular consideration. But if any
man can think them at all considerable, L. 4. c. 4. de la Cene du Signeur.
I refer him to be satisfied by Mich. le Faucheur in his voluminous confutation
of Card. Perron. I for my part am weary of the infinite variety of argument in
this question; and therefore shall only observe this, that antiquity does
frequently use the words (...), venerable, adorable, worshipful to every thing
that ought to be received with great reverence, and used with regard: to
Princes, to Laws, to Baptism, to Bishops, to Priests, to the ears of Priests,
the Cross, the Chalice, the Temples, the words of Scripture, the Feast of
Easter; and upon the same account by which it is pretended that some of the
Fathers taught the adoration of the Eucharist, we may also infer the adoration
of all the other instances. But that which proves too much, proves nothing at
all.

These are the grounds by which I am my self established, and by which I
persuade or confirm others in this article.

I end with the words of the Fathers in the Council of CP. A. D. 745.
(...). Christ commanded the substance of bread to be offered, not the shape of
a man, lest Idolatry should be introduced.

Gloria Deo in excelsis:
In terris pax hominibus bonae voluntatis.
A CATALOGUE of some Books Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in
Ivie-lane, London.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament by Henry
Hammond D. D. in fol. The Practical Catechism, with all other English
Treatises of Henry Hammond D.D. in two volumes in 4o. Dissertationes quatuor,
quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and Primaeva Antiquitate adstruuntur,
contra sententiam D. Blondelli and aliorum. Authore Henrico Hammond. in 4o. A
Letter of Resolution of six Quaere's, in 12o.
The names of several Treatises and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor D.D. viz.
1. (...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundaies of the Year; Together with
a Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness, and Separation
of the Office Ministerial, in fol. 2. Episcopacy asserted, in 4o. 3. The
History of the Life and Death of the Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, 2d Edit. in
fol. 4. The Liberty of Prophesying, in 4o. 5. An Apology for authorized and
Set-forms of Liturgy; in 4o. 6. A Discourse of Baptism, its institution and
efficacy upon all Beleivers, in 4o. 7. The Rule and Exercises of holy living,
in 12o. 8. The Rule and exercises of holy dying, in 12o. 9. A short Catechism
for institution of young persons in the Christian Religion, in 12o.
Certamen Religiosum, or a Conference between the late King of England, and the
late Lord Marquis of Worcester concerning Religion, at Ragland Castle; Together
with a Vindication of the Protestant Cause, by Chr. Cartwright in 4o. The
Psalter of David, with Titles and Collects according to the matter of each
Psalm, by the Right honorable Chr. Hatton, in 12o. Boanerges and Barnabas, or
Judgment and Mercy for wounded and afflicted souls, in several Soliloquies, by
Francis Quarles, in 12o. The life of Faith in Dead Times, by Chr. Hudson in
12o. Motives for Prayer upon the seven days of the Week, by Sir Richard Baker
Knight, in 12o. The Guide unto True Blesledness, or a Body of the Doctrine of
the Scriptures, directing man to the saving knowledge of God, by Sam. Crook, in
12o. Six excellent Sermons upon several occasions, preached by Edward Willan
Vicar of Hoxne, in 4o. The Dipper dipped, or the Anabaptists duck'd and plunged
over head and ears, by Daniel Featly D. D. in 4o. Hermes Theologus, or a Divine
Mercury: new descants upon old Records, by Theoph. Wodnote, in 12o.
Philosophical Elements, concerning Government and Civil society: by Thomas
Hobbs of Malmesbury, in 12o, An Essay upon Statius, or the five first books of
Publ. Papinius Statius his Thebais, by Tho. Stephens Schoolmaster in S.
Edmonds-bury, in 8o. Nomenclatura Brevis Anglo-Latino Graeca in usum Scholae
Westmonasteriensis, per F. Gregory, in 8o. Grammatices Graecae Enchiridion in
usum Scholae Collegialis Wigorniae, in 8o. A Discourse of Holy Love, by Sir
Geo. Strode Knight, in 12o. The Saints Honeycomb full of Divine Truths, by
Rich. Gove Preacher of Henton S. Gorge in Somersetshire, in 8o. Devotion
digested, into several Discourses and Meditations upon the Lords most holy
Prayer: Together with additional Exercitations upon Baptism, The Lords Supper,
Heresies, Blasphemy, The Creatures, Sin, The souls pantings after God, The
Mercies of God, The souls complaint of its absence from God; by Peter Samwaies,
Fellow lately resident in Trinity College, Cambridge, in 12o. Of the Division
between the English and Romish Church upon Reformation, by Hen. Fern D. D. in
12o. Directions for the profitable reading of the Scriptures, by John White M.
A. in 8o. The Exemplary Lives and Memorable Acts of 9. the most worthy women of
the world, 3 Jews, 3 Gentiles, 3 Christians, by Tho. Heywood, in 4o. The Saints
Legacies, or a Collection of promises out of the Word of God, in 12o. Judicium
Universitatis Oxoniensis de Solemni Lega and Foedere, Juramento Negativo etc.
in 8o. Certain Sermons and Letters of Defense and Resolution to some of the
late Controversaries of our times by Jasper Main D. D. in 4o. Janua Linguarum
Reserata, sive omnium Scientiarum and Linguarum seminarium, Auctore Cl. Viro J.
A. Comenio, in 8o. A Treatise concerning Divine providence, very seasonable for
all Ages, by Tho. Morton Bishop of Duresme, in 8o. Animadversions upon Mr.
Hobbs his Leviathan, with some Observations upon Sir Walter Rawleighs History
of the World, by Alex. Rosse, in 12o. Fifty Sermons preached by that learned
and reverend Divine John Done, in fol. Wits-Common-wealth, in 12o. The Banquet
of Jests new and old, in 12o. Balzac's Letters the fourth part, in 8o. Quarles
Virgin Widow a Play, in 4o. Solomon's Recantation, in 4o. by Francis Quarles.
Amesii antisynodalia, in 12o. Christ's Commination against Scandalizers, by
John Tombs in 12o. Dr. Stuart's Answer to Fountain's Letter, in 4o. A Tract of
Fortifications, with 22 brass cuts, in 4o. Dr. Griffiths Sermon preached at S.
Paul's, in 4o. Blessed birthday, printed at Oxford, in 8o. A Discourse of the
state Ecclesiastical, in 4o. An Account of the Church Catholic where it was
before the Reformation, by Edward Boughen D.D. in 4o. An Advertisement to the
Jurymen of England touching Witches, written by the Author of the Observations
up-Mr. Hobbs Leviathan, in 4o. Episcopacy and Presbytery considered, by Hen.
Fern D.D. in 4o. A Sermon preached at the Isle of Wight before His Majesty, by
Hen. Fern D. D. in 4o. The Commoners Liberty or the English-mans Birthright,
in 4o. An Expedient for composing Differences in Religion, in 4o. A Treatise of
Self-denial, in 4o. The holy Life and Death of the late Vi-countesse Falkland,
in 12o. Certain Considerations of present Concernment: Touching this Reformed
Church of England, by Hen. Fern, in 12o. Englands Faithful Reprover and
Monitour, in 12o. A Contemplation of Heaven, together with an exercise of Love
and a Meditation upon the Prayer in the Garden, written by a Catholic
Gentleman.

