The Duke of Tyrconnel's SPEECH TO THE Garrison and Magistrates OF THE City of
LYMERICK, Upon Their late Debates, for the Surrender of the said Place.
Gentlemen,
I Thought fit to Order your Attendance, and to give you my Sentiments upon the
present State of Affairs; and as it is a matter of great Consequence, so (assure
your selves) I am not precipitately carried into these my last Resolutions, but
have consulted both my Reason and my Honor, how far they are consistent with
such Resolves, together with the Nature of our Unhappy Master's declining Cause.

I am satisfied (Gentlemen) of your Loyalty and Bravery, and could yet wish (if
it were not too late) That there was a Proper Subject to employ 'em upon; I
mean not altogether so hazardous and desperate as This we are involved in; and
I hope I may use a Soldiers Freedom, and yet modestly affirm, That I have no
way betrayed my Commission, or acted unworthy my Trust, by a Mismanagement of
it; but have discharged every Post and Station I have past through, both as to
my Employ in France, and these late Revolutions; which last, (though not so
successful as the former) cannot with Justice be attributed to the Defects of
my Conduct.

It is not unknown to some of you, how the Calumny of some Persons (who
perhaps, had more of Envy than Loyalty) Summoned my Attendance at the Court in
England; where my Sincerity to our Religion and Liberties appeared so
Conspicuous, that instead of receiving a Check for my Actions, I returned with
greater Honor, and was made Lord Deputy of this Kingdom, where I so managed
Concerns, (I wish I could say, with as great Success as Loyalty) that my Royal
Master was very well satisfied, especially in sending him over a Supply of well
Disciplined Forces, to assist him against the [falsly stil'd] Invasion in 1688;
for now it plainly appears an Act of Heaven: Providence oftentimes ordering
Affairs against the Determinations of Humane Prudence; and 'twas no common
Change of Fate that attended the immediate Abdication, yet under all that
Misfortune, my Loyalty stood firm and unmoved; nor could the falling Crown
diminish my Duty, although it was enough to shock a Common Loyalist. -- My
Seizing Towns and Forts, my Disciplining you in the Honorable Art of War,
(when England called me Rebel for it) my bolder Loyalty and Zeel; nor would I
showed my Sword for England's Declarations, believing that perfidious,
Self-designing Monarch of France, was real in his Preten^ions to our Unhappy
Abdicated Master; especially when he first sent the Marquess du Pont, to know
the State of our Affairs, in order (as was pretended) to assist and
re-establish him in his Throne; but it appears, (by taking a View of the late
Measures) that 'twas his own Grandeur, and not a Princely Pity, or a Rightful
Justice that was the Motive. Nor has the Fate of Monsieur St. Ruth, (whose
Cruelty and Ambition every one knew) give a fairer Testimony, if we may be
allowed to make any Judgment of Causes by Effects for it looks a Natural piece
of Justice, that such Cruelty and Treachery as he used to some Parties in
France, should be repaid by their Brethren here in Ireland; only here is the
difference, That he treated them with base Massacres, and they him with an
Ho^nourable Death in the Field.

I might add, That some, (if not all) of you are sensible that in one of the
Councils called in Dublin, I gave 'om to understand, That we were threatened
from England, at branded with the Odium of Traitors, if we proceeded; That we
owned only K.J. who sent (...) no such Orders; That we had Promises of Supplys
from France; That we should have O^^ Royal Master's Presence with us speedily.
-- I also gave 'em Notice, That we had Seize the Protestants Effects, and yet
wanted a greater Fund; That we must borrow from our selve to serve the King,
and the Catholic Cause; That Unity of Mind was necessary; and That (...)
Master's Rights, Misfortunes, Commands, and Religion, ought to challenge our
Care, and e^deavour in order to a Retrieve.

But I mention not this (Gentlemen) to boast of my Services, which would be
ver^ Ridiculous, in these reduced Circumstances: But to Convince you, that
there is no Misfortune, -- wherein there could be the least hope of regaining
our declining Privilege which could make me desist my Endeavors, even from our
first Losses before Land0^ Derry, to the last Overthrow we received at Aghrim,
and the Surrender of our only ^^cruiting Sea port of Gallaway; whereby all
Communication of Assistance was cut off, a^^ now we have but a handful of Men
to oppose a Numercus, Victorious Army. And yet con'd still lead on our little
Strength, and hope for Victory, if we had only Flesh an Blood to Engage; But
now we must expect to struggle with Famine, and fruitless Exp^ctation of
further Relie^: Nor is there any avoiding these Miserys at home, if we consult
ho^ little our Dependancies must be from abroad, What shall we say about the
Election an^ Inauguration of Pope Innocent the XIIth, which is yet a deeper
stab to our Cause? Ki^^ Lewis, if he would be real to our Royal Master, has now
enough to do to secure himse^^ The Concluding Treaty betwixt the Turk and
Emperor; the Quieting of Scotland; an^ our own Losses at the Boyne, Athlone,
etc. together with our present Circumstance have no promising Indications of
Hope or Liberty: And what is yet more than all this by our Obstinacy we seem to
fight against Heaven, who (in such a peculiar manne^ Blesses both the Cause and
Arms of their present Victorious Majesty's of England, by happ^ Reformation of
Manners at Home, and Successes Abread: So that my last Resolves a^^ To Submit
upon as Honorable Terms as can be got; and I am yet farther fixed in this my
R^solution, by the Advices sent me from Monsieur Dussone, late Governor of
Gallaw^^ who has also Submitted, and obtained for them that were with him, the
Benefit of the Lords Justices Proclamation, which gives them their Estates and
Liberties.

Gentlemen, I thought it convenient to mention these things to you; and I hope
you will follow my Example, and Advice, and make use of your Interest in
persuading (...) under you to a general Resignation to Their Majesty's, by
laying hold of the Proclam^tion, whereby you will divert the Misery of a Siege,
and prevent the Effusion of more Blood; for it is no longer a prudent Valor,
but an inconsiderate Rashness to be Obst^nate.sAnd now (Gentlemen) I think
nothing remains, but that we use our Reason in this Extremity, by consulting
what Terms and Proposals may be made before (...) too late. These are my
Sentiments of things, as they now stand. Your Advice an^ Counsel is only
wanting, and in my Opinion, it is necessary you come to a speedy Determination,
whilst there is opportunity to do it; for it is in vain to think, that We on^^
can prescribe Laws to Necessity, or the established Designs of Heaven, about the
Revolutions (...) Crowns and Kingdoms.

Printed at Lymerick, for A. Weston: And Reprinted at London, from the
Original, 1691.


