The twelve WONDERS OF ENGLAND, BEING A most strange and wonderful Relation of
the Death of Mr. Parrey, an Innkeeper, living at the sign of the Bell at
Temple Bar;

And the manner how twelve Serpents were voided from him a little before his
Death on Thursday last, some having Heads like Toads and Horse, and others like
Neuts and Dogs, to the great admiration of all that shall read the ensuing
subject.

Together with a Narrative of his Life and Death, his Memento and Character to
all Christians; and other memorable Examples o^ most strange and wonderful
Prodigies.

London, Printed for G. HORTON, 1655.

crude woodcut of a lion Behold. The. Wondars of. This. Age



The twelve WONDERS Of this AGE
Being a most strange and true Relation of the voiding of 12 ugly and monstrous
Serpents by Mr. Parey, Master of the Bell Inn^ncer Temple bar, a little before
his death, with a Narrative of his Life and Conversation.

BEfore the destruction of Sodom and Gomorra, sundry strange Prodigies, and
Comments were seen, as if the heavens, privy to impendent effects, had by their
mystical character revealed a prodigy was in breeding; for in the year that
Nero was adopted by Claudius, there appeared three Suns. And in the time of a
great Pestilence in Germany, Serpents bred in the dead bodies of men and women,
so that they could hardly ^eburied: But in these our days a strange example of
a wonderful Prodigy has fallen out near Temple Bar, where one Mr. Parrey,
Master of the Bell-Inn in Bell yard, near Temple Bar, having for some certain
time been extremely troubled with a pain in the belly, and a great noise or
hiffing, as he conceived, would oftentimes desire his friends and neighbors to
hearken and give ear, whether or no they could hear any thing; they answered,
no: Then he desired that Mr Cook the Physician might be sent for, which was
accordingly done and after some converse together, he advised Mr. Parrey to
betake himself to a course of Physic, which was observed for some few days;
but about the 30. of July he began to be extreme illy; at which time he went to
stool, where he voided twelve Serpents, one having a head like a horse, another
headed like a Toad, a third like a Greyhound, a fourth like a Talbot: all which
had several distinct heads, though extremely deformed, but died immediately
after they came from him: some were at the least a handful long; others about
half a handful, and some shorter: They were somewhat of a dark color when they
were voided; they had no great scent, but a kind of an earthly smell; and were
preserved for some time with the spirits of Wine, diverse Gentlemen of great
worth coming to see them: Nay more, it is credibly reported, that they were
oftentimes heard to croak like Frogs in his belly, and to make such a hideous
noise, that after they crawled from him, the sight thereof struck great
admiration to the Beholders.

Indeed, it is a thing so strange and wonderful, that it surpasse^ sundry
Prodigies in former Ages, and cannot be paralleled in these lat^er Times; and
the rather, by reason he was a Gentleman of singular good life and
conversation, and of good repute and worth: He made a very godly, p^ous, and
Christian end, and departed this life on Thursday the second of August, leaving
a gallant Memento and Character to all Christians.

But again, I am info^med by a Ge tleman and friend of Mr. Parreys, that the
Cause and ^ffects of what is before specified, were only co^ge^led blood,
ingendered in a bladder, and occasioned by a ^all from his horse; to th^s I can
say little; but th^^ is truth and proceeded from the same tongue, that Mrs
Parrey kept these things from Saturday till Monday and then Mr. Cook carried
them home to his own house, where many Gentlemen and Ladie^ of great worth
resorted, to behold so strange an Object.

And to instance somewhat further of the strange Examples of wonderful
prodigies, give me leave to insist somewhat further, and present you with a
most remarkable and memorable passage, which happened before the last destruction
of Jerusalem (which calamity befell the Jews, for crucifying the Lord of Life,
and contemning his Gospel) a Comet, in the likeness of a fiery sword, hung over
the City for a year together. Also, at the Feast of the Passover a great light
appeared about the Altar at midnight, which continued half an hour. Also a Cow
that was led to be sacrificed at the Altar brought sorth a Lamb; and the inward
Gate of the Temple which was made of massy brass, and used to have twenty men
to shut it, being fastened with Locks and bars of Iron, at the fifth hour of
the night opened of its own accord. Also a little before Sunset were seen in
the air iron Chariots, and an army in battel-array as it were begirting the
City.

At the Feast of Pentecost the Priest going into the Temple, felt the place to
move, and tremble, and a voice was heard saying, Let us go hence to Pella. Also
one Jesus the son of Anazaus, 80 years before the war began, went up and down
continually crying; A voice from the East, a voice against Jerusalem, and the
Temple: a voice against new married persons; a voice against this people. Nay
more, before the terrible Wars between the Britains, and Romans in Neros time,
the seas between Britain, and France, at the full tide did overflow of a
bloody color, and at low water the prints of men's bodies were seen upon the
bare sand at the mouth of the Thames.

This is a thing so observable, that the like has not been heard of these many
hundreds years, and so remarkable, that the College of Physicians had an
earnest desire to have had him opened, and then to have embalmed his Corpse; but
his wife would not condescend thereunto upon no terms, although great
satisfaction mighty have occurred thereupon: for indeed the thing being so
remarkable, it would have left such a Memento to future Posterity, that the
most ancient Records cannot parallel it. Here we might treat a little by way of
Comment, but we shall decline the way, as false Astronomy, being not yet in
utter darkness, though the Sun be set; for the star beaming-influene proves all
those Rules excentrick, and Apocryphal.

FINIS.

