MODERATION: OR ARGUMENTS and MOTIVES tending thereunto, Humbly tendered to the
Honorable MEMBERS of PARLIAMENT.

As also indifferently calculated for common consideration.

Together with a brief Touch of the reputed German Anabaptists, AND Munster
Tragedy.

By S. T.

Let your moderation be known unto all men, the Lord is at hand. Phil 4. 5.
Should thou not also have had compassion on thy fellow servants, even as I
had pity on thee? Matthew. 18 33. Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge
amongst you. Let him show out a good conversation his works with meekness of
wisdom. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality, without hypocrisy. James 3. 13, 17. In revenge of injuries, he is
the loser that gers the better. Basil. Henry the fourth of France was wont to
say,That he made all the days of such Golden, who had most offended him, that
so the Lead of their Fault might be darkened by the Gold of his Goodness. Vid.
Traps Comment. on Romans 12. 21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with
good. LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, dwelling in Aldersgate Street, next door
to the Sign of the Peacock. 1660.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
FOr the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart: but though the
breaches of England (in Church and State) are very many, and, indeed great, yet
how few do seriously, with a right spirit, lay them to heart, mourn in secret,
search the causes indifferently on all hands, study the Remedies, apply Balm
and Oil, and cry mightily unto almighty God for help and healing, without whom,
in vain is the help of man? But in stead hereof men are supine, senseless,
touching common danger and Christian duty; or otherwise, some with virulency,
others with vanity, rejoicing in uncovering their neighbors nakedness,
triumphing and sporting themselves over others sins and sorrows, thereby
widening our breaches, adding fuel to the fire, augmenting the sin and shame
of our Nation, and rendering its miserable wounds more incurable. All which, as
by words, so by vicious and luxuriant Pamphlets, issuing from violent passions,
humor, faction, others from filthy frothiness with which the City and Nation
is pestered at this day, as with a contagious corrupted air: which shows,
that through our long intestine discords and animosities (especially those
among the Godly of all persuasions, for which I desire more to mourn) Religion
wants cherishing, which subdues the exorbitant lusts of men, Irreligion and
Atheism begins to overgrow us, and the fear of God, and the power of Godliness
is brought to a very low ebb in the world, to the dishonor of God and his
Gospel, the damage of all sorts, and the great detriment and hazard of the
Reformed Protestant cause among us.

Do not these things call aloud for earnest endeavors of peace and unity,
especially and primarily among the orthodox and Godly, which will never be
effected, without moderation, and that indifferently on every hand, whereby
each may modestly retain their different apprehensions in lesser matters, yet
affectionately and mutually submit and condescend in the fear of God, so as to
pity each others infirmities, and jointly amitably strive together (in Gods
way) for the faith and holiness of the Gospel, against gross delusions and
profaneness, which both abound among us. As my own temper tells me, so my
knowledge of the disposition of many of those called Independents, Anabaptists,
etc. persuades me, that such a closure is attainable: wherein others
discompliance hinders, let that with the issues of it be on them, mean while
I think this a fit opportunity humbly to express my thoughts which are not new:
that the interest of all these equally, with the interest of Religion among
all, lies in mutual moderation. Wherein I have missed it, or been defective in
this short Essay upon some few particulars now in question, I crave pardon of
the sober and judicious, but not of the censuring captious spirit of this Age,
that delights to fish in troubled waters, and to whom moderation is a crime.
The grave Orator suspected that he had spoken something amiss, when at the end
he heard the lauding acclamations of the vulgar: and our Savior pronounces a
Woe to him of whom all men speak well: wherefore not valuing this, I thought it
my duty at this time to speak, though I should do little more than audibly
pronounce the [Word] moderation, yet I should have been glad some abler
precursor might have forestalled, anticipated me in my desired retirement.

If my concessions of the faults of any are beyond their own convictions, I
hope they will be satisfied that none will think that I should be able to speak
for others so well as they for themselves, nor is it fit for me to speak my
utmost, because of brevity and inoffensiveness. Finally, for my part I neither
design nor desire the advance of any of my opinion above others, but only that
moderation in Phil. 4. 5. as it is rendered in our English Annotations, Equity
or equal carriage toward all, which is the undoubted way to beal all our
breaches, and make us yet an honorable and happy Nation, among whom God may
yet delight to dwell.

January 23. 1659. Which is the desire, prayer, and poor endeavor of S. T.

Moderation, or Arguments and Motives tending thereunto, Humbly tendered to the
Honorable MEMBERS of PARLIAMENT.
IT was the saying of a Counselor to James the fifth of Scotland, (as a
Preludium to his Argument for Moderation) [That it was then their happiness,
the meanest Subject might freely speak unto their Sovereign.] Yet do I not
adventure to speak to you as a Collective Body in your Sovereign State, but in
an individual personal capacity, as Members thereof. Pardon therefore my humble
boldness, that in this way, and upon this occasion and subject I address my
self to your Honors, being the more induced by that prudent Dictate of Francis
Lord Verulam, That the wisest Princes need not think it any diminution to their
greatness, nor derogation to their sufficiency to hearken to, and rely upon
counsel. The Argument and subject treated of will (I am sure) apologize for it
self: meekness, temperance, and moderation being such virtues, that (whether
natural, moral, or spiritual) are highly accepted of God, approved of men, and
against which there is no Law, Gal. 5. 23. Never any Age or Nation needed it,
and groaned under the defect thereof more than this. Were it more in the
hearts, tongues, and pens of men of all sorts among us, England might be as
happy a People as any under Heaven; which now being a Nation sadly divided
against it self cannot bear up long in this epidemical Distemper, (without a
speedy Remedy) from sinking into ashes. where there is biting and devouring one
of another, (by secret whispers, evil surmises, harsh interpretings, and paper
incendiaries,) it tends to a consuming one of another, and making us a public
scorn, reproach; Gal. 5. 15.
yea a prey to Domestic and foreign enemies.

Our malady then is manifest, as also the mortal and pernicious tendency
thereof: all sorts of men concentre and agree in this, that animosities and
devisions are our disease and will undo us. And why might not all as easily
agree in the remedy? which when all is done will be found to be Moderation.

The crushing of this Sect, and the violent subduing of that sort, which many
hot and hasty spirits cry out for, as that which will mend all, would prove a
remedy worse than the disease, tempting and provoking every man (judging his
own opinions right, and his right to be free from others imposing) to lift up
his hand against his neighbor, and render our wound more incurable. I cannot
here forbear citing that passage of a very learned man, It was (says he) a
notable observation of a wise Father, and no less ingenuously confessed, [That
those which held and persuaded pressure of consciences were commonly interessed
therein themselves, for their own ends.]

Religion and Reason, the Spirit of Christ and the Gospel should rather be
hearkened unto, who all offer and usher in this remedy of Moderation, so that
it needs not any Epistle of commendation. And, did we strive to approve our
selves Christians, we should strive who should excel in this virtue and work.
How can this be put in use, without some Public Phisicians of value to be as
Hee-goats before the flock, leading Moderators? And who should be the
Moderators in these our public discords, but you our Senators? and where
should you begin with Moderation, if not at your own hearts and house, in the
cases depending before you concerning Military Officers and other Gentlemen who
have acted in your Interval.

Surely the more cordial, voluntary and extensive, you are herein, the more
honorable: and I hope it may not be construed as a limiting or prescribing to
propose, that now it may be written upon you in legible characters, so as to be
read and known to all men.

Though this proposal come from an obscure person, yet it is from one
uninterested, and who among others of your Subjects did disgust and ill resent
the Act of your late interruption, with all the preceding occasions thereof;
hoping your recession (which is now effected) might most effectually tend to
our common safety and settlement: which, as it is my desire and prayer (with
submission to the will of God) so that my endeavors may be somewhat conducing,
I humbly propose these few following healing considerations.

And although it be but a mite, and like the Goats-hair to the public work of
the Tabernacle, yet its offered not with any willingness to go beyond my line
or sphere, nor presumption to be wiser than my teachers, and therefore hope I
shall not hereby make my self a p^ey: as I do it with much submission, so
without the least intent (God knows) of imputation or evil reflection on any
hand, that may any way interfere with my present aim of Moderation, in order to
which I humbly offer.

Sect. 1.
That humility is the direct and only way to honor, Prove. 18. 12. It is a
badge of honor in it self, and in the acceptance of men, the path ordained of
God, and pointed out with his finger to be blessed with that which is truly
honor, rooted in the inward affections and estimations of men. This is applied
as adapting for the great work in your hands, which is to deliver the Island,
Job 22. 29, 30. God has stained the pride of many public persons in this
Nation, showing himself to be above them. Wherefore having by a strange
providence once more invested you with power, Behold the goodness and severity
of God, and be not high minded but fear, Romans 11. 20, 22. God sits with an
inspicious eye among the Gods, who shall dye like men, and shall fall like one
of the Princes, [or like other Princes] Psalm. 82. 7. When Ephraim spoke
trembling, he exalted himself in Israel, Hos. 13. 1. but when he did otherwise
he dyed, like as Nebuchadnezzar for his loftiness was sent seven years grazing
among the Brutes, till he had learned to acknowledge that God ruled in the
Kingdoms of men, and pulled down and set up whom it pleased him.

Sect. 2.
Nor is Humility so excellent, but that Meekness, Mercy and Clemency (whether
reckoned concomitants or fruits thereof) they do bear an excellent proportion
with it, to the adorning of them in whom they are found. What greater argument
then that they are in the sight of God of great price? who has therefore
instructed Rulers, that its their glory to pass over a transgression, Prove. 19.
11, 12. And the throne shall be established, as by righteousness, so by mercy,
Prove. 20. 28. But without mercy, such shall have judgment without mercy, Jam.
2. 13.

This is the more magnified and thank-worthy, by how much there is an opinion
of advantage and opportunity for the contrary, and indeed this is most like God
himself, the similitude and imitation of whom is one principal reason why
Rulers are called Gods, who in this should be public patterns and examples to
the world, and especially in this iron age and Nation.

Sect. 3.
Nor are those virtues more worthy, valuable, venerable, then excessive anger,
wrath, revenge are the contrary. A precipitant spirit will never hit the mark,
nor do the business. Examples are infinite, that it has carried to such
actions and issues in haste, by changing times, persons, laws, as has been
repented of at leisure, proving unretractable, beyond first intentions or
expectations: God would make the passionate Prophet Elijah know, that he was
not in the whirlwind, nor in the thunder, but in the still and soft voice.

And when the Disciples would needs have had fire from heaven upon those who
followed not with them, our Savior instructs them in the same lesson, [You
know not (says he) what spirit you are of.]

And above all does it least become grave Senators to do any thing in rage and
rashness, witness that remarkable example of good Moses, Psalm. 106. 32, 33.
That albeit its only noted he spoke unadvisedly with his lips, and although the
people angered him, and [they] provoked his spirit, yet it went ill with Moses
for [their] sakes: this one hasty, angry act, judicially divested him of his
dignity, occasioned his fall and death in the wilderness, and missing Canaan.

And although rigor and severity may sometimes be termed justice, and done for
security from like actions; yet there is need of care, that revenge be not in
the root, nor yet Lextalionis the rule of such proceedings, nor rigor to be
used in all cases till favor has been tried to effect the same just end, for
the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, Jam. 1. 20.

Sect. 4.
An opinion of some kind of victory and conquest, may have a potent influence
to screw up the minds of men to a more then ordinary rigor toward the
conquered, either in order to their own triumph, or their suppression: may it
not be said, as St. Paul in another case? such glorying is not good; and Events
have oft-times proved it so.

Charron tells us not untruely, the greatest conquest in the world is that of a
man's self, gaining Government and dominion over his own passions and
affections: and Solomon avoucheth it, that he that rules his spirit is better
than the mighty, and does more than he that takes a City, Prove. 16. 32. Had
Alexander done this one exploit, it would have rendered his name more worthy
than his conquest of the world: As it did that Heathen King, who in his tont
hearing one of his own Soldiers without in the Camp reproaching him, only bid
him go further off, lest the King should hear him. Such forgiving and passing
over injuries (says one well) shows a According to Eccles. 7. 21, 22.
mind planted above them and beyond their reach: Many Princes, not thus
conquering themselves in the way of their Passions, have soon, and before they
have been aware, vanquished themselves in the way of their Interest. Governors
and Government being ordained of God to curb the exorbitant lusts of men,
should begin at home, and not suffer any thing in themselves to swell beyond
the regiment of Reason and Moderation.

I shall conclude this Section with a passage of a wise man in like case, Its
an assured sign of a worthy and generous spirit whom honor amends; for honor
is or should be the place of virtue: and as in nature things move violently to
their place: so do they move calmely in their place, so let it be with you.

Sect. 5.
The consideration of Vicissitude I conceive not unseasonable nor impertinent
in this matter; nothing being more notoriously obvious in our days, then that
all things under the Sun are subject to changes and mutations. This makes one
say pithily, All knowledge is but remembrance. Another, All novelty is but
oblivion: agreeable to Salom, there is nothing new: the moral of all is this;
that seeing all things are in Eccles. 3. 15.
a tickle tottering revolving posture, and that Government and Governors are
subject to flux and reflux: moving too and fro: running the circle as much as
any other things, that therefore nothing be done upon an opinion, that the
mountain is so strong that it cannot be removed.

That which is a daily object to the eye, should be daily in the mind: that
that spoak of the wheel that is now up, is by and by down again.

As this observation made the vanquished King rejoice when he was drawing the
Chariot of his Conqueror, because it showed him a possibility of
readvancement, so should it make others in prosperity humbly fear, in order to
their judging as they would be judged, and meting Math 7. 1, 2. Judges 1. 7.
that measure unto others they would should be measured to them again, to
provoke to which, Adonibezek is a pregnant example, and that Emperor upon whom
that observation aforesaid had such an influence.

Neither is it enough to look at the outward wheels, but also at the wheel of
Gods Providence within the wheels, Ezekiel. 1. 16. this tends to moderate the
heart under all changes, and puts upon enquiry what God teaches by every turn.
Thus David, not terminating his observation upon Shimei that cursed him, but
elevating his mind above the instrument, says, It may be the Lord sent him to
curse me this day, 2 Samuel 16. 9, 10, 11. and thereupon forbore to punish him,
though by many about him he was earnestly incited thereunto.

Contrariwise the King of Assyria, Isa. 10. 9, 10, 11. reckoning and accompting
himself above all providential vicissitude, boasts thus, Is not Calno as
Charchemish? is not Hamath as Arpad? is not Samaria as Damascus? as I have done
unto Samaria and her Idols, shall I not do unto Jerusalem and her Idols? not
considering the stern of all affairs to be in Gods hand, and that he was now
to deal with Gods people, whom though under sin, yet God would not utterly
forsake. It greatly alters the case when we deal with good men though supposed
erring, yea though really erring.

Sect. 6.
Shall I crave leave to pass from these premised Generals to somewhat more
particular relating to the reputed fault of those who are now undermost: who
are of two sorts, either such who acted in the Interruption, or such who only
acted in some public affairs in the Interval of the Parliament.

First, not to espouse or justify the fact of interrupting, nor yet to
intermeddle with the causes or occasions of jealousies and offenses, real or
supposed, given or taken any way: yet I hope I may without offense tenderly
touch the circumstances, being simply in order to my aim of Moderation.

To go no farther back then that Act of Parliament made October. 12. Let it first
be supposed thereupon, that the Officers of the Army did account of themselves
as harshly and severely dealt withal, by the said Act, Vacating so many
Commissions, Altering so greatly the Conduct of the Army, Ejecting nine of the
old considerable Officers: yet do I not hereupon say they should do as they
did, put a force upon the house: such cases are very tender. Its a received
maxim, the best Counsels may err; yet Parliaments are the highest Counsels
(though some judged this not to be so.) And therefore although the Officers
might think and revolve in their minds, that they were lately instruments of
introducing this Parliament to a resession, though not giving the^ the right,
yet the opportunity of sitting, that they had served them faithfully, and
lately against their enemies both old and new, that they were free from all
fore intentions of force toward the Parliament; according to the jealousies
they deemed unduely conceived of them, that they feared the altering of the
conduct of the Army might tend to destroy the only outward sense against the
old repated enemy, by a gradual change of the whole, and thereby in a little
time endanger their common cause. All these and more such like considerations
might have been in a fair and submissive way tendered to an uninterrupted
house, with a desire of a favorable hearing, and then submitted to their final
judgment: but such a hearing not being fore provided and preproposed, and they
dispairing of obtaining it, by observing the preparations made, and making for
the forcible and present execution of the said act, and supposing ill
consequences to their cause, as well as persons, might and would ensue, (as
has by them been alleged) did thus proceed to put it upon the issue of an
Interruption. How far this fact was faulty, is not now a season to aggravate,
nor yet how far in any respects it might be venial. I submit the whole thus
stated to the remembrance of all persons any way concerned, to make the best
inprovement thereof to Moderation, save only (not to judge the Parliaments Act
and Judgment, yet were it not beyond the season I might humbly offer) that it
was the sober opinion of not a few at that time, that such a hearing of those
Officers aforesaid, might probably without any inconveniency have produced and
preserved a good understanding, and prevented all the evils supposed ensuing
the defect thereof: how far this may be argumentative now to Moderate, I only
mention it, and submit it.

Sect. 7.
But may there not be many things fit for after consideration tending hereunto?
admit the fact Exorbitant, yet may not their ends therein be public, just and
good, and not sinister private nor injurious unto any? that there may be good
intentions, where there may be obliquity in some prosecuting actions, is a
thing indubitable; to believe they were such here, by those who know the
persons well, is I think groundedly charitable; to insist upon ends and
designs, to that use and end for which I urge them, will I suppose in the close
be judged reasonable.

That then they did not do this from revenge, nor aspiring after sole
Government, or domination, nor being unwilling to be subject so they might be
safe, much less out of any intent to subvert the Magistracy or Ministry of the
Nation, nor overthrow Religion and Learning, as some ungroundedly suggest, that
they did not do it upon the pretended Munster Spirit, nor in pursuance of any
Euthufiastical, Prophetic, Fanatic opinions of any peculiar divine right,
that they or any have to civil Government, but as members of the Nation, having
been long embarked under the greatest obligations in a Common cause, wherein,
among other things, civil and Religious liberty for all who live honest, godly
and peaceable of all persuasions is involved; apprehending that in some hazard
of a shipwreck, (I say not groundedly) were led hereunto, thus far their own
plea to all which professions of theirs, it may be hard to gain the credit of
such readers, who are prejudiced by looking on them through the red glass of
misrepresentations, and know not the persons, nor their or any of their
Integrity, Piety and Morality in their private Conversations,
Church-communions, or family behaviors toward God and their neighbor,
wherein it must be affirmed from undoubted knowledge, for many years past to
this day, that most of them do excel in Virtue, and that from (...) Orthodox
principles of the Christian Religion, generally received and acknowledged to be
such.

Now although all this (supposed true) does not justific this act, nor do I
allege it to that end, yet does it wipe off the dirt of those calumnies, also
extenuate the fault, upon the same reason that they are alleged to increase
it, and abate and diminish the aggravations, with a reference to these persons;
and consequently render them (if not the more deserving, yet) the more fit for
favor and free impunity.

I shall shut up this Section with that advisement of a prudent writer: One
special remedy against excessive anger, is to sever the construction of the
injury from the point of contempt, imputing it to misunderstanding, fear, or
other passions and infirmities, what you will. Sir Fra. Bacons Essaies.

Sect. 8.
The various and manifold turnings and revolutions in Government and Governors
for many years together in this Nation, made and attempted to be made, by other
hands and heads besides theirs of the Army, together with the manifold violent
claims of diverse and contrary parties and interests to the Sovereign Rule of
very late days, several of whom menacing before hand a Ravelling out and
Reverting all, to the first state of affairs before the War began, to the loss
of all these twenty years Contest. All this renders the Fact it self, and
consequently the reputed Fault thereof the more disputable and doubtful to
many judicious men, and doubtless not plainly a Fault to the judgments and
consciences of those especially concerned therein: whereas in other manifest
faults, it may be well presumed, that most of the same persons would avoid
doing the least apparent known evil, to obtain the greatest good unto
themselves; neither is this urged at random. And if all advantages should be
taken upon an exact disquisition and marking all that has been done amiss of
this kind, what sort of men will not be culpable, and some way or other
obnoxious both to censure and danger? If therefore they be allowed but the same
grains for their infirmities with other men, then their falling last and latest
under the eye and hand of offense might not augment their censure, but in stead
thereof there would be room for Moderation, which teaches (among other) this
wholesome Lesson,

That wherein all their errors have,
Let all sorts pardon give, and pardon crave.
It being also notorious how little the public Pulse did beat toward the late
Return, and how much the Authority of this Parliament is disavowed and
impeached by public Prints that freely and currantly pass up and down City and
Country, imputing as great, yea greater Extraordinaries and Exorbitancies unto
them than those now in question; also avowing the hostile undertakings of Sir
George Booth as most worthy upon that account, for the introduction of a free
and full Parliament, the cogency of whose Plea I meddle not withal, but upon a
supposition of their prevailing, many may be accounted to stand in as much need
as others of moderation and indemnity. And whether it may be denied them, the
Lord knows, things being on the reverting hand, God knows where they will stop
and stand.

Sect. 9.
The manner of their managing this Revolution, is not inconsiderable to the
mitigation of the fault; for as much as both in the Act of interruption, as
also in the prosecution in all other parts and places both North and South,
they have used all possible care to avoid and prevent the least drop of blood
in the Contest, wherein the providence of God has eminently concurred thereby,
as with a finger pointing out Moderation. How backward have they been to
action, how forward to admit of delays, how ready for any amicable Conferences
in order to a right understanding and peaceable accord. Moreover, their
indulgent respects toward both Parliament Members and dissenting Officers, not
seizing and securing their persons, when it was in the power of their hand to
do it: yet they rock not those advantages they had and might have had (as well
as others) to pursue their business, had they been disposed to violence in
those respects. All which, as it does from God, so from them bespeak tenderness
and moderation toward their persons, families, friends.

Sect. 10.
Neither may it be forgotten the generally acknowledged faithful and eminent
Services they have done both formerly and lately for this Parliament and the
Nation; which is more a Plea in the present Case than in many other; because
(among other things) it was an opinion in them of an ill requital for all those
services, burying them with their names under infamy, that did precede and
provoke unto the fault, which whether it excuse or not, yet it freeth it from
some aggravation.

Object. And whereas Eccles. 10. 1. and Ezekiel. 18. will and may be objected.

Ans. Yet let me say, It is one thing for a man to apostatize, so as to depart
from all righteousness, to violate manifest morals, another thing for a man to
err in some one act, and that act so circumstantiated as it is; for now in our
times, most sorts of men think it not unrighteous to attempt the sole
possession of the Sovereign power, wherein these possibly may reckon upon a
rightful share, as much, if not more then many others, having been so long, and
so much engaged under Parliamentary authority in the greatest hazards, above
others, to obtain a certain security to the Nations and themselves, in the
enjoyment of their properties and just liberties, and yet far from designing to
abridge or oppress others in matters Religious or Civil (as bypast time
witness^th) wherein others threaten to abridge and oppress them if uppermost.

Sect. 11.
Especially this being added, that their revolving was not a revolt from the
main cause and interest of the Nation to espouse another of a reputed enemy,
either Domestic or foreign, as many others have done both formerly and
lately; now Moderation will consider others faults negatively what they are
not, rather then positively what they are: and it is supposed their fault will
not be greater, or receive a greater sentence, because not of that kind.

Wherefore seeing they remain embarked in the same bottom with all others
concerned as firm as ever, though they may have erred in the agitation and
prosecution of the same public ends, (as who have not?) why may it not be
deemed and adjudged an error of the right hand, and imputed to their frailty,
and not their malice, and therefore to be restored with the Spirit of meekness,
all being subject to temptation? Gal. 6. 1, 2.

Sect. 12.
As touching those Gentlemen, who in the late Interval did act in public
capacities, either the Committee of Safety or in Militia's, upon new Summons;
Commissions, etc. of these whether any did designedly resist the Parliaments
Restitution I know not, yet if any such be, they may not have outacted the
favor of full in indempni^y upon all the Considerations aforesaid. But
possibly all or most of them, did but merely aim and act for the present
preservation of the public peace and safety of the whole, in an Inter regnum,
and time of common danger. This is offered not only as possible, but well known
of sundry sober and judicious persons, and may of others be presumed, that they
designed nothing directly against the Parliament, but only whiles foundations
were out of course, did endeavor to keep all from sinking into a Chaos of
confusion, to which the spirit of the people seemed to tend by a direct
opposition to you. Now it has been accounted a warrantable ground and laudable
rule of action, to take Affairs in their present constitution (however they
came so) and to put a helping hand or shoulder upon a public summons to
prevent all the evil, and usher in all the good that may be.

Upon which account it is supposed (no other substantial ground being known)
many of the honorable Members of this Parliament, have sat as Members upon
new Elections in some of those Parliaments and Counsels that have intervened
their first interruption in 1653. and their first resession on May 7. 1659. and
done many other public actions, which at one step farther may be possibly
reckoned equal with this in hand.

If some few particular persons have reserved themselves merely passive and
neutral in all changes, they best know whether their grounds and ends were
private or public, sufficient or formalities, but that sort or Sect of men
throughout the three Nations that shall plead not guilty, may throw the first
stone, and try whether it will not recoyle and rebound first upon them. Let
such also be added to these, who have been forward at such times for public
action without public Summons, Commissions, etc. for some third interest, and
then upon a scrutinous substraction, there will be very few found to be
employed in the latest turn without oblivion.

Sect. 13.
And as it is judged reasonable, that these nor none of these (above due
proportion and equality) should fare the worse, because they are of this or
that opinion about some instituted parts of Religion, so much less should there
be in any, an ill opinion, or an ill aspect toward those people, who in some
such matters of Religion (far remote from, and foreign unto all contests about
civil Government) may agree with these, or some few of these persons, who may
be the objects of displeasure, forasmuch as these people and congregations with
all peaceableness (attending only their religious concerns and business in
their places) have been and are unconcerned in these transactions, as much as
if none of their persuasion did at all intermeddle with them. What therefore
has been done by any of those called Independents or Anabaptists among many
others in the Army, has not been as they were Members of this or that
congregation, but as Members of the Nation, not aiming at any peculiar
benefits, but the enjoying of a public, common right of equal safety and
liberty, with all others in these Nations, which must be acknowledged to be
more obnoxious to danger in all hands then the right of most others, whose
Religion may be more approximate and coherent with the spirit of the people in
general. Let me herein not be understood to gird those called of the national
way, but only moderately to expostulate with those, who are sober and godly of
them. Are not, or may not such be secure from all fears of persecution in all
changes? do they not in that respect pitch upon their feet in every turn: if
therefore they aspire sole and Supreme rule, have not godly dissenters grounds
to fear, that its for imposing on others, more then simply for self security. I
grant there is two national ways of worship in contest against each other,
which should teach them both Moderation toward sober dissenters from both,
seeing they are each dissenters from the other, but both concurring against the
third: must it not be rationally acknowledged, that there is a grounded
provocation of this third sort to strive and contend for their equal right in
their native country. I consent, that they should strive lawfully in their
places. and so should others as much, but if any of them err herein, must it
not be conceded that they are upon disadvantages in some respects more than
others, which does plead more for their indemnity. But would it not be more
safe for all these sorts, who agree in the main foundation, principles of
Christian Religion, to understand and discharge each other from all jealousies
of Imposition, that all may sit down safely in their rights, and under their
vines and fig trees, none making them or any of them afraid.

Interim, Its then very undue to attribute all our disturbances and
distractions unto those called Independents, Anabaptists indefinitly, as too
commonly it is. Whereas its well known by all, who addict themselves to a right
understanding of what they affirm, that generally they in their several
congregations, do attend only such things as are appropriate to their religious
worship and Christian edifying. And other sorts of men (whom for Moderation
sake (which is my only work and end) I shall not name) have done that against
authority, yea against this constitution of Parliament more deserving these
imputations. Neither is this a new or strange thing for men by maledictions to
lay their own faults wholly on others shoulders, for Ahab could call Elijah the
troubler of Israel, when as Elijah justly retorts it upon himself, 1 King. 18.
18, 19. I speak not this (the Lord knows) from the least degree of Envy, for
I am sincerely bent for peace and unity, and do highly esteem and honor the
sober and godly of all these persuasions, but that no persons forgetting
themselves, may uncharitably vaunt, and lift up themselves and stir up others
against those, who, holding Orthodox principles, desire to fear God and live
peaceably in the land, in lawful subjection to just authorities that are or
shall be established.

Sect. 14.
How far yours and public interest, if duly weighed and consulted (upon a
presumption its not changed) does lie in this of Moderation being a tender
point, I shall now much forbear the enquiry. Howbeit, though those upon the
hill may foresee and descry far, yet those who are in the valley in daily
converse with men of all sorts, are not unacquainted with the jealousies of
your friends, and the boasts of those who are not your friends, that like the
bleating of the sheep and lowing of the Oxen, are very significant: The
ejecting old Officers in the three Nations by hundreds, many of whom deemed
much unconcerned in the late transactions, as it is humbly conceived, it tends
to disoblige many fast friends forward in your late return, so also does it not
gratify the desires and vivifie the expiring hopes of those, who are no better
friends to you than to the Army? touching the tendency of which many
substantial men are the more inspicious, doubting astrenuous prosecuting of a
change may too suddenly run upon an unseen precipice beyond retreat: and the
rather, that whiles the Aim in all this may be to preoccupate a force on the
one hand, other sorts of men may be employed, who in prosecution of their
peculiar interests: may not be to learn to employ force both upon and against
Parliaments, especially this Parliament; and whether upon better or worse
accounts, I spare now to determine, but rather humbly propose it as thought
advisable, whether so great and general dislocations of able Officers in all
parts and employments, does not tend to tear and rend your own interest in
pieces.

Sect. 15.
Moreover it is observable and memorable how able they have been, not only for
Counsel and Courage in their Conduct, but also how much of a good conscience
they have shown in their righteous, pious Government and discipline of the
Army, strictly punishing and suppressing all vices, especially these three most
incident to Martial bands, viz. Swearing, violence and drunkenness, the first
sin being more immediately against God, the second against the neighbor, the
third against the persons themselves: by which discipline they have brought and
kept the Army in that temperate posture, as is famously acknowledged to surpass
all the Armies in the world. That this is already broken and impaired to a
great degree (which is great pity) there are some instances suggested, and
observed.

Sect. 16.
Upon the whole, the greatest cause and interest of the three Nations (out of
other hands) is now in your hands to interpret, manage, and conserve, (which
taken in general) it is the common right of all men in their properties and
liberties, and the special countenance, encouragement, and security of all who
walk in the fear of God, and exercise themselves unto godliness, of different
persuasions, relating to Church Government and discipline. I humbly propose
then, that as righteous, solid, and substantial men seem only adequate and apt
for such a solid and substantial interest; so a moderate, meek, and flexible
temper and disposition is a qualification as undoubtedly necessary for Officers
of trust and power, considering all those Differences among good men throughout
these three Nations. A particular interest formed and framed out of any one of
these in a diametrical opposition unto, or upon the head of others, is humbly
conceived to be the ready way to keep open, and make wider the Wounds and
Breaches already made, to stave off our Settlement, if not augment divisions
and contentions to the breaking all. As public trust should be withheld from
profane men, that may open a Flood-gate for profaneness and ungodliness by evil
example and by a Law: (which through the providence and mercy of God has for
many years been kept out to a very great degree,) so also not put or invested
in the hand of violence, that may prove to any fearing God as the shadow of a
Bramble: for although they cannot expect Grapes from Thorns, nor Figs from
Thistles, yet they can look for deliverance and help to come from Heaven some
other way, from him who is the hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof in the
time of trouble, and no Rock like this Rock to all that trust in him, all
Enemies themselves being Judges. It Is desirable that those that are or may be
in Authority may have that wisdom of the poor wise man whereby to deliver our
Island and City, Eccles. 9. 15, 16, 17, 18. that making sure of being in the
way that God will bless and not blow upon and blast; good men of all sorts may
according to the Rule of Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 1. not only make supplications
(according to their duty) but also offer up thanksgivings unto God on their
behalf. Which as it will be the comfort of the ruled, so will it prove the
crown and comfort of the Ruler, both now and another day.

Sect. 17.
Contrary to the tenor of this last Section, some think it the interest of
God, others the interest of the Nation, to suppress the Liberties, if not to
destroy the Lives of a company of people, styled by them Sectaries, that is,
Followers, which name of Sect and Sectary is equally fit for all sorts, But if
it shall prove in the issue, that they or most of them are and aim to be
Followers of God according to his Image and Word in righ^eousness and true
holiness, surely then it will neither be the interest of God or of the Nation,
(admit they do err, as all others else do) to attempt thus to use them, but
rather prove to such as Christ foresheweth, Matthew. 18. 6. Whosoever shall
offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it were better for him that
a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depths
of the sea. Though they may be but little ones, and weak in faith, yet received
of God, and therein not to be despised and judged of men, Romans 14. 1, 3. Mr.
Trap in his Commentary upon this place runs thus, Affectu charitatis, etc. Put
him into your bosom^, bear with his weaknesses, etc. Bucer (says he) rejected
none, though different in some opinions in whom he found, A liquid Christi, Any
thing of Christ, whose weaklings are to be handled with all tenderness. (And
further wittily) Wring not men's consciences, you may hap to break the wards if
ye do. And why should this Indulgence be peculiar to any sort? why should that
tenderness and liberty be doled and distributed under the notion of favor and
privilege, which is a common and equal right? The truth is in this case, men
run the greatest hazard in the world of fighting against God, and thereby
drawing the judgment of God upon themselves even of the same kind. For
example, Henry the seventh of France enters into a League for the extirpation
of the Protestants, and suddenly after the same returned heavily upon his own
head. And surely there is the same reason to expect it so in England; if we
consider that those who most solicit the suppression of Sectaries are
themselves of different and contrary Sects in the external parts of religious
worship: though these do jointly declaim a third sort of Sectaries, who are
therefore like the Sect of Christians, Acts 22. 28. Every where spoken against.
This conjunction is not from a near Similitude, much less from an identity and
sameness in external profession of Ecclesiastical Discipline among themselves,
but only from an agreement in Nega^ives complicate in a spirit of opposition,
which when Positives come in question among themselves, they are no more
capable of incorporation and admixion than Iron and Clay. And if this third
sort of Sectaries were a short time dormant, it would soon appear there were
other sorts of Sectaries in England by their public contests as of old. Is it
not then most rational and Christian, and most equally profitable for all, that
all these (in pursuance of the negotiation of worthy Mr. John Dury) should
mutually comply upon fair terms of Moderation and Christian forbearance?
especially being all embarked in one common Protestant Cause, agreeing in the
grand points and articles of Faith and Doctrine, against the common Enemies of
Christianity, and its purity, whether Pagans, Mahometans, Jews, Papists, or
profane persons; withal considering that this third sort have the same native
right, and are not an inconsiderable interest in the three Nations.

These things do call aloud upon those at Stern to moderate among all, as they
will save and heal a bleeding languishing State, from perishing and sinking
under intestine discords. Constantine's indulgence toward those he judged
erroneous preserved the unity of Christians and the peace of the Empire and
rendered him a worthy Moderator at several turns. And what learned Author,
ancient or modern, or what sort of men will not acknowledge this most worthy in
the doctrinal part, and in their own case, till being violent and uppermost the
suff^r^ng case becomes applicable unto others? And it must be as freely
acknowledged by all acquainted with History, that for one real Heretic there
have been a thousand good Christians destroyed by the principle and practice of
persecution, in all Nations and Ages.

Sect. 18
It is not to be omitted, that albeit the radical common ground of endeavors
of suppressing some sorts, is mostly, if not merely, their Religious opinions,
yet the grand guize and vizard that is commonly put and sought to be put upon
such Designs is, a public pretense of some flagitious opinions or crimes of a
civil kind and nature, viz. That they are Enemies to Magistracy, Government,
etc The like case of Daniel, chap 6 4 5. Then the Princes and Presidents sought
to find occasion against Daniel, concerning the Kingdom; but finding none, v.
5, Then said they, We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except
we find it against him concerning the Law of his God. Thus Christ was a
reputed Enemy to Caesar. And Paul in like manner, (with this addition) that he
was a mover of sedition. Answerable to all which, Ecclesiastical History tells
us, that when the Heathen had a design to cut the throats of the Christians,
they made their way to it by fomenting and spreading this false calumnious
accusation, that the Christians intended to cut their throats; in which case I
suppose none will blame the Christians if then they should endeavor to
anticipate such a design, and forcibly defend themselves from general
destruction, especially from a popular Massacre, though countenanced and
encouraged by the Magistrate, without interpreting that a resistance of Gods
ordinance of Magistracy. Nay the Waldenses under the Duke of Savoy after
satisfaction in some scruple about it by the judgment of their learned
Ministers in the year 1555. did martially endeavor to obviate the pernicious
Design of the Duke, [Acts and Monuments] and the same again of late days in
1655. upon a new attempt to destroy them, as is memorable to all. The ground
and reason of all which is rendered by the Learned, that for as much as
protection and subjection are reciprocals, where the former is not soundly
assured, or manifestly violated, the later is relaxed, and not obliging, at
least in that natural moral case of self-preservation from public ruin.

I mention not this Position as mine own, nor with any intent to prompt to any
disturbance, nor am I ignorant that cases may vary according to circumstances,
and the point is tender, but my aim is, it may be improved to Moderation, both
in words and actions in this Crisis of our public affairs, that no sort of
men, (particularly those called Sectaries) may be put upon any temptation
through fears of hurt, (which often times works stronger than the feeling) and
then blamed and reproached by those who put the temptation on them, who yet of
all other in such cases should most forbear to blame and reproach; for as much
as those who put the temptation are parties in the fault, if any happen, and
consequently in the reproach due thereunto.

All this I ground upon those notorious public and general suggestions all the
Nation over (I cannot but call calumnies) against those called Sectaries
promiscuously like that of the old against the Christians aforesaid, which
seems like the black cloud of the bigness of a man's hand, to portend a designed
destruction of them, especially wherein in any respects, and in any places,
they are not detected and suppressed by Magistrates, but rather countenanced in
those false reports, when they bring them, without a due inquiry, in order to
peace and impartial justice, that the nocent may be punished, and the innocent
cleared and secured from injury and violence in their habitations, which is no
less their native right than any others whatsoever, as therefore subjection is
expected from all, let equal protection be administered and assured likewise.

Sect. 19
Now for as much as among others bearing the name of Sectaries, the name of
Anabaptists is mainly singled out for public reproach, if not for ruin, and
that their grand Impeachment is their opposing Magistracy, Government, etc.
upon which account the Munster Tragedy is so much and often in all places (by
Prints, and otherwise) laid to their charge, as indeed it could not lightly be
more, if those bearing that name in England had been the very individual actors
thereof at Munster, will not the stones speak, if all men should be wholly mute
under such clamours? Wherefore in answer hereunto, I hope it will not be a
crime very briefly to apologize so far as to do them truth, and justice it self
a little right, without doing others any wrong, further than to undeceive them,
and exonerate all as much as may be from misprisions, which in this and other
things are the bane and poison of public peace and amity.

First, let it be noted that other sorts of men in England do impeach one the
other with the same crime; some men charge the whole Parliament both Lords and
Commons, and all Vid. Vindiciae Regum, or The grand Rebellion, Gr. Williams
Bishop of Ossory. Also Dr. Fern. Salmasius. Mr. Edw: Symons the Loyal Subjects
belief] with the several Answers unto these by other Ministers.
their adherents, with resisting the Authority of the King, saying, Such of
them were only loyal obedient Subjects who went to Oxford upon the Kings
Summons to sit in Parliament there, or to aid and assist him in his War. Others
charge all those Members who have espoused the Seclusion of so many of their
own House, and turned out the House of Lords; others have been adjudged and
proceeded against as Delinquents both formerly and lately for resisting the
Parliament upon the Kings acccount. I modestly mention only matters of fact,
and that but hints, without judging the merit of them, only to the end, it may
be observed, that (setting these aside) others do and will mutually charge with
illegalities and exorbitancies relating to civil power and Government: and
indeed things are not judged illegal (now in our days) so much for what they
are simply and in themselves, but either as they may not prosperously succeed,
or as being done by other hands, and not in prosecution of their own interest
and opinion who so judge of them: which savours more of faction, passion, and
interest, than of reason and justice in the eyes of wise observers.

Secondly, their opinion wherein other Christians differ from them about the
subject and form of that instituted Ordinance of Baptism is as far off the
point of Magistracy, and opposition to it, as Paedobaptism it self, or any
other thing in the world. What though therefore some holding that opinion
either in this or other Nations should be in any wise enormous, yet their
opinion and practice of Baptism would be no more impaired nor untrue than our
Savior Christ's and his Apostles Doctrine was by the treachery of Judas, and
the apostasy of multitudes in the primitive times. And why the denomination of
Anabaptists (which they disown) should be fastened upon them, they are yet to
seek of sufficient reason, not only seeing they acknowledge but once
baptizing, but also they, laying no more weight upon that instituted Ordinance
than upon that other of like institution, the Lords Supper, and then others do
who hold the other way of baptizing; yet this name is abusively put upon them,
as if all their Religion lay in Baptism; whereas in the course of their
Doctrine touching Principles of Faith, and Piety, and Morality in Christian
practice, is such as is generally received for orthodox: even by the most
accounted such, who have read confessions of their Faith, and heard their
common Doctrine.

Thirdly, the generality of the persons who hold this opinion have given
sufficient proof for diverse years, that their principles and practices are as
consistent with humane society, peaceable Cohabitation, and due subjection to
civil Established Government as any other in the land; nor only do their
manifold Declarations, if examined, give satisfaction in this point, but
withal, neither the time, nor place, nor persons of them can be mentioned,
touching any insurrection they ever made against the Magistracy in England; but
if any persons of them had done it, would it be Justice to impute that to the
whole? would those of other ways be so judged? of whom there have been many,
who have both plotted and actually perpetrated public insurrections, which yet
was never called the Munster tragedy of Paedobaptists, because, though the same
reason, yet Moderation would not allow it, for personal faults ought to have
only personal imputations, and they desire to do therein, as they would others
should deal with them.

As what has been said will much obviate an objection, touching those few of
this way in the Army: so let me add, that what they have done in that public
capacity under an opinion of public obligation has been so far personal, and
as members of the Nation, that such do wrongfully who impute it unto their
profession; but if it must needs be so, then let it be tried and proved whether
there have not been [many] called Paedobaptists, joint in all those very
actions for [one] of those, called Anabaptists even in the highest acts done,
whatever unfairly and disingenuously has been by any represented otherwise to
the world. Neither have these things been done in corners, to be hid from the
eyes of indifferent spectators, who are well able to judge of Partiality.

Fourthly, As touching those now, who hold some opinions about Christ's Kingdom
on earth in a reputed offensive way; is it not notorious, that they are many of
them Paedobaptists themselves, and as much against those called Anabaptists as
others, even as well in the subject of baptism? and on the other hand, the
generality of those called Anabaptists, are as much against all their offensive
opinions in those points (though some few of one as well as the other sort may
own them) as any others in the world pitying, those who err therein, and
publicly in their congregations and doctrines detecting such errors,
disclaiming and refuting them. Yet albeit, there are many such called
Paedobaptists of them, the others have more of reason and Moderation, than to
lay the Munster Tragedy upon that name, though there may be the same ground. If
therefore there should be any Exorbitant Irruption in words or actions of that
sort of people, thus mixed, either let such fault be reputed merely personal,
and no further, or else Indifferently, Justly and Impartially be imputed to one
sort as well as another, more than hitherto it has been, which indeed (among
other things) may justly call in question the justice of Historians touching
the Munster people, which was about 130 years past: forasmuch as Truth and
Justice is so much wronged before our eyes, and at our own doors, as it is by
public prints and otherwise daily.

Fifthly, All Historians about the seditions in Germany confess thus far
ingenuosly, that the intolerable oppressions of the Magistrates then, gave one
great occasion of their rise and progress to that height. Wherefore at the
same time, (about the year of our Lord 1525.) in Suevia and Franconia, there
arose in arms about forty thousand men, (who pretended nothing at all to that
called Anabaptisme) to exonerate and acquit themselves by force from their
heavy burdens, which was more a rebellion than the other: for they killed the
greatest part of the Nobility, pilledged, sacked and burnt their houses, Castles
and Fortresses, and violently overflowed and destroyed the Country like an
inundation: yet concerning these, we have only the gentle tender hints of our
Historiographers, giving us in few lines merely narrative of fact, without any
odium on their fault, or any black characters at all upon their Names, Persons
or Religion, when as the same history of the same fact imputed to some called
Anabaptists there, is wrote in most dreadful letters of blood, concerning their
persons, names and religion, which (by the way) may guide the impartial reader
in his observation and credit of histories wrote by adversaries. Now somewhat
contemporary with this great insurrection (according to the same stories)
Carolostadius, Stock, Muntzer, and other public Ministers of the Gospel (as
Luther then was) fell from good principles to dangerous opinions, dreams,
enthusiasmes, pretenses of extraordinary visions and revelations, (all which
these called Anabaptists that I defend, do and ever did as much disclaim and
abhor as any others in the world, holding firmly to the sacred Word of God,
the holy Scriptures) of whom Muntzer chiefly manageth these opinions with the
oppressions unto disturbous practices, to his and others ruin and reproach,
about six or seven years after, which was about the years 1531. 1532. and
forward; broke out the like unhappy bustle at the City of Munster in
Westphalia, by John Becold Knipperdolling, and one Bernard Rotman a public
Preacher in that City, and this was accompanied with the like foolish mad-vain
opinions, being as far remote from, and as foreign unto these people in
England, in their opinions, as they were in their persons, place and time; who
therefore are unduely and unworthily called their spawn, their offspring and
generation, etc. and what not? Howbeit, let it be observed how Monstrous, and
prodigious this is made, and how much the world is made to ring of the noise of
this One disaster, that happened in one little compass of time, and how
unchristianly and unreasonably it is now raked up and reckoned to a company of
people, who in such things are as innocent now of the like, as they were of
that very fact there, being then unborn. Whereas I have mentioned like fact at
the same time in others, and may add the like hints in those histories of the
Switzers, who about 200 years before arose, and violently destroyed their
Lords, and as violently changed (without blame) both their Governors and
Government, not reverting to this day; which if those of Germany had succeeded
as prosperously they might have been no more blamed. I might infinitely
multiply examples, if I should rake in the dust and ashes of other sorts
throughout all ages in Christendom, but what need I go farther then our diverse
and manifold insurrections in England, against all kinds and degrees of
authorities, neither need I mention by whom they have been perpetrated, yet all
this without the least remembrance or reckoning of Munster unto them, or any of
them; such is the power of partiality, and prejudice.

Moreover I must not omit to return the readers eye again to Munster, of which
same City we have had certain account year by year to this very day for some
considerable time, that they rise in arms, resist and oppose their lawful
Magistrate, refuse obedience to his edicts, and maintain the same City against
him by public force, and all without the least brand of infamy on them. On the
other hand such are very great strangers in the world, who know not that in
Holland are ver many, and have been very long, that bear the same name of
Anabaptists, that are as famous for peaceable living and subjection, as any
others have been infamous for the contrary.

All which strongly results and concludes in this, that there is no end not
bounds of impeaching, if there be not strickt restraint of public faults unto
their propper Authors, acquitting other opinions they hold, except only such
opinions as do naturally and directly tend to such faults. Wherein indeed Mr.
Joshua Scotton (though a Paedobaptist) deals the most ingenuously of all other,
who in his translate of Guy du Brez German story calls it, the German
Enthusiast: in the Title page, and not the German Anabaptist, and in the latter
end of his Epistle to the Reader, has these words: those (says he) which he
styleth Anabaptists between whom and mere dissenters in the point of
Paedobaptisme, being otherwise Orthodox and peaceable, the Reader ought always
conscientiously to distinguish.

Sixthly, Let me a little further enforce this by observing: that all this
German sedition that is now (about 130 years after) put to the account of the
innocent reputed Anabaptists in England, was in like manner as much charged
upon innocent Luther at that very day: as the same Historians do jointly and
generally report, and is confessed by Mr. Samuel Clerk in his lives of the
Fathers: yet had they as much reason for that, (though none at all) seeing the
principal fomenters of the sedition had been public Preachers of the Gospel as
Luther was, who then and thereupon could but purge himself, by public
manifesto (which is yet extant) as these in England have done, time after time,
not only by their confession of faith often imprinted, showing their constancy,
besides their manifold declarations more particularly upon this point in hand,
but confirmed by constant practice in their peaceable cohabitation with their
several neighbourhoods both in City and Country.

Seventhly, Is not this same imputation tossed like a ball, or rather a stone
between the Protestants in general, and the Papists in all their paper
contests, and which and who can acquit every individual of their party? If
therefore any particular persons of this name should (among others) prove
extravagant, it will no more make this their glorying void, then that of
others, who may rather (for want of Moderation) watch for haltings in these
more than in all other sorts besides. Its evident then, that the prevalency of
interest and faction above commutative justice, right and reason, in too many
of this age does influence them to this great unfairness, which whether the
design be (in this way) to stifle their opinion about baptism, or to bring
swift destruction upon those who hold it, though they hold it with never so
much piety toward God, righteousness and peace toward men: Moderation and
respect toward those Christians who conscientiously differ from them, yet
(leaving that to God that knows their purposes and is above them) they desire
the Lord to forgive those who thus traduce them, and detract them, and that
(through the assistance of Gods grace) they may be enabled to walk
inoffensively toward Jew or Gentile or Church of God, so as to put to silence
the ignorance of all foolish men, who delight to speak evil of what and of whom
they know not, at least many of them.

Eigthly, As touching extraordinary Impulses, Enthusiasmes, Dreams, Visions,
etc. Such who lay all this upon those called Anabaptists promiscuously in
England, they show themselves to be very great strangers, not understanding
whereof they do affirm, the contrary whereof shines so bright, as in their
ordinary teachings and Church Government; so in the manifold Treatises,
Commentaries, etc. printed and published by many learned of them, upon all
points in the Christian Religion. Wherein let it be duly noted, that one grand
occasion of this and such like imputations, is plainly this: That one writing
Author meeting with Heterodox and gross opinions in his readings of others,
laid upon that name, he transmits it to another that follows, and so the second
to the third, and none of all (for the most part) receiving any such affertions
from the persons themselves, much less from any confession of faith
comprehending the judgment of the generality of that name, by which both
writers and readers both do and suffer wrong in creating to themselves and
others groundless prejudices, conveying them over from age to age, and rendering
them a hiddeous monstrous people: and though I could multiply instances hereof
in my own small readings, yet I shall mention but one, which was called a
Catalogue of the damnable errors of the Anabaptists, enumerating thirty and
one; Yet of all these, there was but that one reputed error of
Antipaedobaptisme, which they will espouse, disavowing the rest as much as he
that accused them, who was a Minister of no inferior note, yet shall I forbear
to mention any names, because I want not due regard to such persons, who may be
otherwise godly and serviceable in both teaching and writing, setting aside
such misprisions, and with all few observing readers are unacquainted herewith,
to need instances.

Ninthly, Neither is it less manifest, that most of those very errors are held
and maintained by Paedobaptists one against the other, the manifold contests
among them about most Principal points of Doctrine; and also most things
appertaining to Church Government and Administration of all Ordinances, have
been upon the house top to be publicly known and read of all men, more
particularly those called of the Episcopal, Presbyterian and Erastian ways, not
to mention more, nor yet these with the lest immoderate spirit toward them,
but rather desiring it may be used by them to a moderation of mind toward each
other, and also to enquire whether the reputed errors chargeable upon those
called Anabaptists, are any way comparable in number or weight to those in
Controversy among themselves, and whether the cause of such estrangedness and
enmity (on their part) be not misunderstanding, or interest of some kind or
other, which in like manner has led themselves to such heat of opposition, as
has ended in removing and revolving of Church Governments.

Tenthly, To conclude these particulars upon this general Section, we find the
stories of a company of people in Germany, who are long since dead and buried,
under the greatest reproach and infamy that can be, of whom none can be left to
answer for themselves, their reported Extirpation and Extinction being about
130 years past, their rise and fall, lives and deaths wrote by their
adversaries, no aggravating circumstances, either for opinion or practice seems
to be omitted, no extenuating passages confessedly inserted; now that upon the
whole, there might be such a people and such persons bearing that appellation
of Anabaptists, who (mixed with others) may be faulty in opinions and practices,
is a matter much undoubted, but that every aggravating passage is true, or that
any one Historian (admitting him otherwise just) was an ear witness of all
their opinions, and an ocular witness of all their tragical actions is
reasonably to be doubted, and consequently their testimony in every puncto not
so much to be regarded; because false reports of contrary minded men touching
both such and other persons and things are so abounding and notorious, in our
own Nation and Age, like that of Jer. 20 10. Report, say they, and we will
report: they watched for my halting, etc. In so much that indeed we have little
ground of credit to common fame (at least) touching particulars of words or
acts spoken or done at the very next town, and least of all from adversaries to
the persons and things reported of; yet all such things thus brought upon the
wings of fame is notwithstanding as commonly and credibly received, and
thereupon again reported, yea printed and published even in all the aggravating
circumstances, as if nothing in the world were more authentic and
indubitable, such is the blind and ^ash credulity of men (though some
otherwise honest) where they are predisposed and prefixed in their affections
or disaffections.

But suppose and admit it granted to be wholly true, yet observe what proximity
and nearness of relation is there between those persons and enormities in
Germany to these now in England, that their eating of sour grapes should set
the teeth of these on edge? For there is not any one thing of agreement is or
can be pretended but in that of Baptism; and if the stories themselves be true,
they do not so much agree in that neither, (all things considered and observed)
as those called Anabaptists and Poedobaptists do here agree; for they relate,
that they grounded their practice of Baptism upon pretenses of immediate
revelations, that they baptized all who came unto them, that they threatened
damnation to all who neglected it, that they forced all persons to be baptized
by proclaiming that all who refused it should be killed; all which signify so
much of frenzy and madness, that to those of that name in England nothing is
more absurd and abominable, and that there were ever any such rude and heady
persons, answerable to this their portraicture and picture, scarce any thing to
them is more incredible. Besides their practices of Poligamy, and destroying
propriety is unto these in England detestable, and both (among other things)
detected in their Declaration 1647. Wherefore I do humbly and fairly propose on
their behalf in England, that if the denomination of Anabaptist be derived
from, or at least imputed reproachfully upon that abominable abuse of Baptism
by these men in Germany, (waving the proper signification of the word as unduly
applied) that then and from henceforth these who bear the name of Anabaptists
in England may be for ever acquitted and discharged thereof, never more to be
called by that name, which discharge is a due debt from justice it self, seeing
they can as clearly and truly plead [not guilty] as any other people in the
world; but if any notwithstanding all must still needs reproach them with this
name of reproach, that then and therewithal (as of right they ought) they do
fully and particularly acquit and discharge them from those horrid
exorbitancies of opinion and practice said to be perpetrated by these German
people, and usually (hand over head) attributed to all that bear this name, in
England: for let but other men suppose their own names and reputatio^s in these
men's stead, and that they do stand fair and clear from these pretended faults,
and then nothing would be to them more apparently equitable and reasonable,
than that all such should enjoy the precious ointment of their good name,
considering also that it is one great Branch of the second Table of the Law to
preserve the Reputation and good name of our Neighbor, as well as life,
liberty, estate, etc. More especially do I urge this, that Gods name and
Christ's name that is called upon these people, and called upon by them, may not
be blasphemed upon by any misprisions or mistakes, which is (I hope) more dear
to them than their own names or humane concerns.

Moreover, let not any hereafter travel beyond the Seas, so far as Germany to
understand; and calculate any people in England, nor yet look upon these in
England through the bloody Prospective-glass of Munster, but look upon them
with their own eyes in their writings, and hear them with their own ears in
their Doctrines, and then observe the generality in their ordinary
conversations, and either compare them with the Word of God, or with other
sorts of Christians, or themselves, and do all this without prejudice,
partiality, and uncharitableness, (that being like the distemper of the Yellow
Jaundies, which does represent the object as yellow as the eye) but allow them
the same grains for frailty with others, and then make a Judgment on them
freely, and if upon the whole you judge they err (as who may not) then without
reproaching, or using violence, deal with them in such a Christian manner as
you will do those of your own way, and as you would others should do to you:
this is Moderation, which teaches to consider that if they dissent from you,
so do you from them, ye are both in the same predicament

But if yet further any will think themselves concerned to write an History of
those called Anabaptists, let me crave leave to make a few fair indifferent
Proposals, to them, viz. 1. That they will write from exact and perfect
knowledge of them, and not upon rumors and reports. 2. That they charge
nothing upon the whole or generality of them, but what bears their own public
and general impression. 3. That where Paedobaptists are equally or jointly
concerned with them in any errors or faults, they may not be partially
severed; but faithfully and expressly put together; setting down (both alike)
their denominations by which they may be equally known: to exemplify this
further, that no Error in Doctrine or manners be imputed, at least not
appropriate unto them, that is not peculiar but common to others, but if it
shall be found that any Protestant Paedobaptists, have in any place, and at any
time held or done the same or like, then must that be expressly mentioned, and
ingenuously confessed with it also. 4. That no faults be inserted but such as
necessarily follow from that opinion that is the occasion of their
distinguishing denomination. 5. That such faults may only be declared, as
wherein they were wilfully obstinate and pertinacious in their preseverance and
persistance after all due Christian means used for their conviction and
recovery to a rectitude. 6. That the story be restrained to the People of that
Age and Country, and not the faults of others put to their account. 7. That
such Errors may be insisted upon (if any be) that are incompatible with the
temporal safety of the bodies properties, and inconsistent with the eternal
safety of the souls of men. 8. Finally, that all this may be fairly done (like
the four Evangelists writing of the History of the Gospel) whiles all things
are fresh in memory, and the persons concerned yet living and at liberty to
answer for themselves, least men in the stating others cause and their own may
seem just, and their Neighbor not have opportunity to search them. Prove. 18.
17. in which case it may be said, as Job 6. 24, 25. Teach me and I will hold my
tongue, cause me to understand wherein I have erred, and How forcible are right
words? but what do your [such] arguings reprove? To which may be added that
remarkable Dictate of Nicodemus, Does our Law judge any man before it hear him
and know what he does? John 6. 51. Contrariwise, the Backbiter and his
backbiting is reckoned and ranked among the worst of sins and sinners, Romans 1.
30. And, Who (says David) shall abide in thy tabernacle? Who shall dwell in
thine holy hill? Psalm: 15. 1. What is the answer? (verse. 4.) He that
backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his Neighbor, nor takes up a
reproach against his Neighbor. As most certainly, Every man must give an
account for every [idle word,] Matthew. 12. 36. so also for every [hard speech,]
either spoken against God or good men, Jude v. 15. O that all men, especially
Christians (of all sides and sorts) would lay these and such like Scriptures
seriously to their hearts, and accordingly and conscientiously ponder the words
of their mouths, and paths of their feet, which indeed would yield as much
inward peace and comfort to their own souls, as honor to God, and credit to
their Christian profession.

Sect. 20.
That I may be indifferent and impartial toward all, let me in like manner on
the other hand, not spare to warn those called Independents, Anabaptists, etc.
against the same evil of Immoderation, both in the matter and manner of either
words or carriages toward those who are godly, Ministers or Christians, called
of the national way; in order to which, let me advise the reading of that
excellent Epistle of Mr. William Allen forerunning his Book, entitled [A Glass
of Justification] And let your Moderation in this respect be known to all men.
It is one great proof of Christianity to value, esteem, and acknowledge the
image of Christ where ever it is; which that you may see more in them or some
of them, be more Christianly conversant with and less estranged from them. As
you will manifest a Gospel Spirit, forbear your selves, and reprove in others
all harsh, censorious, and reproachful speech, and all immodest appellations.
Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how
ye ought to answer every man, Col. 4. 6. which is with meekness and fear: 1
Peter 3 15. If you would not judge so [as] to be judged, Matthew. 7. 1. Then
learn to judge [as] you would be judged. Give the same you will take, and do to
them as you would they should do to you, this is the Law and the Prophets, and
this is taught by the great Prophet. Matthew. 7. 12. And as on the one hand you
should avoid all such scurrilous and provoking speech, as altogether unbecoming
the Gospel, so on the other hand, withhold not any due respect, and
encouragement you are capable of giving to those who labor in the Word and
Doctrine, though they may not be in all respects of your opinion and way,
remembering that Christ's Disciples, being cap^iously offended with those that
followed not with them, and therefore provoked him to forbid them doing a good
work, they were in stead thereof rebuked for their labor, Luke 9. 49, 50.
which is a teaching Example unto us, as not to hinder, so to further any
service for God, especially that in the Gospel, tending to the eternal
salvation of the souls of men. Is it not very sad to think how many thousands
of poor souls may perish for want of knowledge, if the supply of all places
depended only on the preaching of some one way. Let those then of every way be
countenanced and encouraged, who by sound Doctrine, and dividing the Word
aright, may give to every one their portion in due season, that if it be the
will of God, the weighty work of Conversion (I mean from the power of Satan
unto God) may be more revived and made prosperous throughout all the dark
corners of the land: that all our strenuous strifes may be resolved into this,
who shall most excel in virtue, and gather in most wheat of Gods harvest out of
the field, into his Garner.

And for my self, wherein to some degree, I have been in former time, surprised
with this common infirmity of harshness in judging others: I do hereby
publicly retract it, having better learned to hold those opinions modestly,
about lesser matters, wherein so many able and godly men may be of another
mind. And therefore in that particular (without inconstancy) to redeem my time
in Moderating, as far as my small talent, and a pure conscience to God and men
will carry me. Wherein I have for some later years disposed my self, not upon
any sinister considerations, (which is known to the Lord) but from Judgment,
Conscience and Affection, which whatever success it has had on others, yet not
without reflection of comfort to my self: all which I direct to those
aforementioned, if it may be to reason them into (no other then) a Christian
Moderation.

And the rather whereas some few of that name aforesaid, (far from concluding
the generality) being yet sour and harsh against those called of the national
way, have cast upon them the names of Antichristian and Babylonish, whom though
I tender for that they may be otherwise godly, yet let me say without
partiality, that this does not proceed from the wisdom that is from above,
that is gentle and peaceable, as well as pure, Jam. 3. 17. and its different
from the Tenor of that Declaration dated and published, December. 12. 1659. in
the name of many called Anabaptists, which however its harshly, weakly and
mistakingly interpreted; yet is it well known (to many wise observers) that the
matter and sober spirit thereof, is no new thing, but contrariwise a constant
pursuance of the meek and humble spirit of the old confession of their faith,
and many other old Declarations, to which they firmly adhere, some particulars
of whom should have been here recited, had it not been for avoiding prolixity
and tediousness to the reader: save only this must be duly observed, that even
those persons first above mentioned, do also acquit and discharge themselves
from those aspersions about subjection to Magistracy and peaceable cohabitation
among other men, though somewhat severe against those of the national way, and
the more because they judge them of a persecuting spirit.

But with such who thus exert the harshness of their spirits in a girding
censuring speech, let me in few words expostulate: you account those of the
national way Babylonish, Antichristian, these are very big and ambiguous
[words,] easily spoken, more hardly understood, yet too commonly tossed to and
fro upon disagreement in the smallest puncto's of opinion, by those who never
explain those words and things, to demonstrate from the Word of God, where and
who deserves the Imputations. But whereas you Impute those names, may not they
retort them back on you with other additions, and you again on others, and so
run the circle? for where will this end, and to what does it tend, but to make
many judge you all in Babylon? etc. and so run either to the Church of Rome, or
to Atheism and profaneness. Further, (as Job says) What do such arguings
reprove? who will be ever the better or the wiser? who is hereby convinced of
an error, or brought to the knowledge and acknowledgement of any one truth? nay
rather does it not prejudice others against you and your differing opinions?
The like may be said on the other hand of those who use the words Sectary,
Fanatic, etc. upon every trivial difference, as if that were enough to confute
an opinion, or make it ever the worse. But would it not be a good expedient,
and better becoming wise men and sober Christians on all hands, instead of
giving foul and doubtful names to a reputed error in others, to assert rather
positively and modefily what themselves do hold for truth, and then use the
most pregnant arguments to convince thereof, and the most powerful Motives to
persuade thereto. In which way, men may kill three birds with one stone (viz.)
convince of error, inform in the truth, and manifest to others, you hold your
opinions for conscience and not contention: and if you must needs give error a
name, then call it error, and well confute it, and deal not oprobriously with
any persons who may hold it, which never will convince them, but reflect the
imputation of malice and envy upon your selves, and stir it up in others,
whereby too commonly the truth it self between both, is drowned and lost in
jars and discords, and persons gradually lose their spiritual savor, and grow
strangers to godly edifying: by all which faults on both hands, this follows,
that Ichabod is sadly written upon Religion, the glory thereof being much
departed.

Sect. 21.
And because the fault of this kind is of both sides, I shall therefore offer
to both. I hope its well understood on both sides, that the main of Religion
and power of godliness, does neither only nor chiefly, but least of all lie in
those particular instituted matters, which are the matters in difference: why
then the contest should be so hot and severe, accompanied with so great
alienations and oppositions on both sides, for my part I understand not,
especially when I consider that the difference is not so much about the
Doctrinal part, as the manner of practicing those particular institutions. But
the plain main things of Christianity then are summarily such as these, wherein
those called Puritans of old did excel, viz. right principles of doctrine about
God the Father, Son, and holy Spirit; the right way of Justification by Gods
grace through a lively says in the blood and righteousness of Jesus Christ, in
opposition to the merit of inherent righteousness, or external works. This
rectitude in the point of justification, as Luther calls it, and Mr. Anthony
Burgess likewise well, its both the soul and pillar of Christianity: Together
with the great work of regeneration by the holy Spirit, cooperating with the
Gospel, likewise progressive sanctification, chiefly consisting in a constant
continued course of Repentance and Faith, Mortification of sin and lust, lively
exercise of grace in all good and holy works, (viz.) whether Practice of Piety
in all Christian duties, moral or instituted, either public or private,
immediately toward God: Or righteousness, love and mercy toward men, either
in propper and peculiar relations, or in common toward our neighbor and all
men even our enemies; finally perseverance in all this to the second coming of
Christ to raise the bodies of the dead, and render to every man according to
his works, with eternal happiness in heaven, or eternal misery in hell.
Forasmuch then, as there is an agreement very much mutually known about all
these and much more (except only that one branch of institutions) is there not
a thousand fold more reason of Moderation and mutual tenderness and
forbearance, then of estrangedness and censurings, and that of one another
consciences, even unto a kind of violence upon each others names, reputations,
etc. neither would I be mistaken: I urge not the abating of one hairs breadth
of either matter or form of an instituted ordinance; neither dare I do it, when
I consider that the great fall of our first Parents (and we in them) was by the
breach of an institution, that they have Gods stamp upon them, that he has
been always regardful about the smallest pins and eylet holes, that his
servants in Scripture were careful about them, that they have an excellency in
their nature, use and ends, that the Laws of God Natural, Moral and Gospel, yea
and the nature of grace do all comprehend institutions, in a general obedience
to the will of God: from all which I conclude none of them are to be despised,
undervalued, neglected, rejected, (as by too many now, highly elevated, they
are) nor yet violated by an undue administration of them. But about this last,
viz. the manner of administration is the only question: this is like the
Gordian knot, cut it we must not, untye it we cannot, at least not for another,
though we may each for himself. Being thus brought to the only general point in
controversy: the next question is, whether its either unlawful (for truly
most do carry it as if it were a vice, and not a virtue) or impossible for each
cordially to love one the other, and mutually forbear, and Christianly
correspond? albeit neither be brought to own the others opinion. In answer to
which, surely mutual love cannot be either unlawful or impossible among true
Disciples, (as all are who believe in Christ, and endeavor a purity of
conscience) seeing it is the grand duty of all such, above other, and character
of such, John 13. 35. as also agreeable to the whole tenor of the Gospel, and
judged very easily practicable by that excellent reconciler Jacobus Acontius,
in his discovery of Stratagems of the Devil, and for my own part, I do judge
there is no other general impediments than those Stratagems of the Devil, and
the remaining corruptions in the hearts of good men, (which makes me wonder at
the folly of those who boast of present perfection,) neither do I doubt, but
that all who can lay aside prejudice, passion and private interest, will judge
it both desirable and without difficulty for his own part; nor do I know how
(in this world) its possible ever to come to an unity of mind in one common
opinion of the truth, without first a correspondency in unity of common
Christian affection; nor are the differences much more than the tithing of
Mint, Annis and Cummin, in comparison with the weightier matters both of Law
and Gospel, which will well and safely admit of modesty and humbleness of mind
on all sides, without any hurt to the conscience. Upon the whole, where lies
then the Stiffeness and the stick? who must begin first to love, and to express
it? must not every one begin first? and will not the foremen carry the greatest
honor in the sight of God and Christians? and what hurt or hazard can there be
to the truth (be it where it will) thus to lay aside animosities, prejudices,
evil surmises, evil speakings, and converse together in an amicable way,
without looking upon each other as Monsters and prodigies, as too too much
formerly, making every trivial a bear and a lion in the way to hinder the means
of a right understanding and affection

But if it be impossible (contrariwise) thus to walk in mutual love and
forbearance, improving each others gifts and graces as far as may be, unless
and until both be resolved into one common opinion about every puncto of
Institution, then must it be by an actual compliance on the one hand or the
other. If so, then this question follows, which of the parties must be the
Standard, which and who will so arrogate and appropriate to themselves the
[Urim and Thummim] as to whom all others must in every thing conform? again
this conforming on the one side or the other, it must be either voluntary from
change of mind, or constrained by force: the former is not probable to be,
because the way unto it seems to be barred, fenc't, hedged up by an exclusion
of all Christian forbearance and amicable converse. And for the latter, viz.
Coercion, that ought not to be, because both will and may plead an equal right
of liberty in the Nation, from being imposed upon by his neighbor, and like
equal right of liberty, to judge which is the exactest way of serving God, and
the rightest and directest way to heaven; wherefore the final issue whereto
such a violent contest tends, it is to make our Land an Aceldama, a field of
blood; yea (which is worst of all) of Christian blood, which as I desire God
from heaven may forbid, as he seasonably staid the hand of Abraham over his son
Isaac: and countermanded the Angels drawn destroying sword over Jerusalem, at
the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite, 2 Samuel 24. 16. So do I humbly
propose, that reason, grace, and the Royal law of love and charity may prevail
upon the minds of both, to meet each other in Moderation, as the first step to
Christian unity: for you can never be swift to hear each other, unless you are
slow to wrath, Jam. 1. 19. but if after all, any shall retain their wrath, and
remain irreconcilable: let such know, that God knows how to restrain it, Psalm.
76. 10. But were your affections thus united, jealousies and evil surmises thus
removed, it would not a little obviate the clandestine designs of Jesuits among
us, whose prevailing argument, drawn from the pretended unity of the Roman
Church, to prove it the only true Church, is sadly strengthened by our
divisions: the danger of which sort of persons, is lately seasonably suggested
by the Ministers of London in their printed exhortation; and what gives them so
great advantage, but the passionate bickerings among godly Protestants?

Moreover it would as much prevent a strenuous hurtful contest about the
Sovereign power between both, which (without a mutual security of this kind,
from each others unrightful imposing) seems hard to fix in any hands, but is
perpetually rolling to and fro, and subjects the nation to continual changes
and rotations. And none will then be blamed, if they take all opportunities and
advantages, to relieve and secure themselves from the stroke and yoke of
others, and so others again from them; and what and where will be the end
thereof? though the least just blame will fall on them, who in seeking simply
for self security, shall be led to impose in any wise on others, and would not
otherwise do it, could they but be safe in peace and equal liberty.

Sect. 22.
For as much as those honorable persons, who sit in supreme Council are
Representatives of different sorts in common, and not of any one particularly,
I do humbly make it my concluding Proposal, whether some thing extraordinary of
an indifferent nature, ballancing and securing all sorts, till by moderation
they can arrive at a better understanding, and mutual accord, will not most
naturally tend to our long desired settlement, and best become and truly make
it a Commonwealth? Whether the common peace being kept among all, and all
saved from the harm and hurt of others, upon all accounts whatsoever be not the
principal end of Gods ordaining Government among the sons of men, and the best
way to fasten and bind together all the integral parts of this broken Nation,
put a period to all our public changes, and the way to prevent all future
fears, and surcease all just complainings in our streets: all sorts feeling the
benefits hereof, willingly ascribing to such Governors the honor of our
Settlement.

It is humbly hoped, that no individual person (be he of what religious Sect
soever,) much less the generality of a Sect may be judged, crushed and laid
under reproach upon any harsh counsel and suggestion of Adversaries, without a
full and fair hearing of defense, which is most expected under a Government of
the People, where no man's case may be supposed to depend on any one man's
passions, or interest. This is the more necessary and considerable, because
whisperers are always ready to insinuate what may separate chief friends, Prove.
16. 28. There is never wanting some who worship the rising Sun, and having men's
persons in admiration, because of advantage, who neither out of conscience to
God, nor love to Governors, (but like Doeg to David) to get some benefit to
themselves, will be laying loads upon others, by informations.

Wherefore it is desirable that Rulers may always remember, the beloved Kingdom
of God was broken in pieces by Reheboam's taking harsh counsel, and refusing
that which was more moderate, 1 Kings 12. 6, 10. whereas David rejected such
counsel in that petty personal case of cursing Shimei, when yet he had full
opportunity to destroy him under the public reputation of justice. Such counsel
may sometimes be given with the intent of hurt and damage to them to whom it is
given, like Hushai's unto Absalom, or with the same Design the Phi^istims had
upon Sampson, to cut off the locks of his strength and glory.

Wherefore in the midst of all abilities of counsel, foresight and force, I
humbly propose that you will make the Word of God the man of your counsel, and
that you follow the Example of Solomon, to ask of God wisdom for Government,
not only because you have a mighty People as he had, but a People so greatly
divided, which he had not. As an opinion of self-sufficiency is a most
dangerous thing, so the way to prosper is to depend on God, and the way to
depend and lean upon God aright, is to make sure of being in the way of
righteousness and uprightness. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and
what does the Lord require of thee? to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God, Micah 6. 8. Remembering how God answered from Shittim to
Gilgal, v. 5.

Albeit, I know that the hearts of Rulers as well as others are in the hands of
the Lord, who can turn them as the Rivers of Waters: and also that God governs
and overrules all counsels and affairs by his most wise and holy providence to
his own glory, yet does not that dissolve the bond of duty lying upon all to do
what service they can for God in their Generation, upon which account I have
adventured to make this humble address to Rulers and all men, if at least it
may move them more to a study of Moderation, then I little doubt the practice,
and where it may to any degree prevent any harsh intentions, such may have no
cause of repentance, but rejoicing like David, when he was intercepted by
Abigait's moderation.

Although I have been, and am altogether unconcerned in these mutations and
transactions themselves, yet I must be a sharer (among others) in the good or
ill effects and issues of them, which gives me somewhat of right to offer my
poor opinion. This I have done with a sincere aim at common good, with much
submission and sense of mine own weakness.

My humble Requests to God shall be, that he would make some (those at the
Stern, if he please) to be Healers of our Breaches, and Restorers of Paths for
us to dwell in, that we may live under a well-settled Authority a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

And I hope that in prudence and justice, all public Magistrates, Ministers,
and Writers will hereafter forbear that double wrong to their peaceable
Subjects and Neighbors; first, in giving them unduly the name of Anabaptists:
and secondly, in laying the dirt and dung of a mad mis-guided People in one
former Age and foreign Nation upon them, viz. that of Germany; for as much as
it will give them occasion and provocation to retort that greater insurrection,
and those worser devastations of forty thousand at the same time in Suevia and
Franconia, before recited out of the same Histories; as also to observe all the
over-turnings in all Ages and Nations throughout Christendom, by whom they have
been made and perpetrated; all which gendreth and nourishes needless strife
and contention on both hands. Wherefore, contrariwise, Let all sorts follow the
things that make for peace, and such things wherewith one another may be
edified, Romans 14. 19.

FINIS.

