Vnum Necessarium.

OR, The Doctrine and Practice OF REPENTANCE. DESCRIBING The Necessities and
Measures of a Strict, a Holy, and a Christian Life. AND Rescued from Popular
Errors.

By JER. TAILOR D. D.

Poenitentiae compensatione redimendam proponit impunitatem Deus. Tertullian.
de Poenit. Praeveniamus faciem ejus in confessione.

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-lane.
1655.

VNVM NECESSAR^ ^LL or The Doctrine and Practice of Repentance, Rescued from
popular Errors

Ecce agnus Dei gui tolli^ peccata Mundi

London, Printed for R Royston 1655



TO The Right Honorable and Noblest Lord, RICHARD Earl of Carbery, etc.
MY LORD,
THe duty of Repentance is of so great and universal concernment, a Catholicon
to the evils of the Soul of every man, that if there be any particular in which
it is worthy the labors of the whole Ecclesiastical Calling, to be instant in
season and out of season, it is in this duty; and therefore I hope I shall be
excused, if my Discourses of Repentance, like the duty it self, be perpetually
increasing; and I may, like the Widow in the Gospel to the unjust Judge, at
least hope to prevail with some men by my importunity. Men have found out so
many devices and arts to cosen themselves, that they will rather admit any
weak discourses and images of Reason, then think it necessary to repent
speedily, severely and effectively. We find that sinners are prosperous, and
God is long before he strikes; and it is always another man's case, when we see
a judgment happen upon a sinner, we feel it not our selves, for when we do,
it is commonly past remedy. Indeed it was to be pitied in the Heathen, that
many of them were tempted to take the thriving side, when Religion it self was
unprosperous. When Jupiter suffered his golden Scepter to be stole, and the
Image never frowned; and a bold fellow would scrape the Ivory thigh of
Hercules, and go away without a broken pate, for all the Club that was in his
hand; they thought they had reason to think there was no more sacredness in the
Images of their gods, then in the statues of Vigellus: and because the event of
all regular actions was not regular and equal, but Catiline was hewn down by
the Consuls sword for his Rebellion, and for the same thing Caesar became a
Prince, they believed that the Powers that governed these extregular events,
must it self be various and changeable, and they called it Fortune. But (My
Lord) that Christians should thus dote upon temporal events, and the little
baits of fishes and the meat of dogs, adoring every thing that is prosperous,
and hating that condition of things that brings trouble, is not to be pardoned
to them who profess themselves Servants and Disciples of a Crucified Lord and
Master. But it is upon the same account that men are so hardly brought to
repent, or to believe that Repentance has in it so many parts, and requires so
much labor, and exacts such caution, and cannot be performed without the best
assistances, or the greatest skill in spiritual notices. They find sin
pleasant and prosperous, gay and in the fashion: And though wise men know it is
better to be pleased then to be merry to have rest and satisfaction in wisdom
and perfective notices of things, then to laugh loud, and fright sobriety away
with noises, and dissolution, and forgetfulness: yet this severer pleasure
seems dull and flat, and men generally betake themselves to the wildnesses of
sin, and hate to have it interrupted by the intervening of the sullen grace of
Repentance. It was a sprightly saying of him in the Comedy, Ego vitam Deorum
propterea sempiternam esse arbitror,
Quod voluptates eorum propriae sunt. Nam mihi immortalitas
Parta est, si huic nulla aegritudo gaudio intercesserit.
Our immortality is to be reckoned by the continuance of our pleasure. My life
is then perpetual, when my delights are not interrupted. And this is the
immortality that too many men look after by incompetent means. But to be called
upon to Repentance, and when men inquire what that is, to be told it is all the
duty of a returning man; the extermination of sin, the mortification of all our
irregular appetites, and all that perfection of righteousness which can consist
with our state of imperfection; and that in order to these purposes, we must
not refuse the sharpest instruments, that they may be even cut off which
trouble us, but that we suffer all the severity of voluntary or imposed
discipline, according as it shall be judged necessary, this is it which will
trouble men: such, I mean, who love a beggarly ease before a laborious thriving
trade (a foul stable to some beasts is better then a fair way) and therefore it
is, that since all Christians are convinced of the necessity, the indispensable
necessity of Repentance, they have resolved to admit it, but they also resolve
they will not understand what it is. Una hercle falsa lachrymula; one or two
forced tears against a good time: and (believe it) that is a great matter too,
that is not ordinary. But if men lose an estate, -- Nemo dolorem
Fingit in hoc casu, veste^ diducere summam
Contentus, vexare oculos humore coacto.
Men need not to dissemble tears or sorrow in that case: but as if men were in
no danger when they are enemies to God, and as if to lose heaven were no great
matter, and to be cast into hell were a very tolerable condition, and such as a
man might very well undergo, and laugh heartily for all that; they seem so
unconcerned in the actions of Religion, and in their obedience to the severe
laws of Repentance, that it looks as if men had no design in the world, but to
be suffered to die quietly to perish tamely, without being troubled with the
angry arguments of Churchmen, who by all means desire they should live and
recover, and dwell with God for ever. Or if they can be forced to the further
entertainments of Repentance, it is nothing but a calling for mercy, an
ineffective prayer, a moist cloud, a resolution for to day, and a solemn shower
at the most.

Men's immota manet, lachrymae volvuntur inanes. The mind is not changed,
though the face be: for Repentance is thought to be just as other Graces, fit
for their proper season, like fruits in their own month; but then every thing
else must have its day too: we shall sin, and we must repent; but sin will come
again, and so may repentance: For there is a time for every thing under the
Sun; and the time for Repentance is when we can sin no more, when every
objection is answered, when we can have no more excuse; and they who go upon
that principle will never do it, till it be too late: For every age has
temptations of its own, and they that have been used to the yoke all their life
time, will obey their sin when it comes in any shape in which they can take any
pleasure. But men are infinitely abused, and by themselves most of all. For
Repentance is not like the Summer fruits, fit to be taken a little, and in
their own time; it is like bread, the provisions and support of our life, the
entertainment of every day, but it is the bread of affliction to some, and the
bread of carefulness to all: and he that preaches this with the greatest zeal,
and the greatest severity, it may be he takes the liberty of an enemy, but he
gives the counsel and the assistance of a friend.

My Lord, I have been so long acquainted with the secrets of your Spirit and
Religion, that I know I need not make an apology for dedicating this severe
Book to you. You know, according to the prudence which God has given you, that
he that flatters you is your enemy, and you need not be flattered; for he that
desires passionately to be a good man and a religious, to be the servant of God
and be saved, will not be fond of any vanity, and nothing else can need to be
flattered; but I have presented to your Lordship this Discourse, not only to
be a testimony to the world, how great a love, and how great an honor I have
for you, but even by ascribing you into this relation, to endear you the rather
every day more and more to the severest Doctrines and Practices of Holiness. I
was invited to make something of this by an Honorable Person who is now with
God, and who desired his needs should be served by my Ministry. But when I had
entered upon it, I found it necessary to do it in order to more purposes, and in
prosecution of the method of my other Studies. All which as they are designed
to Gods glory and the Ministry of Souls, so if by them I can signify my
obligations to your Lordship, which by your great Nobleness do still increase,
I shall not esteem them wholly ineffective even of some of those purposes
whither they are intended; for truly my Lord, in whatsoever I am or can do, I
desire to appear,

My Noblest Lord, Your Honors most obliged, and most affectionate Servant,
Jer: Tailor.

THE PREFACE To the Right Reverend and Religious FATHERS, Brian Lord Bishop of
Sarum, AND John Lord Bishop of Rochester, And to the most Reverend and
Religious Clergy of England, my dear Brethren.
Men, Brethren and Fathers,
THE wiser part of Mankind has seen so much trifling in the conduct of
disputations, so much partiality, such earnest desires of reputation, such
resolution to prevail by all means, so great mixture of interest in the
contention, so much mistaking of the main question, so frequent excursions into
differing matter, so many personal quarrels, and pety animosities, so many
wranglings about those things that shall never be helped, that is, the errors
and infirmities of men; and after all this (which also must needs be consequent
to it) so little fruit and effect of questions, no man being the wiser, or
changed from error to truth, but from error to error most frequently: and there
are in the very vindication of truth so many incompetent, uncertain, and untrue
things offered, that if by chance some truth be gotten, we are not very great
gainers, because when the whole account is cast up, we shall find, or else
they that are disinterest will observe that there is more error then truth in
the whole purchase; and still no man is satisfied, and every side keeps its
own, unless where folly or interest makes some few persons to change; and still
more weakness and more impertinencies crowd into the whole affair upon every
reply, and more yet upon the rejoinder, and when men have wrangled tediously
and vainly, they are but where they were; save only that they may remember
they suffered infirmity, and, it may be, the transport of passions, and
uncharitable expressions; and all this for an unrewarding interest, for that
which is sometimes uncertain in it self, unrevealed, unuseful, and
unsatisfying; that in the event of things, and after being wearied for little
or nothing, men have now in a very great proportion left it quite off, as
unsatisfying waters, and have been desirous of more material nourishment, and
of such notices of things and just assistances, as may promote their eternal
interest.

And indeed it was great reason and high time that they should do so: for when
they were employed in in rowing up and down uncertain seas, to find something
that was not necessary, it was certain they would less attend to that which was
more worthy their inquiry: and the enemy of mankind knew that to be a time of
his advantage, and accordingly sowed tares while we so slept; and we felt a
real mischief while we contended for an imaginary and fantastic good. For
things were come to that pass, that it was the character of a good man to be
zealous for a Sect, and all of every party respectively if they were earnest
and impatient of contradiction, were sure to be saved by their own Preachers;
and holiness of life was not so severely demanded, but that men believe their
Country Articles; and Heaven gates at no hand might be permitted to stand open
to any one else. Thence came hatred, variance, emulation and strifes; and the
Wars of Christendom which have been kindled by Disputers, and the evil lives
which were occasioned and encouraged by those proceedings, are the best
confutation of the world of all such disputations.

But now when we come to search into that part of Theology which is most
necessary, in which the life of Christianity, and the interest of Souls, the
peace of Christendom, and the union of Minds, the sweetness of Society, and
the support of Government, the usefulness and comfort of our lives, the
advancement of Virtue, and the just measures of Honor; we find many things
disordered, the Tables of the Commandments broken in pieces, and some parts
are lost and some disordered, and into the very practice of Christians there
are crept so many material errors, that although God made nothing plainer, yet
now nothing is more difficult and involved, uncertain and discomposed, then
many of the great lines and propositions in Moral Theology: Nothing is more
neglected, more necessary, or more mistaken. For although very many run into
holy Orders without just abilities, and think their Province is well discharged
if they can preach upon Sundays; and men observing the ordinary preaching to be
little better then ordinary talk, have been made bold to venture into the Holy
Sept, and invade the secrets of the Temple, as thinking they can talk at the
same rate which they observe to be the manner of vulgar Sermons: yet they who
know to give a just value to the best things, know that the sacred Office of a
Priest, a Minister of Religion, does not only require great holiness, that
they may acceptably offer the Christian Sacrifices and Oblations of Prayer and
Eucharist for the people, and become their fairest examples; but also great
abilities, and wise notices of things and persons, strict observation, deep
remembrances, prudent applications, courage and caution, severity and mercy,
diligence and wisdom, that they may dispense the excellent things of
Christianity, to the same effect whither they were designed in the Counsels of
Eternity, that is, to the glory of God and the benefit of Souls.

But it is a sad thing to observe how weakly the Souls of men and women are
guided; with what false measures they are instructed, how their guides
oftentimes strive to please men rather then to save them, and accordingly have
fitted their Discourses and Sermons with easy theoremes, such which the Schools
of learning have fallen upon by chance, or interest, or flattery, or vicious
necessities, or superinduced arts, or weak compliances. But from whatsoever
cause it does proceed, we feel the thing: There are so many false principles in
the institutions and systemes of moral or Casuistical Divinity, and they taught
so generally, and believed so unquestionably, and so fitted to the dispositions
of men, so complying with their evil inclinations, so apt to produce error and
confidence, security and a careless conversation, that neither can there be any
way better to promote the interest of souls, nor to vindicate truth, nor to
adorn the science it self, or to make Religion reasonable and intelligible, or
to promote holy life, then by rescuing our Schools and Pulpits, and private
persuasions from the believing such propositions which have prevailed very much
and very long, but yet which are not only false, but have immediate influence
upon the lives of men, so as to become to them a state of universal temptation
from the severities and wisdom of Holiness.

When therefore I had observed concerning the Church of England [which is the
most excellently instructed with a body of true Articles, and doctrines of
Holiness, with a displine material and prudent, with a Government Apostolical,
with dignities neither splendid nor sordid, too great for contempt, and too
little for envy (unless she had met with little people and greatly malicious)
and indeed with every thing that could instruct or adorn a Christian Church, so
that she wanted nothing but the continuance of peace, and what she already
was;] that amongst all her heaps of excellent things, and Books by which her
sons have ministered to piety and learning both at home and abroad, there was
the greatest scarcity of Books of Cases of Conscience; and that while I stood
watching that some or other should undertake it according to the ability which
God gave them; and yet every one found himself hindered or diverted, persecuted
or disabled, and still the work was left undone, I suffered my self to be
invited to put my weak hand to this work, rather then that it should not be
done at all. But by that time I had made some progression in the first
preparatory discourses to the work, I found that a great part of that learning
was supported by principles very weak and very false: and that it was in vain
to dispute concerning a single case whether it were lawful or no, when by the
general discoursings of men it might be permitted to live in states of sin
without danger or reproof, as to the final event of souls. I thought it
therefore necessary by way of address and preparation to the publication of the
particulars, that it should appear to be necessary for a man to live a holy
life; and that it could be of concern to him to inquire into the very minutes
of his conscience: For if it be no matter how men live, and if the hopes of
heaven can well stand with a wicked life, there is nothing in the world more
unnecessary, then to enquire after cases of Conscience. And if it be sufficient
for a man at the last to cry for pardon for having all his life time neither
regarded Laws nor Conscience, certainly they have found out a better compendium
of Religion, and need not be troubled with variety of rules and cautions of
carefulness and a lasting holiness; nor think concerning any action or state of
life, whether it be lawful or not lawful; for it is all one whether it be or
no, since neither one nor the other will easily change the event of things.

For let it be imagined, what need there can be that any man should write cases
of Conscience, or read them, if it be lawful for a man thus to believe and
speak.

I have indeed often in my younger years been affrighted with the fearful
noises of damnation, and the Ministers of Religion, for what reasons they best
know, did call upon me to deny my appetite, to cross my desires, to destroy my
pleasures, to live against my nature; and I was afraid as long as I could not
consider the secrets of things; but now I find that in theri own Books there
are for me so many confidences and securities, that those fears were most
unreasonable, and that as long as I live by the rules and measures of nature, I
do not offend God, or if I do, I shall soon find a pardon. For I consider
that the Commandments are impossible, and what is not possible to be done we
are not to take care of: and he that fails in one instance cannot be saved
without a pardon, not by his obedience; and he that fails in all may be saved
by pardon and grace. For the case is so, that we are sinners naturally, made so
before we were born; and nature can never be changed until she be destroyed:
and since all our irregularities spring from that root, it is certain they
ought not to be imputed to us; and a man can no more fear Gods anger for being
inclined to all sin, then for being hungry, or miserable: and therefore I
expect from the wisdom and goodness of God some provisions which will so
extinguish this solemn and artificial guilt, that it shall be as if it were
not. But in the mean time the certainty of sinning will proceed. For besides
that I am told that a man has no liberty, but a liberty to sin, and this
definite liberty is in plain English a very necessity, we see it by a daily
experience that those who call themselves good men, are such who do what they
would not, and cannot do what they would; and if it be so, it is better to do
what I have a mind to quietly, then to vex my self, and yet do it
nevertheless: and that it is so, I am taught in almost all the discourses I
have read or heard upon the seventh Chapter to the Romans: and therefore if I
may have leave to do consonantly to what I am taught to believe, I must
confess myself to be under the dominion of sin, and therefore must obey; and
that I am bidden to obey unwillingly, and am told that the striving against sin
is indeed ordinarily ineffective, and yet is a sign of regeneration; I can soon
do that; I can strive against it, and pray against it; but I cannot hope to
prevail in either, because I am told beforehand, that even the regenerate are
under the power of sin; they will and do not; they do and will not; and so it
is with me; I would fain be perfect if I could; but I must not hope it; and
therefore I would only do my actions so reasonably, that I would not be tied
to vex my self for what I cannot help; or to lose the pleasure of my sin by
fretting at it, when it is certain it will be done, and yet I shall remain in
the state of regeneration. And who can help all this, but God, whose mercy is
indeed infinite; and although in the secret dispensation of affairs, he has
concluded all under sin, yet he had no purpose we should therefore perish; but
it was done that he might have mercy upon all; that is, that we may glorify him
for supplying our needs, pardoning our sins, relieving our infirmities? And
therefore when I consider that Gods mercy has no limit in it self, and is made
definite only by the capacity of the object, it is not to be doubted, but he
loves his creatures so well, that we shall all rejoice in our being freed from
eternal fears. For to justify my hopes, why may not I be confident of heaven
for all my sins, since the imputation of Christ's righteousness is that by which
I shall be justified? my own is but like a menstruous rag, and the just falls
seven times a day; but Christ's Cross pays for all. And therefore I am confident
I shall do well. For I am one of those for whom Christ died; and I believe
this, this faith is not to be reproved, for this is that which justifies, who
shall condemn me? It is not a good life that justifies a man before God, but
it is faith in the special promises; for indeed it being impossible to live
innocently, it is necessary that a way of Gods own finding out should be relied
upon. Only this indeed I do, I do avoid the capital sins, blasphemies, and
horrid murders; I am (...), I sin like a Gentleman, not like a Thief; I suffer
infirmities, but do not do like a Devil; and though I sin, yet I repent
speedily, and when I sin again, I repent again, and my spiritual state is like
my natural, day and night succeed each other by a never failing revolution. I
sin indeed in some instances, but I do my duty in many; and every man has
his infirmities; no man can say, My soul is pure from sin; but I hope that
because I repent still as I sin, my sins are but as single actions; and since
I resist them what I can, I hope they will be reckoned to me but as sins of
infirmity, without which no man is, or can be in this state of imperfection.
For if I pray against a sin, and my spirit does resist it, though the flesh
prevails, yet I am in the state of grace. For that I may own publicly what I
am publicly taught; a man cannot be soon out of the state of grace, but he may
be soon in; Gods love is lasting and perpetual when it has once begun; and
when the curtain is drawn over the state of grace by the intervening of a sin,
yet as soon as ever we begin to cry for pardon, nay when we do but say, we
will confess our sins, nay when we do but resolve we will, God meets us with
his pardon, and prevents us with some portions of it. And let things be at the
worst they can, yet he that confesses his sins to God, shall find mercy at
the hands of God; and he has established a holy Ministry in his Church to
absolve all penitents; and if I go to one of them, and tell the sad story of
my infirmity, the good man will presently warrant my pardon, and absolve me.
But then I remember this also, that as my infirmity that is unavoidable shall
not prejudice me, so neither shall any time prejudice my repentance. For if on
my deathbed I cry unto God for pardon, and turn heartily unto God in the very
instant of my dissolution, I am safe; because when ever a man converts to God,
in the same instant God turns to him, or else it were possible for God to hate
him that loves God, and our repentance should in some periods be rejected,
expressly against all the promises. For it is an act of contrition, an act of
the love of God that reconciles us; and I shall be very unfortunate, if in the
midst of all my pains, when my needs increase, and my fears are pregnant, and
my self am ready to accept pardon upon any terms, I shall not then do so much
as one act of a hearty sorrow and contrition. But however, I have the consent
of almost all men, and all the Schools of learning in the world, that after a
wicked life my repentance at last shall be accepted. Saint Ambrose, who was a
good probable Doctor, and one as fit to be relied on as any man else, in his
Funeral Oration of Valentinian has these words; Blessed is he truly, who even
in his old age has amended his error; Blessed is he who even just before the
stroke of death turns his mind from vice. Blessed are they whose sins are
covered, for it is written, Cease from evil, and do good and dwell for
evermore. Whoever therefore shall leave off from sin, and shall in any age be
turned to better things, he has the pardon of his former sins, which either
he has confessed with the affections of a penitent, or turned from them with
the desires of amends. But this [Prince] has company enough in the way of his
obtaining pardon; For there are very many who could in their old age recall
themselves from the slipperinesse and sins of their youth; but seldom is any
one to be found, who in his youth with a serious sobriety will bear the heavy
yoke. And I remember that when Faustus Bishop of Rhegium being asked by
Paulinus Bishop of Nola from Marinus the Hermit, whether a man who was involved
in carnal sins and exercised all that a criminous person could do, might
obtain a full pardon, if he did suddenly repent in the day of his death? did
answer peevishly, and severely, and gave no hopes, nor would allow pardon to
any such; Avitus the Archbishop of Vienna reproved his pride and his morosity,
Epist. 4.
and gave express sentence for the validity of such a repentance: and that
Gentleness has been the continual Doctrine of the Church for many ages;
insomuch that in the year 1584 Henry Kyspenning a Canon of Xant published a
Book, entitled, The Evangelical Doctrine of the meditation of death, with
solid exhortations and comforts to the sick, from the currents of Scripture,
and the Commentaries of the Fathers, Lib. 3. c. 11.
where teaching the sick man how to answer the objections of Satan, he makes
this to be the fifteenth: I repent too late of my sins. He bids him answer;
Lib. 7. c. 9.
It is not late if it be true: and to the thief upon the Cross Christ said,
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: And afterward, a short prayer
easily pierces heaven, so it be darted forth with a vehement force of the
spirit. Truly the history of the Kings tells that David who was so great a
sinner, used but three syllables; for he is read to have said no more but
Peccavi, I have sinned. For S. Ambrose said, The flame of the sacrifice of his
heart ascends up to heaven. Because we have a merciful and gentle Lord; and the
correction of our sins needs not much time, but great fervor. And to the same
purpose are the words of Alcuinus the Tutor of Charles the Great: It behooves us
to come to repentance with all confidence, and by faith to believe undoubtedly,
that by repentance our sins may be blotted out, Etiamsi in ultimo vitae spiritu
commissa poeniteat, although we repent of our sins in the last breath of our
life.

Now after all these grounds of hope and confidence to a sinner, what can be
pretended in defiance of a sinful life; and since men will hope upon one
ground, though it be trifling and inconsiderable, when there are so many
doctrinal grounds of hopes established propositions, parts of Religion and
Articles of faith to rely upon, (for, all these particulars before reckoned,
men are called upon to believe earnestly, and are hated and threatened and
despised, if they do not believe them) what is there left to discourage the
evil lives of men, or to lessen a full iniquity, since upon the account of the
premises, either we may do what we list without sin, or sin without punishment,
or go on without fear, or repent without danger, and without scruple be
confident of Heaven?

And now if Moral Theology rely upon such notices as these, I thought my work
was at an end before I had well finished the first steps of my progression. The
whole sum of affairs was in danger, and therefore I need not trouble my self
or others with consideration of the particulars. I therefore thought it
necessary first to undermine these false foundations; and since an inquiry into
the minutes of conscience is commonly the work of persons that live holily, I
ought to take care that this be accounted necessary, and all false warrants to
the contrary be cancelled, that there might be many idonei auditores, persons
competent to hear and read, and such who ought to be promoted and assisted in
their holy intendments. And I bless God there are very many such; and though
iniquity does abound, yet Gods grace is conspicuous and remarkable in the lives
of very many, to whom I shall design all the labors of my life, as being dear
to God, and my dear Brethren in the service of Jesus. But I would fain have the
Churches as full as I could before I begin; and therefore I esteemed it
necessary to publish these Papers before my other, as containing the greatest
lines of Conscience, and the most general cases of our whole life, even all the
Doctrine of Repentance, upon which all the hopes of man depend through Jesus
Christ.

But I have other purposes also in the publication of this Book. The Ministers
of the Church of Rome (who ever love to fish in troubled waters, and to oppress
the miserable and afflicted, if they differ from them in a proposition) use all
the means they can to persuade our people, that the man that is afflicted is
not alive, that the Church of England now it is a persecuted Church, is no
Church at all; and though (blessed be God) our Propositions, and Doctrines, and
Liturgy, and Communion are sufficiently vindicated in despite of all their
petty oppositions and trifling arrests, yet they will never leave making noises
and outcries; which for my part I can easily neglect, as finding them to be
nothing but noise. But yet I am willing to try the Rights and Excellencies of a
Church with them upon other accounts; by such indications as are the most
proper tokens of life, I mean, propositions of Holiness, the necessities of a
holy life: for certainly that Church is most to be followed, who brings us
nearest to God; and they make our approaches nearest, who teach us to be most
holy, and whose Doctrines command the most excellent and severest lives. But if
it shall appear that the prevailing Doctrines in the Church of Rome do
consequently teach, or directly warrant impiety, or which is all one, are too
easy in promising pardon, and for it have no defenses, but distinctions of
their own inventing, I suppose it will be a greater reproof to their confidence
and bold pretensions, then a discourse against one of their immaterial
propositions, that have neither certainty nor usefulness. But I had rather that
they would preach severity, then be reproved for their careless propositions,
and therefore am well pleased that even amongst themselves some are so
convinced of the weakness of their usual Ministeries of Repentance, that as
much as they dare they call upon the Priests to be more deliberate in their
absolutions, and severe in their impositions of satisfactions, requiring a
longer time of Repentance before the penitents be reconciled.

Mounsieur Arnauld of the Sorbon has appeared publicly in reproof of a
frequent and easy Communion, without the just and long preparations of
Repentance, and its proper exercises and Ministry. Petavius the Jesuit has
opposed him; the one cries, The present Church, the other, The Ancient Church;
and as Petavius is too hard for his adversary in the present Authority, so
Mounsieur Arnauld has the clearest advantage in the pretensions of Antiquity
and the arguments of Truth; from which Petavius and his abettor Bagot the
Jesuit have no escape or defensative, but by distinguishing Repentance into
Solemn and Sacramental: which is just as if they should say, Repentance is
twofold; one, such as was taught and practiced by the Primitive Church; the
other, that which is in use this day in the Church of Rome: for there is not so
much as one pregnant testimony in Antiquity for the first four hundred years,
that there was any Repentance thought of, but Repentance toward God, and
sometimes performed in the Church, in which after their stations were
performed, they were admitted to the holy Communion; excepting only in the
danger or article of death, in which they hastened the Communion, and enjoined
the stations to the afterward completed, in case they did recover, and if they
did not, they left the event to God. But this question of theirs can never be
ended upon the new principles, nor shall be freely argued because of their
interest. For who ever are obliged to profess some false propositions, shall
never from thence find out an entire truth, but like caskes in a troubled sea,
sometimes they will be under water, sometimes above. For the productions of
error are infinite, but most commonly monstrous: and in the fairest of them
there will be some crooked or deformed part.

But of the thing it self I have given such accounts as I could, being engaged
on no side, and the servant of no interest, and have endevour'd to represent
the dangers of every sinner, the difficulty of obtaining pardon, the many parts
and progressions of Repentance, the severity of the Primitive Church, their
rigid Doctrines and austere Disciplines, the degrees of easiness and complyings
that came in by negligence; and I desire that the effect should be, that all
the pious and religious Curates of Souls in the Church of England would
endeavor to produce so much fear and reverence, caution and wariness in all
their penitents, that they should be willing to undergo more severe methods in
their restitution then now they do: that men should not dare to approach to the
holy Sacrament, as soon as ever their foul hands are wet with a drop of holy
rain; but that they should expect the periods of life, and when they have given
to their Curate fair testimony of a hearty Repentance, and know it to be so
within themselves, they may with comfort to all parties, communicate with
holiness and joy. For I conceive this to be that event of things which was
designed by S. Paul in that excellent advice; Obey them that have the rule over
you, Heb. 13.17.
(...), submit your selves, viz. to their ordering and discipline, because they
watch for your souls, as they that must give accounts for them, that they may
do it with joy. I am sure we cannot give accounts of souls of which we have no
notice: and though we had reason to rescue them from the yoke of bondage, which
the unjust laws and fetters of annual and private Confession (as it was by them
ordered) did make men to complain of; yet I believe we should be all unwilling,
our Charges should exchange these fetters for worse, and by shaking off the
laws of Confession, accidentally entertain the tyranny of sin. It was neither
fit that all should be tied to it, nor yet that all should throw it off. There
are some sins, and some cases, and some persons to whom an actual Ministry and
personal provision and conduct by the Priests Office were better, then food or
physic, It were therefore very well if great sinners could be invited to bear
the yoke of holy discipline, and do their Repentances under the conduct of
those who must give an account of them, that they would inquire into the state
of their souls, that they would submit them to be judged by those who are
justly and rightly appointed over them, or such whom they are permitted to
choose; and then that we would apply our selves to understand the secrets of
Religion, the measures of the Spirit, the conduct of Souls, the advantages and
disadvantages of things and persons, the ways of life and death, the
labyrinths of temptation, and all the remedies of sin, the public and private,
the great and little lines of Conscience, and all those ways by which men may
be assisted and promoted in the ways of godliness: for such knowledge as it is
most difficult and secret, untaught and unregarded; so it is most necessary,
and for want of it, the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist is oftentimes given to
them that are in the gall of bitterness: that which is holy is given to Dogs.
Indeed neither we nor our Forefathers could help it always; and the Discipline
of the Church could seize but upon few: all were invited, but none but the
willing could receive the benefit; but however, it were pity that men upon the
account of little and trifling objections, should be discouraged from doing
themselves benefit, and from enabling us with greater advantages to do our duty
to them. It was of old observed of the Christians: (...): they obey the laws,
and by the excellency of their own lives excel the perfection of the laws: and
it is not well, if we shall be earnest to tell them that such a thing is not
necessary, if we know it to be good. For in this present dissolution of
manners, to tell the people concerning any good thing that it is not necessary,
is to tempt them to let it alone.

The Presbyterian Ministers (who are of the Church of England, just as the
Irish are English) have obtained such power with their Proselytes, that they
take some account of the Souls (of such as they please) before they admit them
to their communion in Sacraments; they do it to secure them to their party, or
else make such accounts to be as their Shibboleth, to discern their Jews from
the men of Ephraim: but it were very well we would do that for Conscience, for
Charity, and for Piety, which others do for Interest, or Zeal; and that we
would be careful to use all those Ministeries, and be earnest for all those
Doctrines, which visibly in the causes of things are apt to produce holiness
and severe living. It is no matter whether by these arts any Sect or Name be
promoted; it is certain Christian Religion would, and that is the real interest
of us all, that those who are under our Charges should know the force of the
Resurrection of Christ, and the conduct of the Spirit, and live according to
the purity of God, and the light of the Gospel. To this let us cooperate with
all wisdom, and earnestness, and knowledge, and spiritual understanding. And
there is no better way in the world to do this, then by ministering to persons
singly in the conduct of their Repentance, which as it is the work of every
man, so there are but few persons who need not the conduct of a spiritual guide
in the beginnings and progressions of it.

To the assistance of this work I have now put my Symbol, having by the sad
experience of my own miseries and the calamities of others, to whose
restitution I have been called to minister, been taught something of the secret
of Souls: and I have reason to think that the words of our dearest Lord to S.
Peter were also spoken to me; Tu autem conversus confirma fratres. I hope I
have received many of the mercies of a repenting sinner, and I have felt the
turnings and varieties of spiritual entercourses; and I have often observed the
advantages in ministering to others, and am most confident that the greatest
benefits of our office may with best effect be communicated to souls in
personal and particular Ministrations. In the following book I have given
advices, and have asserted many truths in order to all this: I have endeavored
to break in pieces almost all those propositions, upon the confidence of which
men have been negligent of severe and strict living: I have cancelled some
false grounds upon which many answers in Moral Theology used to be made to
inquiries in Cases of Conscience: I have according to my weak ability described
all the necessities, and great inducements of a holy life; and have endeavored
to do it so plainly, that it may be useful to every man, and so inoffensively,
that it may hurt no man.

I know but one Objection which I am likely to meet withal (excepting those of
my infirmity and disability, which I cannot answer but by protesting the piety
of my purposes) but this only, that in the Chapter of Original sin, I speak
otherwise then is spoken commonly in the Church of England: whose ninth Article
affirms, that the natural propensity to evil, and the perpetual lusting of the
flesh against the spirit, deserves the anger of God and damnation, against
which I so earnestly seem to dispute in the sixth Chapter of my Book. To this I
answer, that it is one thing to say a thing in its own nature deserves
damnation; and another, to say it is damnable to all those persons in whom it
is subjected. The thing it self, that is, our corrupted nature, or our nature
of corruption, does leave us in the state of separation from God, by being
unable to bear us to heaven: imperfection of nature can never carry us to the
perfections of glory; and this I conceive to be all that our Church intends:
for that in the state of nature we can only fall short of heaven, and be
condemned to a poena damni, is the severest thing that any sober person owns;
and this I say, that Nature alone cannot bring us to God, without the
regeneration of the Spirit, and the grace of God, we can never go to heaven:
but because this Nature was not spoiled by Infants, but by persons of reason,
and we are all admitted to a new Covenant of Mercy and Grace, made with Adam
presently after his fall, that is, even before we were born, as much as we were
to a participation of sin before we were born, no man can perish actually for
that, because he is reconciled by this. He that says every sin is damnable,
and deserves the anger of God, says true; but yet some persons that sin of
mere infirmity are accounted by God in the rank of innocent persons. So it is
in this Article. Concupiscence remains in the regenerate, and yet concupiscence
has the nature of sin, but it brings not condemnation. These words explain the
former. Original imperfection is such a thing as is even in the regenerate; and
it is of the nature of sin, that is, it is the effect of one sin, and the cause
of many; but yet it is not damning, because as it is subjected in unconsenting
persons, it loses its own natural venom, and relation to guiltiness, that is,
it may of it self in its abstracted nature be a sin, and deserve Gods anger,
viz. in some persons, in all them that consent to it: but that which will
always be in persons that shall never be damned, that is in infants and
regenerate, shall never damn them. And this is the main of what I affirm, And
since the Church of England intended that Article against the Doctrine of the
Pelagians, I suppose I shall not be thought to recede from the spirit and sense
of the Article, though I use differing manners of expression; because my way of
explicating this question, does most of all destroy the Pelagian Heresy, since
although I am desirous to acquit the dispensation of God and his Justice from
any imputation or suspicion of wrong, and am loath to put our sins upon the
account of another, yet I impute all our evils to the imperfections of our
nature and the malice of our choice, which does most of all demonstrate not
only the necessity of Grace, but also of Infant Baptism; and then to accuse
this Doctrine of Pelagianism, or any newer name of Heresy, will seem like
impotency and weakness of spirit; but there will be nothing of truth or
learning in it. And although this Article was penned according to the style of
the Schools, as they then did love to speak, yet the hardest word in it, is
capable of such a sense as complies with the intendment of that whole sixth
Chapter. For though the Church of England professes her self fallible, and
consequently that all her truths may be peaceably improved; yet I do think that
she is not actually deceived; and also that diverse eminently learned do consent
in my sense of that Article. However, I am so truly zealous for her honor and
peace, that I wholly submit all that I say there, or any where else to her most
prudent judgment. And though I may most easily be deceived, yet I have given
my reasons for what I say, and desire to be tried by them, not by prejudice,
and numbers, and zeal: and if any man resolves to understand the Article in any
other sense then what I have now explicated, all that I shall say is, that it
may be I cannot reconcile my Doctrine to his explication; it is enough that it
is consistent with the Article it self in its best understanding and compliance
with the truth it self, and the justification of God. However, he that
explicates the Article, and thinks it means as he says, does all the honor he
can to the Authority; whose words if he does not understand, yet the sanction
he reverers.

And this liberty I now take, is no other then has been used by the severest
Votaries in that Church where to dissent is death, I mean in the Church of
Rome. I call to witness those disputations and contradictory assertions in the
matter of some articles, which are to be observed in Andreas Vega, Dominicus a
Soto, Andradius, the Lawyers about the Question of divorces, and clandestine
contracts, the Divines about predetermination, and about this very article of
Original sin, as relating to the Virgin Mary. But blessed be God, we are under
the Discipline of a prudent, charitable, and indulgent Mother; and if I may be
allowed to suppose, that the article means no more in short, then the office of
Baptism explicates at large, I will abide by the trial, there is not a word in
the Rubricks or Prayers, but may very perfectly consist with the Doctrine I
deliver. But though the Church of England is my Mother, and I hope I shall ever
live, and at last die in her Communion, and if God shall call me to it, and
enable me, I will not refuse to die for her; yet I conceive there is something
most highly considerable in that saying, Call no man Master upon earth; that
is, no man's explication of her articles, shall prejudice my affirmative, if it
agrees with Scripture and right reason, and the doctrine of the Primitive
Church for the first 300 years; and if in any of this I am mistaken, I will
most thankfully be reproved, and most readily make honorable amends. But my
proposition, I hope, is not built upon the sand: and I am most sure it is so
zealous for Gods honor, and the reputation of his justice, and wisdom, and
goodness, that I hope all that are pious (unless they labor under some
prejudice and prepossession) will upon that account be zealous for it, or at
least confess that what I intend has in it more of piety, then their negative
can have of certainty. That which is strained, and held too hard will soonest
break. He that stoops to the authority, yet twists the article with truth,
preserves both with modesty and Religion.

One thing more I fear will trouble some persons, who will be apt to say to me
as Avitus of Vienna did to Faustus of Rhegium, Hic quantum ad frontem pertinet
quasi abstinentissimam vitam professus, and non secretam crucem, sed publicam
vanitatem, etc. That upon pretense of great severity, as if I were exact or
could be, I urge others to so great strictness, which will rather produce
despair then holiness. Though I have in its proper place taken care concerning
this, and all the way intend, to rescue men from the just causes, and inlets to
despair; that is, not to make them do that against which by preaching a holy
life, I have prepared the best defensative; yet this I shall say here
particularly: That I think this objection is but a mere excuse which some men
would make, lest they should believe it necessary to live well. For to speak
truth, men are not very apt to despair, they have ten thousand ways to flatter
themselves, and they will hope in despite of all arguments to the contrary; In
all the Scripture there is but one example of a despairing man, and that was
Judas; who did so, not upon the stock of any fierce propositions preached to
him, but upon the load of his foul sin, and the pusillanimity of his spirit.
But they are not to be numbered who live in sin, and yet sibi suaviter
benedicunt, think themselves in a good condition; and all them that rely upon
those false principles which I have reckoned in this preface, and confuted in
the Book, are examples of it. But it were well if men would distinguish the sin
of despair, from the misery of despair. Where God has given us no warrant to
hope, there to despair is no sin; it may be a punishment, and to hope also may
be presumption.

I shall end with the most charitable advice I can give to any of my erring
Brethren. Let no man be so vain as to use all the wit and arts, all the shifts
and devices of the world, that he may behold to enjoy the pleasure of his sin,
since it may bring him into that condition, that it will be disputed, whether
he shall despair or no. Our duty is to make our calling and election sure;
which certainly cannot be done but by a timely and effective repentance But
they that will be confident in their health, are sometimes pusillanimous in
their sickness, presumptuous in sin, and despairing in the day of their
calamity. De Repub. ^,
Cognitio de incorrupto Dei judicio in multis dormit; sed excitari solet circa
mortem, said Plato. For though men give false sentences of the Divine
judgments, when their temptations are high, and their sin is pleasant, yet
about the time of their death, their understanding and notices are awakened,
and they see what they would not see before, and what they cannot now avoid.

Thus I have given account of the design of this Book to you, Most Reverend
Fathers and Religious Brethren of this Church; and to your judgment I submit
what I have here discoursed of; as knowing that the chiefest part of the
Ecclesiastical office is conversant about Repentance; and the whole Government
of the Primitive Church was almost wholly employed in ministering to the orders,
and restitution and reconciliation of penitents; and therefore you are not
only by your ability, but by your employment and experiences, the most
competent Judges, and the aptest promoters of those truths by which repentance
is made most perfect and unreprovable. By your Prayers, and your Authority, and
your Wisdom, I hope it will be more and more effected, that the strictnesses
of a holy life be thought necessary, and that repentance may be no more that
trifling, little piece of duty, to which the errors of the late Schools of
learning, and the desires of men to be deceived in this article, have reduced
it. I have done thus much of my part toward it, and I humbly desire it may be
accepted by God, by you, and by all good men.

Jer: Tailor.

The CONTENTS of the Chapters and Sections contained in this Book.
CHAP. I. The Foundation and Necessity of Repentance. Page 1.
Sect. 1 Of the indispensable necessity of Repentance, in remedy to the
unavoidable transgressing the Covenant of Works, ibid. Sect. 2 Of the
possibility or impossibility of keeping the Precepts of the Gospel, 8 Sect. 3
How Repentance and the Precept of Perfection Evangelicall can stand together,
26 Sect. 4 The former Doctrine reduced to practice, 39
CHAP. II.
Sect. 1. Of the nature and definition of Repentance; and what parts of duty
are signified by it in holy Scriptures, p. 63. Sect. 2 Of Repentance in
general; or Conversion, 73 Sect. 3 Descriptions of Repentance taken from the
holy Scriptures, 85
CHAP. III.
Sect. 1. Of the distinction of sins Mortal and Venial, in what sense to be
admitted; and how the smallest sins are to be repented of, and expiated, p. 101
Sect. 2 Of the difference of sins, and their measures, 104 Sect. 3 That all
sins are punishable as God please, even with the pains of Hell, p. 111 Sect. 4
The former Doctrine reduced to practice, 137 Sect. 5 141 Sect. 6 What
Repentance is necessary for the smaller or more Venial sins, 155
CHAP. IV.
Sect. 1. Of Actual, single sins, and what Repentance is proper to them, p. 169
Sect. 2 Whether every single act of these sins puts a man out of Gods favor,
182 Sect. 3 What Repentance is necessary for single acts of sin, 197
CHAP. V. Of Habitual sins, and their manner of eradication or cure, and their
proper instruments of pardon, p. 211
Sect. 1 The state of the Question, p. 211 Sect. 2 Every man is bound to repent
of his sin as soon as he has committed it, 217 Sect. 3 A sinful habit has in
it proper evils, and a proper guiltiness of its own, besides all that which
came directly by the single actions, 228 Sect. 4 Sinful habits do require a
distinct manner of Repentance, and have no promise to be pardoned but by the
introduction of the contrary, 256 Sect. 5 Consideration of the Objections
against the former Doctrine, 272 Sect. 6 The former Doctrine reduced to
practice, 305
CHAP. VI.
Sect. 1. Of Concupiscence, and Original sin, and whether or no, or how far we
are bound to repent of it, p. 361 Sect. 2 Consideration of the objections
against the former doctrine, 392 Sect. 3 How God punishes the Fathers sin upon
the Children, 403 Sect. 4 Of the causes of the Universal wickedness of
Mankind, 411 Sect. 5 Of liberty of Election remaining after Adams fall, 418
Sect. 6 The practical Question, 424 Sect. 7 Advices relating to the matter of
Original sin, 427
CHAP. VII.
Sect. 1. Of sins of Infirmity. p. 449 Sect. 2 455 Sect. 3 463 Sect. 4 468
Sect. 5 How far an Unregenerate man may go in the ways of piety and Religion,
474 Sect. 6 The Character of the Regenerate estate, or person, 495 Sect. 7 What
are properly and truly sins of Infirmity, and how far they can consist with the
regenerate estate, 499 Sect. 8 Practical advices to be added to the foregoing
considerations, 515
CHAP. VIII.
Sect. 1. Of the effect of Repentance, viz. Remission of sins, p. 527 Sect. 2
Of pardon of sins committed after Baptism, 532 Sect. 3 Of the difficulty of
obtaining pardon: The doctrine and practice of the Primitive Church in this
article, p. 536 Sect. 4 Of the sin against the Holy Ghost; and in what sense it
is or may be Unpardonable, 550 Sect. 5 555 Sect. 6 The former Doctrines reduced
to Practice, 568
CHAP. IX.
Sect. 1. Of Ecclesiastical Penance, or, The fruits of Repentance, p. 579 Sect.
2 Of Contrition or godly Sorrow, 582 Sect. 3 Of the natures and difference of
Attrition and Contrition, 599 Sect. 4 Of Confession, 605 Sect. 5 Attrition, or
the imperfect repentance, though with absolution, is not sufficient, 638 Sect.
6 Of Penances, or Satisfactions, 644 Sect. 7 The former doctrine reduced to
practice, 658 Sect. 8 669 Sect. 9. 680
place this before page 1.

sacred heart Cor contritum, et humiliatum Deus non despiciet.



CHAP. I. The foundation, and necessity of Repentance.
. 1. Of the indispensable necessity of Repentance in remedy to the unavoidable
transgressing the Covenant of Works.
IN the first intercourse with Man, God made such a Covenant as he might justly
make out of his absolute dominion, and such as was agreeable with those powers
which he gave us, and the instances in which obedience was demanded. For 1. Man
was made perfect in his kind, and God demanded of him perfect obedience. 2.
The first Covenant was the Covenant of Works, that is, there was nothing in it,
but Man was to obey or die: but God laid but one command upon him that we
find; the Covenant was instanced but in one precept. In that he failed, and
therefore he was lost. There was here no remedy, no second thoughts, no amends
to be made. But because much was not required of him, and the Commandment was
very easy, and he had strengths more then enough to keep it, therefore he had
no cause to complain: God might, and did exact at first the Covenant of Works,
because it was at first infinitely tolerable. But,

From this time forward this Covenant began to be hard, Noah, then to Abraham,
and then to his posterity; and by this time they were very many: And still God
held over man's head the Covenant of Works.

Upon the pressure of this Covenant all the world did complain: Tanta mandata
sunt, ut impossbile sit servari ea, In cap. 3. Gal.
said S. Ambrose: the Commandments were so many and great, that it was
impossible they should be kept. For at first there were no promises at all of
any good, nothing but a threatening of evil to the transgressors; and after a
long time they were entertained but with the promise of temporal good things,
which to some men were performed by the pleasures and rewards of sin; and then
there being a great imperfection in the nature of man, it could not be that man
should remain innocent; and for repentance, in this Covenant there was no
regard, or provisions made. But I said,

The Covenant of Works was still kept on foot; severe institution restraining
their loosenesses, recollecting their inadvertencies, uniting their
distractions. For the world was not then prepared by spiritual usages and
dispositions to be governed by love and an easy yoke, but by threatenings and
severities. And this is the account S. Paul gives of it, (...), The Law was a
Schoolmaster, Gal. 3.24.
that is, had a temporary authority serving to other ends, with no final
concluding power. It could chastise and threaten, but it could not condemn: it
had not power of eternal life and death, that was given by other measures. But
because the world was wild and barbarous, good men were few, the bad potent
and innumerable, and sin was conducted and helped forward by pleasure and
impunity, it was necessary that God should superinduce a law, and show them the
rod, and affright and check their confidences, lest the world it self should
perish by dissolution. The law of Moses was still a part of the Covenant of
Works. Some little it had of repentance; Sacrifice and expiations were
appointed for small sins; but nothing at all for greater. Every great sin
brought death infallibly. And as it had a little image of Repentance, so it had
something of Promises, to be as a grace and auxiliary to set forward obedience.
But this would not do it. The promises were temporal, and that could not
secure obedience in great instances; and there being for them no remedy
appointed by repentance, the law could not justify, it did not promise life
Eternal, nor give sufficient security against the Temporal, only it was
brought in as a pedagogy for the present necessity.

But this pedagogy or institution was also a manuduction to the Gospel. they
would have shut their ears, unless they had had some preparatory institution of
severity and fear: And therefore S. Paul also calls it, (...), a pedagogy, or
institution leading unto Christ.

For it was this which made the world of the Godly long for Christ, the hidden
mystery of Justification by Faith and Repentance. For the law called for exact
obedience, but ministered no grace but that of fear, which was not enough to the
performance or the engagement of exact obedience. All therefore were here
convinced of sin, but by this Covenant they had no hopes, and therefore were to
expect relief from another and a better: Gal. 3.22.
according to that saying of S. Paul, The Scripture concludes all under sin
(that is, declares all the world to be sinners) that the promise by the faith
of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. This S. Bernard expresses
in these words, Deus nobis hoc fecit, ut nostram imperfectionem ostenderet, and
Christi avidiores nos faceret. Our imperfection was sufficiently manifest by
the severity of the first Covenant, that the world might long for salvation by
Jesus Christ.

For since mankind could not be saved by the Covenant of works,

This Covenant began immediately after Adams fall. would find out. The Seed of
the woman should make up the breaches of the man. But this should be acted and
published in its own time, not presently. In the mean time man was by virtue of
that new Covenant or promise admitted to Repentance.

Adam confessed his sin and repented. India, and God promised him a Savior by
whose obedience his repentance should be accepted. And when God did threaten
the old world with a flood of waters, he called upon them to repent, but
because they did not, God brought upon them the flood of waters. For 120. years
together he called upon them to return before he would strike his final blow.
Ten times God tried Pharaoh before he destroyed him. And in all ages, in all
periods, and with all men God did deal by this measure; and (excepting that God
in some great cases, or in the beginning of a Sanction to establish it with the
terror of a great example) he scarce ever destroyed a single man with temporal
death for any nicety of the law, but for long and great prevarications of it:
and when he did otherwise, he did it after the man had been highly warned of
the particular, and could have obeyed easily, which was the case of the man
that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath; and was like the case of Adam, who was
upon the same account judged by the Covenant of works.

This then was an emanation both of Gods justice and his mercy.

From hence the corollaries are plain,

1. Because Man had strengths enough to do it, until he lessened his own
abilities.

2. The Covenant of works was at first instanced but in a small Commandment:
in abstaining from the fruit of one tree, when he had by him very many others
for his use and pleasure.

3. It was necessary that the Covenant of works should begin: for the Covenant
of faith and repentance could not be at first; there was no need of it, no
opportunity for it, it must suppose a defailance, or an infirmity, as physic
supposes sickness and mortality.

4. God never exacted the obedience of Man by strict measures, by the severity
of the first Covenant after Adams fall; but men were saved then as now, they
were admitted to repentance, and justified by faith and the works of faith. And
therefore the Jews say that three things were before the world, The Law, the
name of the Messiah, and Repentance; 1 Cor. 2.7.
that is, as S. Paul better expresses it, This Repentance through faith in the
Messiah is the hidden wisdom of God, ordained before the world unto our glory.
So that at first it was not impossible; and when it was, it was not exacted in
the impossible measure; but it was kept in pretense and overture for ends of
piety, wisdom and mercy, of which I have given account; it was (...), a wise
dispensation, but it was hidden.

For since it is essential to a law that it be in a matter that is possible,
Plato lib 5. de leg. Demosth. contra Timocratem. Plutar. in Solon. Curious
Fortunatianus Rhet. Nemo obligatur ad impossible.
it cannot be supposed that God would judge man by an impossible Commandment.
A good man would not do it, much less the righteous and merciful Judge of
Men and Angels. But God by holding over the world the Covenant of works, non
fecit praevaricatores sed humiles, did not make us sinners by not observing the
(...) the minutes and tittles of the law, but made us humble, needing mercy,
begging grace, longing for a Savior, relying upon a better Covenant, waiting
for better promises, praying for the Spirit of grace, repenting of our sins,
deploring our infirmities, and justified by faith in the promises of God.

2. God incarnate, the first day of our Lord Jesus.

But what are we eased now under the Gospel, Moses? If we by Christ be tied to
more holiness, then the sons of Israel were by Moses Law, then because that
could not be kept, then neither can this. But if we be not tied to more then
they, how is the law of Christ a more perfect institution, and how can we now
be justified by a law no better then that by which we could not be justified?
But then, if this should be as impossible as ever, why is it anew imposed? why
is it held over us, when the ends for which it was held over us, now are
served? And at last, how can it be agreeable to Gods wisdom and justice, to
exact of us a law which we cannot perform, or to impose a law which cannot
justly be exacted? The answering and explicating this difficulty will serve
many propositions in the doctrine of Repentance.

. 2. Of the possibility or impossibility of keeping the Precepts of the Gospel.
IT were strange that it should be possible for all men to keep the
Commandments, Lib. 1. Dial. adve. Pelag.
S. Hierome brings in Atticus thus arguing: Da exemplum, aut confitere
imbecillitatem tuam: and the same also was the argument of Orosius; and the
reasonableness of it is a great prejudice against the contrary affirmation of
S. Austin, Alipius and Evodius, Aurelius and Possidius, who because it is no
good consequence to argue a non esse ad non posse, and though it is not done,
yet possibly it might; conclude, that it is possible to keep the Commandments,
though as yet no man ever did, but he that did it for us all. But as
Marcellinus said well, It is hard to say that by a Man a thing can be done, of
which although there was a great necessity and a severe Commandment, yet there
never was any example. Because in men there is such infinite variety of
tempers, dispositions, apprehensions, designs, fears and hopes, purposes and
interests, that it were next to a miracle that not one of all mankind should
do what he can, and what so highly concerns him. But because this, although it
be a high probability, yet is no certain demonstration; that which S. Paul
taught is certainly to be relied upon, That the Law could not do it for us,
that is, Romans 8.
could not bring us justification, in that it was weak through the flesh;
meaning that because we were so weak we could not fulfill the righteousness of
the Law, therefore we could not be justified by that Covenant. Mosi manus
graves, facies cornuta, impedita lingua, lapideae tabulae. Moses's hand were
heavy, his face bright, his tongue stammering, and the tables were of stone; by
which is meant, that the imposition and the burden was great, but the shoulder
is weak and crushed, and therefore was not able to bear it; and therefore much
less can it stand under a bigger load, if the holy Precepts of the Gospel
should prove so, and we be assisted by no firmer supporters.

For the nature and constitution of man is such, Voluntas per momenta variatur,
S. Hier. lib. 2. in Gal. c. c. 3.
quia solus Deus immutabilis; variety and change, inconstancy and repentance
are in his very nature. * If he be negligent, he is soon tempted. * If he be
watchful, he is soon wearied. * If he be not instructed, he is exposed to every
abuse. * If he be, yet he is ignorant of more then he knows, and may be
cousened by very many things; and in what he knows or seems to know, he is
sometimes confident, sometimes capricious, curious and impertinent, proud and
contemptuous, * The Commandments are instanced in things against our natural
inclinations, and are restraints upon our appetite; and although a man may do
it in single instances, yet to act a part of perpetual violence and
preternatural contentions is too hard and severe an expectation, and the often
unavoidable failings of men will show how impossible it is. It is (as S.
Hieromes expression is) as if a man should hale a boat against the stream; if
ever he slacken his hand, the vessel falls back: and if ever we give way to our
appetite in any of the forbidden instances, we descend naturally and easily. *
Some vices are proportionable to a man's temper, and there he falls pleasantly
and with desire; Rhet. lib. 1.
(...), said Aristotle, That which is natural is sweet, but that which is
violent is troublesome: to others he is indifferent, but to them he is turned
by every byas. * If a man be morose, he is apt to offend with sullenness and
angry pretensions: but if he be compliant and gentle, he is easily cousened
with fair entreaties. * If he be alone, he is sad and fantastic, and woe to
him that is alone: If he be in company, it will be very hard for him to go with
them to the utmost limits of permission, and not to step beyond it. * No man's
leisure is great enough to attend the inquiry after all the actions and
particulars for which he is to be judged; and he does many things which he
considers not whether they be sins or no; and when he does consider, he often
judges wrong. * For some things there are no certain measures; and there are
very many constituent or intervening things and circumstances of things, by
which it is made impossible to give a certain judgment of the whole. *
Oftentimes a man is surprised and cannot deliberate for want of time; sometimes
he is amazed, and wants order and distinction to his thoughts, and cannot
deliberate for want of powers. * Sometimes the case is such, that if a man
determines it against his temporal interest he determines falsely, and yet he
thinks he does it safest: and if he judges in compliance with his temporal
regards, he cannot be confident but that he was moved not by the prevailing
reason, but by prevailing passion. * If the dispute be concerning degrees,
there is no certain measures to weigh them by: and yet sometimes a degree does
diversifie the kind, and virtue and vice are but differing degrees of the same
instance: and the ways of sinning upon the stock of ignorance are as many as
there are ignorances and degrees, and parts and vicious causes, and instances
of it.

Concerning our infirmities, Crescere posse imperfectae rei signum est; Seneca
ep. 67.
and when they are most confirmed and full grown, they are imperfect still.
When we can reckon all the things of chance, then we have summed up the dangers
and aptnesses of man to sin upon that one principle; but so as they can they
are summed up in the words of Epiphanius; Haeres. 59.
(...). The condition of our nature, the inconstancy of our spirits, the
infirmity of our flesh, the distraction of our senses, are an argument to make
us with confidence expect pardon and mercy from the loving kindness of the
Lord, according to the preaching of Truth, the Gospel of Christ.

But besides all this, Obsessa men's hominis and undique Zabuli. S. Cypr. de
oper. and cleemos.
diaboli infestatione vallata vix occurrit singulis, vix resistit; si avaritia
prostrata est, exurgit libido. And if we do not commit things forbidden, yet
the sins of omission are innumerable and undiscernible, * Businesses intervene
and visits are made, and civilities to be rendered, and friendly compliances to
be entertained, and necessities to be served, and some things thought so which
are not so, and so the time goes away, and the duty is left undone; prayers are
hindered, and prayers are omitted; and concerning every part of time which was
once in our power, no man living can give a fair account.

This moral demonstration of the impossibility of perfect and exact obedience
and innocence, Vrbanity to foolish jesting, a free speech into impertinence and
idle talking.

There were no bottom of this consideration if we consider how all mankind
sins with the tongue. considerations do manifest that no man is so perfect. For,

Every passion of the Soul is a spring and a shower,

I need not take notice of the infinite variety of thoughts and sentences that
divide all mankind concerning their manner of pleasing and obeying God; is
very great, when the instrument of serving God is nothing but opinion and
passion abused by interest; especially since this passion of it self is very
much to be suspected; it being temerity or rashness, (for some zeal is no
better) and its very formality is inadvertency and inconsideration.

But the case is very often so, extraregular lines, by which our actions are to
be directed; such as are, the analogy of faith, fame, reputation, public
honesty, not giving offense, being exemplary; all which, and diverse others
being indefinite measures of good and evil, are pursued as men please, and as
they will understand them. And because concerning these, God alone can judge
righteously, he alone can tell when we have observed them; we cannot, and
therefore it is certain we very often do mistake.

Hence it is that they who mean holiness and purity are forced to make to
themselves rules and measures by way of Idea or instrument,

For we see when Religion grows high the dangers do increase, man to know
certainly what intension of spirit is the minimum religionis, the necessary
condition, under or less then which God will not accept the action: and yet
sometimes two duties justle one another, and while we are zealous in one, we
less attend the other, and therefore cannot easily be certain of our measures;
and because sometimes two duties of a very different matter are to be
reconciled and waited upon, who can tell what will be the event of it, since
man's nature is so limited and little that it cannot at once attend upon two
objects?

Is it possible that a man should so attend his prayers, he that is an offender
in one is guilty of all; and yet it is true that in many things we all offend.
And all this is true when a man is well and when he is wise; but he may be
foolish and he will be sick, and there is a new scene of dangers, new duties,
and new infirmities, and new questions, and the old uncertainty of things, and
the same certainty of doing our duty weakly, and imperfectly, and pitiably.

-- Quid tam dextro pede concipis, ut te
Conatus non poeniteat, votique peracti?
Since therefore every sin is forbidden, Sedulius, Lex spiritualis est, In cap.
7. Romans
quia spiritualia mandat, ardua praecipit opera spiritus, prohibens peccata,
and ideo non potest impleri. Gods law is spiritual, and we are carnal and
disproportionate to it while we are in the state of conjunction, and therefore
it cannot be kept. Deus jugum legis homini imponit, homo far non valet, said
the Fathers of the Synod of Frankeford. God has imposed a yoke, but man cannot
bear it. For that I may sum up all,

In affirmative Precepts the measure is, To love God with all our faculties and
degrees. In negative Precepts the measure is, Not to lust or desire. Now if any
man can say that he can so love God in the proper and full measures, as never
to step aside toward the creatures with whom he daily converses, and is of the
same kindred with them, and that he can so abstain from the creature, as never
to cover what he is forbidden; then indeed he justifies God in imposing a
possible law, and condemns himself that he does not what he ought. But in all
he infers the absolute necessity of Repentance.

But because we are sure God is just and cannot be otherwise, Posse hominem
sine peccato decurrere vitam, Carm. de ingratis c. 9.

Si velit, ut potuit, nullo delinquere primus
Liberate sua: Nempe haec damnata fuere
Conciliis, mundique manu -- said Prosper.
For if it were only the fault of men, then a man might if he pleased keep the
whole law, and then might be justified by the law, Epist. ad Innocent.
and should not need a Savior. S. Augustine indeed thought it no great error,
and some African Bishops did expressly affirm that some from their conversion
did to the day of their death live without sin. This was worse then that of
Pelagius, save only that these took in the Grace of God, which (in that sense
which the Church teaches) the Pelagians did not. But this also was affirmed by
S. Lib. 2. de merit. and remiss. c. 6. lib. de Spirit. and lit. c. 1.
Austin, upon which account it must follow that the Commandments are therefore
possible, because it is only our fault that they are not kept. But how to
reconcile this opinion and saying of S. Austin and some other Africans, with
the African Councels, with S. Hierome, Orosius, Lactantius, and with S. Sermon.
49. de tempore.
Austin himself, and generally the whole ancient Church against the Pelagians,
I cannot understand: but it is sufficiently confuted by all the foregoing
considerations.

S. Hierome says, Mankind is reasonable, says that every man is; but he that
says every man is not just, says that all mankind is not just. But if it
contains in it another sense, it is a dangerous affirmative, which I shall
represent in his own words: Lib. 1. dial. adv. Pelag.
Ita fit ut quod in alio aut primum aut totum est, in alio ex part versetur,
and tamen non sit in crimine qui non habet omnia, nec condemnetur ex eo quod
non habet, sed justificetur ex eo quod possidet. I will not be so severe as S.
Austin, who in his 19 Sermon de tempore, calls it blasphemy. It is indeed a
hard saying, if he means that a man can be justified by some virtues, though he
retains some vices: For he that sins in one is guilty of all. But yet some
persons shall be crowned who never converted souls, and some that never
redeemed captives, and millions that never sold all and gave to the poor: and
there are many graces, of which some lives have no opportunities. The state of
Marriage has some graces proper to it self; and the Calling of a Merchant, and
the Office of a Judge, and the employment of an Advocate has some things of
virtue which others do not exercise, and they also have their proper graces:
and in this sense it is true what S. Hierome says, that he that has not all,
may be justified by what he has, and not sentenced for what he has not, it
not being imputed to him that he has not that of which he has no use. Now
although this be true, yet it is not sufficient to explicate the Question: For
the Commandments are not only impossible in this sense, but even in that
where the scene of his duty does lie, and where his graces ought to have been
exercised, every man is a sinner, every man has failed in his proper duty and
calling. So that now to say the Commandments are possible to the whole Church,
and not to every single person, is to divide the duty of a Christian, and to
give to every one a portion of duty, which must leave in every one a portion of
impiety; and to say that this is keeping the Commandments, or a sufficient
means of justification, is that which S. Austin called blasphemy.

But S. Hierome has another answer: Hoc and nos dicimus, posse hominem non
peccare si velit, pro tempore, Dial. extr. adv. Pelag. l. 3.
pro loco, pro imbecillitate corporea, quamdiu intentus est animus, quamdiu
chorda nullo vitio laxatur in Cithara. God has not imposed an impossible law.
For there is no Commandment, but a man that considers that endeavors, that
understands, that watches, that labors, may do in time and place, and so long
as he adverts, and is dispassionate, so long as his instrument is in tune.
Which answer is like that saying of the Schools, That there is no difficulty in
things, but every thing is easy to be understood; but that we find difficulty,
is because of the weakness of the understanding; that is, things are easy to be
understood, if we were wise enough to understand them: But because our
understanding is weak, therefore things are hard; for to be intelligible is a
relative term; and it is not sense to say, that a thing is in it self easy to
be understood, but hard to the understanding; for it is as if it were said, It
is easy, but that it is hard: and that is the thing which in this question is
complained of on all hands. For an Oak is easy to be pulled up by the roots,
if a man had strength enough to do it; but if this be imposed upon a weak man
or a child, they have reason to complain: and a Bushel or two of Wheat is no
great thing to carry, but it is too great for me, I cannot do it. So by this
account of S. Hierome, the Commandments are not impossible, for there is not
any one of them, but any man can do at some time, while he considers and is in
perfect disposition. But then we are to remember, that the Commandments are
always imposed, and we are not always in that condition of good things to be
wise and watchful, well disposed, and well resolved, standing upon our guard,
and doing what we can at other times; and therefore it is that the
Commandments are impossible. So that still the difficulty remains and the
inquiry must go on, How we are to understand the Divine Justice in exacting an
impossible law? or if he does not exact it, how we understand the way of the
Divine Wisdom in imposing that law which he cannot justly exact?

To the first I answer, of the Gospel is to love God with all our soul, that
is, to love him as much as we can love him; and that is certain we can do.
Every man can do as much as he can, and God requires no more: and even those
things which we can do, though he calls upon us to do the most, yet he punishes
us not if we do it heartily and sincerely, though with less passion and
exactness. Now as Gods justice was secured in the imposition of the law of
Moses, because whatever severity was held over them to restrain their
loosenesses, yet God exacted it only by the measures of a man, and healed all
their breaches by the medicine of Repentance: So now in the Gospel he has done
it much more (...), God has taken the vail off, and professed it openly, he
has included this mercy in the very constitution of the Covenant. For the
Gospel is the Covenant of Repentance; we shall not have leave to sin, but we
shall have leave to repent if we have sinned: so that God has imposed a law of
perfection, but he exacts it according to the possibilities of imperfect
persons, S. August. lib. 1. Retract. c. 19.
Omnia mandata Dei facta deputantur, quando quicquid non fit, ignoscitur, and
then we have kept the Commandments, when we have received our pardon for what
we have not kept.

2. Moses was not of it self impossible absolutely and naturally: so neither
are the Commandments of the Gospel. For if we consider the particular of Moses
law, they were such a burden which the Jews themselves were loath to part
withal, because it was in the Moral part of it but a law of abstinence from
evil; to which fear and temporal promises was, as they understood it, a
sufficient endearment: But that burden which neither they nor their fathers
were able to bear, was the sting of the law, that it allowed no repentance for
great crimes, Heb. 10.28.
but the transgressor should die without mercy under two or three witnesses.
Now then since in the Gospel there is no such thing, but there is an allowance
of repentance, this must needs be an easy yoke. This only is to be added,
That the righteousness of the law was in abstinence from evil; the
righteousness of the Gospel is in that, and in the doing all the affirmative
Commandments of Christ. Now this being a new obligation, brought also with it
new abilities, I mean the glorious promises of the Gospel, which whosoever
believes heartily, will find himself able to do or suffer any thing for the
enjoying of them; and this is that which is taught us by S. Paul: For what the
law could not do, Romans 8.3.
in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son, made it
possible by the Spirit of Grace, and by our spiritual conversation.

3. an abatement and an allowance made for this also. Our infirmities are
pitied, our ignorances excused, our unavoidable errors not imputed. These in
the law were imputable, and it was lawful for the avenger of blood to kill a
Manslayer who sinned against his will, if he could overtake him before he got
to Sanctuary. These I say in the Law were imputable, but they were not imputed;
Gods mercy took them off privately upon the accounts of his Mercy and a general
Repentance: But in the Gospel they are neither imputed, nor imputable: They
were paid for beforehand, and put upon the accounts of the Cross: God winked at
the times of your ignorance; and, The Lord had pity on me, because I did it in
ignorance, said S. Paul, and so Christ prayed, Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do. But ye did it ignorantly, as did also your Rulers; so S,
Peter, and upon that account he called them to accept of mercy. And it is
certain in reason, that if God forgives those sins of malice of which we
repent, infinitely rather will he not impute what we cannot probably or
possibly avoid. Apud Diodor. Sicul.
For to do otherwise, were (...): It is a severity above the measures of humane
sufferance and capacity, to be punished for infirmities when they do not sin
wilfully; and therefore God who remembers and pities our infirmities, will
never put these into his account, especially the holy Jesus having already paid
our symbol Upon the account of these particulars it is certain, God does not
exact of us an impossible Commandment; that is, not in the impossible measure:
for that is the meaning of those words of S. Hom. 3^ inter. 19.
Basil, (...). It is impious to say the Commandments of the Spirit, i.e. of
the Gospel, are impossible, viz. in that sense in which they are exacted.

But now to the second inquiry: love him with all our hearts, and all our
strengths; that is, always and with all that we can; if less then this had
been imposed, and we commanded to love God but to a less, and a certain
proportion, besides that it would not have been possible for us to understand
when we did what was commanded, it would have been either a direct lessening
our opinion of God, by tempting us to suppose no more love was due to him then
such a limited measure, or else a teaching us not to give him what was his due,
either of which must necessarily tend to Gods dishonor.

2. commanding us to do all that we can, and that always, though less be
exacted, does invite our greatest endeavors, it entertains the faculties and
labors of the best, and yet despises not the meanest, for they can endeavor
too, and they can do their best: and it serves the end of many graces besides,
and the honor of some of the Divine Attributes.

3. then at first. In epistola ad Innocentium dictum est, multos Catholicos
viros dixisse posse hominem esse sine peccato per gratiam Dei, non a nativitate
sed a conversione.
A lustful person thinks it impossible to mortify his lust: but when he has
long contended and got the mastery, it grows easy, and at last in the
progressions of a long piety, sin is more impossible then duty is. He that is
born of God sins not, neither indeed can he; so S. John: and, Through Christ
that strengthens me I can do all things, says S. Paul. It is long before a man
comes to it, but the impossibility by degrees turns into a possibility, and
that into an easiness, and at last into a necessity. It is a trouble for some
to commit a sin. By this also we exercise a holy fear, and work out our
salvation with fear and trembling. It enlarges our care, and endears our
watchfulness and caution. It cures or prevents our pride and bold challenges of
God for rewards which we never can deserve. It convinces us of the necessity of
the Divine aid, and makes us to rely upon Gods goodness in helping us, and his
mercy in pardoning us; and truly without this we could neither be so sensible
of our infirmities, nor of the excellent gifts and mercies of God: for although
God does not make necessities on purpose that he may serve them, or introduce
sin that he might pardon it, yet he loves we should depend upon him, and by
these rare arts of the Divine Economy make us to strive to be like him, and in
the midst of our finite abilities have infinite desires, that even so we may be
disposed toward the holiness and glories of eternity.

4. always, and offend in the fewest instances. For as our duty is not
limited, so neither are the degrees of glory: and if there were not this
latitude of duty, neither could there be any difference in glory; neither could
it be possible for all men to hope for heaven, but now all may: The meanest of
Gods servants shall go thither, and yet there are greater measures for the best
and most excellent services.

Thus we may understand that the imposing of the Divine Laws in all the periods
of the world, Adam, but all Mankind was admitted to repentance, and washed
clean in the blood of the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of the world,
and was slain from the beginning of it. Repentance was the measure of our duty,
and the remedy for our evils; and the Commandments were not impossible to him
that might amend what was done amiss.

. 3. How Repentance and the Precept of Perfection Evangelicall can stand
together.
THat the Gospel is a Covenant of Repentance, Peter at the first opening the
Commission, and the secret of the Religion. Which Doctrine of Repentance, lest
it should be thought to be a permission to sin, a leave to need the remedy, is
charged with an addition of a strict and severe holiness, the Precept of
Perfection. It therefore must be such a repentance as includes in it
perfection, and yet the perfection is such as needs repentance. How these two
are to stand together, is the subject of the present inquiry. Mat. 5.48.
Be ye therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect; that is the charge.
To be perfect as God, and yet to repent as a Man, seem contrary to each other.
They seem so only. For,

1. Philo said well, (...), Perfections and the heights of excellencies are
only proper to one: (...), said Clemens of Alexandria, God alone is wise, he
alone is perfect. All that we do is but little, and that little is imperfect,
and that imperfection is such as could be condemned, if God did not use
gentleness and mercy toward us. But,

2. Be ye perfect, viz. with the highest degrees of holiness, is to be
understood in a current and transient sense. For this Precept thus understood,
has its obligation upon our endeavor only, and not upon the event. When a
General commands his Army to destroy the Enemy, he binds them only to a
prudent, a possible and vigorous endeavor to do it, and cannot intend the
effect, but by several parts answerable to the steps of the progression. So is
that in the Psalms, Psalm. 2.
Be learned ye that are Princes of the world, that is, learn, and so by
industry and attention arrive at knowledge. For although every man be a sinner,
yet he that does not endeavor to avoid all sin, is not only guilty of the sin
he commits, but the negligence also, which is the parent of the sin, is another
sin, and directly criminal. So it is in the degrees of perfection, what we
cannot attain to, we must at least desire. In this world we cannot arrive
thither, but in this life we must always be going thither. It is status viae,
grace is the way to glory. And as he that commands us to enter into a City from
which we are hugely distant, means we should pass thorough all the ways that
lead thither: so it is here. The Precept must be given here, and begun, and set
forward, and it will be finished hereafter. But as a man may be an adulterer,
or a thief, with his heart and his eye, as well as with his hand; so it is also
in good things: A man's heart and eye may be in heaven, that is, in the state of
perfection, long before he sets his feet upon the golden threshold. His desires
are first crowned and sainted, and then the work shall be made perfect.

3. perfection of state. Be ye perfect, that is, Be ye holy; for (...) is
sanctifico, and (...) is festum, or a holy day, a day that has the perfection
added to it of which a day is capable, a day sanctified to the Lord. For (...)
is the same with (...), Heb. 7.19.
to sanctify is to make perfect. Nihil enim sanctificavit lex, so the Latin
reads the words of S. Paul; but in the Greek it is (...), The law made that
perfect which it did sanctify. So that, Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father
is perfect, is Be ye holy like him, or in imitation of him. And thus the word
is expounded in Plato, (...). That Is the perfection of good to be like God; but
to be like him is to be just, and holy, and prudent. That's (...), as much as we
can, that is, with a hearty, righteous, sincere endeavor: for so (...) or holy
is used. It signifies sincere, true, without error. (...). So Damascius in
Suidas. It is not likely or true, that he that is not wise in little things
should be wise in great things. But to live holily in the Christian sense, is
to live in faith and good works, that is Christian perfection. (...). He is good
and holy, who by faith and good works is like unto God. For this perfection or
(...) holiness is nothing else but a pursuance of that which is just and good;
for so said Moses concerning the man that forsook God, and denied that he had
made a Covenant with him, [ Do not say in thine heart, (...), let it be lawful
or holy, or permitted to me to depart from the Lord. To this sense was that of
Justin Martyr, who expounds this phrase of [Be ye perfect] by Christianum
fieri, Be perfect, that is, Be Christians, be Christ's Disciples; for he who
came (...) to fulfill, to consummate obedience, to perfect the law, to obey him,
and be Disciples of his institution, is our perfection and consummation.

4. perfection of state, although it does not suppose a perfection of degrees,
yet it can be no less then 1. A perfection of parts. It must be a Religion that
is not mingled with interest, piety to God that is not spoiled with cruelty to
our neighbors, a zeal that has in it no uncharitableness or spite, that is,
our Religion must be entire, and not defective in any constituent part. So S.
Jam. 1.4.
James uses the word (...) for (...), perfect and entire wanting nothing. 2. To
which add this also, That to this perfection of state, perseverance is of
necessity to be added. For so we are taught by the same Apostle, Let patience
have her perfect work, that is, let it bear you through all your trials,
lasting till all your sufferings are over; For he that endures to the end shall
be crowned, because he only is perfect. Our holiness must persevere to the
end. But 3. it must also be growing all the way. For this word perfect is
sometimes in Scripture used for degrees, and as a distinction between
Christians in the measures of duty. S. Paul uses it to signify well grown
Christians, or men in Christianity. Col. 4.12.
(...); stand perfectly and full, or confidently fulfilling all the will of
God: for therefore we preach Christ, and exhort every man, and teach every man
in all wisdom, that we may present every man (...) perfect in Christ Jesus;
that is, 1.28.
that they should not always be as babes, for whom milk and weak nutriment is
to be provided; nor like those silly women always learning, and never able to
come to the knowledge of the truth; but it is commanded us to be wise and
perfect, to be men in Christ; so S. Paul makes the antithesis, 1 Cor. 14.20.
Be ye babes in malice, but in your minds (...) be perfect, that is, be men,
wise and confident, and strong, and well grown. Perfectly instructed; that is,
readily prepared to every good work; not always employed in the elements and
infant propositions and practices of Religion, but doing noble actions, well
skilled in the deepest mysteries of faith and holiness. This is agreeable to
that expression of S. Paul, who having laid the foundation of Christianity by
describing the fundamentals, intending to speak of the more mysterious points
of the Religion, Heb. 6.1.
calls it a going on to perfection: So that by this Precept of perfection it is
intended we should do more then the lowest measure of our duties, and there is
no limit, but even the utmost of our power; all that we can is the measure of
our duty: I do not say, all that we can naturally or possibly, but all that we
can morally and probably, according to the measures of a man, and the rate of
our hindrances and infirmities.

5. perfection, is that which our blessed Savior intended particularly in the
instance and subject matter of this Precept, and that is, a perfection in the
kind of action, that is, a choice and prosecution of the most noble and
excellent things in the whole Religion. Three are especially instanced in the
holy Gospel.

1. The first is, a being ready, or a making our selves ready to suffer
persecution, prescribed by our blessed Savior to the rich young man, If thou will be perfect, Mat. 19.21.
sell all and give to the poor, that is, if thou will be my disciple, make thy
self ready, and come and follow me. For it was at that time necessary to all
that would follow Christ's person and fortune, to quit all they had above their
needs. For they that followed him, were sure of a Cross; and therefore to
invite them to be disciples, was to engage them to the suffering persecution;
and this was that which our blessed Savior calls perfection. Dulce periculum
est,
O Lenaee, sequi Deum
Cingentem viridi tempora pampino.
It is an easy thing to follow God in festivals and days of Eucharist; but to
serve him in hard battles, to die for him, is the perfection of love, of faith
and obedience. Obedient unto death, was the Character of his own perfection;
for Greater love then this has no man, then to lay down his life. Scis quem
dicam bonum, perfectum, absolutum? Seneca.
Quem malum fucere nulla vis, nulla necessitas potest. He is good, absolute and
perfect, whom no force, no necessity can make evil.

2. The second instance is, being merciful; for S. Luke recording this Precept
expounds it by (...), Be ye perfect, that is, Luke 6.36.
Be ye merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful; for by mercy only we can
be like him. (...). Scriptor act Diognetum.
He that bears his neighbors burden, and is willing to do benefit to his
inferiors, and to minister to the needy of the good things which God has given
him, he is as God to them that receive, he is an imitator of God himself. And
Justin Martyr reciting this Precept of our blessed Savior, in stead of (...)
uses the word (...), Be ye good and bountiful as your heavenly Father is. And
to this purpose the story of Jesus and the young man before mentioned, is
interpolated in the Gospel according to the Hebrews or the Nazarens, The Lord
said unto him, How say thou, I have kept the Law and the Prophets, when it
is written in the Law, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self? and behold
many of thy brethren the sons of Abraham are covered in filth, and die with
hunger, and thy house is full of good things, and nothing goes forth to them
from thence. If therefore thou will be perfect, sell all and give to the poor.
Charity, which is the fulfilling the Commandment, is also the perfection of a
Christian: and that a giving of alms should be perfection, is not disagreeing
with the design of the word it self; (...), say the Grammarians; it signifies
to spend, and (...) is a great spender or a bountiful person.

3. The third is the very particular to which our blessed Master did especially
relate to in the words of the sanction or institution: and we are taught it by
the particle (...) or therefore. For when the holy Jesus had described that
glory of Christianity that we should love our enemies, bless them that curse
us, do good to them that hate us, and pray for them which despitefully use us
and persecute us; he propounds the example of our heavenly Father; for he
makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good. But the Publicans love
their friends, and salute their brethren: but more is expected of us; Be ye
therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect; that is, do more then the
Publicans, do as your Father does, be perfect as he is, that is, love your
enemies.

6. perfection, because they suppose a man to have passed through the first and
beginning graces, to have arrived at these excellencies of piety and duty. For
as no man can on a sudden become the worst man in the world, his soul must by
degrees be unstript of holiness, and then of modesty, and then of all care of
reputation, and then of disuse, and by these measures he will proceed to the
consummation of the method of Hell and darkness: So can no man on a sudden come
to the right use of these graces. Not every man that dies in a good Cause shall
have the reward of Martyrdom; but he that having lived well, seals that
doctrine with dying, which before he adorned with living. And therefore it does
infinitely concern all them that suffer in a good Cause, to take care that they
be not prodigal of their sufferings, and throw them away upon vice. Peevishness
or pride, lust or intemperance, can never be consecrated by dying or by alms.
But he that after a patient continuance in well doing, adds Charity or
Martyrdom to the collective body of his other graces, he has made them
perfect with this kind of perfection. Martyrdom can supply the place of
actual baptisms, but not of repentance: Because without our fault it may so
happen that the first cannot be had; but without our fault the second is never
left undone.

Thus perfection and repentance may stand together. Mortification, Penitential
sorrow, Spiritual mourning, Patience, some parts of Humility, all the parts and
actions of Humiliation; and since in these also perfection is as great a duty
as in any thing else, it is certain that the perfection of a Christian is not
the supreme degree of action or intention.

But yet perfection cannot be less then an entire piety,

There is not a man upon earth that sins not, Solomon; 1 Kings 8.46. Psalm.
37.29. vet. edit.
and, the righteous shall be punished, said David; and he found it so by a sad
experience: for he, though affirmed to be blameless save in the matter of
Vriah, and a man after Gods own heart, yet complains that his sins are
innumerable, more then the hairs upon his head. But though no man can live
without error or mistake, the effects of weakness and ignorance, inadvertency
and surprise, yet being helped by Gods grace, we can and must live without
great sins, such which no man admits but with deliberation.

For it is one thing to keep the Commandments in a sense of favor and equity,
the Commandment forbids every sin, and sin is a transgression of the
Commandment: But as in this sense no man can keep the Commandments; so in no
sense can he say, that he has not sinned. But we can by the help of Gods grace
keep the Commandments acceptably through Jesus Christ, but we cannot keep them
so as to be without sin. Which S. Gregory thus expresses, Multi sine crimine,
nullus vero esse sine peccatis valet. Many live without crimes, none without
offense. And it is now as it was under the law, many were then righteous and
blameless; David, Josiah, Joshua, Caleb, Zachary and Elisabeth, Saul before his
conversion according to the accounts of the Law; and so are many now, according
to the holy and merciful measures of the Gospel, not by the force of Nature,
but by the helps of Grace, not always, but at some time, not absolutely, but
in a limited measure; that is, not innocent, but penitent, not perfect
absolutely, but excellently contending, and perfect in their desires, not at
their journeys end, but on their way thither; free from great sins, but
speckled with lesser spots, ever striving against sin, though sometimes
failing. This is the Precept of perfection, as it can consist with the measures
and infirmities of a man.

We must turn from all our evil ways, perfect conversion. * We must have
Charity; that is another perfection, it is a perfect grace. * We must be ready
to part with all for a good conscience, and to die for Christ; that is perfect
obedience, and the most perfect love. * We must conform to the Divine Will in
doing and suffering, that is perfect patience: we must live in all holy
conversation and godliness; that is a perfect state. * We must ever be going
forward and growing in godliness, that so we may be perfect men in Christ. *
And we must persevere unto the end; that is perfection, and the crown of all the
rest. If any thing less then this were intended, it cannot be told how the
Gospel should be a holy institution, or that God should require of us to live a
holy life; but if any thing more then this were intended, it is impossible but
all mankind should perish.

To the same sense are we to understand those other severe Precepts of
Scripture of [being pure, that is, that we be honest and sincere, free from
hypocrisy, just in our purposes and actions, without partiality and unhandsome
mixtures. S. Paul makes them to expound each other, (...) and (...), sincere,
Phil. 1.10.
that is, without fault, pure and clear in conscience.

Like to this is that of [Toto corde] loving and serving God with all our
heart, Cord and cord in the Psalmist. Cord and cord loquuti sunt; 1 Chronicles.
12.33.
they spoke with a double heart: but the men of Zebulon went out to battle
absque cord and cord, they were not of a double heart, so S. Hierome renders
it, but heartily or with a whole heart they did their business. 2. It signifies
diligence and labor, earnestness and caution: Totus in hoc sum; so the Latins
use to speak, I am earnest and hearty in this affair. I am wholly taken up with
it.

Perfection and Repentance. God has sent Jesus to bless you (...), whilst, or
so that, Act. 3.36.
every one of you turn from your iniquities. He blesses us, and we must do our
duty; He pardons us, and we obey him; He turns us, and we are turned. And when
S. 2 Pet. 3.11.
Peter had represented the terrors of the day of Judgment, he infers, What
manner of persons ought we to be (...), Ver. 14.
in holy living and holy worshippings? This he calls a giving diligence to be
found (...), without spot, and unblameable; that is Christian perfection: and
yet this very thing is no other then what he calls a little before (...), a
coming to repentance. Ver. 9.
Living in holy conversation and piety, in the faith of Christ, is the extent
and burden of repentance, and it is the limit and declaration of the [spotless
and unblameable] This is no more, and that is no less.

Upon this account the Commandments are not only possible but easy,
Arausican Council. Omnes baptizati Christo auxiliante and cooperante possunt
and debent quae ad salutem pertineut, si fideliter laborare voluerint,
adimplere. All baptized Christians may by the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ,
if they will faithfully labor, perform and fulfill all things that belong to
their salvation.

The sum of all is this: perfection all the way, even when it is imperfect in
its degrees. The whole state of a Christians life is a state of perfection.
Sincerity is the formality or the Soul of it: A hearty constant endeavor is the
Body or material part of it: And the Mercies of God accepting it in Christ,
and assisting and promoting it by his Spirit of Grace, is the third part of its
constitution, it is the Spirit. This perfection is the perfection of Men, not
of Angels; and it is as in the perfection of Glory, where all are perfect, yet
all are not equal. Every regenerate man has that perfection, without which he
cannot be accepted, but some have this perfection more, some less. It is the
perfection of state, but the perfection of degrees is not yet. Here men are
(...), made perfect according to the measure of their Fathers (as Porphyrie
expressed it) that is, by the measures of mortality, or as it pleases God to
enable and accept them.

. 4. The former Doctrine reduced to Practice.
1. THe Law is either taken for the Law of Moses, or the Law of Works: The Law
of Works is that Empire and Dominion which God exercised over man, using his
utmost right, and obliging man to the rigorous observation of all that Law he
should impose upon him. And in this sense, it was a Law of death, not of life,
for no man could keep it, and they that did not, might not live. This was
imposed on Adam only.

But when God brought Israel out of Egypt, mercy as the other was a misery, a
repentance as the sin: But for great sins there was no Sacrifice appointed, no
repentance ministered. And therefore still we were in the ministration of death;
for this mercy was not sufficient, as yet it was not possible for a man to be
justified by the Law. It threatened sinners with death, it inflicted death, it
did not promise eternal life, it ministered no grace, but fear and temporal
hope: It was written in Tables of stone, not in their hearts; that is, the
material parts of the Law of Moses was not consonant to natural and essential
reason, but arbitrary impositions; they were not perfective of a man, but very
often destructive. This was a little alteration or ease of the Covenant of
Works, but not enough.

From this state of evil things we were freed by Christ; the letter, the
ministration of death, the ministration of condemnation, the old Testament; apt
to amaze and confound a sinner, but did not give him any hopes of remission, no
glimpse of heaven, no ministry of pardon: But the Gospel is called, the
Spirit, or the ministration of the Spirit, the law of faith, the law of
liberty; it ministers repentance, it enjoins holiness, it gives life, and we
all have hopes of being saved.

This which is the state of things in which the whole world is represented in
their several periods, some made to be the state of every returning sinner; and
men are taught that they must pass through the terrors of the Law, before they
can receive the mercies of the Gospel. The Law was a Schoolmaster to bring the
Synagogue to Christ; it was so to them who were under the Law, but it cannot be
so to us, who are not under the law but under grace. For if they mean the law
of Works, or that imposition which was the first intercourse with man, they
lose their title to the mercies of the Gospel; If they mean the law of Moses,
then they do not stand fast in the liberty by which Christ has made them free.
But whatsoever the meaning be, neither of them can concern Christians. For God
has sent his Son to establish a better Covenant in his blood, to preach
repentance, to offer pardon, to condemn sin in the flesh, to publish the
righteousness of God, to convince the world of sin by his holy Spirit, to
threaten damnation not to sinners absolutely, but absolutely to the impenitent,
and to promise and give salvation to his Sons and Servants.

1. Covenant, who does not judge us by the measures of an Angel, but by the
span of a man's hand. But we are not to subject our selves so much as by fiction
of law or fancy to the curse and threatenings of the Covenant of Works, or of
Moses Law, though it was of more instances and less severity, by reason of the
allowance of Sacrifices for expiation.

2. a sword. This we are taught by that excellent Author of the Divine Epistle
to the Hebrews, Heb. 10.28, 29.
He that despised Moses law, died without mercy under two or three witnesses:
Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant
wherewith he was saenctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite to the
Spirit of Grace? So that, under the Gospel, he that sins and repents is in a
far better condition, then he that sinned under the Law, and repented. For
repentance was not then allowed of, the man was to die without mercy. But he
that sins and repents not, is under the Gospel in a far worse condition then
under the Law; for under the Gospel, he shall have a far sorer punishment,
then under the Law was threatened. Therefore let no man mistake the mercies of
the New Covenant, or turn the grace of God into wantonness. The mercies of the
Gospel neither allow us to sin, nor inflict an easier punishment; but they
oblige us to more holiness, under a greater penalty. In pursuance of which, I
add,

3. of exact measures, no consideration of surprises, passions, folly, and
inadvertency: but under the New Covenant our hearty endeavor is accepted; but
we are tied to endeavor higher and more excellent things then they. But he that
thinks this mercy gives him liberty to do what he please, loses the mercy, and
mistakes the whole design and Economy of Gods loving kindness.

4.

5. He does his best, who heartily endeavors to do the duty in its proper
season: But it were well we would remember that he that did a good act to day,
can do the same to morrow in the same circumstances; and he that yesterday
fought a noble battle and resisted valiantly, can upon the same terms contend
as manfully every day, if he will consider and watch. And though it will never
be that men will always do as well as at some times, yet when at any time they
commit a sin, it is not because they could not, but because they would not help
it.

6.

7.

8.

9. perfection is an infinite word; and it could not be communicated to several
persons of different capacities and degrees, but that there is something common
to them all which has analogy and equivalent proportions. Now nothing can be
perfect, but that to which nothing is wanting; and therefore a man is not any
way perfect but by doing all, all that he can; for then nothing is wanting to
him, when he has put forth all his strength. For perfection is not to be
accounted by comparing the subjects which are perfect, for in that sense
nothing is perfect but God; but perfection is to be reckoned by every man's own
proportions: For a body may be a perfect body, though it have not the
perfection of a soul; and a man is perfect when he is heartily and entirely
Gods servant, though he have not the perfection of S. Paul; as a man is a meek
man, though he be not so meek as Moses or Christ. But he is not meek, if he
keeps any fierceness or violence within. * But then because to be more perfect
is incident with humane nature, he that does not endeavor to get as much as he
can, and more then he has, he has not the perfection of holy desires.
Therefore

10.

Vt cum carceribus missos rapit ungula currus, Horat. Sermon. l. 1, Satyr. 1.

Inflat equis auriga suos vincentibus, illum
Praeteritum temnens, extremos inter euntem.
For so did the Contenders in the Olympic Races, never look behind but
contend forwards: And from hence S. Paul gives the rule I have now described.
Brethren, Phil. 3.13, 14.
I count not my self to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting
those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are
before, I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling: Let
therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded. That is, no man can do the duty
of a Christian, no man can in any sense be perfect, but he that adds virtue to
virtue, and one degree of grace unto another.

Nilque putans actum, dum quid superesset agendum. Nothing is finished, as long
as any thing is undone. For our perfection is always growing; it stands not,
till it arrive at the (...) the crowning of him that runs. For the enforcing of
which the more, I only use S. Chrysostoms argument, (...); If S. Paul who had
done so much, and suffered so much, was not very confident, but that if he did
look back, he might also fall back; what shall we say, whose perfection is so
little, so infant and imperfect, that we are come forwards but a little, and
have great spaces still to measure?

11. Luke 17.7.
that the servant who was bidden to plow the field, or feed the cattle, is
still called an unprofitable servant, because he has done only what was
commanded him; that is, they had done the work, utcunque, some way or other the
thing was finished, though with a servile spirit; for (...) properly signifies
to do the outward work; and the works of the Law are those which consisted in
outward obedience, and by which a man could not be justified. But our blessed
Savior teaching us the righteousness of the Kingdom, has also brought the
word (...) to signify the internal also; a mixture of faith and operation.
John 6.28, 29.
For to the Jews enquiring, What shall we do to work the works of God? Jesus
answers, (...), etc. This is the work of God, that ye believe in him whom he
has sent: and since this [to do] in the Christian sense is to do bona been,
good Works with a good mind. For since the works are not only in themselves
inconsiderable, but we also do them most imperfectly and with often failings, a
good mind and the spirit of a friend or a son will not only heighten the
excellency of the work, but make amends for the defect too. The doing what we
are commanded, that is in the usual sense of doing, still leaves us
unprofitable; for we are servants of God, he has a perfect and supreme right
over us, and when this is done, still can demand more, when we have plowed, he
will call upon us to wait at supper; and for all this, we are to expect only
impunity and our daily provisions. And upon this account, if we should have
performed the Covenant of Works, we could not have been justified. But then,
there is a sort of working, and there are some such servants which our Lord
uses magis ex aequo and bono, quam ex Imperio; Luke 12.37.
with the usages of sons, not of slaves or servants. He will gird himself and
serve them, Luke 12.
he will call them friends and not servants; these are such as serve animo
liberali, such which Seneca calls humiles amicos, humble friends, serving as S.
Paul expresses it, (...), in the simplicity of their heart; not (...), with
eye-service, but honestly, heartily, zealously, and affectionately, (...); so
S. Peter, freely, readily, not grudingly, or of necessity.

12. Exiguum est ad legem bonum esse, To be good according to the rigor of the
law, to do what we are forced to, to do all that is lawful to do, and to go
toward evil or danger as far as we can, these are no good signs of a filial
spirit, this is not Christian perfection; (...), That, slaves consider; This is
commanded and must be done under horrible pains: and such are the negative
precepts of the Law, and the proper duties of every man's calling. (...), This
is an act of piety of mine own choosing, a righteousness that I delight in;
that is the voice of sons and good servants, and that is rewardable with a
mighty grace. And of this nature are the affirmative precepts of the Gospel,
which being propounded in general terms, and with indefinite proportions, for
the measures are left under our liberty and choice, to signify our great love
to God. (...), said S. Chrysostom; Whatsoever is over and above the
Commandments, that shall have a great reward. God forbids unmercifulness, he
that is not unmerciful keeps the Commandment; but he that besides his
abstinence from unmercifulness according to the Commandment, shall open his
hand and his heart, and give plentifully to the poor, this man shall have a
reward; he is amongst those servants whom his Lord will make to sit down, and
himself will serve him. When God in the Commandment forbids uncleanness and
fornication; he that is not unchaste, and does not pollute himself, keeps the
Commandment. But if to preserve his chastity he uses fasting and prayer, if he
mortifies his body, if he denies himself the pleasures of the world, if he uses
the easiest, or the harder remedies, according to the proportion of his love
and industry, especially if it be prudent, so shall his greater reward be. If a
man out of fear of falling into uncleanness shall use austerities, and find
that they will not secure him, and therefore to ascertain his duty the rather
shall enter into a state of marriage, according as the prudence and the passion
of his desires were for God and for purity; so also shall his reward be. To
follow Christ is all our duty; but if that we may follow Christ with greater
advanges we quit all the possessions of the world, this is more acceptable;
because it is a doing the Commandment with greater love. We must so order
things that the Commandment be not broken, but the difference is in finding
out the better ways, and doing the duty with the more affections.

Now in this case they are highly mistaken that think any thing of this nature
is a work of supererogation: Commandement] is taken in a general sense, for the
prescription of whatsoever is pleasing and acceptable to God, whatsoever he
will reward with mighty glories. So loving God with all our heart, with all our
soul, Mat. 22.37.
and all our mind, and all our strength, is called (...), the first and the
great Commandment; that is, nothing is more pleasing, nothing is more
acceptable to God, because it proceeds out of an excellent love. But some
Commandments are propounded as to friends some as to servants; some under the
threatening of horrible pains, others not so, but with the proposition and under
the invitation by glorious rewards. It was commanded to S. Paul to preach the
Gospel; if he had not obeyed, he should have perished: Woe is me (says he) if
I preach not the Gospel: he was bound to do it. But he had another Commandment
also, to love God as much as was possible, and to love his neighbor: which
precepts were infinite, and of an unlimited signification, and therefore were
left to every servants choice to do them with his several measures of affection
and zeal. He that did most, did the Commandment best; and therefore cannot be
said to do more then was commanded; but he that does less; if he preaches the
Gospel, though with a less diligence, and fewer advantages, he obeys the
Commandment, but not so nobly as the other. For example: God commands us to
pray. He obeys this, that constantly and devoutly keeps his morning and evening
Sacrifice, offering devoutly twice a day. He that prays thrice a day, does
better, and he that prays seven times a day, has done no work of
supererogation, but does what he does in pursuance of the Commandment. All the
difference is in the manner of doing what is commanded; for no man can do more
then he is commanded. But some do it better, some less perfectly; but all is
comprehended under this Commandment of loving God with all our hearts. When a
father commands his children to come to him, he that comes slowly, obeyes the
commandment, but he that runs does obey more willingly and readily: now though
to come running was left to the choice of the childs affection, yet it was but
a brisk pursuance of the commandment. Thus when he that is bound to pay
Tithes, gives the best portion, or does it cheerfully, without contention, in
all questions taking the worse of the thing, and the better of the duty, does
what he is commanded, and he does it with the affection of a son and of a
friend, he loves his duty. Be angry, but sin not: so it is in the Commandment;
but he that to avoid the sin, will endeavor not to be angry at all, is the
greater friend of God, by how much the further he stands off from sin. Thus in
all doubts to take the surest side, to determine always for Religion, when
without sin we might have determined for interest; to deny our selves in lawful
things, to do all our duty by the measures of Love and of the Spirit, are
instances of this filial obedience, and are rewarded by a (...), a persuasion
and confidence of Gods love to us, enabling us to call him Father, as well as
Lord. Thus this Parable, or one like it is told in the book of Hermas. The Lord
commanded his servant to put pales about his vineyard: He did so, and dug a
ditch besides, and rooted out all the weeds; which when his Lord observed, he
made him coheir with his son. When S. Paul exhorted the Corinthians to give a
free contribution to the poor Saints at Jerusalem, he invites to do it nobly
and cheerfully, not as of constraint; for Gods Commandment named not the
sum, neither can the degree of affection be named; but yet God demands all
our affection. Now in all the affirmative Precepts, the duty in the lowest
degree is that which is now made necessary under the loss of all our hopes of
Eternity; but all the further degrees of the same duty are imposed upon the
condition of greater rewards, and other collateral advantages of duty.

When Hystaspes asked Cyrus the Persian why he preferred Chrysantas before him,
Chrysantas does not stay till he is called; and he does not only what is
commanded, but what is best, what he knows is most pleasing to me. So does
every perfect man, according to the degrees of his love and his perfection;
Clem. Alex. Strom. 5.
(...). The righteousness of a perfect man consists not in legal innocence, but
in love and voluntary obedience. This is that charity which is the glory of
Christianity, the crown of all other graces, that which makes all the external
works of obedience to be acceptable, and every act of the most excellent piety
and devotion is a particular of that grace, and therefore though it is highly
acceptable, yet it is also commanded in the general, and in the sense before
explicated; and he that does no more then he is particularly commanded, obeys
God as a Lion obeys his keeper; meat and stripes are all the endearments of his
peace and services.

Qui manet ut moneatur semper serves homo officium suum, Plautus Sticho.

Non voluntate id facere meminit, servos is habitu haud probus est.
The servant that must be called upon at every step, is but an unprofitable and
unworthy person: To do only what we are commanded, will never bring us to the
portion and inheritance of Sons. We must do this cheerfully, and we must do
more; even contend to please God with doing that which is the righteousness of
God, striving for perfection, till perfection it self becomes perfect; still
obeying that law of Sons, Love the Lord with all thy heart, till our charity it
self is crowned. Therefore.

13.

14. his failings and infirmities. De spir. and lit. c. 36.
Multum in hac vita ille profecit, qui quam long sit a perfectione justitiae
proficiendo cognovit, said S. Austin. It is a good degree of perfection to have
proceeded so far, as well to know and observe our own imperfections. The
Scripture concludes all under sin; not only because all have failed of the
Covenant of Works, of the exactness of obedience, but by reason of their
prevarication of that law which they can obey. And indeed no man could be a
sinner, but he that breaks that law which he could have kept. We were all
sinners by the Covenant of Works, but that was in those instances where it
might have been otherwise. For the Covenant of Works was not impossible,
because it consisted of impossible Commandments; for every Commandment was
kept by some or other, and all at some times: but therefore it was impossible
to be kept, because at some time or other men would be impotent, or ignorant,
or surprised, and for this, no abatement was made in that Covenant. But then
since in what every man could help he is found to be a sinner, he ought to
account it a mighty grace that his other services are accepted. In pursuance of
this,

15. Qui in Ecclesia semper gloriose and granditer operati sunt, Epist. ad
lapsos.
and opus suum Domino nunquam imputaverunt, as S. Cyprian's expression is; They
who have greatly served God in the Church, and have not been forward to exact
and challenge their reward of God, they are such whom God will most certainly
reward. For humility without other external works is more pleasing to God, then
pride though standing upon heaps of excellent actions. It is the saying of S.
Chrysostom. * live by their nature and instinct, what thanks is due to us for
that, more then to them for this? And therefore one said well, Ne te jactes si
been servisti: Obsequitur Sol, obtemperat Lunae. Boast not if thou have well
obeyed: The Sun and the Moon do so, and shall never be rewarded. Council:
A^ausic. 2. c. 18. D^betur merocs bonis operibus: sed gratia quae non debetur
praecedit ut fiant.
that he will so crown our services. * But he does not only give us all our
being and all our faculties, but makes them also irriguous with the dew of his
Divine Grace; sending his holy Son to call us to repentance, and to die to
obtain for us pardon, and resurrection, and eternal life; sending his holy
Spirit by rare arguments, and aids external and internal to help us in our
spiritual contentions and difficulties. So that we have nothing of our own, and
therefore can challenge nothing to our selves. Galileo when he had found out a
Star which he had never observed before, Job 35.7.
and pleased himself in his own fancy, should demand of the Grand Signior to
make him King of Tunis: for what is he the better, that the studious man has
pleased himself in his own Art, and the Turkish Empire gets no advantages by
his new Argument. Romans 8.18.
and the poor Countryman might as well have demanded of Cyrus to give him a
Province for his handful of river water, as we can expect of God to give us
Heaven as a reward of our good works.

16. our God is merciful, Psa. 62.12.
he rewards every man according to his work: so said David; according to the
nature and graciousness of the work, not according to their value and proper
worthiness; Mat. 5.12. 1 Cor. 3.8. Matt. 16. 27. 2 Cor. 4.17. 2 Thessalonians. 1.5.
Apoc. 3.4, and 16.6. Romans 8.18.
not that they deserve it, but because God for the communication of his
goodness was pleased to promise it. Promissum quidem ex misericordia sed ex
justitia persolvendum, said S. Bernard. Mercy first made the promise, but
Justice pays the debt. Which words were true, if we did exactly do all that
duty to which the reward was so graciously promised; but where much is to be
abated even of that little which was bound upon us by so glorious promises of
reward, there we can in no sense challenge Gods justice, but so as it signifies
equity, In Matthew. lib. 3. cap. 20. v. 8.
and is mingled with the mercies of the chancery. Gratis promisit, gratis
reddit. So Ferus. God promised freely, and pays freely. If therefore thou will
obtain grace and favor, make no mention of thy deservings. And yet let not
this slacken thy work, but reinforce it, and enlarge thy industry, since thou
have so gracious a Lord, who of his own mere goodness will so plentifully
reward it.

17. will is accepted for the fact, in all things where the fact is not in our
power. But where it is, there to pretend a will, is hypocrisy. Nequam illud
verbum est, been vult, nisi qui been facit, said the Comedian. This rule is our
measure in the great lines of duty, in all negative Precepts, and in the
periods of the law of Christ, which cannot pass by us without being observed.
But in the material and external instances of duty, we may without our fault be
disabled, and therefore can only be supplied with our endeavors and desires.
But that is our advantage: we thus can perform all Gods will acceptably. For if
we endeavor all that we can, and desire more, and pursue more, it is accepted
as if we had done all: 2 Cor. 8.12.
for we are accepted according to what a man has, and not according to what he
has not. Unless we can neither endeavor, nor desire, we ought not to complain
of the burden of the Divine Commandments. For to endeavor truly, and
passionately to desire and contend for more, is obedience and charity, and that
is the fulfilling of the Commandments.

Matter for Meditation out of Scripture, according to the former Doctrine.
The Old Covenant, or the Covenant of Works.
IN that day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die. Genesis 2.17.


Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
law to do them. Gal. 3 10. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Deuteronomy. 27.8.


And thou shall write upon stones all the words of this law very plainly.

Thou shall not go aside from any of the words which I command thee this day,
to the right hand or to the left.

But it shall come to pass, Deuteronomy. 28.
if thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do
all his commandments and his statutes, then shall all these curses come upon
thee, and overtake thee.

And if you will not be reformed by these things, Lev. 26.23, 24, etc.
but will walk contrary unto me, then will I also walk contrary unto you, and
will punish you yet seven times for your sins.

He that despised Moses law, Heb. 10.28.
died without mercy under two or three witnesses.

The New Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace.
WE are justified freely by his grace, Romans 3. ver. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ: * Whom God has set forth to
be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for
the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. * To
declare I say at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus. * Where is boasting then? it is
excluded: by what law? of works? Nay, but by the law of faith. * Therefore we
conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law.

There is therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans
8.1, 14, 26, 27, 28.
who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. * For as many as are led
by the Spirit they are the sons of God. * Likewise the Spirit, also helps our
infirmities -- because he makes intercession for the Saints according to the
will of God. * And we know that all things work together for good to them that
love God.

He that spared not his own Son, Ver. 33, etc.
but delivered him up for us all, how shall not he with him also freely give us
all things? * Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God
that justifies.

This is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those
days, Heb. 8.10, 11, 12.
says the Lord, I will put my laws in their mind, and write them in their
hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people -- all
shall know me from the least to the greatest. * For I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more.

If any man be in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
he is a new creature: old things are past away, all things are become new. *
And all things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ,
and has given to us the ministry of reconciliation. * Now then we are
ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God. * For he has made him to be sin for us
who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins, Acts 2.37, 38.
and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost: for the promise is unto you
and to your children, and to all that are afar off, and to as many as the Lord
our God shall call.

And it shall come to pass, Romans 10.13. Acts 2.21. Romans 10.5, 6, 8, 9.
that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.

Moses describes the righteousness which is of the law, that the man which
does those things shall live by them. But the righteousness which is of faith
speaks on this wise -- The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in thy
heart, that is, the word of faith which we preach, that if thou shall confess
with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart that God has
raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved.

Death is swallowed up in victory. 1 Cor. 15.55, 56.
O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? The sting of death
is sin, and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which gives
us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

My yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

For what the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, Romans 8.3,
4.
God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, has for sin
condemned sin in the flesh; that the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

His Commandments are not grievous. 1 John 5.3. Romans 5.10.


If while we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son,
much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life. * And not only so,
but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now
received the atonement.

I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me. Phil. 4.13.


My grace is sufficient for thee: 2 Cor. 12.9.
for my strength is made perfect in weakness.

Ask and you shall have, Mat. 7.7.
seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you.

To him that has shall be given, and he shall have more abundantly.

Having therefore these promises, 2 Cor. 7.1.
let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, Vid.
etiam Isa. 49.6. and 53.12. Psalm. 22.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Jer. 32.34.
perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord.

The PRAYER.
I. OEternal God, Lord of Heaven and Earth, Father of Men and Angels, we do
adore thy infinite Goodness, we revere thy Justice, and delight in thy Mercies,
by which thou have dealt with us, not with the utmost right and dominion of a
Lord, but with the gentleness of a Father; treating us like friends, who were
indeed thy enemies. Thou, O God, did see our follies, and observe our
weaknesses, thou know the aversness of our nature to good, and our proneness
to commit vanity; and because our imperfect obedience could not bring us to
perfect felicity whither thou did design us, the great God of all the world
was pleased to make a new Covenant with Man, and to become a debtor to his
servants. Blessed be God, and blessed be that Mercy, which has done so great
things for us. O be pleased to work that in us which thou expectest from us.
Let us not lose our title in the Covenant of Faith and Repentance, by deferring
the one, or dishonouring the other; but let us walk worthy of our vocation,
according to the law of Faith, and the Mercies of God, and the Covenant of our
Lord Jesus.

II. O Blessed Jesus, never suffer us to abuse thy Mercies, or to turn thy
Grace into wantonness. Let the remembrance and sense of thy glorious favors
endear our services, and let thy goodness lead us to Repentance, and our
Repentance bring forth the fruits of godliness in our whole life. Imprint
deeply upon our hearts the fear and terror of thy Majesty, and perpetually
entertain our spirits with the highest apprehensions of thy loving kindeness,
that we may fear more, and love more, every day more and more hating sin,
crucifying all its affections and desires, passionately loving holy things,
zealously following after them, prudently conducting them, and indefatigably
persevering in them to the end of our lives.

III. O Blessed and Eternal God, with thy Spirit inlighten our understandings
in the rare mysterious Secrets of thy Law. Make me to understand all the most
advantageous ways of duty, and kindle a flame in my Soul, that no difficulty
or contradiction, no temptation within, or persecution without, may ever
extinguish. Give me a mighty grace, that I may design to please thee with my
best and all my services, to follow the best examples, to do the noblest
Charities, to pursue all Perfection, ever pressing forward to the mark of the
high calling in Christ Jesus. Let us rather choose to die, then to sin against
our Consciences. Let us also watch, that we may omit nothing of our duty, nor
pretermit any opportunity by which thou can be glorified, or any Christian
instructed, comforted or assisted, not resting in the strictest measures of
Command, but passing forward to great and prudent significations of love, doing
heroic actions; some things by which thou may be greatly pleased, that thou
may take delight to pardon, to sanctify, and to preserve thy servants for
ever. Amen.

CHAP. II. Of the nature and definition of Repentance; And what parts of duty
are signified by it in holy Scriptures.
. I.
THe Greeks use two words to express this duty, Post factum angi and cruciari,
to be afflicted in mind, to be troubled for our former folly; it is (...),
says Phavorinus; a being displeased for what we have done: and it is generally
used for all sorts of Repentance, but more properly to signify either the
beginnings of a good, or the whole state of an ineffective Repentance. In the
first sense we find it in S. Matthew 21.32.
, (...); and ye seeing, did not repent that ye might believe him. Of the second
sense we have example in Judas, (...), he repented too, but the end of it was,
Mat. 27.3
he died with anguish and despair; and of Esau it is said, (...), He found no
place for an [effective] repentance; but yet he repented too, for he was (...),
and (...), Heb. 12, 17.
he fain would have had it otherwise, and he sought it with tears; which two do
fully express all the meaning of this (...), when it is distinguished from the
better and effective Repentance. There is in this Repentance, a sorrow for what
is done, a disliking of the thing with its consequents and effect; and so far
also it is a change of mind. But it goes no further then so far to change
the mind, that it brings trouble and sorrow, and such things which are the
natural events of it. (...), says Suidas. It is an affection incident to man,
not to God, who cannot repent: where although by (...) he means an Accident or
property of Man, that is, a quality in the general sense; yet that it is
properly a passion in the special sense, was the sense of all men, Lib. de
poenit.
as Tertullian observes; saying, that the Heathens know Repentance to be
passionem animi quandam, (the same with (...) in Suidas) a passion quae veniat
de offensa sententiae prioris, coming from our being offended, or troubled at
our former course. But Tertullian uses the Latin word, of which I shall give
account in the following periods.

But when there was a difference made, works this better Repentance, 2 Cor.
7.11.
(...), and (...), a repentance not to be repented of, not to be sorrowed for,
a repentance that is unto salvation. Sorrow may go before this, but dwells not
with it, according to that of S. Chrysostom, Homil. 9. de Poenit.
Medicinae hic locus, non judicii, non poenas sed peccatorum remissionem
poenitentia tribuit. (...) is the word. Repentance brings not pains, but pardon
with it; for this is the place of medicine and remedy, not of judgment or
condemnation: meaning that this Repentance is wholly salutary, as tending to
reformation and amendment. Lib. ^adv. Marcion. cap. 20.
But Tertullian made the observation more express. In Graeco sono Poenitentiae
nomen non ex delicti confessione, sed ex animi demutatione compositum est. To
repent among the Greeks signifies not a confession of our fault, but the change
of mind. He speaks of the Grammatical sense of the word; for in the whole use
of it, it is otherwise.

For however the Grammarians may distinguish them, Matthew. 21.29.
(...); ye seeing were not troubled, and sorrowful, that ye might believe, that
is, amend your fault. (...) is in both places used for a salutary repentance.
And on the other side, (...) is used to signify in the evil sense, a state of
misery, without remedy. (...), so the Septuagint read that of Solomon, Prove. 14.
The wicked man comes to repentance, that is, to misery, and sorrow. So that
there is nothing of usefulness which can be drawn from the Grammatical sense of
these words; They both signify a change of mind; and they both signify a
sorrow; and they both are used for the same thing: and indeed that will be the
best use of them: No man can be truly said to repent, but he who being
sorrowful for doing evil betakes himself to wiser courses. So Phavorinus,
(...), Repentance is a sense and compunction of the soul for those things which
were done foolishly.

Sum Deaquae facti, Auson. Epigr.
non factique exigo poenas,
Nempe ut poeniteat, sic Metanoea Male Metanoea usus est: verbum purum Graecum
est, nec tamen eo sensu and definitione a Graecis usurpatum. Recte igitur and
facete fassus est idem Ausonius in epigrammate de abusu hujus verbi parum
Latini,
vocor.
Repentance does exact punishment for evils done, and good undone; but besides
this, it is (...), a conversion to that which is better. Sum Dea, cui nomen nec
Cicero ipse dedit.
So Aretas defines it. (...), The same with the former; an eschewing evil, and
doing good.

And thus the Holy Scriptures understand this word and this duty. Heb. 6.1. 1
Kings 8.35. Isai. 59.20. 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Jer. 18.7, 8, 9. and 31.19. 2 Timothy 2.19.
, a turning from sin; and it is emphatically called by the Apostle (...), a
repentance from dead works, that is, a forsaking them with sorrow that ever we
committed them: And it is also (...), a conversion to God 2 Samuel 12.5, 13.
Deuteronomy. 30.2. Jer. 3.7. Act. 26.18. Ephesians. 5.14. Ezekiel. 33.12. Luke 19.8, 9, 10.
; from darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God: (...), a returning
to sobriety, the same with (...), in Justin Martin, all signifying a departing
from our follies and a changing to a better life. And though sometimes to
Repent is in Scripture taken for sorrow only, or a being troubled that the
fact is done; yet it is called Repentance, no otherwise then as alms is called
Charity; that is, it is an effect of it, a part, or action, or adjunct of the
duty and state of Repentance: which ought to be observed lest (as it is too
commonly) one act be mistaken for the whole state, and we account our selves
perfect penitents, if we have only wept a penitential shower; which is also to
be observed in the definitions which the Doctors give of it.

Tertullian De poenit. in princip.
calls it [a passion of the mind, S. Austin Lib. de ver. and falls. poenit. c. 8.
calls it [a revenge always punishing in it self that which it grieves to have
committed] These do only describe that part of repentance which is sometimes
signified by (...), and is nothing else but a godly sorrow, the porch, or
beginnings of Repentance. On the other side Lactantius Lib. 6. Divin. instit.
c. 13.
describing Repentance, gives only the Grammatical sense of (...). Agere autem
poenitentiam nihil aliud est quam profiteri and affirmare se ulterius non
peccaturum: To repent (says he) is nothing else but a profession and
affirmation, that he will sin no more; which descriptions of Repentance are
just as if we should say, A man is a creature that speaks, or laughs, or that
can learn to read. These are effects of his nature, but not the ingredients of
a proper definition. Sorrow, and Revenge, and holy purposes and protestations
are but single acts of a returning and penitent man: whereas Repentance is a
whole state of a new life, an entire change of the sinner, with all its
appendages and instruments of ministry.

As the Greeks have, Poenitentia and Resipiscentia, and these have almost the
same fate and the same usages with the other. Poenitentia is used by the old
Latin translation; and is most tenaciously retained by all them who make the
very life of Repentance to run into corporal austerities (like the juice of
luxuriant trees into irregular suckers and excrescencies) which therefore by
way of eminency they call Penances; for they suppose the word in its very
nature and institution to signify something that is punitive, and afflictive.
So Hugo, Lib. 3. de myste^. Eccles.
Poenitentia quasi punientia, quod per eam homo in se puniat, quod male
admisit. Much like that of Scotus; poenitentia quasi poenae tenentia? which
they both learned from S. Austin; poenitere est idem quod rei commissae aliquem
pudere ac pigere, Solil. cap. 19.
ita ut, poenitet, sit idem quod poena tenet. This sense of the word prevailed
long and therefore some that would speak exactly, observing that the duty of
Repentance did principally consist in the amendment of our lives, were forced
to use the word Resipiscentia, which better renders the Greek (...). Lib. 6. c.
24.
So Lactantius expressly, Graeci melius and significantius (...) dicunt: quam
Latin possumus resipiscentiam dicere. Resipiscit enim ac mentem suam quasi ab
insania recipit quem errare piget, castigatque seipsum dementiae, and confirmat
animum suum ad rectius vivendum. He truly repents who recovers his mind from
folly, and chastising his error, and grieving for his madness, strengthens his
purposes to better living.

Either of the words will serve the turn. Poenitentia, or Penance, is the old
Latin word; Resipiscentia is the new one, but very expressive and significant:
and it is indifferent which be used, if men had not a design upon one, which
cannot prudently be effected by it. But such is the force of words, especially
when men choose and affect one particularly and studiously reject another which
is apt to signify the same thing, that in the Greek Church because their words
for Repentance did imply only or principally a change of life, they usually
describe Repentance in that formality; but the later Latins practice and
discourse to other purposes; and the College of Rhemes render (...), word for
word after their vulgar Latin, agite poenitentiam, do penance, which is so
absurd a reddition that their interest and design is more apparent then their
skill in Grammar, or their ingenuity. It is much very much better which we
learn from a wise Heathen, who gives such an account both of the words and
thing as might not misbecome the best instructed Christian, so far as concerns
the nature and morality of the duty: His words are excellent words, and
therefore I shall transcribe them. (...). We ought principally to take care
that we do not sin; but if we be overtaken, then to make diligent haste to
return to justice or righteousness as the cure of our wickedness: that we may
amend our evil counsels or wills, by the help of a better. For when we are
fallen from goodness, we receive or recover it again (...), by a wise or well
principled penitential sorrow, admitting a Divine correction. (...), but
repentance it self is the beginning of wisdom, a flying from foolish words and
deeds, and the first institution of a life not to be repented of. Where besides
the definition of repentance and a most perfect description of its nature and
intention, he with some curiosity differences the two Greek words; making (...)
to be but the beginning of (...): sorrow the beginning of repentance; and both
together the reformation of the old, and the institution of a new life.

But to quit the words from being the subject matter of a Quarrel, poenitentia
does really signify (by use I mean and custom) as much as the Greek (...), and
is expressive of the whole duty of Repentance; and although it implies that
sorrow and grief which is the natural inlet of reformation of our lives, and
the consequent of our shame and sin, yet it also does signify correction and
amendment, which is the formality and essence of Repentance; and therefore
Erasmus more warily and in imitation of the old Latins, says that poenitere
is from pone tenere, quod est posterius consilium capere; to be wiser the next
time; to choose again and choose better; Noct. At. lib. 17. c. 1.
and so A. Gellius defines it, Poenitere, tum dicere solemus, cum quae ipsi
fecimus, aut quae de nostra voluntate nostroque consilio facta sunt, ea nobis
post incipiunt displicere, sententiamque in iis nostram demutamus. To repent is
when those things which we have done displease us, and we change our minds. So
that here is both a Displeasure and a Change; a displeasure and sorrow for the
evil, and a change to better. And there ought to be no scruple in this; for by
the first sorrow of a penitent man, is meant nothing else but the first act of
eschewing evil: which whether it be by grief alone, or by fear, or by hope, or
by all these, it is not without some trouble of mind, and displeasure; for if
it were still in all senses a pleasure to go on, they would never return back.
And therefore to suppose repentance without displeasure, is to suppose a change
of mind without alteration, or a taking a new course without disliking the
old. But then to suppose any other sorrow naturally necessary, then this which
naturally is included in the change, is to affirm that to be true which
experience tells us is not true, and it is to place self-affliction and punition
at the head, which is to be looked for in the retinue of repentance; to make
the daughter to be before the Mother, and the fruit to be kept in the root, not
to grow upon the branches. But the Latin words can no way determine any thing
of Question in this article; and the Greek words are used promiscuously; and
when they are distinguished, they differ but as the more and less perfect, as
the beginning of Repentance and the progress of perfection; according to that
saying, Poenitentia erroris magnus gradus est ad resipiscentiam, To acknowledge
and be sorry for our sin is a great step to repentance; and both together
signify all that piety, that change, and holiness which is the duty of the new
man, of the Returning sinner: and we can best learn it by the words of him that
revealed and gave this grace to all his servants; even of the Holy Jesus
speaking to S. Paul at his Conversion, from whose blessed words, together with
those of S. Paul in his narrative of that story, we may draw this more perfect
description. To repent is to turn from darkness to light, Acts 26.18, 20.
from the power of Satan unto God, doing works worthy of amendment of life, for
the forgiveness of sins, that we may receive inheritance among them that are
sanctified by faith in Christ Jesus.

Upon this account, leaving our sins: which is properly repentance from dead
works. And 2. doing holy actions in the remaining portion of our days; actions
meet for repentance; so the Baptist called them. This is in Scripture by way of
propriety called Repentance; (...), Mat. 3.8.
so the Baptist used it; distinguishing Repentance from its fruits; that is,
from such significations, exercises and prosecutions of this change, as are apt
to represent, and to effect it more and more; such as are confession, weeping,
self-afflictions, alms, and the like. Acts 26.2^.
So S. Paul, using the same words before King Agrippa. But by way of Synedoche,
not only the fruits and consequent expressions, but the beginning sorrow also
is signified by the same word: and all are under the same Commandment, though
with different degrees of necessity, and expression; of which I shall
afterward give account. Here I only account concerning the essential and
constituent parts and definition of Repentance.

All the whole duty of Repentance, James calls upon sinners, Be afflicted, James
4.
and mourn, and weep, let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy
into weeping. This is the first change of our affections, which is attended
with a change of our judgment: when we do no longer admire the false beauties
of sin; but judge righteously concerning it. And of this the Prophet Jeremy
gives testimony, Jer. 31.19.
Surely, after that I was turned, I repented. And by this word (...) the
Hebrews express the duty; which the LXX. indifferently render by (...) and
(...), and is best rendered, Conversion. And then follows the conversion of the
whole man, body and soul, mind and spirit, all are set in opposition against
sin, and apply themselves to the service of God, and conformity to Jesus.

. 2. Of Repentance in general; or Conversion.
REpentance and Faith in Scriptures signify sometimes more generally; our sins
shall be blotted out, and we shall be saved if we obey heartily and diligently,
though not exactly. This becoming his Disciples is called Faith, that is,
coming to him, believing him, hoping in him, obeying him; and consequent to
this is, that we are admitted to Repentance, that is, to the pardon of our
sins. For him has God exalted on his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior
(...), Act. 5.31.
to give repentance and remission of sins. This is the sum Total of the
Gospel. That we have leave to repent, supposes that God will pardon what is
past. But then that we have leave to repent, supposes us also highly bound to
it. It is in mere pity to our infirmities, our needs and our miseries, that we
have leave to do it: and this is given to mankind by faith in Jesus Christ,
that is, by becoming his Disciples; for he has power to pardon sins, and to
take them away, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, viz. which we have
committed. This is that which all the world did need, and longed for; it was
the (...), the hidden mystery from all ages, but revealed in Christ; whose
blood (as S. Clement expresses it) (...), brought to all the world the grace of
Repentance.

This is the Gospel. Gospel is nothing else but Faith and Repentance. The
Gospel is called Faith by S. Paul, Gal. 3.23.
(...), before that faith came, we were under the law, shut up unto the faith
which should afterward be revealed; that is, to the Gospel, or the glad
tidings of Repentance; which is called (...), Ver. 2.
the hearing of faith. For Faith being here opposed to the Law, that is, the
Covenant of Mercy to the Covenant of Works, must mean, the Covenant of
Repentance. And therefore although, if we consider them as proper and
particular graces and habits, they have differing natures and definitions; yet
in the general and foederal sense of which I now speak, Faith and Repentance
are only distinguished by relations and respects, not by substance and
reality. Acts 20.21.
Repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; that is,
Repentance for having sinned against God; a Repentance, I say, through faith in
Jesus Christ; that is, a Repentance procured, and preached and enjoined by
Christ, being the sum of his Discipline. And that it may appear Faith and
Repentance to be the same thing, and differing only in name and manner of
expression, S. Paul confounds the distinction which he formerly made, and that
which he called, Repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus, in
his Sermons in Asia; in his Epistles to the Hebrews he calls, Repentance from
dead works and faith in God. And the words are used for each other
promiscuously in S. Luke; for that which the rich man in hell called (...),
Abraham called (...), If one comes from the dead they will repent: No, said
Abraham, If they will not hear Moses and the Prophets, then if one come from
the dead, they will not believe, or be persuaded. And S. 2 Pet. 3.9, 15.
Peter giving an account of the delaying of the coming of the Lord for the
punishment of the obdurate Jews and enemies of Christ, says, it is because God
of his infinite goodness expects even them also to be converted to the faith,
or becoming Christians, as the whole design of the place infers; and this he
calls (...), a coming to Repentance, that is, to the faith of Christ. And
therefore the Gospel is nothing else but an universal publication of Repentance
and pardon of sins in the Name of Christ, that is, procured for all them who
are his Disciples: and to this we are baptized, that is, adopted into the
Religion, into that Discipleship under which God requires holiness, but not
perfect measures; sincerity without hypocrisy, but not impeccability or
perfect innocence.

And as the Gospel is called Faith, Faith is Repentance, that is, it is the
same Covenant of Grace and Mercy, with this only difference, that it is called
Faith, as it relates to Christ who procured this mercy for us, Repentance, as
it signifies the mercy it self so procured: So Baptism by the same analogy is
called the Baptism unto Repentance, (...), the Baptism of Repentance, so it is
called in the Jerusalem Creed; that is, the admission to the grace of the
Gospel; which the Fathers of CP. in their appendage to the Nicene Creed, thus
express: I believe one Baptism for the remission of sins, that is, to remission
of sins we are admitted by Baptism alone; no other way shall we have this
grace, this title, but by being once initiated into the Gospel to be Disciples
of Jesus. Not that it is to be supposed that our sins are only pardoned when
we are baptized; but that by Baptism we are admitted to the state and grace of
Repentance and pardon of sins. And this is demonstratively certain, not only
upon those many instances of baptized penitents, admitted to pardon, and
baptized Criminals called upon in Scripture to repent, but upon the very nature
of the Evangelical Covenant, and the whole design of Christ's coming. For if we
were not admitted to Repentance after Baptism, then we were still to be judged
by the Covenant of Works, not by the Covenant of Faith; and we should inherit
by the Law, or not at all, and not be heirs according to promise; and then
Christ were dead in vain, we are yet in our sins; and all the world must
perish, because all men have sinned, and so none should go to heaven but newly
baptized Infants, or newly baptized Catechumens: and how then could the Gospel
be a New Covenant, it being exactly the same with the Law; for so it must be,
if it promise no mercy or Repentance to them that sin after our admittance to
it. * But Baptism is a new birth, and by it we are (...), renewed unto
Repentance, unto that state of life which supposes holiness and imperfection,
and consequently needs mercy all the way; according to that saying, Justus ex
fide vivet, The just shall live by faith; that is, all our righteousness, all
our hopes, all our spiritual life is conserved by, and is relying upon this
Covenant of Mercy, the Covenant of Faith, or Repentance: all his life time the
just shall still need pardon, and find it, if he perseveres in it, that is,
endeavors to obey according to the righteousness of Faith, that is, sincerely,
diligently, and by the measures of a man. Of this we shall in the sequel make
use.

For the present I consider, Conversion admits of degrees according to the
necessities of men. For that Repentance which Christ and his Apostles preached
at the opening of the Kingdom, was an universal change of life, which men did
lead in the darkness of Heathen ignorance, and idolatrous impieties among the
Gentiles, and the more then Heathen crimes among the Jews; the whole Nation
being generally false, superstitious, bloody, persecutors, proud, rebellious,
and at last rejecters and crucifiers of their Messiah, whom they had longed for
ever since they were a people: But in the persuasion and effecting of this
Repentance, there was some difference of Dispensation and Ministry.

John the Baptist began, they might believe in the Messiah, and so flee from
the wrath to come, that is, from the destruction of their Nation, which he
prophetically foretold should come to pass for their rejecting him whom the
Baptist did fore-signifie. Christ and his Apostles pursued the same Doctrine,
still thrusting forward the design, that is, preaching such a Repentance as was
proportionable to his purpose; that is, obedience to the Gospel, the admission
of such doctrines which did destroy the gayeties and cursed usages of the
world. So that the Repentance which was first preached was in order to Faith;
that is, the Baptist, and Christ, and Christ's Apostles preaching Repentance,
did mean such a conversion or change as would take them off from those crimes
which so prepossessed their hearts, that by them they were indisposed to
receive Christ's person and doctrine, both which were so contrary to their
prejudices of Pride and Covetousness, Malice and Ambition.

And therefore among the Jews, disposed to believe the Revelations of God, they
had been used to Prophets, and expected the Messiah, and prayed for his day,
and longed passionately for it; so that they were by nothing hindered in their
faith, but by their lusts and secular thoughts; and the way to make them
believe, was to cure their pride. Joh. 5.44.
How can ye believe, who receive honor one of another? Their hunting after
praise among the people, did indispose them to the believing and receiving
Christ's person and doctrine. Therefore until they did repent of that, they
could not believe; and accordingly our blessed Savior complained, that when
they saw the light which shined in the Ministry of John the Baptist, yet they
would not repent, that they might believe. * But afterward the Jews when they
were invited to the Religion, that is, to believe in Jesus, were first to be
called to Repentance, because they had crucified the Lord of life: and if they
should not repent for crucifying an innocent person, they would be infinitely
far from believing him to be the Lord of life, and their long desired Messiah.

But the Repentance that was preached to the Gentiles, Sodom: they had false
confidences, and evil examples, and foolish principles; they had evil laws, and
an abominable Priesthood, and their Demons, whom they called Gods, would be
worshipped with lusts and cruelty, with drunkenness and revellings; so that
their false belief and evil Religion betrayed them to evil lives, therefore
they were to be recovered by being taught a better belief, and a more holy
Religion, therefore in these, faith was to go before Repentance. Poenitentiae
stimulus ex fide acciderat, as Tertullians expression is. Faith was the motive
of their Repentance. (...). So S. Clemens Alexandrinus. Strom. 2.
(...). Repentance is the perfection and consummation of Faith. For unless the
sinner believes his action to be a sin, and that evil is his portion if he
sins, and that he shall be happy if he live by the rule of the Commandments,
he can never be converted: Therefore in the conversion of the Gentiles, Faith
was to be ordinarily the first.

In proportion to these several methods, Faith Mark 1.15.
, sometimes Repentance Acts 26.20.2.38.3.19.
: He that believed Jesus Christ, would repent of his sins; and he that did
repent, would believe. But sometimes Infidelity stood at the gate, and
sometimes Malice and vile Affections. That which stood next, was first to be
removed.

Now the access of both these to Christ is in Scripture called Conversion,
Moses and a good man, the becoming a Christian was a (...), a perfection or
consummation, a progression rather then a returning, (...) not (...). But when
Christ had been preached, all the obfirmation and obstinacy of mind by which
they shut their eyes against that light, all that was choice, Acts 14.15. and
26.18. 2 Cor. 3.16. Romans 13.12, 13. Ephesians. 5.8.
and interest, or passion, and was to be rescinded by Repentance. But
Conversion was the word indifferently used concerning the change both of Jews
and Gentiles, because they both abounded in iniquity, and did need this change,
called by S. Paul, (...) a redemption from all iniquity; by S. Peter (...),
Tit. 2.14. Acts 3.26.
a conversion from wickedness.

In analogy and proportion to these Repentances and Conversions of Jews and
Gentiles, Conversion. Luke 22.32. Jam. 3.20. Mat. 13.15. Joh. 12.40.
We have an instance of the word so used in the case of S. Peter, When thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren; that is, when thou art returned from thy
folly and sin of denying the Lord, do thou confirm thy brethren, that they may
not fall as thou have done. This is (...), and (...), a conversion from vanity,
and impiety, or injustice; when a person of any evil life returns to his duty,
and his undertaking in Baptism: from the unregenerate to the regenerate estate,
that is, from habitual sin to habitual grace. But the Repentances of good men
for their sins of infirmity, or the seldom interruptions of a good life by
single falls, is not properly Conversion. But as the distance from God is, from
whence we are to retire, so is the degree of our Conversion. The term from
whence, is various, but the term whither we go, is the same. All must come to
God through Jesus Christ in the measures and strictnesses of the Evangelical
holiness, which is, that state of Repentance I have been now describing, which
is, A perfect abrenuntiation of all iniquity, and a sincere obedience in the
faith of Jesus Christ: which is the result of all the foregoing considerations
and usages of words; and is further manifested in the following appellatives
and descriptions, by which Repentance is signified and recommended to us in
^cripture.

1. Reconciliation. (...). We pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled to
God; that is, to be friends with him, no longer to stand in terms of distance;
for every habitual sinner, every one that provokes him to anger by his
iniquity, is his enemy: not that every sinner hates God by a direct hate; but
as obedience is love, so disobedience is enmity or hatred by interpretation,
(...), enemies in their mind by wicked works. Col. 1.21.
So S. Paul expresses it: and therefore the reconciling of these, is to
represent them holy and unblameable, and unreprovable in his sight. 23,
Pardon of sins is the least part of this reconciliation; Our sins and our
sinfulness too must be taken away; that is, our old guilt, and the remanent
affections must be taken off, before we are friends of God. And therefore we
find this reconciliation pressed on our parts; we are reconciled to God, not
God to us. For although the term be relative, and so signifies both parts; as
conjunction, and friendship, and society, and union do: yet it pleased the
Spirit of God by this expression to signify our duty expressly, and to leave
the other to be supposed; because if our parts be done, whatsoever is on Gods
part, can never fail. And 2. Although this reconciliation begins on Gods part,
and he first invites us to peace, and gave his Son a Sacrifice; yet Gods love
is very revocable till we are reconciled by obedience and conformity.

2. Renewing, and that either with the connotation of the subject renewed, or
the cause renewing. The renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. Romans 18.2 Ephesians,
4.23.
and the renewing of the mind, or the spirit of the mind. The word is exactly
the same with (...), which is a change of mind from worse to better, as it is
distinguished from the fruits and effects of it. So, be renewed in your mind,
that is, throw away all your foolish principles, and nonsense propositions by
which you use to be tempted and persuaded to sin, and inform your mind with
wise notices and sentences of God: That ye put off concerning the old
conversation the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts;
and that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness; which is an excellent description of Repentance: In which it is
observable, that S. Paul uses two words more to express the greatness and
nature of this change and conversion. It is

3. A new Creature; The new Man; Created in Righteousness: Ephesians. 2.10.3.9. John
3.6.
for the state of Repentance is so great an alteration, that in some sense it
is greater then the Creation; because the things created had in them no
opposition to the power of God, but a pure capacity obediential: Jam. 1.18.
but a sinner has dispositions opposite to the Spirit of Grace, and he must
unlearn much before he can learn any thing; He must die before he can be born.

Nam quodcunque suis mutatum finibus exit,
Continuo hoc mors est illius quod fuit ante. Lucret.
Our sins, the body of sin, the spirit of uncleanness, the old man must be
abolished, mortified, crucified, buried; Jude Rev. 7.14, Heb. 10.22, 23. Psalm.
50.9. 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 John 3.3.
our sins must be laid away, we must hate the garments spotted with the flesh,
and our garments must be whitened in the blood of the Lamb; our hearts must be
purged from an evil conscience, purified as God is pure, that is, as S. Paul
expresses it, from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, denying or
renouncing all ungodliness and worldly lusts.

And then as the antithesis or consequent of this is, We must live godly,
righteously, and soberly in this present world; Gal. 2.20.
we must not live either to the world, or to our selves, but to Christ: Hic
dies aliam vitam adfert, alios mores postulat; Our manner of life must be
wholly differing from our former vanities, so that the life which we now live
in the flesh, we must live by the faith of the Son of God, that is, according
to his Laws and most holy Discipline.

This is pressed earnestly upon us by those many Precepts of obedience, Romans
6.17. Acts 6.7. 1 Pet. 4.3. Ephesians. 2 3. Jam. 1.22.23. 1 John 3.22. Joh. 3.4. 1 John 1.6. 2 Cor. 8.21. Col. 1.10. 1 Cor. 15.58.
to the holy Gospel, to the Truth, to the Doctrine of Faith; * of doing good,
doing righteousness, doing the truth; * serving in the newness of the Spirit; *
giving our members up as servants of righteousness unto holiness; * being holy
in all conversations; * following after peace with all men and holiness; being
followers of good works; providing things honest in the sight of God and men;
abhorring evil, and cleaving to that which is good; * perfecting holiness in
the fear of God; to be perfect in every good work; * being filled with the
fruits of righteousness; walking worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing; being
fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God; *
abounding in the work of the Lord. (...) and (...) are the words often used,
filled full, and perfect.

To the same purpose is it, live in Christ, and unto God, that is, 2 Timothy 3.12.
to live according to their will, and by their rule, and to their glory, and in
their fear and love, called by S. Paul to live in the faith of the Son of God:
Gal. 2.20. 1 Cor. 2.1. 1 Thessalonians. 16. Joh. 2.6. Ephesians. 2.10.
to be followers of Christ, and of God, to dwell in Christ, and to abide in
him; to walk according to the Commandments of God, in good works, in truth,
according to the Spirit, to walk in light, to walk with God; which was said of
Enoch: of whom the Greek LXX. read (...), He pleased God. * There are very
many more to the same purpose. For with great caution and earnestness the holy
Scriptures place the duties of mankind in practice and holiness of living, and
removes it far from a confidence of notion and speculation. Qui fecerit, and
docuerit, He that does them and teaches them, Mat. 5 19. Luke 5.46.
shall be great in the Kingdom; and, Why do you call me Lord, Lord, and do not
the things I say to you; Joh. 15.14.
and, Ye are my friends if ye do what I command you. (...). Ignat. ad Magnes.
We must not only be called Christians, but be so; for not to be called but to
be so, brings us to felicity; that is, since the life of a Christian is the
life of Repentance, whose work it is, for ever to contend against sin, for ever
to strive to please God, a dying to sin, a living to Christ, he that thinks his
Repentance can have another definition, or is completed in any other, or in
fewer parts, must be of another Religion then is taught by Christ and his holy
Apostles. This is the Faith of the Son of God, this is that state of excellent
things which he purchased with his blood: and as there is no other Name under
heaven, so there is no other Faith, no other Repentance whereby we can be saved.

Upon this Article it is usual to discourse of Sorrow and Contrition, of
Confession of sins, of making amends, of self-affliction, and some other
particulars: but because they are not parts, but actions, fruits, and
significations of Repentance, I have reserved them for their proper place. Now
I am to apply this general Doctrine to particular states of sin and sinners, in
the following Chapters.

. 3. Descriptions of Repentance taken from the holy Scriptures.
WHen heaven is shut up, 1 Kings 8.35, 36.
and there is no rain, because they have sinned against thee: if they pray
toward this place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin when thou
afflictest them: * Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy
servants, and of thy people Israel, that thou teach them the good way wherein
they should walk, and give rain upon thy land which thou have given to thy
people for an inheritance.

And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, Isa. 59.20, 21.
and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob (says the Lord.) * As for
me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee,
and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says
the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.

Again, when I say unto the wicked, Ezekiel. 33.14, 15 16.
Thou shall surely die: if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful
and right: * If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had rebbed,
walk in the statutes of life without committing iniquity; he shall even live,
he shall not die. * None of his sins that he has committed, shall be mentioned
unto him; he has done that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live.

Knowing this, Romans 6.6, 11, 12, 13, 18, 19.
that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. * Likewise reckon ye also
your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ
our Lord. * Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should
obey it in the lusts thereof. * Neither yield ye your members as instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin; but yield your selves unto God, as those that are
alive from the dead and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God.
* Being then made free from sin, ye became the servants of righteousness. * I
speak after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of your flesh: for as
ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity unto
iniquity, even so now yield your members servants to righteousness unto
holiness.

Wherefore my brethren, Romans 7.4, 5, 6.
ye also are become dead to the law by the body of Christ, that ye should be
married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should
bring forth fruit unto God. * For when we were in the flesh, the motions of
sins which were by the law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto
death. * But now we are delivered from the law, that being dead wherein we were
held, that we should serve in the newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of
the letter.

And that, Romans 13.11, 12, 13.
knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of sleep: for now is
our salvation nearer then when we believed. * The night is far spent, the day
is at hand: let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on
the armor of light. * Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying. * But
put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof.

Having therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of the flesh 2 Cor. 7.1, 10, 11.
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. * For godly sorrow works
Repentance to salvation not to be repented of: but the sorrow of the world
works death. * For behold, this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a
godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your
selves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea,
what zeal, yea, what revenge? in all things ye have approved your selves to be
clear in this matter.

For the love of Christ constrains us, 2 Cor. 5.15, 17.
because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead. *
Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are past
away, behold all things are become new.

That ye put off, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24.
concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to
the deceitful lusts: * And be renewed in the spirit of your mind. * And that
ye put on that new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness.

Let no man deceive you with vain words: Ephesians. 5.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 15, 16, 17.
for because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. * Be not ye therefore partakers with them. * For ye were
sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord, walk as children of
light. * For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and
truth. * Proving what is acceptable unto the Lord: * And have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. * See then that
ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise: * Redeeming the time, because
the days are evil. * Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the
will of the Lord is.

If ye then be risen with Christ, Col 31, 2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 10.
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of
God. * Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth. * For ye
are dead, and your life is hidden with Christ in God. * Mortify therefore your
members, which are upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness, inordinate
affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is idolatry. * But now,
you also put off all these, anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy
communication out of your mouth. * Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have
put off the old man with his deeds; * And have put on the new man, which is
renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him.

For the grace of God that brings salvation, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14.
has appeared to all men, * Teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world: *
Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ: * Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works.

Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of
witnesses, Heb. 12.1, 2, 14, 15.
let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us, and
let us run with patience the race that is set before us: * Looking unto Jesus,
the Author and Finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the throne of God. * Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord: * Looking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of
God, lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be
defiled.

Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, Jam. 1.18, 21, 22.
that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures. * Wherefore lay
apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with meekness
the ingraffed word, which is able to save your souls. * But be ye doers of the
word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.

Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lust. * And besides this, giving all
diligence, add to your faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; * And to
knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness;
* And to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity: *
For if these things be in you and abound, they make you that ye shall neither
be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. * But he
that lacks these things is blind, and cannot see far off, and has
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.

Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, 1 Pet. 1.13, 14, 15, 16.
be sober, and hope to the end, for the grace that is to be brought to you at
the revelation of Jesus Christ. * As obedient children, not fashioning your
selves according to the former lusts in your ignorance. * But as he which has
called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation; * Because it
is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy.

Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead
to sins, 1 Pet. 2.24.
should live unto righteousness, by whose stripes ye were healed.

The indispensable necessity of a good life, represented in the following
Scriptures.
WHosoever breaks one of these least Commandments, Mat. 5.19.
and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of
heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great
in the Kingdom of heaven.

And why call ye me Lord, Luke 6.46.
Lord, and do not the things which I say?

Ye are my friends, Joh. 15.14.
if ye do whatsoever I command you.

I beseech you therefore, Romans 12.1, 2.
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. * And
be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your
mind, that ye may prove what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of
God.

Who will render to every man according to his deeds: Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
* To them, who by patient continuance in well doing, seck for glory, and
honor, and immortality, eternal life. * But unto them that are contentious,
and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness; indignation and wrath, *
Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile. * But glory, honor and peace to every man that
works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile.

Circumcision is nothing, 1 Cor. 7.19.
and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments of God.

Therefore my beloved brethren, 1 Cor. 18.58.
be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

For in Christ Jesus, Gal. 6.15.
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature.

For in Jesus Christ, Gal. 5.6.
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which
works by love.

For we are his workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10.
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained, that
we should walk in them.

And this I pray, Phil. 1.9, 10, 11.
that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in all judgment:
* That ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere, and
without offense till the day of Christ: * Being filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God.

Furthermore then we beseech you, brethren, 1 Thessalonians. 4.1, 2, 3.
and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought
to walk, and to please God, so ye would abound more and more. * For ye know
what Commandments we gave by the Lord Jesus. * For this is the will of God,
even your sanctification.

As you know how we exhorted, and comforted, 1 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12, 13.
and charged every one of you (as a Father does his children;) * That ye should
walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his Kingdom and glory. * For this
cause also thank we God without ceasing, because when ye received the word of
God, which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men, but (as it is
in truth) the word of God, which effectually works also in you that believe.

How much more shall the blood of Christ, Heb. 9.4, 5, 9.
who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your
conscience from dead works, to serve the living God?

And having an High Priest over the house of God; Heb. 10.21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
26, 27, 28, 29.
* Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure
water: * Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering, (for he
is faithful that promised.) * And let us consider one another, to provoke unto
love and to good works. * Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together,
as the manner of some is; but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as
ye see the day approaching. For if we sin wilfully, after that we have received
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins; * but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall
devour the adversaries. * He that despised Moses law, died without mercy under
two or three witnesses: * Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be
thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the
blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has
done despite unto the Spirit of Grace?

For the time is come, 1 Pet. 4.17.
that judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at us,
what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God?

And every man that has this hope in him, 1 John 3.3, 22.
purifieth himself, even as he is pure. * And whatsoever we ask, we receive of
him, because we keep his Commandments, and do those things which are pleasing
in his sight.

And he that overcomes, Apoc. 2.26.
and keeps my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the Nations.

A Penitential Psalm, collected out of the Psalms and Prophets.
HAve mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindeness: according to the
multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.

For our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins testify
against us: our trangressions are with us, and as for our iniquities, we know
them;

In transgressing and lying against the Lord, and departing away from our God,
speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from the heart words of
falsehood.

Our feet have run to evil, our thoughts are thoughts of iniquity. The way of
peace we have not known: we have made us crooked paths, whosoever goes therein
shall not know peace.

Therefore do we wait for light, but behold obscurity: for brightness, but we
walk in darkness.

Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy Holiness and of
thy Glory: where is thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and
of thy mercies toward me? are they restrained?

We are indeed as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy
rags: and we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities like the wind have taken
us away.

But now, O Lord, thou art our Father: we are the clay, and thou our potter,
and we all are the work of thy hand. Be not wroth very sore, O Lord; neither
remember iniquity for ever: behold, see we beseech thee, we are thy people.
Thou, O Lord, art our Redemer: thy Name is from everlasting.

O Lord, Father and Governor of my whole life, leave me not to the sinful
counsels of my own heart, and let me not any more fall by them. Set scourges
over my thoughts, and the discipline of wisdom over my heart, lest my
ignorances increase, and my sins abound to my destruction.

O Lord, Father and God of my life, give me not a proud look, but turn away
from thy servant always a haughty mind.

Turn away from me vain hopes and concupiscence, and thou shall hold him up
that is always desirous to serve thee.

Let not the greediness of the belly, nor the lust of the flesh take hold of
me: and give not thy servant over to an impudent mind.

There is a word that is clothed about with death: God grant it be not found in
the portion of thy servant. For all such things shall be far from the godly,
and they shall not wallow in their sins.

Though my fins be as scarlet, yet make them white as snow: though they be red
like crimson, let them be as wool.

For I am ashamed of the sins I have desired, and am confounded for the
pleasures that I have chosen.

Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is: that I
may know how frail I am, and that I may apply my heart unto wisdom.

Withhold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O Lord: let thy loving kindness
and thy truth continually preserve me.

For innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have taken hold
upon me, so that I am not able to look up: for they are more then the hairs of
my head, therefore my heart fails me.

But thou, O Lord, though mine iniquities testify against me, save me for thy
Name sake: for our backslidings are many, we have sinned grievously against
thee.

But the Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore
have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed.

He is near that justifies me, who will contend with me? The Lord God will
help me, who is he that shall condemn me? I will trust in the Lord, and stay
upon my God.

O let me have this of thine hand, that I may not lie down in sorrow.

S. Paul 's Prayers for a holy life.
I. I Bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.14, etc.
of whom the whole family in Heaven and Earth is named, that he would grant
unto me according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by
his Spirit in the inner man; that Christ may dwell in my heart by faith; that
being rooted and grounded in love, I may be able to comprehend with all Saints,
what is the breadth and length, and depth and height: and to know the love of
Christ, which passes knowledge, and may be filled with all the fullness of God,
through the same our most blessed Savior Jesus. Amen.

The Doxology.

Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think, according to the power that works in us: Unto him be glory in the
Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.

II. O Most gracious God, Col. 1.9, etc.
grant to thy servant to be filled with the knowledge of thy Will in all
wisdom and spiritual understanding; to walk worthy of the Lord unto all
pleasing, to be fruitful in every good work, increasing in the knowledge of
God. Strengthen me, O God, with all might according to thy glorious power, unto
all patience, and long-suffering, and joyfulness: So shall I give thanks unto
the Father, who has made me meet to be partaker of the inheritance of the
Saints in light, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

III. NOw God himself and our Father, 1 Thessalonians. 3.11, 12.
and our Lord Jesus Christ perfect what is lacking in my faith, direct my way
unto him, make me to increase and abound in love toward all men, and establish
my heart unblameable in holiness before God even our Father, at the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints.

IV. THe God of peace, Heb. 13.20, 21.
that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the
sheep, through the blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make me perfect in every
good work to do his will, working in me what is well pleasing in his sight,
through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A Penitential Prayer.
I. OEternal God, most merciful Father, who have revealed thy self to Mankind
in Christ Jesus, full of pity and compassion, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin; be pleased to effect
these thy admirable mercies upon thy servant, whom thou have made to put thy
trust in thee. I know, O God, that I am vile and polluted in thy sight; but I
must come into thy presence or I die. Thou can not behold any unclean thing,
and yet unless thou look upon me, who am nothing but uncleanness, I shall
perish miserably and eternally. O look upon me with a gracious eye; cleanse my
Soul with the blood of the holy Lamb; that being purified in that holy stream,
my sins may lose their own foulness, and become white as snow: Then shall the
leprous man be admitted to thy Sanctuary, and stand before the Throne of Grace,
humble, and full of sorrow for my fault, and full of hope of thy mercy and
pardon, through Jesus Christ.

II. O My God, thou were reconciled to Mankind by thy own graciousness and
glorious goodness, even when thou did find out so mysterious ways of
Redemption for us by sending Jesus Christ; then thou did love us, and that
holy Lamb did from the beginning of the world lie before thee as sacrificed and
bleeding; and in the fullness of time he came to actuate and exhibit what thy
goodness had designed and wrought in the Counsels of Eternity. But now, O
gracious Father, let me also be reconciled to thee; for we continued enemies to
thee, though thou lovedst us; let me no longer stand at distance from thee, but
run unto thee, bowing my will, and submitting my understanding, and mortifying
my affections, and resigning all my powers and faculties to thy holy Laws, that
thou may take delight to pardon and to sanctify, to assist thy servant with
thy grace, till by so excellent conduct, and so unspeakable mercy, I shall
arrive to the state of glory.

III. O Blessed Savior Jesus, thou have made thy self a blessed Peace Offering
for sins, thou have procured and revealed to us this Covenant of Repentance and
remission of sins; and by the infinite mercies of the Father, and the death and
intercession of the Son, we stand fair and hopeful in the eye of the Divine
Compassion, and we have hopes of being saved. O be pleased to work thy own work
in us. The grace and admission to Repentance is thy own glorious production,
thou have obtained it for us with a mighty puchase: but then be pleased also to
take me in, to partake actually of this glorious mercy. Give to thy servant a
perfect hatred of sin, a great displeasure at my own folly for ever having
provoked thee to anger; a perpetual watchfulness against it, an effective
resolution against all its tempting instances, a prevailing strife, and a
glorious victory; that the body of sin being destroyed, I may never any more
serve any of its baser interests; but that by a diligent labor, and a constant
care, I may approve my self to thee my God, mindful of thy Covenant, a servant
of thy Will, a lover of thy Glory; that being thy Minister in a holy service, I
may be thy Son by adoption and participation of the glories of the Lord Jesus.
O let me never lie down in sin, nor rise in shame; but be partaker both of the
Death and the Resurrection of our Lord; that my imperfect and unworthy services
may, by passing into the holiness of thy Kingdom, be such as thy servant
desires they should, and fit to be presented unto thee in the perfect holiness
of Eternity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. III. Of the distinction of sins Mortal and Venial, in what sense to be
admitted; and how the smallest sins are to be repented of, and expiated.
. 1.
MEn have not been satisfied with devising infinite retirements and disguises
of their follies to hide them from the world, but finding themselves open and
discerned by God, have endeavored to discover means of escaping from that Eye
from which nothing can escape but innocence, and from which nothing can be hid,
but under the cover of mercy. For besides that we expound the Divine Laws to
our own purposes of ease and ambition, we give to our sins gentle censures, and
adorn them with good words, and refuse to load them with their proper
characters and punishments, and at last are come to that state of things, that
since we cannot allow to our selves a liberty of doing every sin, we have
distinguished the Question of sins into several orders, and have taken one half
to our selves. For we have found rest to our fancies in the permissions of one
whole kind, having distinguished sins into Mortal and Venial in their own
nature; that is, sins which may, and sins which may not be done, without
danger; so that all the difference is, that some sins must be taken heed of,
but others there are, and they the most in number, and the most frequent in
their instances and returns, which we have leave to commit, without being
affrighted with the fearful noises of damnation; by which doctrine, iniquity
and confidence have much increased and grown upon the ruins and declension of
the Spirit.

And this one Article has almost an infinite influence to the disparagement of
Religion in the determination of Cases of Conscience. Venial or Mortal, then
whether it be lawful or not lawful; and as Purgatory is to Hell, so Venial is
to Sin, a thing which men fear not, because the main stake they think to be
secured: for if they may have Heaven at last, they care not what comes between.
And as many men of the Roman persuasion will rather choose Purgatory, then
suffer here an inconsiderable penance, or do those little services which
themselves think will prevent it: so they choose venial sins, and hug the
pleasures of trifles, warming themselves at fantastic fires, and dancing in
the light of the glo-worms; and they love them so well, that rather then quit
those little things, they will suffer the intolerable pains of a temporary
Hell; for so they believe: which is the testimony of a great evil and a mighty
danger; for it gives testimony, that little sins can be beloved passionately,
and therefore can minister such a delight as is thought a price great enough to
pay for the sufferance of temporal evils, and Purgatory it self.

But the evil is worse yet when it is reduced to practice. It is a venial sin;
that is, though it be a sin, yet there is in it no danger of losing the favor
of God by that, but you may do it, and you may do it again a thousand thousand
times; and all the venial sins of the world put together, can never do what one
mortal sin can, that is, make God to be your enemy: Lib. 1. de amiss. gratiae
cap. 13.. alterum est.
So Bellarmine expressly affirms. But because there are many Doctors who write
Cases of Conscience, and there is no measure to limit the parts of this
distinction, (for that which is not at all cannot be measured) the Doctors
differ infinitely in their sentences; some calling that Mortal which others
call Venial, (as you may see in the little Summaries of Navar and Emanuel Sa)
the poor souls of the Laity, and the vulgar Clergy who believe what is told
them by the Authors or Confessors they choose to follow, must needs be in
infinite danger, and the whole body of Practical Divinity, in which the life of
Religion and of all our hopes depends, shall be rendered dangerous and
uncertain, and their confidence shall betray them unto death.

To bring relief to this state of evil, punishable as God please, even with the
highest expressions of his anger. 3. By what Repentance they are cured, and
pardoned respectively.

. 2. Of the difference of sins, and their measures.
1. Jovinian, which he learned from the Schools of the Stoics, that all sins
are alike grievous; -- Nam dicunt esse pares res, Horat. Sermon. l. 1. Sat. 3.

Furta latrociniis, and magnis parva minantur:
Falce recisuros simili se, si sibi regnum
Permittant homines --
For they supposed an absolute irresistible Fate to be the cause of all things;
and therefore what was equally necessary, was equally culpable, that is, not at
all: and where men have no power of choice, or (which is all one) that it be
necessary that they choose what they do, there can be no such thing as Laws, or
sins against them. To which they adding that all evils are indifferent, and the
event of things, be it good or bad, had no influence upon the felicity or
infelicity of man, they could neither be differenced by their cause, nor by
their effect; the first being necessary, and the latter, indifferent. * Against
this I shall not need to oppose many Arguments; for though this follows most
certainly from their doctrine, who teach an irresistible Decree of God to be
the cause of all things and actions; yet they that own the doctrine disavow the
consequent, and in that are good Christians, but ill Logicians. But the Article
is sufficiently cleared by the words of our B. Lord in the case of Judas, whose
sin (as Christ told to Pilate) was the greater, because he had not power over
him but by special concession; Mat. 23.24. Luke 6.41.
in the case of the servant that knows his Masters will, and does it not; in
the several condemnations of the degrees and expressions of anger in the
instances of Racha, and (...) Ira festuca est: odium vero trabs. Aug.
, Thou vain man, or Thou fool: by this comparing some sins to gnats, and some
to Camels: and in proportion to these, there are (...) in S. Luke, many
stripes; a (...) in S. James, a greater condemnation. Ira festuca est: odium
vero trabs. Aug.
Thus to rob a Church is a greater sin then to rob a Thief; To strike a Father
is a higher impiety then to resist a Tutor; To oppress a Widow is clamorous,
and calls aloud for vengeance, when a less repentance will vote down the
whispering murmurs of a trifling injury, done to a fortune that is not sensible
of smaller diminutions. Nec vincit ratio tantundem ut peccet, idemque
Qui teneros caules alieni fregerit horti,
Vt qui nocturnus Divum sacra legerit --
He is a greater criminal that steals the Chalice from a Church, then he that
takes a few Coleworts, or robs a garden of Cucumers. But this distinction and
difference is by something that is extrinsecal to the action, the greatness of
the mischief, or the dignity of the person; according to that, Omne animi
vitium tanto conspectius in se
Crimen habet, quanto major qui peccat habetur.


2. is, because such greater sins are complicated; they are commonly two or
three sins wrapped together, as the unchastity of a Priest, is uncleanness and
scandal too: Adultery is worse then Fornication, because it is unchastity and
injustice, and by the fearful consequents of it, is mischievous and
uncharitable. Et quas Euphrates, and quas mihi misit Orontes,
Me capiant; Nolo furta pudica thori.
So Sacrilege is theft and impiety. And Apicius killing himself, when he
supposed his estate would not maintain his luxury, was not only a
self-murtherer, but a gluttonous person in his death: Nil est Apici tibi
gulosius factum. Lib. 3.22. Epign. Mart.
So that the greatness of sins is in most instances by extension and
accumulation; that as he is a greater sinner who sins often in the same
instance, then he that sins seldom; so is he who sins such sins as are
complicated and entangled, like the twinings of combining Serpents. And this
appears to be so, because if we take single sins, as uncleanness and theft, no
man can tell which is the greater sin; neither can they be differenced but by
something that is besides the nature of the action it self. A thought of theft,
and an unclean thought, have nothing by which they can excel each other; but
when you clothe them with the dress of active circumstances, they grow greater
or less respectively; because then two or three sins are put together, and get
a new name.

3. more immediately, and by him alone is judged; but the former being invested
with material circumstances, can be judged by men: But all that God reserves
for his own portion of the Sacrifice, is the Heart; that is, our love and
choice; and therefore the degrees of love or hatred, is that measure by which
God makes differing judgments of them. For by this it is, that little sins
become great, and great sins become little. If a Jew had maliciously touched a
dead body in the days of Easter, it had been a greater crime, then if in the
violence of his temptation he had unwillingly willed to commit an act of
fornication. He that delights in little thefts, because they are breaches of
Gods Law, or burns a Prayer book, because he hates Religion, is a greater
criminal then he that falls into a material heresy by an invincible or less
discerned deception: Secure but to God your affections, and he will secure your
innocence or pardon; for men live or die by their own measures. If a man spits
in the face of a Priest to defy Religion, or shaves the beard of an Ambassador
to disgrace the Prince (as it happened to David's Messengers) his sin is greater
then if he killed the Priest in his own just defense, or shot the Ambassador
through the heart, when he intended to strike a Lion. For every negligence,
every disobedience being against Charity or the love of God, by interpretation;
this superaddition of direct malice is open enmity against him, and therefore
is more severely condemned by him who sees every thought and degrees of passion
and affection. For the increase of malice does aggravate the sin, just as the
complication of material instances. Every degree of malice being as distinct
and commensurate a sin, as any one external instance that has a name; and
therefore many degrees of malice combine and grow greater as many sins
conjoined in one action, they differ only in Nature, not in Morality; just as
a great number and a great weight: So that in effect, all sins are differenced
by complication only, that is, either of the external or the internal
instances.

4. Though the negligence or the malice be naturally equal, yet sometimes by
accident the sins may be unequal, not only in the account of men, but also
before God too; but it is upon the account of both the former. It is when the
material effect being different upon men, God has with greater caution secured
such interests. So that by interpretation the negligence is greater, because
the care was with greater earnestness commanded; or else because in such cases
the sin is complicated: for such sins which do most mischief, have besides
their proper malignity, the evil of uncharitableness, or hating our brother. In
some cases God requires one hand, and in others both. Now he that puts but one
of his fingers to each of them, his negligence is in nature the same, but not
in value, because where more is required, the defect was greater. If a man be
equally careless of the life of his Neighbors Son and his Neighbors Cock,
although the will or attendance to the action be naturally equal, that is, none
at all, yet morally, and in the divine account they differ, because the
proportions of duty and obligation were different, and therefore more ought to
have been put upon the one then upon the other: just as he is equally clothed
that wears a single garment in Summer and Winter, but he is not equally warm,
unless he that wears a silk Mantle when the Dog Star rages, claps on Furs
when the cold North-star changes the waters into rocks.

5. Single sins done with equal affection or disaffection, do not differ in
degrees as they relate to God, but in themselves are equally prevarications of
the Divine Commandment. Nihil invenies rectius recto, non magis quam verius
vero, quam temperato temperatius, omnis in modo est virtus: modus certa mensura
est. Constantia non habet quo proredat, non magis quam fiducia, aut veritas,
aut fides. Sen. Ep. 67.
As he tells a lie that says the Moon is foursquare, as great as he that says
there were but three Apostles, or that Christ was not the Son of Man: and as
every lie is an equal sin against truth; so every sin is an equal disobedience
and recession from the Rule. But some lies are more against Charity, or
Justice, or Religion, then others are, and so are greater by complication; but
against truth they are all equally opposed: and so are all sins contrary to the
Commandment. And in this sense is that saying of S. Basil: In regul, brevior.
Primo enim scire illud convenit, differentiam minorum and majorum nusquam in
Novo Testamento reperiri. Siquidem una est and eadem sententia adversus
quaelibet peccata, cum Dominus dixerit, Qui facit peccatum servus est peccati:
and item, Sermo quem loquutus sum vobis, ille judicabit eum in Novissimo die:
and Johannes vociferans dicat, Qui contumax est in filium, non videbit vitam
aeternam; sed ira Dei manet super eum: cum contumacia non in discrimine
peccatorum, sed in violatione praecepti positam habeat futuri supplicii
denunciationem. The difference of great and little sins is no where to be found
in the New Testament. One and the same sentence is against all sins; our Lord
saying, He that does sin is the servant of sin; and the word that I have
spoken, that shall judge you in the last day; and John cries out, saying, He
that is disobedient to the Son, shall not see eternal life, but the wrath of
God abides on him: for this contumacy or disobedience does not consist in the
difference of sins, but in the violation of the Divine Law; and for that it is
threatened with eternal pain. But besides these Arguments from Scripture, he
adds an excellent Reason: Prorsus autem si id nobis permittitur, ut in
peccatis hoc magnum, illud exiguum appellemus, invicto argumento concluditur
magnum unicuique esse illud a quo quisque superatur: contraque exiguum quod
unusquisque ipse superat. Vt in athletis qui vicit fortis est; qui autem victus
est, imbecillior eo unde victus est, quisque ille sit. If it be permitted that
men shall call this sin great, and that sin little; they will conclude that to
be great which was too strong for them; and that to be little which they can
master. As among Champions, he is the strongest that gets the victory. And then
upon this account, no sin is Venial that a man commits, because that is it
which has prevailed upon and mastered all his strengths.

The instance is great whatsoever it be that God has chosen for our obedience.
Lot for Zoar, Is it not a little one? For no man can say it is little, if God
has chosen the Commandment which the sin trangresses, as an instrument of his
glorification and our felicity. Disobedience is the formality of sin; and since
the instance or the matter of sin is all one to God, so also is the
disobedience. The result of this consideration is this: 1. That no man should
indulge to himself the smallest sin, because it is equally against God as the
greatest: and though accidentally it may come not to be so exacted, yet of it
self it may, and God is just if he does. 2. There is no sin, but if God enters
into judgment with us, he may justly sentence us for it to the portion of
accursed Spirits. For if for any, then for all, there being (as to him) no
difference. But these things are to be proved in the following Section.

. 3. That all sins are punishable as God please, even with the pains of Hell.
1. not to be called little, unless God himself should be little esteemed. And
since men usually give this account, that God punishes a transient sin with an
immortal pain, because though the action is finite, yet it was against an
infinite God, we may upon the same ground esteem it just, that even for the
smallest sin, God in the rigor of his justice can exact the biggest calamity.
For an act of Murder, or a whole year of Adultery, has no nearer proportion
to an eternity of pains, then one sinful thought has: for greater or less are
no approaches toward infinite; for between them both, and what is infinite,
the distance is equally infinite.

2. Venialia peccata ex consensu omnium Theologorum, neque tollunt neque
minuunt habitum charitatis, sed solum actum and fervorem ejus impediunt.
Bellarm. de amiss. great. c. 13., alterum est.
; in the very definition supposing that thing which is most of all in question;
and the ground of the definition is nothing but the analogy and proportion of
the entercourses and usages of men, who for a small offense do not neglect or
cast away the endearments of an old friend Idem ib. cap. 11.. Quartum argum.
: of which when I have given account, I suppose the greatest difficulty of the
question is removed. Against this therefore I oppose this proposition, The
smallest sins are destructive of our friendship with God. For although Gods
mercies are infinite and glorious, and he forgives millions to us that grudge
to remit the trifles of our brother; and therefore whatsoever we can suppose a
man will forgive to his friend, that and much more, infinitely more may we
expect from the treasures of his goodness and mercy; yet our present
consideration is, not what we can expect from Gods mercy, but what is the just
demerit of our sins; not what he will forgive, but what he may justly exact;
not what are the measures of pardon, but what are the accounts of his justice:
for though we have hopes upon other reckonings, yet upon the account even of
our smallest sins, we have nothing but fear and sadder expectations. For we are
not to account the measures and rules of our friendship with God, by the
easiness and ignorance, by the necessities and usual compliances of men. For

1.

2. their neighbors action is directed, and therefore reckon only by the next
and most apparent cause, not by the secret and most operative and effective.

3. Georges show, at a training, or in a Procession; and yet that is punished
with death, this with a Cudgel; the aptness to mischief, and the evil
consequent, being in humane Judicatories the only measures of judgment: Men
feel the effects, and the Laws do judge accordingly. 2. In the private
judgments of men, mercy must interpose; and it can oftener then in the public:
because in the private entercourses of men, there is a sense, and can be a
consideration of particulars, and little accidents and significations of
things, and some purposes may be privately discerned, which cannot publicly be
proved. He that went to help his friend out of a river, and pulled his arm out
of joint, was excused by the wronged preserved person: the evil accident was
taken off by the pious purpose: But he that to dishonor his friend throws a
glass of wine in his sace, and says he did it in sport, may be judged by his
purpose, not by his pretense, because the pretense can be confuted by the
observation of little circumstances and adherencies of the action, which yet
peradventure cannot legally be proved. Aliter leges, aliter philosophi tollunt
asturias: leges, quatenus tenere manu res possunt; philosophi, quatenus ratione
and intelligentia. Laws regard the great materialities of obedience, the real,
sensible effect. But wise men. Philosophers and private Judges take in the
accounts of accidental moments and incidencies to the action, Offic. lib. 3.
said Cicero. But 3. Gods judgment is otherwise yet; for he alone can tell the
affection, and all that which had secret influence into the event: and
therefore he can judge by what is secret, by the purpose and heart, which is
indeed the only way of doing exact justice. From hence it follows, that what
ought not to dissolve the friendship of man, may yet justly dissolve our
friendship with God, for he takes other measures then men may or can.

4. him: but men are often governed by Chance; and that which pleases them to
day, shall provoke them to morrow; and the next day you shall be their enemy,
for that for which three days ago they paid you thanks.

5. Hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim; We give and ask pardon; Det ille
veniam facile, cui venia est opus; But we never found iniquity in God, or
injustice in the most High, and therefore he that is innocent may throw a stone
at the criminal.

6. He that despises little things, shall perish by little and little. * He
has told us, they asperse us with a mighty guilt; for he that offends in one
Commandment, is guilty of all. * He has told us that we are not certainly
excused, though our conscience do not manifestly accuse us; for so S. Paul, I
am not hereby justified, for God is greater then my conscience. * He has
threatened loss of heaven to him that is guilty of the breach of one, (...),
though of the least of these Commandments ((...), these which Christ had
reckoned in his Sermon, where fetters are laid upon thoughts and words) shall
be called the least in the Kingdom, that is he shall be quite shut out: for
minimus here is as much as nullus; miaimus vocabitur, that is, minimi
aestimabitur, In resp. ad orthod. apud Justin.
he shall not be esteemed at all in the accounts of doomsday mercy, (...) in
the accounts of the Doomsday book, where there shall be a discerning of them
who shall be glorified, from them that are to be punished. And this which is
one of the severest periods of holy Scripture, can by no arts be turned aside
from concluding fully in this question. De amiss. great. cap. 12. Restat ultim.
Bellarmine says it means only to condemn those who by false doctrines
corrupt these severe precepts, and teach men as the Pharisees did of old; not
all those who break them themselves, if they teach others to keep them. He that
breaks one of these, and shall teach men so to do; so are the words of Christ.
But it is a known thing that (...) is oftentimes used for (...); He that breaks
one of these, or shall teach others. The words were spoken to the persons of
the Apostles, who were to teach these doctrines (...) exactly as Christ
preached them; but without peradventure they were also intended to all the
Church: and the following words, and the whole analogy of the adjoined
discourse make it clear to every observing Reader; and the words plainly say
this, He that shall break one of these least Commandments, and He that shall
teach men so, each of them shall be called the least in the Kingdom. But 2.
why did our blessed Lord so severely threaten those that should teach others to
break any of these severe Commandments by false interpretation? but only
because it was so necessary for all to keep them in the true sense, and so
fearful a thing to any to break them. 3. Those who preach severe doctrines to
others, and touch them not with one of their fingers, are guilty of that which
Christ reproved in the Pharisees; and themselves shall be cast-awayes, while
they preach to others: so that the breaking it by disobedience is damnable, as
well as the breaking it by false interpretation: Odi homines ignava opera,
philosopha sententia, Pacuvivs,

Qui cum sibi semitam non sapiant, alteri monstrant viam.
Indeed it is intolerable to teach men to be vicious; but it is a hateful
baseness to show others that way which our selves refuse to walk in. Whatever
therefore may not be allowed to be taught, may not also be done; for the people
are not to be taught evil, because they must not do evil; but may the teachers
do what they may not teach, and what the people may not do, or is not the same
punishment to them both? 4. Now upon these grounds this very gloss which
Bellarmine gives being a false interpretation of these words of Christ (which
are a summary of his whole Sermon, and as it were the sanction and
establishment of the former and following periods into laws) must needs be of
infinite danger to the inventer and followers of it: for this gloss gives leave
to men to break the least of these Commandments, some way or other (if they do
not teach others so to do) without being affrighted with fears of Hell; but in
the mean while, this gloss teaches, or gives leave to others to break them, but
allows no false interpretation of them but its own. 5. But then it is worse
with them who teach others so to do, and command all men to teach so; and if
the Roman Doctors who teach that some breach of these Commandments is not of
its own nature, and by the divine threatenings, exclusive of the transgressors
from the Kingdom of God, be not in some sense a teaching men so to do, then
nothing is: For when God said to Adam, That day thou eatest of the forbidden
fruit, thou shall die; the Tempter said, Nay, but ye shall not die; and so was
author to Adam of committing his sin. So when our blessed Savior has told us,
that to break one of these least Commandments is exclusive of us from heaven,
they that say, that not every solution or breaking of them is exclusive from
heaven (which are the words of Bellarmine and the doctrine of the Roman Church)
must even by the consequence of this very gloss of his fall under the danger of
the (...) of the false teachers, or the breakers of them by false
interpretation. However, fearful is the malediction even to the breakers of the
least: (...), that is, (...) (that I may use the words of Theophylach) he shall
be last in the resurrection and shall be thrown into hell: for that is the
meaning of [least in the Kingdom of heaven] and fortasse ideo non erit in regno
coelorum, ubi nisi magni esse non possunt, said S. Austin; least is none at
all; for into heaven none can enter but they which are great in Gods account.

7.

Upon this account it is, proceeding, but it will deceive no body but our
selves.

2. Every sin is directly against Gods law; and therefore is damnable and
deadly in the accounts of the Divine justice, one as well, though not so
grievously, as another. For though sins be differenced by greater and less, yet
their proportion to punishment is not differenced by Temporal and Eternal, but
by greater and less in that kind which God has threatened. So Origin. Homil.
35. in Lucam.
Vnusquisque pro qualitate and quantitate peccati diversam mulctae sententiam
expendit. Si parum est quod peccas, ferieris damno minuti, ut Lucas scripsit,
ut vero Matthaeus, quadrantis. Veruntamen necesse est hoc ipsum quod exstitisti
debtor, solvere. Non eniminde exibis, nisi and minima quaeque persolveris.
Every one according to the quantity and quality of his sin must pay his fine;
but till he has paid he shall not be loosed from those fearful prisons; that
is, he shall never be loosed, if he agree not before he comes thither. The
smallest offense is a sin, and therefore it is (...), a transgression of the
Law, a violation of that band by which our obedience unites us unto God. And
this the holy Scripture signifies unto us in various expressions. For though
the several words are variously used in sacred and profane writers, yet all of
them signify that even the smallest sin is a prevarication of the Holy laws;
(...). Lib. 4. de orthod. fide cap. 23.
(...), so Damascen calls sin; which we render well by Transgression: and even
those words which in distinction signify a small offense, yet they also signify
the same with the greater words, to show that they all have the same formality,
and do the same displeasure, or at least that by the difference of the words,
no difference of their natures can be regularly observed. (...).
* Sins against God only are by Phavorinus called (...); and the same word is
also used for sin against our neighbors; (...), If thy brother sin against
thee, that is, do thee injury; (...).
and this is properly (...), injustice; But Demosthenes distinguishes injustice
from sin, (...) from (...), by voluntary and involuntary; (...). Orat. (...).
He that does wrong willingly is unjust, he that does it unwillingly is a
sinner.

The same indistinction is observable in the other words of Scripture; (...).
(...) is by S. Hierome used for the beginnings of sin, Cum cogitatio tacita
subrepit, and ex aliqua part conniventibus nobis, nec dum tamen nos impulit ad
ruinam; when a sudden thought invades us without our advertency and
observation, and has not brought forth death as yet: and yet that death is
appendent to whatsoever it be that can be signified by (...) we may observe,
because the sin of Adam that called death upon all the world is called (...);
Romans 5.18. Ephesians. 2.1.
and of the Ephesian Gentiles S. Paul said they had been dead (...), in
trespasses and sins; and therefore it cannot hence be inferred that such little
obliquities, or beginnings of greater sins are only (...) besides the law, not
against it, for it is (at least the word hinders not but it may be) of the same
kind of malignity as was the sin of Adam: Lib. 3. quaest. super Levit. q. 20.
And therefore S. Austin renders the word (...) delictum or offense, and so do
our Bibles. And the same also is the case of (...), which is attributed even to
concupiscence or the beginnings of mischief, Romans 7.5. In cap. 2. Ephesians. Jam.
1.15.
by S. Paul and by S. Hierome: but the same is used for the consummation of
concupiscence in the matter of uncleanness by S. James; Lust when it has
conceived (...); Vid. Com. DD. in Titum verb. (...).
peccatum is the Latin word, which when it is used in a distinct and pressed
sense, it is taken for the lesser sins, and is distinguished from crimen.
Paulus Orosius Apol. de liber. arbit.
uses it to signify only the concupiscence or sinful thoughts of the heart,
and when it breaks forth to action, he calls it a crime; peccatum cogitatio
concipit, crimen vero non nisi actus ostendit: and it was so used by the
ancient Latins. Peccatus it was called by them; quasi pellicatus, that enticing
which is proper to uncleanness. So Cicero in A. Gellius, Lib. 13. c. 19.
Nemo ita manifesto peccatu tenebatur, ut cum impudens fuisset in facto, tum
impudentior videretur si negaret. Thus the indistinction of words mingles all
their significations in the same common notion and formality. They were not
sins at all, if they were not against a Law, and if they be, they cannot be of
their own nature venial, but must be liable to that punishment which was
threatened in the Law whereof that action is a transgression.

2. Basil argues; Nullum peccatum contemnendum ut parvum, quando D. Paulus de
omni peccato generatim pronunciaverat stimulum mortis esse peccatum; The sting
of death is sin; that is, death is the evil consequent of sin, and comes in the
tail of it; of every sin, and therefore no sin must be despised as if it were
little. Now if every little sin has this sting also (as it is on all hands
agreed that it has) it follows that every little transgression is perfectly
and entirely against a Commandment. And indeed it is not sense to say any
thing can in any sense be a sin, and that it should not in the same sense be
against a Commandment. For although the particular instance be not named in
the Law, yet every instance of that matter must be meant. It was an extreme
folly in Bellarmine to affirm, De amiss. great. cap. 11.. Assumptio probatur.
Peceatum veniale ex parvitate materiae est quidem perfect voluntarium, sed
non perfect contra legem. Lex enim non prohibet furtum unius oboli in specie,
sed prohibet furtum in genere. That a sin that is venial by the smalness of the
matter is not perfectly against the Law, because the Law forbids theft indeed
in the general, but does not in particular forbid the stealing of a halfpenny:
for upon the same reason it is not perfectly against the Law to steal three
pound nineteen shillings three pence, because the Law in general only forbids
theft, but does not in particular forbid the stealing of that sum. * But what
is besides the Law, and not against it, cannot be a sin; and therefore to fancy
any sin to be only besides the Law is a contradiction; so, to walk, to ride,
to eat flesh or herbs, to wear a long or a short garment, are said to be
besides the Law; but therefore they are permitted and indifferent. Indifferent
I say in respect of that Law which relates to that particular matter, and
indifferent in all senses; unless there be some collateral Law which may
prohibit it indirectly. So for a Judge to be a Coachman, for a Priest to be a
Fiddler or Inne-keeper, are not directly unlawful, but indirectly they are, as
being against decency and public honesty or reputation, or being inconvenient
in order to that end whither their calling is designed. To this sense are those
words of S. Paul, All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient; That is, some things which directly are lawful, by an indirect
obligation may become unfit to be done; but otherwise, Licitum est quod nulla
lege prohibetur, says the Law. If no Law forbids it, then it is lawful; and to
abstain from what is lawful though it may have a worthiness in it more then
ordinary, yet to use our liberty is at no hand a sin. The issue then is this;
either we are forbidden to do a venial sin, or we are not. If we are not
forbidden, then it is as lawful to do a venial sin as to marry, or eat flesh:
If we are forbidden, then every such action is directly against Gods Law, and
consequently finable at the will of the supreme Judge, and if he please,
punishable with a supreme anger. And to this purpose there is an excellent
observation in S. Austin, Lib. 3. Quaest. super Levit. q. 20.
Peccatum and delictum si nihil differrent inter se, and si unius rei duo
nomina essent, non curaret Scriptura tam diligenter unum esse utriusque
sacrificium; There are several names in Scripture to signify our wanderings, and
to represent the several degrees of sin; but carefully it is provided for, that
they should be expiated with the same sacrifice; which proves that certainly
they are prevarications of the same Law, offenses of the same God, provocations
of the same anger, and hei^s of the same death: and even for small offenses a
Sacrifice was appointed, lest men should neglect what they think God regarded
not.

3. Every sin, even the smallest, is against Charity, which is the end of the
Commandment. For every sin or evil of transgression is far worse then all the
evils of punishment with which mankind is afflicted in this world; and it is a
less evil that all mankind should be destroyed, then that God should be
displeased in the least instance that is imaginable. Now if we esteem the loss
of our life or our estate, the wounding our head, or the extinction of an eye
to be great evils to us, and him that does any thing of this to us, to be our
enemy, or to be injurious, we are to remember that God hates every sin worse,
then we can hate pain or beggary. And if a nice and a tender conscience, the
spirit of every excellent person does extremely hate all that can provoke God
to anger or to jealousy; it must be certain that God hates every such thing
with an hatred infinitely greater, so great that no understanding can perceive
the vastness of it and immensity. For by how much every one is better, by so
much the more he hates every sin; and the soul of a righteous man is vexed and
afflicted with the inrodes of his unavoidable calamities, the armies of Egypt,
the lice and flies, his insinuating, creeping infirmities: Now if it be
holiness in him to hate these little sins, it is an imitation of God; for what
is in us by derivation, is in God essentially; therefore that which angers a
good man, and ought so to do, displeases God, and consequently is against
charity or the love of God. For it is but a vain dream to imagine, that because
just men, such who are in the state of grace, and of the love of God, do commit
smaller offenses therefore they are not against the love of God; for every
degree of cold does abate something of the heat in any hot body; but yet
because it cannot destroy it all, cold and heat may be consistent in the same
subject; but no man can therefore say, they are not contraries, and would not
destroy each other if they were not hindered by something else; and so would the
smallest offenses also destroy the life of grace, if they were not destroyed
themselves. But of this afterward. For the present, let it be considered, how
it can possibly consist with our love to God, with that duty that commands us
to love him with all our heart, with all our strength, with all our might, and
with all our soul, how (I say) it can be consistent with a love so extended, so
intended, to entertain any thing that he hates so essentially. To these
particulars I add this one consideration; That since there is in the world a
fierce opinion, that some sins are so slight and little, that they do not
destroy our relation to God, and cannot break the sacred tie of friendship, he
who upon the inference and presumption of that opinion shall choose to commit
such small sins, which he thinks to be the All that is permitted him, is not
excused by that supposition: For if it be said that he is therefore supposed to
love God, because he only does those little sins which he thinks are not
against the love of God, and if he did not think so, he would not do them; This
excuses him not, but aggravates the sin, for it is turning the grace of God
into wantonness. For since that such little things are the easier pardoned, is
wholly owing to Gods grace and his singular goodness, he that abuses this
goodness to licentiousness, makes his sin to abound, because Gods grace
abounds; because God is good, he takes leave to do evil, that is, to be most
contrary to God. For it is certain that every man in this case, has affections
for sin as formerly; indeed he entertains it not in the ruder instances because
he dares not, but he does all that he dares do; for when he is taught that
some certain sins are not damnable, there he will not abstain: which is a
demonstration that though he does something for fear, yet he does nothing for
love.

4. every sin, though in the smallest instance, is a turning from God and a
conversion to the creature. Suidas defines (...) sin to be (...), a declension
from good; and (...), that is, (...), to shoot besides the mark, to conduct our
actions by an indirect line to a wrong object, from God to the Creature.
Peccare est tanquam lineas transilire; so Parad. 3.
Cicero: a sinner goes out of those limits and marks which are appointed him by
God. Then this, no greater evil can be spoken of any thing, and of this, all
sin partakes more or less. Some few sins are direct aversions from God; so
Atheism, Blasphemy, Apostasy, Resolution never to repent, and some few more:
but many other very great sins are turnings from God not directly, but by
interpretation, He that commits fornication may yet by a direct act of
understanding and a full consent, believe God to be the chiefest Good: and some
very vicious persons have given their lives for a good cause, and to preserve
their innocence in some great instance, where the scene of their proper and
natural temptation does not lie. Some others there are who out of a sincere but
an abused Conscience persecute a good cause; these men are zealous for God, and
yet fight against him: But because these are real enemies, and but supposed
friends, therefore by interpretation and in effect they turn from God and turn
to the Creature. Lib. 3. Quaest. in Lev. c. 20.
Delictum quasi derelictum, said S. Austin; because in every sin God is
forsaken. They have left me the living Fountain, and dug to themselves
cisterns that hold no water. So God complains by the Prophet. He that prefers
pleasure or profit before his duty, rejects God, but loves money, and pays his
devotion to interest or ease, or sensuality. And just so does the smallest sin.
For since every action has something propounded to it as its last end, it is
certain he that sins, does not do it for God, or in order to him. He that tells
a lie to promote Religion, or to save the life of a man, or to convert his
soul, does not tell that lie for God, but tells the lie to make way for
something else which is in order to God; he breaks his legs, that he may the
better walk in the path of the Divine Commandments. A sin cannot be for God,
or in order to him, no not so much as habitually. For whatsoever can never be
referred to God actually, c^nnot at any time be referred habitually. Since
therefore the smallest sins cannot be for God that which is not with him is
against him; if it be no way for God, it is either directly or by
interpretation for pleasure or ease, or profit or pride, for something that is
against him.

And it is not to be neglected, the acting of their clamorous sins, and yet
keep the affections to them, and consequently entertain them in thoughts and
little reflections, in remembrances and fantastic images.

5.

Now concerning the first sort of venial sins, venial, (that is) apt for
pardon: for by the imperfection of the agent or the act, all great sins in
their matter, may become little in their malice and guilt. Now these are those
which Divines call sins of infirmity; and of them I shall give an account in a
distinct Chapter, under that title.

Concerning the second, i. e. sins venial for the smalness of the matter; I
know none such. For if the matter be a particular that God has expressly
commanded or forbidden respectively, it is not little, but all one to him as
that which we call the greatest. But if the particular be wholly relating to
our neighbor, the smalness of the matter does not absolutely make the sin
venial: for amongst us nothing is absolutely great, or absolutely little, but
in comparison with something else; and if a vile person had robbed the poor
woman that offered two mites to the treasury of the Temple, he had undone her;
a farthing there was all her substance: so that the smalness of the matter is
not directly an excuse. If a man had robbed a rich man of a farthing, he had
not indeed done him so great a mischief: but how if the rich man was not
willing to part with his farthing, but would be angry at the injury, is it not
a sin, because the theft was small? No man questions but it is. It follows
therefore that the smalness of the matter cannot make a sin venial, but where
there is a leave expressly given, or justly presumed: and if it be so in a great
matter, it is as little a sin as if the matter were small, that is, none at all.

But now concerning the third, sins venial in their own nature, and in their
whole kind; that is it which I have been disputing against all this while, and
shall now further conclude against by arguments more practical and moral. For
if we consider what are those particulars which these men call venial sins in
their whole kind and nature, we shall find that Christ and they give measures
differing from each other. The Catalogues of them I will take from the Fathers,
not that they ever thought these things to be in their nature venial, (for they
that think so of them are strangers to their writings: and to this purpose
Bellarmine has not brought one testimony pertinent and home to the question:)
but because they reckon such Catalogues of venial sins, which demonstrate that
they do mean sins made venial by accident, by men's infirmity, by Gods grace, by
pardon, by repentance, and not such which are so in their own nature. But the
thing it self will be its own proof.

S. Austin reckons, Vanas cachinnationes; in escis aviditatem, Lib 50. homil.
hom. 50.7. Sermon. 244. de temp. Enchir. c 78.
and immoderatiorem appetitum; in vendendis and emendis rebus, charitatis and
vilitatis vota perversa; usum matrimonii ad libidinem; judicia apud infideles
agitare; Dicere fratri Fatue. Vain laughter, greediness in meat, an immoderate
or ungoverned appetite; perverse desires of dearness and cheapness in buying
and selling commodities; the use of marriage to lustfulness and inordination;
Dial. 2. adv. Pelag.
the use of marriage to lustfulness and inordination; to go to law before the
unbelievers; to call our brother Fool. S. Hierome reckons, jestings, anger, and
injurious words. Caesarius Arelatensis the Bishop reckons, Homil. 8. and 13.
excess in eating and drinking, idle words, importune silence, to exasperate an
importunate beggar, to omit the fasts of the Church, sleepiness or immoderate
sleeping, the use of a wife to lustfulness, to omit the visitation of the sick
and of prisoners, and to neglect to reconcile them that are at variance, too
much severity or harshnes to our family, or too great indulgence, flattery,
talkings in the Church, poor men to eat too much when they are brought rarely
to a good table, forswearings [unwary perjury] slander or reproaches, rash
judgment, hatred, sudden anger, envy, evil concupiscence, filthy thoughts, the
lust of the eyes, the voluptuousness of the ears, or the itch of hearing, the
speaking filthy words: and indeed he reckons almost all the common sins of
mankind. De Prae. cept. and dispens. c. 14.
S. Bernard reckons, stultiloquium, vaniloquium, otiose dicta, facta, cogitata;
talking vainly, talking like a fool, idle or vain thoughts, words and deeds.
These are the usual Catalogues, and if any be reckoned, they must be these; for
many times some of these are least consented to, most involuntary, most ready,
less avoidable, of the highest effect, of an eternal return, incurable in the
whole, and therefore plead the most probably, and are the soonest likely to
prevail for pardon; but yet they cannot pretend to need no pardon, or to fear
no damnation. For our blessed Savior says it of him that speaks an angry
word, that he shall be guilty of hell fire. Now since we find such as these
reckoned in the Catalogue of venial sins; and S. Austin in particular calls
that venial to which our blessed Savior threatened hell fire; it is certain he
must not mean that it is in its own nature venial, but damnable as any other:
but it is venial, that is, prepared for pardon upon other contingencies and
causes, of which I shall afterward give account. In the mean time, I consider,

6. eodem sanguine eluenda, and without shedding of blood there was no
remission, they were reckoned in the same accounts of death and the Divine
anger. And it is manifest that by the severities and curse of the Law no sin
could escape. For cursed is he that continues not in every thing written in the
law, to do them. The Law was a Covenant of Works and exact measures. There were
no venial sins by virtue of that Covenant; for there was no remission: and
without the death of Christ we could not be eased of this state of danger.
Since therefore that any sin is venial or pardonable, is only owing to the
grace of God, to the death of Christ; and this death pardons all upon the
condition of Faith and Repentance, and pardons none without it: it follows that
though sins differ in degree, yet they differ not in their natural and
essential order to death. The man that commits any sin, dies if he repents not,
and he that does repent timely and effectually, dies for none. The wages of sin
is death; of sin indefinitely, and therefore of all sin, and all death: for
there is no more distinction of sin then death; only when death is threatened
indefinitely, that death is to be understood, which is properly and
specifically threatened in that Covenant where the death is named; as death
temporal in the Law, death eternal under the Gospel.

And thus it appears in a very material instance relating to this question:
Houses of Judgment among the Jews. Mat. 5.22.
Now it is observable, that to the least of these sins Christ assigns a
punishment just proportionable to that which the gloss of the Pharisees and the
Law it self did to them that committed Murder, which was capital; He shall be
guilty of judgment; so we read it, (...), not (...): so it is in the Greek:
He shall be guilty in the (...), that is, in the Court of Judgment, the
Assembly of the twenty three Elders; and there his punishment was death, but
the gentlest manner of it, the decapitation or smiting him through with the
sword, and therefore the least punishment hereafter answering to death here,
can mean no less then death hereafter Ita interpretantur hunc locum Barradius,
Maldonatus, and Estius ad hunc locum: and apud vetustiores eadem sententia
praevaluit. Haec enim erat men's Strabi Fuldensis qui glossam ordinariam
compilavit, and Hugonis Cardinalis.
. * And so also was the second; (...), he that calls Racha shall be guilty, that
is, shall be used as one that stands guilty in the Sanhedrim, or Council,
meaning that he is to die too, but with a severer execution by stoning to
death: this was the greatest punishment by the houses of judgment; for
Crucifixion was the Roman manner. These two already signify hell, in a less
degree, but as certainly and evidently as the third. For though we read
Hellfire, in the third sentence only, yet (...) no otherwise signifies Hell,
then the other two, by analogy and proportionable representment. The cause of
the mistake is this: When Christ was pleased to add yet a further degree of
punishment in hell to a further degree of anger and reproach, the Jews having
no greater then that of stoning by the judgment of the Sanhedrim or Council,
he would borrow his expression from that which they and their Fathers too well
understood, (...)
a barbarous custom of the Phoenicians of burning children alive in the valley
of Hinnom, which in succession of time the Hellenists called (...) not much
unlike the Hebrew word: and because by our blessed Lord it was used to signify
or represent the greatest pains of hell that were spoken of in that gradation,
the Christians took the word and made it to be its appellative, and to signify
the state or place of the damned: just as (...) the garden of Eden is called
Paradise. But it was no more intended that this should signify Hell, then that
any of the other two should. The word it self never did so before; but that and
the other two were taken as being the most fearful things amongst them here, to
represent the degrees of the most intolerable state hereafter: just as
damnation is called death; the second death; that because we fear the first as
the worst of present evils, we may be affrighted with the apprehensions of the
latter. From this authority it follows; that as in the Law no sins were venial,
but by repentance and sacrifice; so neither in the Gospel are they: nor in
their own nature, not by the more holy Covenant of the Gospel, but by
repentance and mortification. For the Gospel has with greater severity laid
restraint upon these minutes and little particles of action and passion: and
therefore if in the law every transgression was exacted, we cannot reasonably
think that the least parts of duty, which the Gospel superadded with a new and
severer caution, as great and greater then that by which the law exacted the
greatest Commandments, can be broken with indemnity, or without the highest
danger. The law exacted all its smallest minutes; and therefore so does the
Gospel, as being a Covenant of greater holiness. But as in the law for the
smaller transgressions there was an assignment of expiatory rites; so is there
in the Gospel of a ready repentance, and a prepared mercy.

7. deceived in this. * For if the damned souls in hell are punished for all
their sins, then the unpardoned venial sins are there also smarted for. But so
it is, and so we are taught in the doctrine of our great Master. If we agree
not while we are in the way, we shall be cast into the eternal prison, and
shall not depart thence till we have paid the uttermost farthing: that is, even
for our smallest sins, if they be unremitted, men shall pay in hell their
horrible Symbol of damnation. And this is confessed on all hands Aquinas 1.2.^
quaest. 87. art. 5.
: that they who fall into hell, pay their sorrows there, even for all. But it
is pretended, that this is only by accident Bellar. de amiss. gra. lib. 1. c.
14.. Extusad.
, not by the first intention of the Divine justice; because it happens that
they are subjected in such persons, who for other sins (not for these) go to
hell. Well! yet let it be considered, whether or no do not the smallest
unremitted sins, in crease the torments of hell in their proportion? If they
do not, then they are not at all punished in hell; for if without them the
perishing soul is equally punished, then for them there is no punishment at
all. But if they do increase the pains, as it is certain they do, then to
them properly, and for their own malignity and demerit, a portion of eternal
pains is assigned. Now if God punishes them in hell, then they deserved hell;
if they be damnable in their event, then they were so in their merit; for God
never punishes any sin more then it deserves, though he often does less. But to
say that this is by accident, that is, for their conjunction with mortal sins,
is confuted infinitely, because God punishes them with degrees of evil proper
to them, and for their own demerit; There is no other accident by which these
come to be smarted for in hell, but because they were not repented of; for by
that accident they become Mortal; as by the contrary accident, to wit, if the
sinner repents worthily, not only the smallest, but the greatest also become
Venial: The impenitent pays for all; all together. But if the man be a worthy
penitent, if he continues and abides in Gods love, he will find a mercy
according to his circumstances, by the measures of Gods graciousness, and his
own repentance: so that by accident they may be pardoned, but if that accident
does not happen, if the man be not penitent, the sins shall be punished
directly, and for their own natural demerit. The sum is this.

If a man repents truly of the greater sins, he also repents of the smallest;
for it cannot be a true repentance which refuses to repent of any; so that if
it happens that for the smallest he do smart in hell, it is because he did not
repent truly of any, greatest, nor smallest. But if it happens that the man did
not commit any of the greater sins, and yet did indulge to himself a license to
do the smallest, even for those which he calls the smallest, he may perish; and
what he is pleased to call little, Sermon. 1. de coena Dom. and Sermon. 1. de
convers. Pauli.
God may call great. Cum his peccatis neminem salvandum, said S. Bernard: with
these (even the smallest sins) actually remaining upon him unrepented of in
general or particular, no man can be saved.

. 4. The former doctrine reduced to practice.
I Have been the more earnest in this article,

1.

2. Gregory said well, Lib. 10. Moral. c. 14.
Si curare parva negligimus, insensibiliter seducti audenter etiam majora
perpetramus: we are too apt to return to our old crimes, whose relics we are
permitted to keep and kiss.

3. Mortal and Venial in their nature is such a separation of sin from sin, as
is rather a dispensation or leave to commit one sort of them; the expiation of
which is so easy, the pardon so certain, the remedy so ready, the observation
and exaction of them so inconsiderable. For there being so many ways of making
great sins little, and little sins none at all, found out by the folly of men
and the craft of the Devil, a great portion of Gods right, and the duty we owe
to him, is by way of compromise and agreement left as a portion to carelessness
and folly: and why may not a man rejoice in those trifling sins, for which he
has security he shall never be damned? As for the device of Purgatory, indeed
if there were any such thing, it were enough to scare any one from committing
any sins, much more little ones. But I have conversed with many of that
persuasion, and yet never observed any to whom it was a terror to speak of
Purgatory, but would talk of it as an antidote or security against hell, but
not as a formidable story to affright them from their sins, but to warrant
their venial sins, and their imperfect repentance for their mortal sins. And
indeed let it be considered: If venial sins be such as the Roman DD. describe
them; that they neither destroy nor lessen charity or the grace of God, that
they only hinder the fervency of an act, which sleep or business, or any thing
that is most innocent may do; that they are not against the law, but besides
it; as walking and riding, standing and sitting are; that they are not properly
sins, that all the venial sins in the world cannot amount to one mortal sin,
but as time differs from eternity, as finite from infinite, so do all the
Venial sins in the world put together, from one Mortal act; that for all them a
man is never the less beloved, and loves God nothing the less; I say if venial
sins be such (as the Roman Writers affirm they are) how can it be imagined to
be agreeable to Gods goodness to inflict upon such sinners who only have
venial sins unsatisfied for, such horrible pains (which they dream of in
Purgatory) as are, during their abode, equal to the intolerable pains of hell,
for that which breaks none of his laws, which angers him not, which is not
against him or his love, which is incident to his dearest servants? Pro peccato
magno paulum supplicii sat is est patri; But if fathers take such severe amends
of their children for that which is not properly sin, there is nothing left by
which we can boast of a fathers kindness. In this case, there is no remission;
for if it be not just in God to punish such sins in hell, because they are
consistent with the state of the love of God, and yet they are punished in
Purgatory, that is, as much as they can be punished; then God does remit to his
children nothing for their loves sake, but deals with them as severely as for
his justice he can, in the matter of venial sins; indeed if he uses mercy to
them at all, it is in remitting their mortal sins, but in their venial sins he
uses none at all. Now if things were thus on both sides, it is strange, men are
not more afraid of their venial sins, and that they are not more terrible in
their description, which are so sad in their event; and that their punishment
should be so great, when their malice is so none at all; and it is strangest of
all, that if men did believe such horrible effects to be the consequent of
venial sins, they should esteem them little, and inconsiderable, and warn men
of them with so little caution. But to take this wonder off, though they
affright men with Purgatory at the end, yet they make the bugbear nothing by
their easy remedies and preventions in the way. Venial sins may be taken off
(according to their doctrine) at as cheap a rate as they may be committed; but
of this I shall give a fuller account in the 6.. of this Chapter. In the mean
time, to believe Purgatory, serves the ends of the Roman Clergy, and to have so
much easiness and leave in venial sins, serves the ends of their Laity; but as
truth is disserv'd in the former, so is piety and the severities of a holy life
very much slackned by the latter.

But as care is taken that their doctrine do not destroy charity or good life
by looseness and indulgence, Quae non possit homo quisquam evitare cavendo, a
man by all his industry cannot wholly avoid. Now because the Scripture
pronounces some persons just and righteous, as David and Josiah, Zechary and
Elizabeth, who yet could not be innocent and pure from small offenses: either
these little things are in their own nature venial, or the godly have leave to
do that, which is punished in the ungodly, or some other way must be found
out, how that which is in its own nature damnable, can stand with the state of
grace; and upon what causes, sins which of themselves are not so, may come to
be venial, that is, more apt and ready to be pardoned, and in the next
dispositions to receive a mercy.

. 5.
1.

2. dull, or the affections busy, or the spirit otherwise employed, or the
faculties wearied, or reason abused: Therefore if you enquire for venial sins,
they must be in this throng of imperfections, but they never go higher. Let no
man therefore say, I have a desire to please my self in some little things; for
if he desires it, he may not do it, that very desire makes that it cannot be
venial, but as damnable as any, in its proportion.

3.

4. Graviora and Leviora, or Peccata (...) Crimina, does not mean a distinction
of kind, but of degrees. They call them mortal sins which shall never, or very
hardly be pardoned, not at all but upon very hard terms. So Pacianus. De modo
criminum edisserens nequis existimet omnibus omnino peccatis summum discrimen
impositum, In Paraen.
seduloque requirens, quae sint peccata, quae crimina, nequis existimet propter
innumera delicta, quorum fraudibus nullus immunis est, me omne hominum genus
indiscreta poenitendi lege constringere. The highest danger is not in every
sin; offenses and crimes must be distinguished carefully: for the same severe
impositions are not indifferently to be laid upon Criminals, and those whose
guilt is in such instances from which no man is free. Wherefore covetousness
may be redeemed with liberality, slander with satisfaction, morosity with
cheerfulness, sharpness with gentle usages, lightness with gravity, perverseness
or peevishness with honesty and fair carriage. But what shall the despiser of
God do? what shall the Murderer do? what remedy shall the Adulterer
Fornicator, promiscue. Saepius usurpantur fornicatio and adulterium.
have? Ista sunt capitalia Fratres, ista mortalia. These are the deadly sins,
these are capital crimes: meaning that these were to be taken off by the
severities of Ecclesiastical or public Repentance (of which I am afterward to
give account) and would cost more to be cleansed. To a good man, and meliorum
operum compensatione (as Pacianus affirms) by the compensation of good works,
that is, of the actions of the contrary graces, they are venial, they are
cured. For by venial they mean such which with less difficulty and hazard may
be pardoned: such as was S. Paul's blasphemy and persecuting the Church; for
that was venial, that is, apt for pardon, because he did it ignorantly in
unbelief: and such are those sins (says Caesarius) which are usual in the
world, though of their own nature very horrible, as forswearing our selves,
slander, reproach, and the like; yet because they are extremely common, they
are such to which if a continual pardon were not offered, Gods numbers would be
infinitely lessened. In this sense every sin is venial, excepting the three
Capitals reckoned in Tertullian, Idolatry, Murder, and Adultery; every thing
but the sin against the Holy Ghost, and its branches reckoned in Pacianus;
every thing but the seven deadly sins, in others. Now according to the degree
and malignity of the sin, or its abatement by any lessening circumstance, or
intervening consideration, so it puts on its degrees of veniality, or being
pardonoble. Every sin has some degree of being venial, till it arrived at the
unpardonable state, and then none was. But every sin that had many degrees of
Venial, had also some degrees of Damnable. So that to enquire what venial sins
can stand with the state of grace; is to ask, how long a man may sin before he
shall be damned; how long will God still forbear him, how long he will continue
to give him leave to repent? For a sin is venial upon no other account but of
Repentance. If Venial be taken for pardonable, it is true that many
circumstances make it so, more or less; that is, whatever makes the sin greater
or less, makes it more or less venial: and of these I shall give account in the
chapter of sins of Infirmity. But if by Venial. we mean actually pardoned, or
not exacted: Nothing makes a sin venial, but Repentance, and that makes every
sin to be so. Therefore,

5. Pacianus expresses it, contrariis emendata proficiunt, they can be helped
by contrary actions: and the good man does perpetually watch against them, he
opposes a good against every every evil; that is, in effect he uses them just
as he uses the greatest that ever he committed. Thus the good man when he
reproves a sinning person over-acts his anger, and is transported to undecency,
though it be for God: Some are over zealous, some are fantastic and too apt
to opinion, which in little degrees of inordination are not so soon
discernible. A good man may be over-joyed, or too much pleased with his
recreation, or be too passionate at the death of a child, or in a sudden anger
go beyond the evenness of a wise Christian, and yet be a good man still, and a
friend of God, his son and his servant: but then these things happen in despite
of all his care and observation; and when he does espy any of these
obliquities, he is troubled at it, and seeks to amend it: and therefore these
things are venial, that is, pitied and excused, because they are unavoidable,
but avoided as much as they well can (all things considered) and God does not
exact them of him, because the good man exacts them of himself. * These being
the Rules of Doctrine, we are to practice accordingly.

To which add the following measures.

6. Mortal and Venial, that is, greater and less, is not to be considered by
us, but by God alone, and cannot have influence upon us to any good purposes.
For 1. We do not always know by what particular measures they are lessened: In
general we know some proportions of them, but when we come to particulars, we
may easily be deceived, but can very hardly be exact. S. Austin said the same
thing. Quae sint levia, Enchirid, cap. 78.
and quae gravia peccata, non humano sed Divino sunt pensanda judicio. God
only, not man, can tell which sins are great, and which little. For since we
see them equally forbidden, we must with equal care avoid them all. Indeed if
the case should be so put, that we must either commit Sacrilege, or tell a
spiteful lie, kill a man, or speak unclean words, then it might be of use to us
to consider which is the greater, which is less, that, of evils we might choose
the less: but this ease can never be, for no man is ever brought to that
necessity that he must choose one sin; for he can choose to die before he shall
do either, and that is the worst that he can be put to. And therefore though
right reason and experience, and some general lines of Religion mark out some
actions as criminal, and leave others under a general and indefinite
condemnation, yet it is in order to repentance and amends when such things are
done, not to greater caution directly of avoiding them in the days of
temptation; for of two infinites in the same kind, one cannot be bigger then
the other. We are tied with the biggest care to avoid every sin, and bigger
then the biggest we find not This only: For the avoiding of the greatest
sins, there are more arguments from without, and sometimes more instruments and
ministeries of caution and prevention are to be used, then in lesser sins; but
it is because fewer will serve in one then in another; but all that is needful
must be used in all, but there is no difference in our choice that can be
considerable, for we must never choose either, and therefore beforehand to
compare them together, whereof neither is to be preferred before the other is
to lay a snare for our selves, and make us apt to one by undervaluing it, and
calling it less then others, that affright us more. Indeed when the sin is
done, to measure it may be of use (as I shall show) but to do it beforehand
has danger in it of being tempted, and more then a danger of being deceived.
For our hearts deceive us, our purposes are complicated, and we know not which
end is principally intended, nor by what argument amongst many, we were finally
determined, or which is the prevailing ingredient; nor are we competent Judges
of our own strengths, and we can do more then we think we can; and we remember
not, that the temptation which prevails was sought for by our selves; nor can
we separate necessity from choice, our consent from our being betrayed; nor
tell whether our fort is given up, because we would do so, or because we could
not help it. Who can tell whether he could not stand one assault more, and if
he had, whether or no the temptation would not have left him? The ways of
consent are not always direct, and if they be crooked, we see them not. And
after all this, if we were able, yet we are not willing to judge right, with
truth, and with severity: something for our selves, something for excuse,
something for pride; a little for vanity, and a little in hypocrisy, but a
great deal for peace and quiet, that the rest of the mind may not be
disturbed, that we may live and die in peace, and in a good opinion of our
selves. These indeed are evil measures, but such by which we usually make
judgment of our actions, and are therefore likely to call great sins little,
and little sins none at all. **

2. Actual sins) there are also ebbings and flowings of sin and pardon: and
therefore none but God only knows how long this state of veniality and pardon
will last; and therefore as no man can pronounce concerning any kind of sins,
that they are in themselves venial, so neither can he know concerning his own,
or any man's particular state, that any such sins are pardoned, or Venial to
him. He that lives a good life will find it so in its own case, and in the
event of things; and that is all which can be said as to his particular: and it
is well it is so, ne studium proficiendi ad omnia peccata cavenda pigrescat (as
S. Austin well observed.) If it were otherwise, and that sins in their own
nature by venial and not venial are distinguished and separate in their natures
from each other, and that some of them are of so easy remedy, and
inconsiderable a guilt, they would never become earnest to avoid all.

3. in Scripturis demonstrantur opinione graviora (as S. Enchirid. 79.
Austin notes) they are by the word of God declared to be greater then they are
thought to be; and we have reason to judge so, concerning many instances in
which men are too easy, and cruelly kind unto themselves. S. Paul said, I had
not known concupiscence to be a sin, if the law had not said, Thou shall not
lust: and we use to call them scrupulous and fantastic persons who make much
ado about a careless word, and call themselves to severe account for every
thought, and are troubled for every morsel they eat, when it can be disputed
whether it might not better have been spared. Who could have guessed that
calling my enemy Fool should be so great a matter; but because we are told that
it is so; told by him that shall be our Judge, who shall call us to account for
every idle word; we may well think that the measures which men usually make by
their customs and false principles, and their own necessities, lest they by
themselves should be condemned, are weak and fallacious: and therefore
whatsoever can be of truth in the difference of sins, may become a danger to
them who desire to distinguish them, but can bring no advantages to the
interests of piety and a holy life.

4. Peccata sola inusitata exhorrescimus, August. ubi supra.
usitata vero diligimus. But those which they act every day, they suppose them
to be small, quotidianae incursiones, the unavoidable acts of every day; and by
degrees our spirit is reconciled to them, conversing with them as with a tame
wolf, who by custom has forgotten the circumstances of his barbarous nature,
but is a wolf still. (...) (as Synesius calls them) the little customs of
sinning, men think, ought to be dissembled. This was so of old; Hom. 16.
Caesarius Bishop of Arles complained of it in his time. Vere dico Fratres etc.
I say truly to you Brethren, this thing according to the Law and Commandment
of our Lord, never was lawful, neither is it, nor shall it ever be; but as if
it were worse, it a peccata ista in consuetudinem missa sunt, and tanti sunt
qui illa faciunt, ut jam quasi ex licito fieri credantur; these sins are so
usual and common that men now begin to think them lawful. And indeed who can
do a sin every day, and think it great and highly damnable? If he thinks so,
it will be very uneasy for him to keep it: but if he will keep it, he will also
endeavor to get some protection or excuse for it; something to warrant, or
something to undervalue it; and at last it shall be accounted venial, and by
some means or other reconcilable with the hopes of heaven. He that is used to
oppress the poor every day, thinks he is a charitable man if he lets them go
away with any thing he could have taken from them: But he is not troubled in
conscience for detaining the wages of the hireling, with deferring to do
justice, with little arts of exaction and lessening their provisions. For since
nothing is great or little but in comparison with something else, he accounts
his sin small, because he commits greater; and he that can suffer the greatest
burden, shrinks not under a lighter weight; and upon this account it is
impossible but such men must be deceived and die.

7.

8. chastise his little misdemeanors, or reserve some of his displeasure so far
as may minister to discipline, not to destruction: and therefore if a son have
escaped his Fathers anger and final displeasure, let him remember, that though
his Father is not willing to dis-inherit him, yet he will be ready to chastise
him. And we see it by the whole dispensation of God, that the righteous are
punished, and afflictions begin at the House of God; and God is so impatient
even of little evils in them, that to make them pure he will draw them through
the fire; and there are some who are saved, yet so as by fire. And certainly,
those sins ought not to be neglected, or esteemed little, which provoke God to
anger even against his servants. We find this instanced in the case of the
Corinthians, who used undecent circumstances and unhandsome usages of the
blessed Sacrament; even for this, God severely reproved them; 1 Cor. 11.30.
for this cause many are weak, and sick, and some are fallen asleep, which is
an expression used in Scripture to signify them that die in the Lord, and is
not used to signify the death of them that perish from the presence of the
Lord. These persons died in the state of grace and repentance, but yet died in
their sin; chastised for their lesser sins, but so that their souls were saved.
This is that which Clemens Alexandrinus affirms of sins committed after our
illumination, (...), Stromat. 4.
These sins must be purged with a (...), with the chastisement of sons. The
result of this consideration is that which S. Peter advises, that we pass the
time of our sojourning here in fear: for no man ought to walk confidently, who
knows that even the most laudable life has in it evil enough to be smarted for
with a severe calamity.

9. they be neglected combine and knit together, till by their multitude they
grow insupportable; This caution I learn from Caesarius Arelatensis. Hom. 13.
Et hoc considerate Fratres, quia etiamsi capitalia crimina non subreperent,
ipsa minuta peccata quae (quod pejus est) aut non attendimus, aut certe pro
nihilo computamus, si simul omnia congregentur, nescio quae bonorum operum
abundantia illis praeponderare sufficiat. Although capital sins invade you not,
yet if your minutes, your small sins which either we do not consider at all,
or value not at all, be combined, or gathered into one heap, I know not what
multitude of good works will suffice to weigh them down. For little sins are
like the sand, and when they become a heap are heavy as lead; S. August. epist.
108. ad Seleu. lib. 50. homil. 42.
and a leaking ship may as certainly perish with the little inlets of water as
with a mighty wave; for of many drops a river is made; and therefore, ipsa
minuta vel levia non contemnantur. Illa enim quae humanae fragilitati quamvis
parva tamen crebra subrepunt, quasi collecta contra nos fuerint, ita nos
gravabunt sicut unum aliquod grande peccatum Idem tract. 1. in ep. Johan. Levia
multa saciunt unum grande.
. Let not little sins be despised, for even those smallest things which creep
upon us by our natural weakness, yet when they are gathered together against
us, stand on an heap, and like an army of flies can destroy us, as well as any
one deadly enemy. Quae quamvis singula non lethali vulnere ferire sentiantur,
Lib 50. hom. hom. 50. c. 8.
sicut homicidium, and adulterium, vel caetera hujusmodi, tamen omnia simul
congregata velut scabies, quo plura sunt, necant, and nostrum decus ita
exterminant ut a filio sponsi speciosi forma prae filiis hominum castissimis
amplexibus separent, nisi medicamento quotidianae poenitentiae dissecentur.
Indeed we do not feel every one of them strike so home and deadly, as murder
and adultery does, yet when they are united, they are like a scab, they kill
with their multitude, and so destroy our internal beauty, that they separate
us from the purest embraces of the Bridegroom, unless they be scattered with
the medicine of a daily repentance. For he that does these little sins often,
and repents not of them, nor strives against them, either loves them directly,
or by interpretation.

10.

11.

12. Hierom. Si ira and sermonis injuria, atque interdum jocus judicio,
concilioque, atque Gehenne ignibus delegatur, quid merebitur turpium rerum
appetitio, and avaritia quae est radix omnium malorum? If anger, and injurious
words, and sometimes a foolish jest is sentenced to capital and supreme
punishments, what punishment shall the lustful and the covetous have? And what
will be the event of all our souls, who reckon these injurious or angry words
of calling Fool, or Sot amongst the smallest, and those which are indeed less
we do not observe at all? For who is there amongst us almost, who calls himself
to an account for trifling words, loose laughter, the smallest beginnings of
intemperance, careless spending too great portions of our time in trifling
visits and courtships, balls, revellings, fantastic dressings, sleepiness,
idleness and useless conversation, neglecting our times of prayer frequently,
or causlesly, slighting religion and religious persons, siding with factions
indifferently, forgetting our former obligations upon trifling regards, vain
thoughts, wanderings and weariness at our devotion, love of praise, laying
little plots and snares to be commended; high opinion of our selves,
resolutions to excuse all, and never to confess an error; going to Church for
vain purposes, itching ears, love of flattery, and thousands more? The very
kinds of them put together are a heap; and therefore the so frequent and almost
infinite repetition of the acts of all those are, as David's expression is,
without hyperbole, more then the hairs upon our head; they are like the number
of the sands upon the Sea shore for multitude.

. 6. What repentance is necessary for the smaller or more Venial sins.
1. Caesarius Bishop of Arles, who spoke many excellent things in this article,
says that for these smaller sins a private repentance is proportionable. Hom. 1.
Si levia fortasse sunt delicta, v.g. si homo vel in sermon, vel in aliqua
reprehensibili voluntate; si in oculo peccavit, aut cord; verborum and
cogitationum maculae quotidiana oratione curandae, and privata compunctione
terendae sunt. The sins of the eye, and the sins of the heart, and the offenses
of the tongue are to be cured by secret contrition and compunction and a daily
prayer. But S. Cyprian commends many whose conscience being of a tender
complexion, they would even for the thoughts of their heart, do public
penance: His words are these; -- multos timoratae conscientiae, De lapsis.
quamvis nullo sacrificii aut libelli facinore constricti ^ssent, quoniam tamen
de hoc vel cogitaverunt, hoc ipsum apud Sacerdotes Dei dolenter and simpliciter
confitentes exomologesin conscientiae fecisse, animi sui pondus exposuisse,
salutarem medelam parvis licet and modicis vulneribus exquirentes. Because they
had but thought of complying with idolaters, they sadly and ingenuously came to
the Ministers of holy things, Gods Priests, confessing the secret turpitude of
their conscience, laying aside the weight that pressed their spirit, and
seeking remedy even for their smallest wounds. Vide S. Aug. lib. 83. q. 26. and
Caesar. Arelat. hom. 1.
And indeed we find that among the Ancients there was no other difference in
assignation of repentance to the several degrees of sin, but only by public,
and private: Capital sins they would have submitted to public judgment; but
the lesser evils to be mourned for in private: of this I shall give account in
the Chapter of Ecclesiastical repentance. In the mean time, their general rule
was, That because the lesser sins came in by a daily incursion, therefore they
were to be cut off by a daily repentance; which because it was daily, could not
be so intense and signally punitive as the sharper repentances for the seldom
returning sins, yet as the sins were daily, but of less malice, so their
repentance must be daily, but of less affliction. Lib. 50. hom. h. 50. c. 8.
Medicamento quotidianae p^^^itertiae dissecentur; That was S. Austins rule.
Those evils that happen every day, must be cried out against every day.

2. picks out some special instances, and apportions them to his special sins;
as to acts of uncleanness he opposes acts of severity, to intemperance he
opposes fasting. But then as he rests not here, but goes on to the consummation
of Repentance in his whole life: so it must be in the more venial sins. A less
instance of express anger is graciously accepted, if it be done in the state of
grace and in the virtue of Repentance; but then the pardon is to be completed
in the pursuance and integrity of that grace, in the Sums total. For no man
can say that so much sorrow, or such a degree of Repentance is enough to any
sin he has done: and yet a man cannot apportion to every sin large portions of
special sorrow, it must therefore be done all his life time; and the little
portions must be made up by the whole grace and state of Repentance. One
instance is enough particularly to express the anger, or to apply the grace of
Repentance to any single sin which is not among the Capitals; but no one
instance is enough to extinguish it. For sin is not pardoned in an instant (as
I shall afterward discourse) neither is the remedy of a natural and a just
proportion to the sin. Ecclesia Romana alia excogitavit facile, quorum non
nulla declinant aperte nimis ad superstitionem: Confiteor, tundo, conspergor,
conteror, oro,
Signor, edo, dono, per haec venialia pondo.

Therefore when many of the ancient Doctors apply to venial sins special
remedies by way of expiation, or deprecation, such as are, beating the breast,
saying the Lords Prayer, Alms, communicating, confessing, and some others; the
doctrine of such remedies is not true, if it be understood that those
particulars are just physically, or meritoriously proportioned to the sin. No
one of these alone is a cure or expiation of the past sin; but every one of
these in the virtue of Repentance is effective to its part of the work, that
is, he that repents and forsakes them as he can, shall be accepted, though the
expression of his Repentance be applied to his fault but in one or more of
these single instances; because all good works done in the Faith of Christ,
have an efficacy toward the extinction of those sins which cannot be avoided
by any moral diligence; there is no other thing on our parts which can be done,
and if that which is unavoidable were also irremediable, our condition would be
intolerable and desperate. To the sense of this advice we have the words of S.
Gregory: Si quis ergo peccata sua tecta esse desiderat, Deo ea per vocem
confessionis ostendat, etc. If any man desires to have his sins covered, let
him first open them to God in confession: but there are some sins, which so
long as we live in this world, can hurdly, or indeed not at all be wholly
avoided by perfect men. For holy men have something in this life, which they
ought to cover; for it is altogether impossible that they should never sin in
word or thought. Therefore the men of God do study to cover the faults of their
eyes or tongue with good deeds, they study to overpower the number of their
idle words with the weight of good works. But how can it be that the faults of
good men should be covered, when all things are naked to the eyes of God? but
only because that which is covered is put under, something is brought over it:
Our sins are covered when we bring over them the cover of good works. But
Caesarius the Bishop is more punctual, and descends to particulars. For having
given this general rule, Illa parva vel quotidiana peccata bonis operibus
redimere non desistant. Let them not cease to redeem or expiate their daily and
small faults with good works; he adds, But I desire more fully to insinuate to
you, with what works small sins are taken off. So often as we visit the sick,
go (in Charity) to them that are in prison, reconcile variances, keep the fasts
of the Church, wash the feet of strangers, repair to the vigils and watches of
the Church, give alms to passing beggars, forgive our enemies when they ask
pardon: istis enim operibus and his similibus minuta peccata quotidie
redimuntur; with these and the like works the minute or smaller sins are daily
redeemed or taken off.

3. Chap of sins of infirmity.
afterward demonstrate) upon the stock of ignorance, or which is all one,
imperfect notices and acts of understanding; and therefore have not any thing
in the natural parts and instances of Repentance, so fit to expiate or to cure
them. But because they are beyond humane cure, they are to be cured by the
Divine Grace, and this is to be obtained by Prayer, And this S. Clement advised
in his Epistle. (...). Lift up your eyes to God Almighty, praying him to be
merciful to you, if you have unwillingly fallen into error. And to the same
purpose are the words of S. Austin: De Symb. ad Catech. lib 1. c. 6. and lib.
50. Homil. 28.
Propter levia sine quibus esse non possumus, oration inventae: for those
lighter sins without which we cannot be, Prayer is invented as a remedy.

4. them, as against any, never indulging to thy self leave to proceed in one.
Let this care be constant and indefatigable, and leave the success to God. For
in this there is a great difference between Capital or Deadly, and the more
venial sins. For, he that repents of great sins, does so resolve against them,
that he ought really to believe that he shall never return to them again. No
drunkard is truly to be esteemed a penitent, but he that in consideration of
himself, his purpose, his reasons, and all his circumstances, is by the grace
of God confident that he shall never be drunk again. The reason is plain: For
if he thinks that for all his resolution and repentance the case may happen, or
will return in which he shall be tempted above his strength, that is, above the
efficacy of his resolution, then he has not resolved against the sin in all
its forms or instances: but he has left some roots of bitterness which may
spring up and defile him; he has left some weak places, some parts
unfortified, and does secretly purpose to give up his fort, if he be assaulted
by some sort of enemies. He is not resolved to resist the importunity of a
friend, or a prevailing person, a Prince, his Landlord, or his Master; that for
the present he thinks impossible, and therefore owes his spiritual life to
chance, or to the mercies of his enemy, who may have it for asking: But if he
thinks it possible to resist any temptation, and resolves to do it if it be
possible, the natural consequent of that is, that he thinks he shall never fall
again into it. But if beforehand he thinks he shall relapse, he is then but an
imperfect resolver, but a half-fac'd penitent. * But this is not so in the case
of smaller sins coming by ignorance or surprise, by inadvertency and imperfect
notices, by the unavoidable weakness and imperfect condition of mankind. For
he who in these resolves the strongest, knows that he shall not be innocent,
but that he shall feel his weakness in the same or in other instances; and that
this shall be his condition as long as he lives, that he shall always need to
pray, Forgive me my trespasses: and even his not knowing concerning all
actions, and all words, and all thoughts, whether they be sins or no, is a
certain betraying him into a necessity of doing something for the pardon of
which Christ died, for the preventing of which a mighty care is necessary, in
the suffering of which he ought to be humbled, and for the pardon of which he
ought for ever to pray. And therefore S. Chrysostom upon those words of S.
Paul; I am conscious in nothing, that is, I do not know of any failing in my
Ministry; says, (...); what then? he is not hereby justified, (...), because
some sins might adhere to him he not knowing that they were sins. Ab occult is
meis munda me Domine, was an excellent Prayer of David. Cleanse me, O Lord,
from my secret faults. Hoc dicit, nequid forte per ignorantiam deliquisset,
says S, Hierome; he prayed so, lest peradventure he should have sinned
ignorantly. But of this I shall give a further account in describing the
measures of sins of infirmity. For the present, although this resolution
against all, is ineffective as to a perfect immunity from small offenses, yet
it is accepted as really done, because it is done as it can possibly.

5. Venial sins, may with more facility be admitted, and with smaller portions
of care be regarded, or with a slighter repentance washed off. For besides that
some have called perjuries, anger, envy injurious words, by lighter names and
titles of a little reproof, and having lived in wicked times, were betrayed
into easier sentences of those sins which they saw all mankind almost to
practice, which was the case of some of the Doctors who lived in the time of
those Wars which broke the Roman Empire; besides this, I say, venial sins can
rather be See chap. 7. of sins of infirmity.
described, then enumerated. For none are so in their nature, but all that are
so, are so by accident; and according as sins tend to excuse, so they put on
their degrees of veniality. No sin is absolutely venial, but in comparison with
others: Neither is any sin at all times, and to all persons alike venial. And
therefore let no man venture upon it upon any mistaken confidence: They that
think sins are venial in their own nature, cannot agree which are venial, and
which are not; and therefore nothing is in this case so certain, as that all
that doctrine which does in any sense represent sins as harmless or tame
Serpents, is infinitely dangerous, and there is no safety, but by striving
against all beforehand, and repenting of all as there is need.

I sum up this question and these advices with the saying of Josephus, (...).
Babylonians against the stones, against the Rock that was smitten for us. For
by the blood of Jesus, and the tears of Repentance, and the watchfulness of a
diligent, careful person, many of them shall be prevented, and all shall be
pardoned.

A Psalm to be frequently used in our Repentance for our daily sins.
BOw down thine ear, O Lord, hear me, for I am poor and needy: Rejoice the soul
of thy servant; for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.

For thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy unto
all them that call upon thee: Teach me thy way, O Lord, I will walk in thy
truth; unite my heart to fear thy Name.

Shall mortal man be more just then God? shall a man be more pure then his
Maker? Behold, he put no trust in his Servants; and his Angels he charged with
folly.

How much less on them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the
dust, which are crushed before the moth? Does not their excellency which is in
them go away? They die even without wisdom.

The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord
is sure, making wise the simple. Moreover, by them is thy servant warned, and
in keeping of them there is great reward.

Who can understand his errors? Cleanse thou me from my secret faults: keep
back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over
me, then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the great
transgression.

O ye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? how long will ye
love vanity and seek after leasing? But know that the Lord has set apart him
that is godly, for himself: The Lord will hear when I call unto him.

Out of the deep have I called unto thee, O Lord; Lord hear my voice: O let
thine ears consider well the voice of my complaint.

If thou, Lord, wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may
abide it? But there is mercy with thee, therefore shall thou be feared.

Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips: Take from
me the way of lying; and cause thou me to make much of thy law.

The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, long-suffering, and of great
goodness: He will not always be chiding, neither keeps he his anger for ever.

Yea, like as a Father pitieth his own children: even so is the Lord merciful
unto them that fear him. For he knows whereof we are made: he remembers that
we are but dust.

Praise the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits: which forgiveth
all thy sin, and heals all thine infirmities.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

The PRAYER.
O Eternal God, whose perfections are infinite, whose mercies are glorious,
whose justice is severe, whose eyes are pure, whose judgments are wise; be
pleased to look upon the infirmities of thy servant, and consider my weakness.
My spirit is willing, but my flesh is weak; I desire to please thee, but in my
endeavors I fail so often, so foolishly, so unreasonably, that I extremely
displease my self, and I have too great reason to fear that thou also art
displeased with thy servant. O my God, I know my duty, I resolve to do it, I
know my dangers, I stand upon my guard against them, but when they come near I
begin to be pleased, and delighted in the little images of death, and am seized
upon by folly, even when with greatest severity I decree against it. Blessed
Jesus pity me, and have mercy upon my infirmities.

II. O Dear God, I humbly beg to be relieved by a mighty grace, for I bear a
body of sin and death about me; sin creeps upon me in every thing that I do or
suffer. When I do well, I am apt to be proud, when I do amiss, I am sometimes
too confident, sometimes affrighted: If I see others do amiss, I either
neglect them, or grow too angry; and in the very mortification of my anger, I
grow angry and peevish. My duties are imperfect, my repentances little, my
passions great, my fancy trifting: The sins of my tongue are infinite, and my
omissions are infinite, and my evil thoughts cannot be numbered, and I cannot
give an account concerning innumerable portions of my time which were once in
my power, but were let slip and were partly spent in sin, partly thrown away
upon trifles and vanity: and even of the basest sins of which in accounts of
men I am most innocent, I am guilty before thee, entertaining those sins in
little instances, thoughts, desires and imaginations, which I durst not produce
into action and open significations. Blessed Jesus pity me, and have mercy upon
my infirmities.

III. TEach me, O Lord, to walk before thee in righteousness, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God. Give me an obedient will, a loving spirit, a
humble understanding, watchfulness over my thoughts, deliberation in all my
words and actions, well tempered passions, and a great prudence, and a great
zeal, and a great charity, that I may do my duty wisely, diligently, holily; O
let me be humbled in my infirmities, but let me be also safe from my enemies;
let me never fall by their violence, nor by my own weakness; let me never be
overcome by them, nor yet give my self up to folly and weak principles, to
idleness, and secure, careless walking; but give me the strengths of thy
Spirit, that I may grow strong upon the ruins of the flesh, growing from grace
to grace till I become a perfect man in Christ Jesus. O let thy strength be
seen in my weakness; and let thy mercy triumph over my infirmities; pitying the
condition of my nature, the infancy of grace, the imperfection of my knowledge,
the transportations of my passion. Let me never consent to sin, but for ever
strive against it, and every day prevail, till it be quite dead in me, that thy
servant living the life of grace, may at last be admitted to that state of
glory where all my infirmities shall be done away, and all tears be dried up,
and sin and death shall be no more. Grant this, O most gracious God and Father,
for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

OUr Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil. Amen.

CHAP. IV. Of Actual, single sins, and what Repentance is proper to them.
. 1.
THE first part of Conversion or Repentance is a quitting of all sinful habits,
and abstaining from all criminal actions whatsoever. Virtus est vitium fugere,
and sapientia prima
Stultitia caruisse --
For unless the Spirit of God rule in our hearts, we are none of Christ's; but
he rules not where the works of the flesh are frequently, or maliciously, or
voluntarily entertained. All the works of the flesh, and whatsoever leads to
them, all that is contrary to the Spirit, and does either grieve or extinguish
him, must be rescinded, and utterly taken away. Concerning which, it is
necessary that I set down the Mat. 15.19. Mar. 7.21. Galat. 5.16, 19, 20, 21.
Ephesians 4.31. etc. 5.3, 4, 5. 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5. Romans 1.29, 30, 31, 32. 1 Cor.
6.9. Revel. 21.8. 1 Pet. 4.3, 15.
Catalogues which by Christ and his Apostles are left us as lights and
watchtowers to point out the rocks and quicksands where our danger is: and this
I shall the rather do, not only because they comprehend many evils which are
not observed or feared; some which are commended, and many that are excused;
but also because although they are all marked with the same black character of
death, yet there is some difference in the execution of the sentence, and in
the degrees of their condemnation, and of the consequent Repentance.

2. Evil thoughts: or discoursings. (...), Evil reasonings. (...), says
Hesychius, that is, prating; importune prattling and looseness of tongue, such as
is usual with bold boys and young men; prating much and to no purpose. But our
Bibles read it, Evil thoughts, or surmisings; for in Scripture it is (...); so
Suidas observes concerning (...), and (...), that is, (...), to think long and
carefully, to dwell in meditation upon a thing: to which when our blessed
Savior adds (...), evil, he notes and reproves such kind of morose thinkings
and fancying of evil things: and it is not unlikely that he means thoughts of
uncleanness, or lustful fancies. For (...), says Suidas: (...), says
Hesychius; it signifies such words as are prologues to wantonness: so (...) in
Aristophanes. (...)
(...) Lysistrata.

So that here are forbidden all wanton words, and all morose delighting in
venereous thoughts, all rollings and tossing such things in our minds. For even
these defile the soul. Verborum obscoenitas si turpitudini rerum adhibeatur,
ludus ne libero quidem homine dignus est, said Cicero. Obscene words are a
mockery not worthy of an ingenuous person. This is that (...), or (...). Ephesians.
5.4.
(...), that foolish talking and jesting which S. Paul joins to (...), that
filthiness of communication which men make a jest of, but is indeed the basest
in the world; the sign of a vile dishonest mind: and it particularly noted the
talk of Mimicks and Parasites, Buffoons and Players, whose trade was to make
sport, (...), and they did use to do it with nastiness and filthy talkings; as
is to be seen in Aristophanes, and is rarely described and severely reproved in
S. Chrysostom in his 6. Homily upon S. Matthew. For per verba dediscitur rerum
pudor, which S. Paul also affirms in the words of Menander, (...), Evil words
corrupt good manners; and evil thoughts being the fountain of evil words, lie
under the same prohibition. Under this head is the (...), a talkative rash
person, ready to speak, slow to hear; against S. James his rule.

3. Inventers of evil things. Contrivers of all such artifices as minister to
vice. Curious inventions for cruelty, for gluttony, for lust; witty methods of
drinking, wanton pictures, and the like; which for the likeness of the matter I
have subjoined next to the (...) the evil thinkings or surmisings reproved by
our blessed Savior, as these are expressly by S. Paul.

4. (...), Covetousness: or, Inordinate, unreasonable desires. For the word
does not only signify the designing and contrivances of unjust ways of
purchasing, which is not often separated from covetous desires: but the very
studium habendi, the thirst, or greediness, secret and impatient desires of
having abundance: (...), the hurt of immoderate lusting or desire; and is
sometimes applied to the matter of uncleanness; but in this Catalogue I wholly
separate it from this, because this is comprised under other words. Neither
will it be hard to discern and to reprove this sin of desires in them that are
guilty of it, though they will not think or confess what is, and what is not
abundance. For there is not easily to be found a greater testimony of
covetousness then the error concerning the measure of our possessions. He that
is not easy to call that abundance which by good and severe men is thought so,
desires more then he should. (...), when any thing is over and above the needs
of our life, that is too much; and to desire that, is covetousness, says S.
Luke. (...), Take heed and keep your selves from covetousness; for our life
consists not in abundance; intimating that to desire more then our life
needs, is to desire abundance, and that is covetousness; and that is the root
of all evil: that is, all sins and all mischiefs can come from hence. Divitis
hoc vitium est auri: nec bella fuere,
Faginus adstabat cum scyphus ante dapes.
There were no wars in those days when men did drink in a treen cup.

5. (...), Wickedness. This is the same that the Latins call Malitia; a
scurvy, base disposition; aptness to do shrewd turns, to delight in mischiess
and tragedies; a loving to trouble our neighbor, and to do him ill offices;
crosseness, perverseness and peevishness of action in our intercourse. (...),
says Suidas. Facessere negotium alicui; to do a man an evil office, or to put
him to trouble. And to this is reducible that which S. Paul calls (...),
Malignity; a baseness of nature by which we take things by the wrong handle,
and expounding things always in the worst sense. Vitiositas is the Latin word
for it, and it seems to be worse then the former, by being a more general
principle of mischief. Tuscul. 4.
Malitia certi cujusdam vitii est: vitiositas omnium, said Cicero. This is in a
man's nature an universal depravation of his spirit; that is in manners, and is
sooner cured then this.

6. (...). Craftiness. That is, a wiliness and aptness to deceive; a studying
by some underhand trick to overreach our brother: like that of Corax his
Scholar, he cousen'd his Master with a trick of his own art; (...), A crafty
Crow laid a crafty egg. By which is not signified that natural or acquired
sagacity by which men can contrive wittily, or be too hard for their brother if
they should endeavor it: but a studying how to circumvent him, and an habitual
design of getting advantage upon his weakness; a watching him where he is most
easy and apt for impression, and then striking him upon the unarmed part. But
this is brought to effect,

7. Deceit Cum aliud simulatur, aliud agitur alterius decipiendi causa, said
Vlpian and Aquilius; that is, all dissembling to the prejudice of thy
Neighbor, (...); any thing designed to thy Neighbors disadvantage by
simulation or dissimulation.

8. Uncleanness. (...). Stinking: So the Syriack Interpreter renders it; and it
means obscene actions. But it signifies all manner of excess or immoderation;
and so may signify (...) prodigal or lavish expenses, and immoderate use of
permitted pleasures, even the excess of liberty in the use of the Marriage Bed.
For the Ancients use the word not only for unchaste, but for great and
excessive. (...), They are exceeding fat: and a Goat with great horns is called
(...). It is luxuria or the excess of desire in the matter of pleasures. Every
excess is (...), it is intemperance: (...) signifies a special kind of crime
under this. It means all voluntary pollutions of the body, or

9. Wantonness: That is, all tempting foolish gestures; such which Juvenal
reproves, Cheironomon Ledam molli saltante Bathyllo, which being presented in
the Theater would make the Vestal wanton. Every thing by which a man or woman
is (...) abominable in their lusts; to which the (...), the lusts not to be
named are reducible: amongst which S. Paul reckons the effeminate, and abusers
of themselves with mankind; that is, they that do, and they that suffer such
things. Philoctetes and Paris; Caesar and the King of Pontus. Mollities or
softness is the name by which this vice is known, and the persons guilty of it,
Joh. 21.8.
are also called the (...), The abominable.

10. Hatred. (...); Great, but transient angers. The cause, and the degree, and
the abode makes the anger Criminal. By these two words are forbidden all
violent passion, fury, revengefulness. (...), The enemy and the avenger, says
David. But not this only, but the misliking and hating of a man, though
without actual designs of hurting him, is here noted; that is, when men retain
the displeasure, and refuse to converse, or have any thing to do with the man,
though there be from him no danger of damage, the former experiment being
warning enough. The forbearing to salute him, to be kind or civil to him, and
every degree of anger that is kept, is an (...), a part of Enmity or Hatred. To
this are reduced the Unmerciful; that is, such as use their right in extreme
severity toward Servants and Malefactors, Criminal or obnoxious persons: and
the Implacable, that is a degree beyond; such who being once offended will take
no satisfaction, but the utmost and extremest forfeiture.

11. Debate, Contentions. That is, all striving in words or actions, scolding
and quarrels, in which as commonly both parties are faulty when they enter, so
it is certain they cannot go forth from them without having contracted the
guilt of more then one sin: whither is reduced clamor, or loud expressions of
anger: Clamor is the horse of anger, said S. Chrysostom, Ephesians. 4.31.
anger rides upon it; throw the horse down, and the rider will fall to the
ground. Blasphemy; backbiting we read it, but the Greek signifies all words
that are injurious to God or Man.

12. Whisperers. That is, such who are apt to do shrewd turns in private; a
speaking evil of our Neighbor in a man's ear; Hic nigrae succus loliginis, haec
est Aerugo mera: this is an arrow that flies in the dark, it wounds secretly,
and no man can be warned of it. (...), backbiters; it is the same mischief, but
it speaks out a little more then the other; and it denotes such who pretend
friendship and society, but yet traduce their friend, or accuse him secretly;
(...), as Polybius calls it, a new way of accusation, to undermine a man by
praising him, that you seeming his friend, a lover of his virtue and his
person, by praising him may be the more easily believed in reporting his
faults: like him in Horace, who was glad to hear any good of his old friend
Capitolinus, whom he knew so well, who had so kindly obliged him, Sed tamen
admiror quo pacto Judicium illud
Fugerit --
but yet I wonder that he escaped the Judges Sentence in his Criminal cause.
There is a louder kind of this evil, (...), Railers; that is when the smoke is
turned into a flame, and breaks out; it is the same iniquity with another
circumstance; it is the vice of women and boys, and rich imperious fools, and
hard rude Masters to their Servants, and it does too often infect the spirit
and language of a Governor. Our Bibles read this word, by Despitefull; that
notes an aptness to speak spiteful words, cross and untoward, such which we
know will do mischief or displease.

13. Foolishness. Which we understand by the words of S. Paul, Ephesians. 5.17.
Be not foolish, but understanding what the will of the Lord is: It means a
neglect of enquiring into holy things; a wilful or careless ignorance of the
best things, a not studying our Religion, Prove. 2^.9.
which indeed is the greatest folly and sottishness, it being a neglecting of
our greatest interests, and of the most excellent notices, and it is the
fountain of many impure emanations. A Christian must not be (...), he must not
call fool, nor be a fool. Heady, is reduced to this, and signifies, rash and
indiscreet in assenting and dissenting; people that speak and do foolishly,
because they speak and do without deliberation.

14. Pride. (...); a despising of others, if compared with our selves: so
Theophrastus calls it. Concerning which we are to judge our selves by the
voices of others, and by the consequent actions observable in our selves: any
thing whereby we overvalue our selves, or despise others; preferring our
selves, or depressing them in unequal places or usages, is the signification of
this vice; which no man does heartily think himself guilty of, but he that is
not; that is, the humble man. A particular of this sin is that which is in
particular noted by the Apostle, under the name of (...), arrogance, or
bragging; which includes pride and hypocrisy together: for so Plato defines it
to be, (...), a pretending to excellencies which we have not; a desiring to
seem good, but a carelessness of being so; reputation and fame, not goodness
being the design. To this may be referred Emulations, (...), so the Apostle
calls them, zeals, it signifies immoderate love to a lawful object: like that
of the wife of Ajax in Sophocles. (...)
(...),
(...).
She did him most strange, zealous services, as if her affection had no
measure. It signifies also violent desires of equalling or excelling another
for honors sake, ambition and envy mixed together: it is a violent pursuit
after a thing that deserves it not. A consequent of these is,

15. (...). Seditions, or Schisms and Heresies. That is, Divisions in the
Church upon diversity of Opinions, or upon Pride, Faction and Interest, as in
choosing Bishops, in Praelations and Governments Ecclesiastical, from factious
Rulers, or factious Subjects; which are properly Schisms, but use commonly to
belch forth into Heresy: according to that saying, Plerunque schisma in
haeresin eructat.

16. An evil Eye. That is, a repining at the good of others; Envy, a not
rejoicing in the prosperity of our Neighbors; a grieving because he grieves
not. Aut illi nescio quid incommodi accidit, aut nescio cui aliquid boni: when
good happens to another, it is as bad as if evil happened to himself. (...)
(...).
This is one of the worst of Crimes, for a man to hate him that is prosperous;
hate him whom God loves or blesses. It bears part of its punishment along with
it: the sin has in it no pleasure, but very much torment. Nam sese excruciat
qui beatis invidet. A part of this is Vnthankefulness; 2 Timothy ^.2.
those who do not return kindnesses to others, from whom they have received
any, neither are apt to acknowledge them: which is properly an envying to our
friend the noblest of all graces, that of Charity; or it is Pride or
Covetousness, for from any of these roots this equivocal issue can proceed.

17. Lovers of Pleasures. Such who study and spend their time and money to
please their senses; -- rarum and memorabile magni
Gutturis exemplum, conducendusque Magister:
Rare Epicures and Gluttons, such which were famous in the Roman Luxury, and
fit to be Presidents of a Greek Symposiack, not for their skill in Philosophy,
but their witty Arts of drinking. Ingeniosa gula est, Petron.
Siculo scarus aequore mersus
Ad mensam vivus perducitur --
Sensual men: Such who are dull, and unaffected with the things of God, and
transported with the lusts of the lower belly; Alex. Aphrod. in lib. de anim.
persons that are greedy of baser pleasures. (...), said the Scholiast upon
Aristotle. The wicked man allows to himself too large a portion of sweet
things. Licorishness, is the common word to express this vice in the matter of
eating and drinking.

18. Busybodies. That is, such who invade the offices, or impertinently
obtrude their advice and help when there is no need, and when it is not liked,
not out of charity, but of curiosity, or of a trifling spirit: and this
produces talking of others, and makes their conversation a scene of Censure and
Satyr against others; never speaking of their own duty, but often to the
reproach of their Neighbors, something that may lessen or disparage him.

19. The Fearful, and the Unbelievers. That is, they that fear man more then
God, that will do any thing, but suffer nothing, that fall away in persecution;
such who dare not trust the Promises, but fear want, and fear death, and trust
not God with cheerfulness, and joy, and confidence.

20. (...). They that take pleasure in those that do these things. That is,
they who in any sense encourage, or promote, or love the sin of another, are
guilty themselves; not of the others sin, but of their own. He that commands a
man to swear, is not guilty of that swearing, but of that commanding him. It is
a sin to do so; but that sin to which the man is encouraged or tempted, or
assisted, is his own sin, and for it he is to repent; every man for his own.
For it is inartificially said by the Masters of Moral Theology, that by many
ways we are guilty of the sins of others: by many ways indeed we can procure
them to sin; and every such action of ours is a sin, against charity and the
matter of that Commandment in which the temptation was instanced: But their
sin is not ours; their sin does not properly load us, neither does our being
author of it, excuse them. It was the case of Adam and Eve, and the Serpent,
who yet did every one bear their own burden. Aristotle, Zeno, and Chrysippus
were notorious in this kind. Non est enim immunis a scelere qui ut fieret
imperavit, nec est alienus a crimine, Epist. 21.
cujus consensu licet a se non admissum crimen, tamen public legitur, said S.
Cyprian. He that commands, and he that consents, and he that delights, and he
that commends, and he that maintains, and he that counsels, and he that tempts,
or conceals, or is silent in another danger, when his speaking will prevent
it, is guilty before God. Corrumpere, and corrumpi saeculum vocatur. This evil
is of a great extent, but receives its degrees according to the influence or
causality it has in the sins of others.

21. These I have noted and explicated, because they are not so notorious as
others, which have a public name, and filthy character, and easy definition:
Such as, adulteries, fornication, drunkenness, idolatry, hating of God and good
men, perjury, malicious lies, (...), as S. Paul adds, and such like; these and
those and all that are like these, Gal. 5.21.
exclude us from the kingdom of heaven. They are the works of the flesh; but
these which are last reckoned are such which all the world condemns, and they
are easily discerned, as smoke, or a cloud upon the face of the Sun: but the
other are sometimes esteemed innocent, often excused, commonly neglected,
always undervalued. But concerning all these, the sentence is sad and
decretory. 1 Cor. 6.10.
They that are such shall not inherit the Kingdom of heaven: Rev. 21.8.
But, they shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone. Now if we list to observe it, many of these are such which occur
so frequently in our daily conversation, are so little noted and so confidently
practiced, that to try men concerning their hopes of heaven by such measures
would seem strange, and hard: but it is our faults that it is so^; these are
the measures of the Sanctuary, and not to be prejudged by later and looser
customs.

. 2. Whether every single act of these sins puts a man out of Gods favor?
IN this Question, a single act, I mean, a deliberate act, a wilful, observed,
known act; for concerning acts by surprise, by incogitancy, by imperfection, I
shall give a special account in a Chapter on purpose. To this therefore I
answer by several propositions.

1. idolatry, wilful murder, adultery, witchcraft, perjury, sacrilege, and the
like: such which by reason of their evil effect are called peccata clamantia ad
Dominum, crying sins; as, oppressing widows, entering into the fields of the
fatherless, killing a man by false accusation, grinding the face of the poor,
some sort of unnatural lusts: or such which by reason of their scandal, and
severe prohibitions of them, and their proper baseness and unholiness, are
peccata vastantia conscientiam, they lay a man's conscience waste; such are all
these that I have now reckoned. Now concerning every one of these there is
amongst wise and good men no question, but every act of them is exclusive of a
man from all his hopes of heaven, unless he repent timely and effectually. For
every act of these is such as a man cannot be surprised in the commission of
it; he can have no ignorance, no necessity, no infirmity to lessen or excuse
his fault; which because it is very mischievous in the event, expressly and
severely, and by name forbidden, is also against holiness, and against charity,
against God, and against the Commandment so apparently, that there is nothing
to lessen them into the neighborhood of an excuse, if he that commits them
have a clear use of reason. Some acts of other sins are such which as they are
innocent of doing mischief to our neighbor, so they are forbidden only in
general; but concerning the particular there is not any express certainty, as
in drunkenness; which though every Christian knows to be forbidden, yet
concerning every particular act it is not always so certain that it is
drunkenness, because the acts partake of more and less; which is not true in
murder, in adultery, apostasy, witchcraft, and the like: Besides which, in
some of the forbidden instances there are some degrees of surprise, even when
there are some degrees of presumption and deliberation, which in others there
cannot be. Upon which considerations it is apparent that the single acts of
these greater sins are equal to a habit in others, and are for the present,
destructive of the state of Gods favor, a man that does them is in the state
of damnation, till he has repented; that is, no good man can do one of these
acts, and be a good man still; he is a wicked person, and an enemy of God if he
does.

2. one of them; the man dies in his sin, in that sin which excludes him from
heaven. Every act of these sins is like the stinging of bees; -- animamque in
vulnere ponunt; He cannot strike again, he can sin that sin over no more; and
therefore it is a single act that damnes in that case. Now though it is by
accident that these sins can be but once acted, yet it is not by accident that
these single acts destroy the soul, but by their malice and evil effect, their
mischief or uncharitableness: it follows therefore that it is so in all the
single acts of these great crimes; for since they that cannot be habitual, yet
are highly damnable; the evil sentence is upon every act of these greater
crimes.

3. Paul in his Epistle to the Corinthians seems only to condemn the habit,
Thieves, 1 Cor. 6.10.
drunkards, covetous, railers, etc. shall not inherit the kindome of heaven.
Now one act does not make them properly such; a habit, not an act, denominates.
But lest this be expounded to be a permission to commit single acts, Gal. 5.21.
S. Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians, affixes the same penalty to the
actions, as to the habits; (...), Gal. 5.21.
they that do such things; that is, the actions of those sins are damnable and
exclusive from heaven as verily as the habits. And however in moral accounts,
or in Aristotle's Ethics, a man is not called by the name of a single action,
yet in all laws both of God and man he is. He that steals once is a thief, in
the Courts of God and the King; and one act of adultery makes a man an
adulterer; so that by this measure, [they that are such] and [ they that do
such things] means the same; and the effect of both, is exclusion from the
Kingdom of heaven.

4. works of darkness, deeds of the body, works of the flesh; Ephesians. 8. Romans
8.13.
and though they do not reign, yet if they enter, they disturb the rest and
possession of the spirit of grace; and therefore are in their several measures
against the holiness of the Gospel of Christ. All sins are single in their
acting; and a sinful habit differs from a sinful act, but as many differ from
one, or as a year from an hour: a vicious habit is but one sin continued or
repeated; for as a sin grows from little to great, so it passes from act to
habit: a sin is greater because it is complicated externally or internally, no
other way in the world; it is made up of more kinds, or more degrees of choice;
and when two or three crimes are mixed in one action, then the sin is loud and
clamorous; and if these still grow more numerous, and not interrupted and
disjoined by a speedy repentance, then it becomes a habit. As the continuation
of an instant or its perpetual flux makes time and proper succession, so does
the reacting or the continuing in any one or more sins make a habitual sinner.
So that in this Question, the answer for one will serve for the other: where
ever the habit is forbidden, there also the act is criminal and against God,
damnable by the laws of God, and actually damning without repentance. Between
sins great and little, actual and habitual, there is no difference of nature or
formality, but only of degrees.

5. he that commits sin is of the Devil; so S. 1 John 3.8.
John: by which although he means especially him that commits sin frequently or
habitually; for where there is greater reason, there is the stronger
affirmative: yet that he must also mean it of single sins is evident, not only
by the nature of the thing, some single acts in some instances being as
mischievous and malicious as a habit in others; but by the words of our blessed
Savior, that the Devil is the Father of lies; and therefore every one that
tells a lie is of the Devil; eatenus. To which add also the words of S. John
explicating his whole design in these and all his other words; These things I
write unto you that ye might not sin, that is, that ye might not do sinful
actions; for it cannot be supposed, that he did not as verily intend to prevent
every sin, as any sin, or that he would only have men to beware of habitual
sins, and not of actual, single sins, without which caution he could never have
prevented the habitual. To do sin is to do one, or to do many; and are both
forbidden under the same danger.

The same manner of expression in a differing matter has a different
signification. To do sin is to do any one act of it: but to do righteousness
is to do it habitually. He that does sin, that is, one act of sin, is of the
Devil; But he that does righteousness, viz. habitually, he [onely] is
righteous. The reason of the difference is this, because one sin can destroy a
man, but one act of virtue cannot make him alive. As a phial is broken, though
but a piece of its lip be cut away; but it is not whole unless it be entire and
unbroken in every part. Dionys de Divin. Nomin.
Bonum ex integra causa, malum ex qualibet particulari. And therefore since he
that does righteousness (in S. John's phrase) is righteous; and yet no man is
righteous for doing one act of righteousness; it follows, that by doing
righteousness, he must mean doing it habitually. But because one blow can kill
a man or wound him desperately; therefore when S. John speaks of doing sin, he
means doing any sin, any way, or in any degree of act or habit. For this is
that we are commanded by the Spirit of Christ; we must (...), walk exactly, not
having spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.15.27.
or any thing of that nature, (...), holy and unblameable; so must the Church
be; that is, so must be all the faithful, or the men and women of the Christian
Church; for the Church is nothing but a congregation or collective body of
believing persons; Christ therefore intending to represent the Church to God
without spot, or wrinkle, or fault; Caesar. Arelat. hom. 16.
intends that all his servants should be so. For, let no man deceive himself.
Omnis homo qui post baptismum mortalia crimina commiserit; hoc est, homicidium,
adulterium, furtum, falsum testimonium, vel reliqua crimina perpetravit, unde
per legem mundanam mori poterat, si poenitentiam non egerit, eleemosynam justam
non fecerit, nunquam habebit vitam aeternam, sed cum Diabolo descendet ad
inferna. Every man who after his baptism has committed mortal, or killing
sins, that is to say, murder, adultery, theft, false witness, or any other
crimes which are capital by humane laws, if he does not repent, if he does not
give just measures of alms, he shall not have eternal life, but with the Devil
he shall descend into hell. This is the sad sentence against all single acts of
sin in the capital or greater instances.

But upon this account who can be justified?

To this I answer, the essence and nature of repentance, which is a conversion
from sin to righteousness: but every single act is against the cautions and
watchfulness of repentance. It is an act of death, but not a state; it is the
way of death, but is not in the possession of it. It is true that every single
act of fornication merits an eternal hell, yet when we name it to be a single
act, we suppose it to be no more, that is, to be rescinded and immediately cut
off by a vigorous and proportionable repentance: if it be not, it is more then
a single act, for it is a habit, as I shall remonstrate in the Chapter of
Habits. But then upon this account a single act of any sin may be incident to
the state of a good man, and yet not destroy his interests or his hopes; but it
is upon no other ground but this, It is a single act, and it does not abide
there, but passes immediately into repentance: and then though it did interrupt
or discompose the state of grace or the Divine favor, yet it did not destroy
it quite. The man may pray David's prayer: I have gone astray like a sheep that
is lost: Psalm. 119. ult.
O seek thy servant, for I do not forget thy Commandments.

So that if a man asks whether a good man falling into one act of these great
sins, He is a good man that is so sorry for his sin, and so hates it, that he
will not abide in it: and this is the best indication, that in the act there
was something very pityable, because the man's affections abide not there; the
good man was smitten in a weak part, or in an ill hour, and then repents: for
such is our goodness; to need repentance daily for smaller things, and too
often for greater things. But be they great or little, they must be speedily
repented of; and he that does so, is a good man still. Not but that the single
act is highly damnable, and exclusive of Heaven, if it self were not excluded
from his affections: but it does not the mischief, because he does not suffer
it to proceed in finishing that death which it would have effected, if the
poison had not been speedily expelled, before it had seized upon a vital part.

But 2ly, John, All unrighteousness is sin, 1 John: 5.17.
and there is a sin not unto death; that is, some sorts of sins are so incident
to the condition of men, and their state of imperfection, that the man who has
committed them is still within the methods of pardon, and has not forfeited
his title to the Promises and Covenant of Repentance: But there is a sin unto
death; that is, some men proceed beyond the measures and Economy of the
Gospel, and the usual methods and probabilities of Repentance, by obstinacy,
and persevering in sin, by a wilful, spiteful resisting, or despising the
offers of grace and the means of pardon; for such a man S. John does not
encourage us to pray: If he be such a person as S. John described, our prayers
will do him no good; but because no man can tell the last minute or period of
pardon, nor just when a man is gone beyond the limit; and because the limit it
self can be enlarged, and Gods mercies stay for some longer then for others,
therefore S. John left us under this indefinite restraint and caution; which
was decretory enough to represent that sad state of things in which the
refractary and impenitent have immerged themselves, and yet so indefinite and
cautious, that we may not be too forward in applying it to particulars, nor in
prescribing measures to the Divine Mercy, nor passing final sentences upon our
brother, before we have heard our Judge himself speak. Sinning a sin not unto
death, is an expression fully signifying that there are some sins which though
they be committed and displease God, and must be repented of, and need many and
mighty prayers for their pardon, yet the man is in the state of grace and
pardon, that is, he is within the Covenant of mercy, he may be admitted to
repentance, if he will return to his duty: So that being in the state of grace,
is having a title to Gods loving kindness, a not being rejected of God, but a
being beloved by him to certain purposes of mercy, and that has these measures
and degrees.

1. goes but thus far, that he still continues the means of his salvation; he
is angry with him, but not finally. The Jews were in some portions of this
state until the final day came in which God would not be merciful any more:
Even in this thy day, O Jerusalem, said our blessed Savior; so long as their
day lasted, their state of grace lasted, God had mercy for them, if they had
had gracious hearts to receive it.

2. He is not far from the Kingdom of Heaven, so our blessed Lord expressed
the like condition; he is (...), ordered, disposed toward life eternal: and
this is a further approach toward the state of life.

3. God will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed; God has
in some measure prevailed upon him: and as God is ready to receive the first
unto the means, and the second unto the grace of Repentance; so this third he
is ready to receive unto pardon, if he shall grow and persevere in grace. And
these are the several stages and periods of being in the state of grace.

1. With the first of these not only an act, but a habit of sin is consistent;
but how long and how far, God only knows.

2. With the second period a frequency of falling into single sins is
consistent: But if he comes not out of this state, and proceed to the third
period, he will relapse to the first, he must not stay here long.

3. But they that are in the third period, do sometimes fall into single sins,
but it is but seldom, and it is without any remanent portion of affection, but
not without much displeasure and a speedy repentance; and to this person, the
proper remedy is to grow in grace, for if he does not, he cannot either be
secure of the present, or confident of the future.

4. summo jure, that is, be extreme to mark that which was done amiss. The
single act is highly damnable; the wages of it are death, it defiles a man, it
excludes from heaven, it grieves the holy Spirit of grace, it is against his
undertaking, and in its own proportion against all his hopes: if it be not
pardoned, it will bear the man to Hell; but then how it comes to be pardoned in
good men, and by what measures of favor and proper dispensation, is next to be
considered. Therefore,

5. it; yet by the Economy of God and the Divine Dispensation it is sometimes
otherwise. For besides the eternal wrath of God, there are some that suffer his
temporal; some suffer both, some but one. God uses to smite them whom he would
make to be, or them who are his sons, if they do amiss. If a wicked man be
smitten with a temporal judgment, and thence begins to fear God and to return,
the anger will go no further; and therefore much rather shall such temporal
judgments upon the good man that was overtaken in a fault be the whole
exaction. God smites them that sin these single sins, and though he could take
all, yet will demand but a fine.

6. David, Because thou have made the enemies of God to blaspheme, the child
that is born unto thee shall die: or else 2. When the good man is negligent of
his danger, or dilatory in his repentance, and careless in his watch, then God
awakens him with a judgment, sent with much mercy.

7. Moses and Aaron for their fault at the waters of Massah and Meribah; to the
Prophet of Judah that came to cry out against the Altar in Bethel; to Vzzah for
touching the Ark with unhallowed fingers, though he did it in zeal; to the
Corinthians who had not observed decent measures in receiving the holy
Sacrament; and thus it happened (say some of the ancient Doctors) to Ananias
and Sapphira; God took a fine of them also salvo contenemento, their main stake
being secured, -- Culpam hanc miserorum morte piabant. There is in these
instances this difference: Moses and Aaron were not smitten in their sin, but
for it, and (as is not doubted) after they had repented: but Vzzah, and the
Prophet, and Ananias and Sapphira, and the Corinthians died not only for their
sin, but in it too: and yet it is hoped Gods anger went no further then that
death, because in every such person who lives well, and yet is overtaken in a
fault, there is much of infirmity and imperfection of choice, even when there
are some degrees of wilfulness and a wicked heart. And though it be easy to
suppose that such persons in the beginning of that judgment, and the approach
of that death, did morally retract the sinful action by an act of repentance,
and that upon that account they found the effect of the Divine mercies by the
blood of the Lamb who was slain from the beginning of the world, yet if it
should happen that any of them die so suddenly, as not to have power to
exercise one act of repentance, though the case be harder, yet it is to be
hoped that even the habitual repentance and hatred of sin by which they pleased
God in the greater portions of their life, will have some influence upon this
also. But this case is but seldom, and Gods mercies are very great and
glorious; but because there is in this case no warrant, and this case may
happen oftener then it does, even to any one that sins one wilful sin, it is
enough to all considering persons to make them fear: but the fool sins and
is confident.

8. him, then the man is to return; and provided that he repent speedily, and
neither add a new crime, nor neglect this, his state of grace was but allayed
and disordered, not broken in pieces or destroyed.

9. Tertullians words are excellent words to this purpose: Licet perisse
dicatur, Lib. de Pudicit. c. 7.
erit and de perditionis genere retractare, quia and ovis non moriendo, sed
errando; and dram non intereundo, sed latitando perierunt. Ita licet dici
perisse quod salvum est. That may be said to be lost which is missing, and the
sheep that went astray was also lost; and so was the groat, which yet was but
laid aside, it was so lost that it was found again. And thus that may be said
to have perished, which yet is safe. Perit igitur and fidelis elapsus in
spectaculum quadrigarii furoris and gladiatorii cruoris, and scenicae
foeditatis, Xisticae vanitatis, in lusus, in convivia saecularis solennitatis,
in officium, in Ministerium alienae idololatriae aliquas arts adhibuit
curiositatis, in verbum ancipitis negotiationis impegit, ob tale quid extra
gregem datus est: vel and ipse forte ira, tumore, aemulatione, quod denique
saepe fit, dedignatione castigationis abrupit, debet requiri atque revocari.
The Christian is (in some sort) perished, who sins by beholding bloody or
unchaste spectacles, who ministers to the sins of others; who offends by anger,
emulation, rage, and swelling, too severe animadversions; this man must be
sought for and called back, but this man is not quite lost. Quod potest
recuperari non perit, nisi foris perseveravit. Been interpretaberis parabolam,
viventem adhuc revocans peccatorem. That which may be recovered, is but as it
were lost, unless it remains abroad, and returns not to the place from whence
it wandered.

To the same purpose S. Cyprian and S. Ambrose discourse of the Parable of him
that fell among the thieves and was wounded and half dead. Such are they who in
times of persecution fell away into dissimulation. De lapsis ad Anton. 52.
Nec putemus mortuos esse, sed magis semianimes jacere eos quos persecutione
funesta sauciatos videmus, qui si in totum mortui essent, nunquam de eisdem
postmodum and Confessores and Martyrs fierent. For if these were quite dead,
you should not find of them to return to life, and to become Martyrs and
Confessors for that faith which through weakness they did seemingly abjure.
These men therefore were but wounded and half dead: for they still keep the
faith, they preserve their title to the Covenant, and the Promises of the
Gospel, and the grace of Repentance. Quam fidem qui habet, Lib. 1. de Poenit.
c. 10.
vitam habet (says S. Ambrose) He that has this faith has life, that is, he
is not excluded from pardon; whom therefore peradventure the good Samaritan
does not pass by, because he finds there is life in him, some principle by
which he may live again. Now as it was in the matter of Faith, so it is of
Charity and the other graces. Every act of sin takes away something from the
contrary grace; but if the root abides in the ground, the plant is still alive,
and may bring forth fruit again. But he only is dead who has thrown God off
for ever, or entirely, with his very heart. Ephesians. 4.1.
So S. Ambrose. To be dead in trespasses and sins, which is the phrase of S.
Paul, is the same with that expression of S. John, of sinning a sin unto death,
that is, habitual, refractary, pertinacious and incorrigible sinners, in whom
there is scarce any hopes or sign of life. These are they upon whom (as S. 1 Thessalonians. 2.16.
Paul's expression is) the wrath of God is come upon them to the uttermost;
(...), unto death; so was their sin, it was a sin unto death, so is their
punishment.

The result of these considerations is this. He that commits one act of a
wilful sin, has provoked God to anger; which whether it will be final or no,
we cannot know but by the event, by his forbearing us, and calling us, and
accepting us to repentance. One act does not destroy the life of grace utterly,
but wounds it more or less, according to the vileness and quantity, or abode in
the sin.

. 3. What repentance is necessary for single acts of sin.
1. practically to inquire how far single acts of sin can stand with the state
of grace, or the being of a good man. For they ought not to be at all, and if
they be once, we must repent, and the sin must be pardoned, or we die: And when
it can be asked how far any sin can be consistent with the state of Gods
favor, it cannot be meant that God indulges it to a good man with impunity, or
that his grace and favor consists in this that he may safely sin once or twice
in what instance or in any instance he shall choose: but in this it does; a
single act of sin does not so destroy the hopes of a good man, but that if he
returns speedily he shall be pardoned speedily; for this, God will do for him,
not by permitting him to sin again, but by taking his sin away, and healing his
soul; but how soon, or how much, or how long God will pardon or forbear, he
has no way told us. * For in the several states and periods of the soul in
order to virtue or vice respectively, there is no specifical difference but of
degrees only, not of state. As the sins are more or longer, God is more angry,
and the man further off; but the man is not wholly altered from his state of
grace till he be arrived at the unpardonable condition. He is a good, or an
evil man, more or less, according as he sins or repents. For neither of the
appellatives are absolute and irrespective; and though in philosophy we use to
account them such by the prevailing ingredient, yet the measures of the spirit
are otherwise. The whole affair is arbitrary, and gradual, various by its own
measures and the good pleasure of God, so that we cannot in these things which
are in perpetual flux, come to any certain measures. But although in judging of
events we are uncertain, yet in the measures of repentance we can be better
guided. Therefore first in general:

2. Cyprians rule is a prudent measure, Quam magna deliquimus, tam granditer
defleamus; ut poenitentia crimine minor non sit. According to the greatness of
the sin, so must be the greatness of the sorrow: and therefore we are in our
beginnings and progressions of repentance to consider all the 1 circumstances
of aggravation, 2 the complication of the crime, 3 the scandal and 4 evil
effect; and in proportion to every one of these, the sorrow is to be enlarged
and continued. For if it be necessary to be afflicted because we have done
evil; it is also necessary that our affliction and grief be answerable to all
the parts of evil: because a sin grows greater by being more in matter or
choice, in the instances, or in the adhesion; and as two sins must be deplored
more then one, so must two degrees, that is, the greater portions of malice and
wilfulness be mourned for with a bigger sorrow then the less.

3. mean, an express hatred and detestation of it. For an act of sin being in
its proportion an aversion or turning from God, and repentance being in its
whole nature a conversion to him, that act must be destroyed as it can be. Now
because that which is done, cannot naturally be made undone, it must morally;
that is, it must be revoked by an act of nolition, and hatred of it, and a
wishing it had never been done, for that is properly a conversion from that act
of sin.

4. nolition or hating of the sin, in all signal and remarked instances of sin,
it is highly requisite that the sinning man do oppose an act of virtue to the
act of sin in the same instance where it is capable; as to an act of gluttony,
let him oppose an act of abstinence; to an act of uncleanness, an act of purity
and chastity; to anger and fierce contentions, let him oppose charity and
silence: for to hate sin and not to love virtue is a contradiction, and to
pretend it is hypocrisy. But besides this, as the nolition or hatred of it
does (if it be real) destroy the moral being of that act, so does the contrary
act destroy its natural being (as far as it is capable.) And however it be,
yet it is upon this account necessary. For since one act of sin deliberately
chosen was an ill beginning and inlet of a habit, it is necessary that there be
as much done to obtain the habit of the contrary virtue, as was done toward
the habit of vice; that to God as entire a restitution as can, may be made of
his own right, and purchased inheritance.

5. of sorrow is a moral revocation of one act of sin, and as much a natural
deletion of it as the thing is capable. * But there is something more in it
then thus, for a single act of sin deserves an eternal hell; and upon what
account soever that be, it is fit that we do something of repentance in
relation to the offense of an infinite God: and therefore let our repentance
proceed toward infinite as much as it may: my meaning is, that we do not
finally rest in a moral revocation of an act by an act, but that we beg for
pardon all our days even for that one sin. * For besides that every sin is
against an infinite God, and so ought to be washed off with a sorrow as near to
infinite as we can; we are not certain in what periods of sorrow God will speak
to us in the accents of mercy and voice of pardon: He always takes of them that
repent, less then he could in justice exact if he so pleased, but how much less
he will take, he has no where told us, and therefore let us make our way as
secure as we can; let us still go on in repentance, and in the progression we
are sure to meet with God. * But there is in it yet more. For however the act
of sin be usually called and supposed to be a single act, yet if we consider
how many fancies and temptations were preparatory to it, how many consentings
to the sin, how many desires and acts of prosecution, what contrivances, and
resistances of the holy motions of Gods Spirit and the checks of conscience how
many refusings of God and his laws, what unfitting means and sinful
progressions were made to arrive thither, what criminal and undecent
circumstances, what degrees of consent, and approaches to a perfect choice,
what vicious hopes, and vile fears, what expense of time and mis-imployed
passions were in one act of fornication or murder, oppression of the poor, or
subornation of witnesses, we shall find that the proportions will be too
little to oppose but one act of virtue against all these evils; especially
since an act of virtue (as we order our affairs) is much more single then in
act of vice is.

6. David's repentance was particularly applied to his special case, of murder
and adultery: and because some sins are harder to be pardoned, and harder to be
cured then others, it is certain they must be taken off by a special regard. A
general repentance is never sufficient, but when there cannot be a particular.

7. let him design some fasting days, as the solemnities of his repentance,
which he must employ in the bitterness of his soul, in detestation of his sin,
in judging, condemning, and executing sentence upon himself; and in all the
actions of repentance, which are the parts and fruits of this duty, according
as he shall find them described in their proper places.

These are the measures of repentance for single acts of deliberate sin,

8. and retains it: Every man that repents, is bound to make his sinful act as
much as he can to be undone: and the moral revocation or nolition of it, is our
intercourse with God only, who takes and accepts that, which is the All which
can be done to him. But God takes care of our brother also, and therefore will
not accept his own share unless all interested persons be satisfied as much as
they ought. There is a great matter in it, that our neighbor also do forgive
us, that his interest be served, that he do not desire our punishment: of this
I shall afterward give accounts; in the mean time, if the matter of our sin be
not taken away, so long as it remains, so long there is a remanency and a
tarrying in it, and that is a degree of habit.

9.

10. adultery; for a child to accuse his Father falsely; to oppress a widow in
judgment, are sins of a monstrous proportion; they are three or four sins
apeece, and therefore are to be repented of by untwining the knot, and cutting
asunder every thread: He that repents of adultery, must repent of his
uncleanness, and of his injustice or wrong to his neighbor, and of his own
breach of faith, and of his tempting a poor soul to sin and death; and he must
make amends for the scandal besides, in case there was any in it. In these, and
all the like cases let no man flatter himself when he has wept and prayed
against his sin; one solemnity is not sufficient; one act of contrition is but
the beginning of a repentance; and where the crime is capital by the laws of
wise Nations, the greatest, the longest, the sharpest repentance is little
enough in the Court of conscience. Paraenes. ad poenitentiam.
So Pacianus; Haec est novi Testamenti tota conclusio; despectus in multis
Spiritus sanctus haec nobis capitalis periculi condition legavit. Reliqua
peccata meliorum operum compensatione curantur: Haec vero tria crimina, ut
basilisci alicujus afflatus, ut veneni calix, ut lethalis arundo metuenda sunt:
non enim vitiare animam, sed intercipere noverunt. Some sins do pollute, and
some do kill the soul, that is, are very near approaches to death, next to the
unpardonable state: See Chapt. 5.
and they are to be repented of, just as habits are, even by a long and a
laborious repentance, and by the piety and holiness of our whole ensuing life.
De peccato remisso noli esse securus, said the son of Sirach. Be not secure
though your sin be pardoned; when therefore you are working out and suing your
pardon, be not too confident.

11. are to be cured by Prayer and Sorrow, and entercourses with God
immediately: the effect of which because it can never be told, and because the
mischief can never be rescinded so much as by fiction of Law, nor any supply be
made to the injured person, the guilty man must never think himself safe, but
in the daily and nightly actions of a holy Repentance.

12.

13. single sin. Jam. 2.10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offends in one instance, he shall
be guilty of all, says S. James; plainly affirming, that the admitting one
sin, much more, the abiding in any one sin, destroys all our present possession
of Gods favor. Concerning which, although it may seem strange that one
prevarication in one instance should make an universal guilt, yet it will be
certain and intelligible if we consider that it relates not to the formality,
but to the event of things. He that commits an act of Murder is not therefore
an Adulterer, but yet for being a Murderer he shall die. He is as if he were
guilty of all; that is, his innocence in the other shall not procure him
impunity in this. One crime is inconsistent with Gods love and favor.

But there is something more in it then this. Non quod omnia legis praecepta
violarit, sed quod legis Authorem contempserit, eoque proemio merito careat
quod legis cultoribus propositum est, says venerable Bede. He did not violate
all the Commandments, but he offended him who is the giver of all the
Commandments. It is like letting one Bead fall from a Rosary or Coronet of
Bugles. This, or that, or a third makes no difference, the string is as much
broken if he lets one to slide, as if he dropped twenty. It was not an ill
conceit of Menedemus the Eretrian, that there was but one virtue which had
diverse names. Aristo Chius expressed the same conceit with a little difference;
affirming all virtues to be the same in reality and nature, but to have a
certain diversification or rational difference by relation to their objects. As
if one should call the sight when it looks upon a Crow (...), if upon a Swan
(...); so is virtue. When it moderates the affections, it is Temperance; when
it balances contracts, it is Justice; when it considers what is, and what is
not to be done, it is Prudence. That which they call Virtue, if we call it the
Grace of God, or Obedience, it is very true which they say. For the same
spirit, the same grace of obedience, is Chastity, or Temperance, or Justice,
according as is the subject matter. The love of God, if it be in us, is
productive of all worthiness: and this is it which S. John said, This is love,
that we keep his Commandments; The love of God constrains us; It works all
the works of God in us; It is the fulfilling of the Commandments. For this is
a Catholicon, an Universal Grace. Charity gives being to all virtues, it is the
life and spirit of all holy actions. Abstinence from feasts and inordination,
mingled with Charity, is Temperance. And Justice is Charity, and Chastity is
Charity, and Humility is still but an instance of Charity. This is that
Transcendent that gives life and virtue to Alms, to Preaching, to Faith, to
Miracles; it does all obedience to God, all good offices to our Neighbors:
which in effect is nothing but the sentence of Menedemus and Aristo, that there
is an Universal Virtue; that is, there is one soul and essence of all virtue:
They call it Virtue, S. Paul calls it Charity; and this is that one thing which
is necessary, that one thing which every man that sins, does violate: He that
is guilty of all, is but guilty of that one, and therefore he that is guilty of
that one, of the breach of Charity, is guilty of all. And upon this account it
is, that no one sin can stand with the state of grace; because he that sins in
one instance, sins against all goodness: not against all instances of duty, but
against that which is the life of all, against Charity and Obedience.

A Prayer to be said in the days of Repentance for the commission of any great
Crime.
O Most glorious God, I tremble to come into thy presence, so polluted and
dishonored as I am by my foul stain of sin which I have contracted, but I must
come, or I perish. O my God I cannot help it now; Miserable man that I am, to
reduce my self to so sad a state of things, that I neither am worthy to come
unto thee, nor dare I stay from thee: Miserable man that I am, who lost that
portion of innocence which if I should pay my life in price I cannot now
recover. O dear God, I have offended thee my gracious Father, my Lord, my
Patron, my Judge, my Advocate, and my Redeemer. Shame and sorrow is upon me,
for so offending thee my gracious Savior. But glory be to thee, O Lord, who
art such to me who have offended thee. It aggravates my sin, that I have sinned
against thee who art so excellent in thy self, who art so good to me: But if
thou were not so good to me, though my sin would be less, yet my misery would
be greater. The greatness of my Crime brings me to my Remedy; and now I humbly
pray thee to be merciful to my sin, for it is very great.

II. O My God pity me, and relieve my sad condition, which is so extremely
evil, that I have no comfort but from that which is indeed my misery: My
baseness is increased by my hopes; for it is thy grace and thy goodness which I
have so provoked, Thou, O God, did give me thy grace, and assist me by thy
holy Spirit, and call by thy Word, and instruct me by thy Wisdom, and did
work in me to will and to do according to thy good pleasure. I knew my sin, and
I saw my danger, and I was not ignorant, and I was not surprised: but wilfully,
knowingly, basely, and sensually I gave thee away for the pleasure of a minute,
for the purchase of vanity; nay I exchanged thee for shame and sorrow, and
having justly forfeited thy love, am placed I know not where, nor in what
degree of thy anger, nor in what neighborhood of damnation.

III. O God my God, what have I done? whither am I fallen? I was well and
blessed, circled with thy Graces, conducted by thy Spirit, sealed up to the day
of Redemption, in a hopeful way toward thee; and now I have listened to the
whispers of a tempting Spirit, and for that which has in it no good, no
reason, no satisfaction, for that which is not, I have forfeited those
excellencies, for the recovery of which my life is too cheap a price. I am
ashamed, O God, I am ashamed. I put my mouth in the dust, and my face in
darkness; and hate my self for my sin, which I am sure thou hate. But give
thy servant leave to hope, that I shall feel the gracious effluxes of thy love:
I know thou art angry with me, I have deserved it. But if thou had not loved
me and pitied me, thou might have stricken me in the act of my shame: I know
the design of thy mercy and loving kindness is to bring me to repentance and
pardon, to life and grace. I obey thee, O God, I humbly obey thy gracious
purposes. Receive, O Lord, a returning sinner, a poor wounded person, smitten
by my enemies, broken by my sin, weary and heavy laden; ease me of my burden,
and strengthen me by a mighty grace, that hereafter I may watch more carefully,
resist more pertinaciously, walk more circumspectly, and serve thee without the
interruptions of duty by the intervening of a sin. O let me rather die, then
choose to sin against thee any more. Only try me this once, and bear me in thy
arms, and fortify my holy purposes, and conduct me with thy grace, that thou
may delight to pardon me, and to save me through Jesus Christ my Lord and
dearest Savior. Amen.

I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost: O seek thy servant, for I do not
forget thy Commandments.

CHAP. V. Of Habitual sins, and their manner of Eradication or Cure, and their
proper instruments of pardon.
. 1. The state of the Question.
Boethus the Epicurean being asked, Strato's Comedy. Why, it being troublesome
to us to see a man furious, angry, timorous or sad, we do yet with so great
pleasure behold all these passions acted with the highest, nearest, and most
natural significations? In answer to the question discoursed wittily concerning
the powers of Art and Reason, and how much our selves can add to our own
Natures by Art and Study. Children choose bread efform'd in the image of a bird
or man, rather then a loaf plucked rudely from the Bakers lump; and a golden
fish rather then an artless ingot: because Reason and Art being mingled with
it, it entertains more faculties, and pleases on more sides.

Thus we are delighted when upon a Table we see Cleopatra dying with her
Aspicks, Lucretia piercing her chaste breast. We give great prices for a
Picture of S. Sebastian shot through with a shower of arrows, or S. Laurence
rosting upon his Gridiron, when the things themselves would have pierced our
eyes with horror, and rent our very hearts with pity and compassion: and the
Country fellows were so taken with Parmeno's imitating the noise of Swine,
that they preferred it before that of the Arcadian Boar, being so deceived with
fancy and prejudice, that they thought it more natural then that which indeed
was so.

For first we are naturally pleased with imitation, kind of production from
our own perfections, such as it is, and such as they are, we are delighted in
the imagery, as God is in the contemplation of the world. For we see a nature
brought in upon us by art and imitation. But what in natural things we can but
weakly imitate, in moral things we can really effect. We can efform our nature
over a new, and create our selves again, and make our selves bad when God had
made us good: and what was innocent in nature, we make to be vicious by custom
and evil habit; or on the contrary, what was crooked in nature, we can make
straight by Philosophy, and wise notices, and severe customs; and there is
nothing in nature so imperfect or vicious but it can be made useful and regular
by reason and custom, and the grace of God; and even our brute parts are
obedient to these. Homer observes it of the wise Ulysses, that though he was
troubled to see his wife weep for him, yet (...) (...).

(...).
He held the corners of his eyes as firmly as the horn of his Bow, or the iron
of his Spear, and by his wit he kept his eyes from running over. Reason can
make every member of the body obey; but Use can make it obey willingly: That
can command nature, but this can change it: That can make it do what it
pleases, but this can make it be so.

For there being in man so much brutishness and inclination to forbidden
actions and things,

(...). Nature does seem to do violence to us, and constrain us by violent
inclinations to things against reason: But then when Passion supervenes and
like strong winds blow vehemently and raise a storm, we should certainly
perish, if God did not give us other principles which might be as effective of
his purposes, as Nature and Passion are of death and folly. Passion can be
commanded by reason, but nothing has sufficient and final effort and strength
against Nature, but Custom.

(...),
(...).
For our ship is kept fast and firm in its station by Cables, and when the
winds blow, we have anchors and fastnesses to secure it. Which verses Plutarch
expounding, (...), says, that the Cables which are to secure our ship in
tempests are the firm and permanent judgments against that which is filthy.
They secure us when the winds of passion are violent and dangerous. But then
because the storm is renewed every day, and (...), Nature will revert, and for
ever be longing after its own proportions, we must introduce a nature against a
nature: and as passion sets nature on work, and is it self overcome by reason,
so if this reason become constant, firm, and habitual, it makes nature an
artless, joyntless enemy.

But then on the other side,

Now because this is a great state of danger,

If you ask when every man is bound to repent? I answer, as soon as ever he
has sinned. But how if he does not? then he adds more sin both against God
and against his own soul by delaying this duty, to that he did before in the
single action of which he is tied to repent. For every man is bound to repent
instantly of every known sin; he sins anew if he does not, though he add no
more of the same actions to his heap. But it is much worse if he sins on; not
only because he sins oftener, but because if he contracts a custom or habit of
sin, he superaddes a state of evil to himself, distinct from the guilt of all
those single actions which made the habit. This I shall endeavor to prove
against the doctrine of the Roman Schools, who teach;

1. Navarr. Compend. Manual. ca. 1. n. 31.
For it is as in the case of baptism, or prayers; to the time of the
performance of which duties, the Commandment of God does not specifically
bind us, now, or an hour hence, or when it is convenient, or when it becomes
accidentally necessary, and determined by something else that intervenes: So it
is in repentance; so it be done at all, it matters not when, as to the duty of
it; when you come to die, or when you justly fear it; as in the days of the
plague, or before a battle, or when the holy man comes to take his leave of his
dying Parishioner, then let him look to it Vide Infidelity unmasked, page 604 "
It is true, the best Divines teach that a sinner is not bound to repent himself
instantly of his sin, etc.
. But else he is not obliged. For the sin that was committed ten years since,
grows no worse for abiding; and of that we committed yesterday we are as deeply
guilty, as of the early sins of our youth; but no single sin can increase its
guilt by the putting off our repentance and amendment.

2. De poenit. disp. 7. sect. 5. n. 48.
they call habitual sin; that is, a remaining obligation to punishment for an
action that is past, a guiltiness: or as Johannes de Lugo expresses it,
peccatum actuale moraliter perseverans; Sic etiam Suarez. tom. 4. in 3. part.
disp. 9. sect. 4. n. 23.
the actual sin morally remaining, by which a man is justly hated by God. But
this habitual sin is not any real quality, or habit, but a kind of Moral
denomination or ground thereof, Granatens. in materia de peccatis tract. 8.
disp. 1. sect. 1.
which remains till it be retracted by Repentance. Insidelity unmasked, page 605.
The person is still esteemed injurious and obliged to satisfaction. That is
all.

3. time naturally produce a habit, a proper physical, inherent, permanent
quality; but this is so natural, that it is no way voluntary but in its cause,
that is, Ibid. page 607.
in the actions which produced it, and therefore it can have in it no blame, no
sinfulness, no obliquity distinct from those actions that caused it, and
requires no particular or distinct repentance; for when the single acts of sin
are repented of, the remaining habit is innocent, and the facility to sin which
remains, is no sin at all.

4.

I do suppose these propositions not only to be false, but extremely
dangerous and destructive of the duty of repentance, and all its consequent
hopes, and therefore I shall oppose against them these Conclusions.

1. Every man is bound to repent of his sin as soon as ever he has committed
it. 2. That a sinful habit has in it proper evils, and a proper guiltiness of
its own, besides all that which came directly by the single actions. 3. That
sinful habits do require a distinct manner of repentance, and are not pardoned
but by the introduction of the contrary.
* The consequent of these propositions will be this. Our repentance must not
be deferred at all, much less to our deathbed. 2. Our repentance must be so
early, and so effective of a change, that it must root out the habits of sin,
and introduce the habits of virtue; and in that degree in which this is done,
in the same degree the repentance is perfect, more or less. For there is a
latitude in this duty, as there are degrees of perfection.

. 2. 1. Every man is bound to repent of his sin as soon as he has committed it.
THat this doctrine is of great usefulness and advantage to the necessity and
persuasions of holy life,

Pars magna Italiae est, si verum admittimus, in qua
Nemo togam sumit nisi mortuus --
No man puts on his mourning garment till he be dead. This day we seldom think
it fit to repent, but the day appointed for repentance is always To morrow.
Against which dangerous folly I offer these considerations.

1. felo de se, uncharitable to himself and a murderer of his own soul, then so
is he in his proportion who puts it off one day: because every day of delay is
a day of danger; and the same law of charity obliges him to repent to day if he
sinned yesterday, lest he be dead before to morrow. The necessity indeed is not
so great, and the duty is not so urgent, and the refusal is not so great a sin
in health, as in sickness, and dangers imminent and visible: But there are
degrees of necessity as there are degrees of danger: And he that considers how
many persons die suddenly, and how many more may, and no man knows that he
shall not, cannot but confess that because there is danger, there is also an
obligation of duty and charity to repent speedily, and that positively, or
carelessly to put it off, is a new fault and increases Gods enmity against him.
He that is well, may die to morrow. He that is very sick, may recover and live
many years. If therefore a periculum ne fiat, a danger lest repentance be never
done, is a sufficient determination of the Divine Commandment to do it then,
it is certain that it is in every instant determinately necessary; because in
every instant there is danger. In all great sicknesses there is not an equal
danger; yet in all great sicknesses it is a particular sin not to repent, even
by the confession of all sides; it is so therefore in all the periods of an
uncertain life; a sin, but in differing degrees. And therefore this is not an
argument of caution only, but of duty. For therefore it is of duty, because it
is of caution. It could not be a caution, unless there were a danger; and if
there be a danger, then it is a duty. For he that is very sick must do it. But
how if he escapes, was he obliged for all that? He was, because he knew not
that he should escape. By the same reason is every one obliged, because whether
he shall or shall not escape the next minute, he knows not. And certainly, it
was none of the least reasons of Gods concealing the day of our death, that we
might ever stand ready. And this is plainly enough taught us by our blessed
Savior, laboriously persuading and commanding us not to defer our repentance,
by his parable of the rich man who promised to himself the pleasures of many
years: he reproved that folly with a Stulte hac nocte; and it may be any man's
case; for Nemo tam felix --
Crastinum ut possit sibi polliceri.
But he adds a Precept; Luke 12.35, etc.
Let your loins be girded about, and your lights shining, and ye your selves
like men that wait for their Lord. And blessed are those servants whom their
lord when he comes shall find watching. And much more to the same purpose.
Nay, that it was the reason why God concealed the time of his coming to us,
that we might always expect him, he intimated in the following Parable; " This
know, that if the good man of the house had known what hour the thief would
come, he would have watched. Be ye therefore ready also, for the Son of man
comes at an hour when ye think not. Nothing could better have improved this
argument, then these words of our blessed Savior; we must stand in procinctu,
ready girded, (...), ready for the service, always watching, as uncertain of
the time, but in perpetual expectation of the day of our Lord. I think nothing
can be said fuller to this purpose. In Psalm. 114.
But I add the words of S. Austin; Verum quidem dicis quod Deus poenitentiae
tuae indulgentiam promisit, sed huic dilationi tuae crastinum non promisit. To
him that repents, God has promised pardon, but to him that defers repentance
he has not promised the respite of one day. It is certain therefore, he
intended thou should speedily repent; and since he has by words and deeds
declared this to be his purpose, he that obeys not, is in this very delay,
properly and specisically, a Transgressor.

2. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. That is, defer
not to hear him, this day; for every putting it off is a hardening your hearts.
For he that speaks to day, is not pleased if you promise to hear him to morrow.
It was Felix his case to S. Paul, Go away, I will hear thee some other time. He
that calls every day, means every day that we should repent. For although to
most men God gives time and leisure, and expects and perseveres to call, yet
this is not because he gives them leave to defer it; but because he still
forbears to strike, though their sin grows greater. Now I demand, when God calls
us to repentance, is it indifferent to him whether we repent to day or no? Why
does he call so earnestly, if he desires it so coldly? Or if he be not
indifferent, is he displeased if we repent speedily? This no man thinks. But is
he not displeased if we do not? Does not every call, and every expectation, and
every message, when it is rejected, provoke Gods anger and exasperate him? Does
not he in the day of vengeance smite more sorely, by how much with the more
patience he has waited? This cannot be denied. But then it follows, that every
delay did grieve him and displease him, and therefore it is of it self a
provocation distinct from the first sin.

3. supererogation, then he that repents to day, does not do it in obedience to
a Commandment: for this is such a work (by the confession of the Roman
Schools) which if a man omits he is nevertheless in the state of grace and the
Divine favor; as he that does not vow perpetual Chastity, or Poverty, is
nevertheless the servant of God; but he that does not repent to day of his
yesterdayes sin, is not Gods servant, and therefore this cannot be of the
nature of Counsels, but of Precept and duty respectively. But to put it past
all question: It is expressly commanded us by our blessed Savior, Agree with
thine adversary (...) quickly. For as it is amongst men of merciful
dispositions, he that yields quickly obtains mercy; but he that stands out as
long as he can, must expect the rigor of the law: So it is between God and us;
a hasty Repentance reconciles graciously, whilst the delay and putting it off,
provokes his severe anger. And this the Spirit of God was pleased to signify
to the Angel or Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.5.
Remember whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works: If thou
do not, (...), I come unto thee quickly, and will remove the Candlestick out
of its place, unless thou do repent. Christ did not mean to wait long and be
satisfied with their Repentance, be it when it would be; for he comes quickly,
and yet our Repentance must prevent his coming. His coming here is not by
death, or final judgment, but for scrutiny and inquiry: for the event of the
delaying their Repentance, would have been the removing of their Candlestick.
So that (...) is, I come speedily to exact of thee a speedy repentance, or to
punish thee for delaying; for so the antithesis is plain, (...) and (...), I
come quickly, unless thou do repent, viz. quickly; (...), (that I may use
the words of Libanius) God will condemn our actions, unless we appear before
him with a speedy Repentance.

4. damnation to some for not repenting instantly, has made it damnable to
all, and therefore to repent speedily is certainly a duty. The earth does not
open and swallow up all Rebels in the day of their Mutiny; but it did so once,
and by that God did sufficiently consign to all ages his displeasure against
Rebelsion. So it is in the deferring Repentance. That some have smarted for it
eternally, is for ever enough to tell us, that God is displeased with every one
that does defer it; and therefore commands us not to defer it. But this
consideration is sufficiently heightened upon this account: For there is no
sinner dies, but he is taken away without one days respite. For though God did
many times forbear him, yet now he does not, and to his last sin, or his last
refusal to hear God, either he afforded no time, or no grace of Repentance.

S. Paul's discourse and treaty of the Corinthians, is sufficient to guide us
here: he feared that at his coming again God would humble him, that is, 1 Cor.
12.21.
afflict him with grief and sorrow to see it, that himself should be forced to
bewail many, that is, to excommunicate, or deliver to Satan them that have
sinned already, and have not repented. If they had repented before S. Paul's
coming, they should escape that rod; but for deferring it, they were like to
smart bitterly. Neither ought it to be supposed that the not repenting of sins
is no otherwise then as the being discovered of theft. The thief dies for his
robbery, not for his being discovered; though if he were not discovered, he
should have escaped for his theft. So for their uncleanness S. Paul would have
delivered them over to Satan, not for their not repenting speedily. For the
case is wholly differing here. A thief is not bound at all to discover himself
to the Criminal Judge; but every man is bound to repent. If therefore his
repenting speedily would prevent so great a calamity as his being delivered
over to Satan, besides the procuring his eternal pardon, it is clear that to
repent speedily was great charity, and great necessity; which is that which was
to be proved. Satan should have power over him to afflict him for his sin, if
he did not speedily repent: but if he did repent speedily, he should wholly
escape; therefore to repent speedily is a duty which God expects of us, and
will punish if it be omitted.

-- Hodie, mihi credes, vivere serum est.
Ille sapit quisquis, Posthume, vixit Heri.
Think it not a hasty Commandment that we are called upon to repent to day. It
was too much that yesterday past by you, it is late enough if you do it to day.

5.

Nunc vivit sibi neuter, Martial ep. 20. lib. 5.
heu! bonosque
Soles effugere atque abire sentit,
Qui nobis pereunt, and imputantur:
And this, not only by the danger of sudden death, but for want of the just
measures of Repentance: Because it is a secret which God has kept to himself
only, and he only knows what degrees of Repentance himself will admit of; how
much the sin provoked him, and by what measures of sorrow and carefulness
himself will be appeased. For there is in this a very great difference. To
Simon Magus it was almost a desperate case, If peradventure the thoughts of thy
heart may be forgiven: It was worse to Esau, There was no place left for his
repentance. It was so with Judas, he was not admitted to pardon, neither can
any one tell, whether it was not resolved he should never be pardoned. However
it be for the particulars, yet it is certain there is a great difference in the
admitting penitents. On some have compassion, Jude 22, 23.
others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire. Now since for all our
sins we are bound to ask pardon every day, if we do so, who dares say it is too
much, that it is more then needs? But if to repent every day be not too much,
who can be sure that if he puts it off one day it shall be sufficient? To some
men, and at some times God is implacably angry; some men, and at some times God
has in his fury and sudden anger seized upon, with the apprehensions of death
and saddest judgments, and broken them all in pieces: and as there is a reign
and kingdom of Mercy, so there are sudden irruptions of a fierce Justice, of
which God has therefore given us examples, that we may not defer Repentance
one day. But this mischief goes further. For,

6.

7. he neglects, or out of tediousness and an irreligious spirit quite puts
off, or for ever pass by, it is unpardonable; it shall never be forgiven in
this world, nor in the world to come. Now since final impenitence is the
consummation and perfection of all sin, we are to remember, that it is nothing
but a perseverance of neglecting, or refusing to repent. A man is always
dying, and that which we call death is but the finishing of death, the last act
of it: So is final impenitence, nothing but the same sin told over so many
days; it is a persevering carelessness, or resolution, and therefore it cannot
be the sin of one day, unless it be by accident; it is a state of sin, begun as
soon as ever the sin is acted, and grows in every day of thy negligence or
forgetfulness. But if it should happen that a sinner that sinned yesterday
should die to day, his deferring his Repentance that one day would be esteemed
so, and indeed really be a final impenitence. It follows therefore, that to put
off our Repentance one day, differs only accidentally and by chance from the
worst of evils, from final impenitence; it is the beginning of it, it differs
from it, as an infant from a man; it is materially the same sin, and may also
have the same formality.

8.

These Considerations seem to me of very great moment, at least they ought to
effect this persuasion upon us, that whoever has committed a sin cannot
honestly, nor prudently, nor safely defer his Repentance one hour. He that
repents instantly, breaks his habit when it is in ovo in the shell, and
prevents Gods anger, and his own debauchment and disimprovement: -- Qui parvis
obvius ibit, Nazian.

Is nunquam praeceps scelera in graviora feretur.
And let us consider, that if we defer our Repentance one hour, we do to our
souls worse then to our bodies, Quae laedunt oculos, festinas demere; Horat.
lib. 1. ep.
si quid
Est animum, differs curandi tempus in annum?
If dirt fall into our eyes, we do not say to the Surgeon, Stay Sir, and let
the grit or little stone abide there till next week, but get it out presently.
This similitude if it proves nothing, yet will serve to upbraid our folly, to
instruct and exhort us in the duty of this Question. Remember this, that as in
Gods account (...) and (...) to remit and to retain a sin are opposite, so it
ought to be in ours. Our retaining and keeping of a sin though but for a day,
is contrary to the designs of mercy and holiness, it is against God, and
against the interest of our souls.

3. A sinful habit has in it proper evils, and a proper guiltiness of its own,
besides all that which came directly by the single actions.
BY a sinful habit, E^hic. Nicom. l. 2. c. 2.
for that Aristotle calls the infallible and proper indication of habits,
(...): And so long as any man sins willingly, readily, frequently, and upon
every temptation, or most commonly; so long he is an habitual sinner: when he
does his actions of Religion with pain, and of his sin with pleasure, he is in
the state of death, and enmity against God. And as by frequent playing upon an
instrument a man gets a habit of playing; so he does in renewing the actions of
the same sin, there is an evil quality produced, which affects and corrupts his
soul. * But concerning the nature of a vicious habit, this also is to be added.

That a vicious habit is not only contracted by the repetition of acts in the
same kind, ambulatory impiety, and sin in all, or most of their opportunities;
but their occasions are not uniform, and therefore their irregularities are
irregular and by chance for the instance, but regular and certain in the
prevarication. Vetuleius Pavo would be sure to be drunk at the feasts of
Saturn, and take a surfeit in the Calends of January; he would be wanton at the
Floralia, and bloody in the Theaters: he would be prodigal upon his birth day,
and on the day of his marriage sacrifice Hecatombs to his Pertunda Dea, and he
would be sure to observe all the solemnities and festivals of vice in their own
particulars and instances, and thought himself a good man enough, because he
could not be called a drunkard or a glutton for one act, and by sinning singly
escaped the appellatives of scorn, which are usually fixed upon vain persons
that are married to one sin. * Naturally to contract the habit of any one sin
is like the entertaining of a Concubine, and dwelling upon the folly of one
miserable woman. But a wandering habit is like a Libido vaga, the vile
adulteries of looser persons that drink at every cistern that runs over, and
stands open for them. For such persons have a supreme habit, a habit of
disobedience, and may for want of opportunity or abilities, for want of
pleasure, or by the influence of an impertinent humor be kept from acting
always in one scene. But so long as they choose all that pleases them, and
exterminate no vice, but entertain the instances of many, their malice is
habitual, their state is a perfect aversation from God. For this is that which
the Apostle calls, The body of sin, Romans 7.
a compagination of many parts and members; just as among the Lawyers, a flock,
a people, a legion, are called bodies: and corpus civitatis, we find in Livy,
corpus collegiorum in Caius, corpus regni in Virgil; and so here, this union of
several sins is the body of sin, and that is, the body of death. And not only
he that feeds perpetually upon raw fruit puts himself into an ill habit of
body; but he also does the same thing, who to day drinks too much, and to
morrow fills himself with cold fruits, and the next day with condited mushromes,
and by evil orders and carelessness of diet, and accidental miscarriages heaps
up a multitude of causes, and unites them in the production and causality of
his death. This general disorder is indeed longer doing, but it kills as fatally
and infallibly as a violent surfeit. And if a man dwells in the kingdom of sin,
it is all one whether he be sick in one, or in twenty places; they are all but
several rooms of the same Infirmatory, and ingredients of the same deadly
poison. He that repeats his sin, whether it be in one, or in several instances,
strikes himself often to the heart, with the same, or with several daggers.

Having thus premised what was necessary for the explication of the nature of
vicious habits,

1. Of the Natural capacity of sinful habits.
The natural capacity of sinful habits is a facility or readiness of the
faculty to do the like actions; Ethic. lib. 3. c. 8.
said Aristotle. Actions are otherwise voluntary then habits. We are masters of
our actions all the way, but of habits only in the beginning But because it
was in our choice to do so or otherwise, therefore the habit which is
consequent is called voluntary: not then chosen, because it cannot then be
hindered; and therefore it is of it self indifferent; an evil indeed, as
sickness, or crookedness, thirst or famine, and as death it self to them that
have repented them of that sin for which they die; but no sin, if we consider
it in its mere natural capacity. * Nay so, it may become the exercise of
virtue, the scene of trouble indeed or danger, of temptation and sorrow, but a
field of victory. For there are here two things very considerable.

1. -- (...)
(...). Aristoph. (...).

For so God uses to do, if we sin we shall smart for it, but he turns it into
good: And S. Austin applies that promise, that all things shall work together
for good to them that fear God, even to this particular; etiam ipsa peccata,
nimirum non ex natura sua, sed ex Dei virtute and sapientia: if all things,
then sins also, not by their proper efficacy, but by the overruling power and
wisdom of God; like that of Phocylides, (...). He that will be a good man,
must be often deceived, that is, buy his wit at a dear rate. And thus some have
been cured of pride by the shames of lust, and of lukewarmness by a fall into
sin, being awakened by their own noddings, and mending their pace by their
fall. And so also the sense of our sad infirmities introduced by our vicious
living and daily prevarications may become an accidental fortification to our
spirits, a new spur by the sense of an infinite necessity and an infinite
danger.

(...)
(...). A^isteph.

For whoever repents after such sad intervals of sorrow and sin, either must
do more then other men, or they do nothing to purpose. For besides, that an
ordinary care cannot secure them, who have brought tempters home to themselves;
a common industry cannot root out vicious customs; a trifling mortification
cannot crucify and kill what has so long been growing with us: besides this
(for this will not directly go into the account; for this difficulty the
sinner must thank himself) he must do more actions of piety to obtain his
pardon and to secure it. But because they need much pardon, and an infinite
care, and an assiduous watchfulness, o^ they perish infallibly, therefore all
holy penitents are to arise to greater excellencies then if they had never
sinned.

Major deceptae faema est, and gloria dextrae;
Si non errasset, fecerat illa minus.
Scaevola's hand grew famous for being deceived, and it had been less
reputation to have struck his enemy to the heart, Vide S. Chrysostom. epist. ad
The^dor.
then to do such honorable infliction upon it for missing. And thus there is
in heaven more joy over one repenting sinner, then over ninety nine just
persons that need it not; there is a greater deliverance, and a mightier
miracle, a bigger grace, and a prodigy of chance; it being, as S. Austin
affirms, a greater thing that a sinner should be converted, then that being
converted he should afterward be saved; and this he learned from those words
of S. Paul; Romans 5.8, 9.
But God commended his love to us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us. Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved
from wrath through him. * But now the sinner is more busy in his recovery,
more fearful of relapse then before his fall; Sicut ferae decipulam erumpentes
cautiores facti, says Lactantius; like wild beasts breaking from their toils,
they walk more cautiously for ever after. Thus it is impossible that sin should
be exalted above grace, or that the Devils malice can be superior to the rare
arts of the Divine mercy; for by his conduct, poison it self shall become
medicinal, and sin like the Persian apple, -- Pomis quae Barbara Persis
Miserat, ut fama est, patriis armata venenis,
At nunc expositi parvo discrimine lethi
Ambrosios praebent succos oblita nocendi,
transplanted from its native soil to the Athenian gardens, loses its natural
venom, and becomes pleasant as the rinds of Citrons, and aromatic as the
Eastern spices.

2. virtue, but causes great diminution of it. * For it is a high mistake
crudely to affirm, that every repugnancy to an act of virtue, and every
temptation to a sin, if it be overcome, increases the reward. Indeed if the
temptation be wholly from without, unsought for, prayed against, inferred
infallibly, superinduced by God, then the reward is greater, by how much it was
the more difficult to obey. Thus for Jephthah to pay his daughter which he had
vowed, and for Abraham to slay his son, were greater acts of obedience, because
they were in despite of great temptations to the contrary, and there was
nothing evil from within that did lessen the choice, or retard the virtue. *
But when our nature is spoiled, and our strengths diminished, when the grace of
God by which we stood is despised and cancelled, when we have made it natural
for us to sin, then this remaining inclination to sin, and unwillingness to
obey, is so far from increasing the reward, that it is not only a state of
danger, but it is an unwillingness to do good, an abatement of the choice, a
state which is still to be mortified, and the strengths to be restored, and the
affections made obedient, and the will determined by other objects.

But if the unwillingness to obey,

2. It would also follow from hence, that the less men did delight in Gods
service, the more pleasing they should be to him: For if the reluctance
increases, then the perfect choice would lessen the reward. And then,

3. A habit of virtue were not so good as single actions with the remains of a
habit of vice, upon the same account: and a state of imperfection were better
then a state of perfection, and to grow in grace, were great imprudence.

4. It were not good to pray against entering into temptation; nay it were good
we did tempt our selves, so we did not yield; to provoke our enemy, so he did
not conquer us; to enter into danger, so we did not sink under it; because
these increase the difficulty, and this increases the reward. All which being
such strange and horrid consequences, it follows undeniably, that the remanent
portion of a vicious habit after the man's conversion is not the occasion of a
greater reward, is not good formally, is not good materially, but is a fomes, a
nest of concupiscence, a bed of vipers, and the spawn of toads.

Now although this is not a sin, every sin, that is, to the action in its
natural capacity, but that is therefore innocent so far; that is, if you
consider it without any relation to manners and laws, it is not unlawful. But
then if you consider the whole action in its entire constitution, it is a sin.
And so is a sinful habit, it is vicious and criminal in its whole nature; and
when the Question is whether any thing be in its own capacity distinctly, good
or bad; the answer must not be made by separating the thing from all
considerations of good and bad. However it will suffice, that a habit of vice
in its natural capacity is no otherwise innocent then an act of adultery or
drunkenness.

2. Of the Moral capacity of sinful Habits.
But then if we consider sinful Habits in their moral capacity, we shall find
them to be a Lerna malorum, and we shall open Pandora's box a swarm of evils
will issue thence. In the enumerating of which, I shall make a great progress
to the demonstration of the main Question.

1. Jer. 13.22, 25.
And therefore this habitual iniquity the Prophet describing, calls it,
magnitudinem iniquitatis, and the punishment designed for it, is called, thy
lot, the portion of thy measures, that is, Plenitudo poenae ad plenitudinem
peccatorum, a great judgment to an habitual sin, a final judgment, an
exterminating Angel, when the sin is confirmed, and of a perfect habit.

For till habits supervene, Sophocles speaks of; (...)
(...),
It is full of joy and sorrow, it sings and weeps together, it triumphs in
mourning, and with tears wets the festival Chariot. We are divided between good
and evil; and all our good or bad is but a disposition toward either: but then
the sin is arrived to its state and manhood, when the joints are grown stiff
and firm by the consolidation of a habit. So Plutarch defines a habit, (...). A
habit is a strength and confirmation to the brute and unreasonable part of man
gotten by custom. (...). The brutish passions in a man are not quickly
mastered and reduced to reason. (...): Custom and studies efform the soul like
wax, and by assuefaction introduce a nature: To this purpose Aristotle quotes
the verses of Evenus, (...) Stobaeus de Rep. Sermon. 41.

(...)
For as experience is to notice, and Tutors to children, so is Custom to the
manners of men; a fixing good or evil upon the spirit: that as it was said of
Alexander, when he was a man he could not easily want the vices of his Tutor
Leonidas, which he sucked into his manners and was accustomed to in his youth;
so we cannot without trouble do against our habit and common usages; Vsus
Magister, use is the greatest Teacher: and the words in Jer my 13, 23. Ye which
are accustomed to do evil, are commonly read, Ye which are taught to do evil;
and what we are so taught to do, we believe infinitely, and find it very hard
to entertain principles of persuasion against those of our breeding and
education. For what the mind of man is accustomed to, and thoroughly acquainted
with, it is highly reconciled to it; the strangeness is removed, the objections
are considered or neglected, and the compliance and entertainment is set very
forward toward pleasures and union. (...), Theoctist. apud Stobaeum.

Quantum consuetudo poterit intelliges, si videris seras quoque convictu nostro
mansuescere: nullique immani bestiae vim suam permanere, si hominis
contubernium diu passa est. Senec. de ira lib. 3. c. 8.


This habit therefore when it is instanced in a vice, is the perfecting and
improving of our enmity against God, for it strengthens the lust, as a good
habit confirms reason and the grace of God.

2. The law of sin. Lex enim peccati est violentia consuetudinis, qua trahitur
and tenetur animus etiam invitus. The violence of custom is the law of sin, by
which such a man is overruled against his will. Nam si discedas, laqueo tenet
ambitiosi
Consuetudo mali -- and in aegro cord senescit.
You cannot leave it if you would. S. Austin represents himself as a sad
instance of this particular. I was afraid lest God should hear me when I prayed
against my lust: As I feared death, Lib. 8. Confess. c. 7. etc. 5.
so dreadful it was to me to change my custom. Velle meum tenebat inimicus,
inde mihi catenam fecerat, and constrinxerat me. Quippe ex voluntate perversa
facta est libido, and dum servitur libidini facta est consuetudo, and dum
consuetudini non resistitur facta est necessitas. The Devil had made a chain
for him, and bound his will in fetters of darkness. His perverse will made his
lust grow high, and while he served his lust, he superinduced a custom upon
himself, and that in time brought upon him a necessity. For as an old disease
has not only afflicted the part of its proper residence, and by its abode
made continual diminution of his strength, but made a path also and a channel
for the humors to run thither, which by continual defluxion have dug an
open passage, and prevailed beyond all the natural powers of resistance: So is
an habitual vice; it has debauched the understanding, and made it to believe
foolish things, it has abused the will and made it like a diseased appetite in
love with filthy things; it is like an evil stomach that makes a man eat
unwholesome meat against his Reason: (...)
(...).
That Is a sad calamity, when a man sees what is good and yet cannot follow it,
nay that he should desire it, and yet cannot lay hold upon it; for his
faculties are bound in fetters; the habit has taken away all those strengths
of Reason and Religion by which it was hindered, and all the objections by which
it was disturbed, and all that tenderness by which it was uneasy, and now the
sin is chosen, and believed and loved; it is pleasant and easy, usual and
necessary, and by these steps of progression enters within the iron gates of
death, sealed up by fate and a sad decree.

And therefore Simplicius upon Epictetus speaking of Medea seeing and approving
good things by her understanding, Plutarch observes) (...) a fatal bestiality
in the men, (...). Plutarch.
they sin and can neither will nor choose. They are driven to death, and they
see themselves crowned with garlands for the Sacrifice, and yet go to their
ruin merry as the Minstrels, and the temptations that entertain and attend
those horrid rites. Trinummus.
Scibam ut esse me deceret, facere non quibam miser, said he in the Comedy. I
knew it well enough how I should comport my self, but I was so wretched that I
could not do it.

Now all this being the effect of a vicious habit,

3. that which is a natural punishment of the sinful actions, is or may be
morally a sin, as the lust which is produced by gluttony. And when a man has
entertained a holy sorrow for his sins, and made holy vows of obedience and a
new life, he must be forced to contend for every act of duty, and he is daily
tempted, and the temptation is strong, and his progression is slow; he marches
upon sharp-pointed stones, where he was not used to go, and where he has no
pleasure. He is forced to do his duty, as he takes Physic, where reason and
the grace of God make him consent against his inclination, and to be willing
against his will. He is brought to that state of sorrow, that either he shall
perish for ever, or he must do more for heaven then is needful to be done by a
good man, whose body is chaste, and his spirit serene, whose will is obedient,
and his understanding well informed, whose temptations are ineffective, and his
strengths great, who loves God and is reconciled to duty, who delights in
Religion, and is at rest when he is doing God service. But an habitual sinner
even when he begins to return, and in some measure loves God, has yet too
great fondnesses for his enemy, his repentances are imperfect, his hatred and
his love mixed, nothing is pure, nothing is whole, nothing is easy: So that the
bands of holiness are like a yoke shaken upon the neck, they fret the laboring
Ox, and make his work turn to a disease; and (as Isaac) he marches up the hill
with the wood upon his shoulders, and yet for ought he knows, himself may
become the Sacrifice. S. Austin complains that it was his own case. He was so
accustomed to the apertures and free emissions of his lust, so pleased with the
entertainments, so frequent in the employment, so satisfied in his mind, so
hardened in his spirit, so ready in his choice, so peremptory in his foul
determinations, that when he began to consider that death stood at the end of
that life, he was amazed to see himself as he thought without remedy; and was
not to be recovered but by a long time, and a mighty grace, the perpetual, the
daily, the nightly prayers and violent importunities of his Mother, the
admirable Precepts and wise deportments of S. Ambrose, the efficacy of truth,
the horrible fears of damnation hourly beating upon his spirit with the wings
of horror and affrightment; and after all, with a mighty uneasiness and a
discomposed spirit he was by the good hand of God dragged from his fatal ruin.
(...) Sophocles in Oedip.

(...),
(...).
Thus one folly added to another has great labor and vexation, unquietness
and difficulty for its reward. But as when our blessed Savior dispossessed the
little Daemoniack in the Gospel, when the Devil went forth he roared and
foamed, he rent him with horrid Spasmes and Convulsions, and left him half
dead: So is every man that recovers from a vicious habit, he suffers violence
like a bird shut up in a cage, or a sick person not to be restored but by
Causticks and Scarifications, and all the torments of Art, from the dangers of
his Nature.

4. An dubitat solitus totum conflare Tonantem,
Radet inaurati femur Herculis, and faciem ipsam
Neptuni, qui bracteolam de Castore ducet?
He that is used to it, makes nothing of Sacrilege, who before started at the
defrauding his Neighbor of an uncertain right: but when he has digested the
first (...), by step and step he ventures so far till he dares to steal the
Thunderbolts from Jupiter; when sin is grown up to its height and station by
all its firmest measures, a great sin is not felt; and let the sin be what it
will, many of the instances pass so easily, that they are not observed: as the
hands and feet sometimes obey the fancy without the notice of the superior
faculties; and as we say some parts of our prayers which we are used to, though
we attend not, and as Musicians strike many single strokes upon which they do
not at all consider; which indeed is the perfection of a habit. So we see many
men swear when they know not that they do so, they lie and know they lie, and
yet believe themselves: They are drunk often, and at last believe it innocent,
and themselves the wiser, and the action necessary, and the excess not
intemperance. Enchirid, c. 8.
Peccata quamvis magna and horrenda cum in consuetudinem venerint, aut parva
aut nulla esse creduntur, usque adeo ut non solum non occultanda, verum etiam
jam praedicanda, ac diffamanda videantur, said S. Austin. At first we are
ashamed of sin; but custom makes us bold and confident, apt to proclaim not to
conceal our shame. For though at first it seemed great, yet every day of use
makes it less, and at last, all is well, it is a very nothing.

This is a sad state of sin, Oath will pass for an indeliberate folly, and an
issue of infirmity. But then if we remember that it is voluntary in its
principle, that this easiness of sinning comes from an intolerable cause, from
a custom of profaneness and impiety, that it was nourished by a base and a
careless spirit, it grew up with a cursed inadvertency, and a caitiff
disposition, that it could not be at all, but that the man is infinitely
distant from God, it is to be reckoned like the pangs of death, which although
they are not always felt, yet they are violent, and extreme, they are fatal in
themselves, and full of horror to the standers by.

But from hence, viz. that in a vicious habit there is a venom and a malice
beyond the guilt, and besides the sinfulness of the single actions that produce
and nourish it, the quality it self is criminal. For unless it can be supposed
that to swear frequently can at last bring its excuse with it, and that such a
custom is only to be estimated according to the present notice and
deliberation by which it is attended to; and that to swear often can be but a
little thing, but to swear seldom shall be horrid and inexcusable, it must be
certain, that the very habit it self is a state of sin, and enmity against God,
besides the guilt of the many single actions: because this customary swearing
cannot be accounted so bad as it is by the value and baseness of the single
actions, which are scarce considered, very often not known, not noted at all,
not attended to; but therefore they have their load by being effects of a
cursed habit and custom. Here the habit is worse then the action, and has an
evil of its own.

5. Appianus tells of Lentulus, Spinther, and Dolabella, that when Caesar was
killed in the Senate they drew their swords and ran about the streets, as if
they had done the fact, supposing it to be great and glorious: quibus gloria
quidem frui non contigit, sed poenas dederunt easdem cum sontibus; they lost
their hopes of fame, but yet they were punished for the fact. So useless, and
yet so pernicious a thing is a vicious habit; a man may pay the price of his
lust when he thinks not of it, and perish for all that he was willing to enjoy,
though he did not what he would. This is that by which Divines use to reconcile
the justice of God with the infliction of eternal pains upon temporal and
transitory actions. There is in unrepenting or habitual sinners an eternal
spring or principle of evil, and they were ready for ever to have sinned; and
for this preparation of mind to have sinned for ever, it is by them affirmed
to be just to punish them for ever. Now this is not true in the single actions
and interruptions of grace by sin, but in the habitual sinner it is more
reasonable. Such are they of whom the Apostle speaks, They were past feeling,
and yet were given up unto uncleanness; (...), which properly signifies the
beginnings or little images of lust; which as they are first in the
introduction of lust, so in such persons, they are the only remains of the old
man. He cannot sin as he used to do, not by his action, but he sins by his
habit.

The sum is this. Job differs from the patience of S. Laurence, as natural
virtue, from the same grace in a Christian: so does a natural habit of vice in
its moral capacity differ from our aversion from God; I mean in the active
sense, which if it be not a distinct state of sinfulness, distinct from the
guilt of sinful actions, yet it is at least a further degree of the same
guiltiness and being criminal; and either of them both do sufficiently evince
the main question. As the charity and devotion of Cornelius was increased by
passing into a habit of these graces; and as the piety of him a Jewish
Proselyte, the habitual piety was mended by his being a Christian: So the
single actions of vice pass a great guilt; but there is more contracted by the
habitual vileness, and that habit is made worse by being an opposition to, and
an alienation from God. But of this I am now to give more special accounts.

3. Of the Relative capacity of sinful Habits, in reference to God.
1. the will, and whatsoever is naturally there, is voluntary still. A habit of
sinning cannot remain at all, but by consent and by delight, by love and
adhesion. The habit is radicated no where but in the will, except it be by
subordination, and in the way of ministeries. It follows therefore that every
vicious habit is the prolongation of a sin, a continuing to love that, which to
love but once is death. For every one that has a vicious habit, chooses his
sin cheerfully, acts it frequently, is ready to do it in every opportunity,
and at the call of every temptation; and according as these things are in every
one, so is the degree of his habit. Now since every one of these which are the
constituent parts of a habit, implies a readiness and apt choice of the will to
sin, it follows evidently that the capacity of a vicious habit by which it
relates to God, consisting of so much evil, and all of it voluntary upon the
stock of its own nature and constitution, is highly and chiefly, and distinctly
sinful. Although the natural facility, is naturally and unavoidably consequent
to frequent sinful actions, yet it is also voluntary; for the habit is not
contracted, nor can it remain but by our being willing to sin, and delighting
in the ways of error.

2. Hebr. 10.
It is (...), a root of bitterness, Ephesians. ^.2.
such as was in Esau when he undid himself an repented too late: an evil heart
in turning from the living Lord: a seared conscience: a walking according to
the Prince of this world: enemies of the cross of Christ: (...), such as cannot
cease from sin: enemies that will not have Christ, but the Devil to reign over
them; for this is the true state and constitution of vicious habits. This is
more then an (...) or hindrance of doing our duty; it is a direct (...), a
disorder and corruption inherent in all our faculties.

This is signally described by S. Paul, a concupiscence wrought by sin: Romans
7.8.11 14.
For sin (says he) wrought in me all manner of concupiscence: it is called by
him, a law in the members fighting against the law in my mind; and the man he
calls carnal, sold under sin, dead, killed; and the sin it self, inhabitans
peccatum, sin dwelling in me, and flesh in which dwells no good: (...), the
carnal mind. These things (as is evident) cannot be spoken of the single
actions of sin, but of the law, the power, the dominion, the reign, the habit
of sin. It is that which was wrought by sin, viz. by the single actions of sin;
and therefore he does not mean single actions, neither can he mean the remanent
guilt of the past action; but he speaks of a direct state of sinfulness, which
is prolifical and productive of sin. For sin wrought this concupiscence and
carnal-mindedness; and this carnal-mindedness is such a propensity and desire
to sin, and has in it such easiness to act, that it brings forth many sins,
and they bring forth death; and therefore the Apostle says expressly, (...),
this carnal mindedness is death and enmity against God; this is that state, in
which whosoever abides cannot please God. * To the same purpose are those other
expressions of Scripture calling this state, Vias Balaam, Number. 15.30. Jude 11.2
Pe. 2.14.
the ways of Bal^am the son of Bosor, a walking perversely with God, a being
sold under sin, and (...), hearts exercised or employed and used to
covetousness; and it follows, (...), sons of cursing; The fault, or charge is
more then that of single actions, and the curse is greater then ordinary; as
the sin is, so is the curse; the one is apportion'd to the other, and
appropriate.

3. is habitual. Indeed he is called a thief or an adulterer that does one
action of those crimes; because his consent in such things is great enough to
equal a habit in lesser things. The effect is notorious, the prohibition
severe, the dangers infinite, the reasons of them evident; they are peccata
vastantia conscientiam, and quae uno actu perimunt, as S. Austin says, they
kill with one blow, and therefore God exacts them highly, and men call the
criminal by the name of the vice: But the action gives denomination but in some
cases, but the habit in all. No man lives without sin; and in the state of
regeneration, our infirmities still press upon us, and make our hands shake,
and our foot to stumble; and sometimes the enemy makes an inroad, and is
presently beaten out again, and though the good man resolves against all, and
contends against all, Pauca tamon suberunt priscae vestigia fraudis, there will
be something for him to be humbled at, something to contest against, to keep him
watchful and upon his guard. But if he be ebriosus or petulans, if he be a
drunkard, or wanton, an extortioner, or covetous; that is, if he have a habit
of any sin whatsoever, then he is not the son of God, but an heir of death and
hell. That therefore which in all cases denominates a man such, both before God
and before men, when the actions do not, that must needs have in it a proper
malignity of its own, and that is the habit.

4. habitual, is a special irregularity.

5. and therefore is worse then single actions.

6. Pelagius also introduced this opinion, against which I am now disputing.
And lest concupiscence might be reckoned a sin, he affirmed that no habitude,
no disposition, nothing but an act could be a sin. But on the other side, lest
concupiscence should be accounted no sin, Lib. de peccat. Grig. cap. 6. and 13.
S. Austin disputes earnestly, largely affirming and proving, that a sinful
habit is a special sinfulness distinct from that of evil actions: malus
thesaurus cordis, the evil treasure of the heart out of which proceeds all
mischief, and a continual defluxion of impurities.

7. Romans 6.13, 20.
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies; we must not be servants of sin, not
sold under sin, that sin have no dominion over us. That is, not only that we
do not repeat the actions of sin, but that we be not enslaved to it, under the
power of it, of such a lost liberty that we cannot resist the temptation. For
he that is so, is guilty before God, although no temptation comes. Such are
they whom S. Peter notes, that cannot cease from sin. And indeed we cannot but
confess the reasonableness of this. For all men hate such persons whose minds
are habitually averse from them; who watch for opportunities to do them evil
offices, who lose none that are offered, who seek for more, who delight in our
displeasure, who oftentimes effect what they maliciously will. Saul was David's
enemy even when he was asleep. For the evil will, and the contradicting mind,
and the spiteful heart are worse then the crooked or injurious hand. And as
grace is a principle of good, so is this of evil; and therefore as the one
denominates the subject gracious, so the other, sinful; both of them inherent,
that given by God, this introduced by our own unworthiness. * He that sins in a
single act, does an injury to God, but he that does it habitually, he that
cannot do otherwise is his essential enemy. The first is like an offending
servant who deserves to be thrown away; but in a vicious habit there is an
antipathy: The Man is Gods enemy, as a Wolf to the Lamb, as the Hyaena to the
Dog. He that commits a single sin, has stained his skin, and thrown dirt upon
it; but an habitual sinner is an Ethiop, Jer. 13.23.
and must be flayed alive before his blackness will disappear.

8. Paratum est cor meum Deus. O God my heart is ready, my heart is ready: and
S. John had the reward of Martyrdom, because he was ready to die for his Lord,
though he was not permitted; and S. Austin affirms, De bono conjugat. c. 21.
that the continency of Abraham was as certainly crowned as the continence of
John, it being as acceptable to God to have a chaste spirit as a virgin body,
that is, habitual continence being as pleasing as actual. Thus a man may be a
Persecutor, or a Murderer, if he have a heart ready to do it: and if a lustful
soul be an Adulteress, because the desire is a sin, it follows that the habit
is a particular state of sin distinct from the act, because it is a state of
vicious desires. And as a body may be said to be lustful though it be asleep,
or eatting, without the sense of actual urtications and violence, by reason of
its constitution: so may the soul by the reason of its habit, that is, its
vicious principle and base effect of sin be hated by God, and condemned upon
that account.

So that a habit is not only distinct from its acts in the manner of being,
Zeno, as a fist from a palm, as a bird from the egg, and the flower from the
gemme: but a habit differs from its acts, as an effect from the cause, as a
distinct principle from another, as a pregnant Daughter from a teeming Mother,
as a Conclusion from its Premises, as a state of aversation from God, from a
single act of provocation.

9. should perish, which was affirmed by the Pharisees of old: and then we were
to live or die by chance and opportunity, by actions and not by the will, by
the outward and not by the inward man; then there could be no such thing
necessary as the Kingdom of Grace, Christ's Empire and Dominion in the soul;
then we can belong to God without belonging to his Kingdom; and we might be in
God, though the Kingdom of God were not in us. For without this we might do
many single actions of virtue, and it might happen that these might be more
then the single actions of sin, even though the habit and affection and state
of sin remain. Now if the case may be so (as in the particular instance) that
the man's final condition shall not be determined by single actions, it must be
by habits, and states and principles of actions: and therefore these must have
in them a proper good and bad respectively by which the man shall be judged,
distinct from the actions by which he shall not (in the present case) be
judged. All which considerations being put together, do unanswerably put us
upon this conclusion: That a habit of sin is that state of evil by which we are
enemies to God and slaves of Satan, by which we are strangers from the Covenant
of Grace, and consigned to the portion of Devils: and therefore as a Corollary
of all, we are bound under pain of a new sin to rise up instantly after every
fall, to repent speedily for every sin, not to let the Sun go down upon our
wrath, nor rise upon our lust, nor run his course upon our covetousness or
ambition. For not only every period of impenitence is a period of danger, and
eternal death may enter; but it is an aggravation of our folly, a continuing to
provoke God, a further aberration from the rule, a departure from life, it is a
growing in sin, a progression toward final impenitence, to obduration and
Apostasy, it is a tempting God, and a despising of his grace, it is all the
way presumption, and a dwelling in sin by delight and obedience; that is, it is
a conjugation of new evils, and new degrees of evil. As pertinacy makes error
to be heresy, and impenitence makes little sins unite and become deadly, and
perseverance causes good to be crowned, and evil to be unpardonable: So is the
habit of viciousness, the confirmation of our danger, and solennities of death,
the investiture and security of our horrible inheritance.

The sum is this. Palladium fall from heaven; the man cannot live again,
unless God shall do more for him then he did for Lazarus when he raised him
from the dead.

. 4. Sinful habits do require a distinct manner of Repentance, and have no
promise to be pardoned but by the introduction of the contrary.
THis is the most material and practical difficulty of the Question:

A vicious habit is not to be pardoned without the introduction of the
contrary, either in kind, or in perfect affection, and in all those instances
in which the man has opportunities to work. The Church of Rome, by any single
act of contrition; the continued sin of forty years may be washed off in less
then forty minutes, nay by an act of attrition with the Priestly absolution:
which proposition, if it be false, does destroy the interest of souls; and it
cannot be true, because it destroys the interest of piety, and the necessities
of a good life. The reproof of this depends upon many propositions, of which I
shall give as plain accounts as the thing will bear.

1. in nature can remit sins, or be the immediate natural disposition to
pardon. All this is the gift of God, a grace obtained by our holy Redeemer, the
price of his blood; but in this, the case is all one as it is in the greatest
innocence of the best of men, which if it be not allowed by incorporation into
Christ, and sanctified by faith, wants its proper title to heaven: and so it is
with Repentance. For nature cannot teach us this lesson, much less make it
acceptable. For it depending wholly upon Gods graciousness and free
forgiveness, can be taught only by him, by whom it is effectual, and this is
conveyed to us by our blessed Lord, according to that saying, Grace and truth
came by Jesus Christ.

2. of sin by an act of contrition and repentance: so also it is as necessary
that the habit be retracted by a habit, that every wound may have its balsam,
and every broken bone be bound up and redintegrate.

3. a destroyer, and therefore as it has a particular obliquity, so it must
have a special repentance, a repentance proper to it, that is, as an act
rescinds an act, so must a habit be opposed to a habit, a single act of
contrition to a single sin, and therefore it must be more, no less then a
lasting and an habitual contrition to obtain pardon for the habit. And although
a habit can meritoriously remit a habit, no more then an act can do an act,
they being both equal as to that particular, yet they are also dispositions
equally (at least on this hand) necessary for the obtaining pardon of their
respective contraries.

4. act of sorrow can abolish many foul acts of sin, we but deceive our selves;
we must have many for one (as I have already made to appear) a multitude of
sighs and prayers against every foul action that we remember: and then the
consequent is plain, that upon this reckoning when a habit is contracted, the
actions which were its principle cannot be rescinded but by such Repentances
which will extinguish not only the formality, but the material and natural
effect of that cursed production, at least in very many degrees.

5. the guilt, nor meritoriously obtain its pardon: but neither can it destroy
its natural being, which was not permanent, and therefore not to be wrought
upon by an after act. But to oppose a habit to a habit, can equally in the
merits of Christ be the disposition to a pardon, as an act can for an act; and
is certainly much better then any one act can be, because it includes many
single acts of the same nature, and it is all of them, and their permanent
effect and change wrought by them besides. So that it is certainly the better
and the surer way. But now the Question is not, whether it be the better way,
but whether it be necessary, and will not the lesser way suffice? To this
therefore I answer, that since no man can be acceptable to God as long as sin
reigns in his mortal body, and since either sin must reign, or the Spirit of
Christ must reign; for a man cannot be a Neuter in this war; it is necessary
that sins kingdom be destroyed and broken, and that Christ rule in our hearts;
that is, it is necessary that the first and the old habits be taken off and new
ones introduced. For although the moral revocation of a single act may be a
sufficient disposition to its pardon, because the act was transient, and unless
there be a habit or something of it, nothing remains: yet the moral revocation
of a sinful habit cannot be sufficient, because there is impressed upon the
soul a viciousness and contrariety to God, which must be taken off, or there
can be no reconciliation. For let it be but considered, that a vicious habit is
a remanent aversation from God, an evil heart, the evil treasure of the heart,
a carnal mindedness, an union and principle of sins; and then let it be
answered, whether a man who is in this state can be a friend of God, or
reconciled to him in his Son, who lives in a state so contrary to his holy
Spirit of Grace. The guilt cannot be taken off without destroying its nature,
since the nature it self is a viciousness and corruption.

6. He will by no means acquit the guilty. It was part of his Name which he
caused to be proclaimed in the Camp of Israel. And if this could be otherwise,
a man might be in the state of sin, and the state of grace at the same time;
which hitherto all Theology has believed to be impossible.

7. Paul. For having under the person of an unregenerate man complained of the
habitual state of prevailing sin, of one who is a slave to sin, Romans 7.14,
sold under sin, captive under a law of sin, that is, under vile inclinations,
and high pronenesses and necessities of sinning, so that when he is convinced
that he ought not to do it, yet he cannot help it; though he fain would have
it helped, 19, etc.
yet he cannot obey his own will, but his accursed superinduced necessities;
and his sin within him was the ruler, that, and not his own better choice was
the principle of his actions, which is the perfect character of an habitual
sinner; he inquires after a remedy for all this, which remedy he calls a being
delivered (...), from the body of this death. The remedy is (...), the grace of
God through Jesus Christ, for by Christ alone we can be delivered. But what is
to be done? the extermination of this dominion and Empire of concupiscence, the
breaking of the kingdom of sin. That being the evil he complains of, and of
which he seeks remedy, that is to be removed. But that we may well understand
to what sense, and in what degree this is to be done; in the next periods he
describes the contrary state of deliverance, by the parts and characters of an
habit or state of holiness; which he calls, a walking after the Spirit, Romans
8.1. etc.
opposed to a walking after the flesh. It was a law in his members, a law of
sin and death. Now he is to be made free by a contrary law, the law of the
spirit of life in Christ Jesus: That is, as sin before gave him law, so now
must the Spirit of God; whereas before he minded the things of the flesh, now
he minds the things of the spirit; that is, the carnal-mindedness is gone, and
a spiritual-mindedness is the principle and ruler of his actions. This is the
deliverance from habitual sins, even no other then by habitual graces wrought
in us by the spirit of life, by the grace of our Lord Jesus. And this whole
affair is rarely well summed up by the same Apostle; Romans 6.19.
As ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity, unto
iniquity: even so now yield your members servants to righteousness unto
holiness. If ye were servants before, so ye must be now; it is but justice and
reason, that at least as much be done for God as for the Devil; It is not
enough morally to revoke what is past, by a wishing it had not been done, but
you must oppose a state to a state, a habit to a habit. And the Author of the
Book of Baruch presses it further yet; Baruch 4.28.
As it was your mind to go astray from God, so being returned seek him ten
times more. It ought not to be less; it must be as S. Chrysostom expresses it,
In Act. 4. hom. 10,
A custom against a custom, a habit opposed to a habit, that the evil may be
driven out by the good, as one nail is by another. (...), Vandalic. ^1.
said Procopius. In those things where you have sinned, to profit, and to
increase, and improve to their contraries, that is the more comely way to
pardon.

8. of every day, and the employment of all the prudence, and all the advices
of good men, and the whole grace of God. It is like the curing of a Hectic
fever, which one potion will not do. Origin does excellently describe it,
(...). When a word is strengthened and nourished by care and assiduity, and
confirmed by opinions and wise sentences, or near to confirmation, it masters
all oppositions, and breaks in pieces the concupiscence. This is the manner of
mortification, there must be resolutions and discourses, assiduity and
diligence, auxiliaries from reason, and wise sentences, and advices of the
prudent; and all these must operate (...), unto a confirmation, or near it, and
by these the concupiscence can be mastered. But this must be a work of time.
(...)
(...),
said Menander. To dissolve a long custom in a short time is a work indeed,
but very hard, if not impossible, to be done by any man. A man did not suddenly
come to the state of evil, from whence he is to arise. Nemo repent fuit
turpissimus. S. Basil, homil 9.
But as a man coming into a pestilential air, does not suck in death at every
motion of his lungs, but by little and little the spirits are poisoned, and at
last enter into their portion of death; so it is in a vicious custom. (...).
Stob.
The evil is not felt instantly, it begins from little things, and is the
production of time and frequent actions. And therefore much less can it be
supposed, that we can overcome our filthy habits, and master our fortified
corruptions by a sudden dash of piety and the ex tempore gleams of repentance.
Concerning this, S. In regul. fusius disput. q. 6. and 55.
Basil discourses excellently. Sicut enim morbi corporis inveterati, etc. For
as the old diseases of the body are not healed without a long and painful
attendance; so must old sins be cured by a long patience, a daily prayer, and
the sharpest contention of the spirit. That which is died with many dippings,
is in grain, and can very hardly be washed out: Sic anima sanie peccatorum
suppurata and in habitu constituta malitiae, vix ac multo negotio ^^ui potest.
So is the soul when it is corrupted with the poison of sin, and has contracted
a malicious habit, it can scarce, but not without much labor be made clean.

Now since we say our nature is inclined to sin, the kingdom of heaven by
force, by a state of contradiction and hostility against the tempting enemy. It
is much harder to get a habit against our nature, and a prepossessing habit,
then to confirm nature, and to actuate our inclinations.

And this does not only relate to habits in their Natural capacity, Moral, and
consequently their Relative capacity, as appertaining to God, in the matter of
his valuation of them. Because in habits as it is in acts, although
metaphysically we can distinguish the action from the irregularity, yet because
they are subjected in the same person, and the irregularity is inherent in the
action, in the whole composition the action is sinful; so it is in habits. For
the sin adheres to the natural facility, and follows it in all its capacities.
And as the natural facility of doing viciously, is cured by time, and a
successive continued diligence; so is the sinfulness, because that facility is
vicious and sinful. And as heat is distinguished from fire, but you cannot
lessen the heat, but by decreasing the natural being of fire: so does the sin
of a vicious habit pass away as the habit naturally lessens; that is, the Moral
capacity changes as does the Natural, this being the subject of that, and it
could not have been this habit, if it had not in it this sinfulness. *

Now if the parts of this argument be put together, natural being is overcome
by its contrary. But the sinfulness of it does pass away with the natural
being; and no otherwise; therefore the sinfulness of it cannot be removed
suddenly. And therefore if mortification be a duty, and we be commanded to do
it, we are commanded to do a long work and a difficult, a thing that is more
then the moral retractation of it by a single act of sorrow or contrition, a
duty that contains in it so much work as is proportioned to the necessity, even
to the breaking the habit of sin, and setting up the habit of virtue over it.
Now then, all the question will be, whether Mortification be a Precept, or a
Counsel. Concerning which, I only appeal to the words of S. Paul, Colos. 3.5.
(...), Mortify therefore your earthly members; and, Romans 8.13.
If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.
Mortification is the condition of life, it is expressly commanded by the
Apostle, that we make the deeds of the body to be dead; that is, the evil
habits and concupiscence of the body; for that which S. Paul here calls (...) or
deeds, in the same precept written to the Galatians, Gal. 5.2.4.
he calls (...), lusts and concupiscences. And of what great necessity and
effect this mortification and crucifying of our sinful customs is, we may
understand best by those other words of the same Apostle; Romans 6.7.
He that is dead is justified from sins, not till then, not till his habit was
dead; not as soon as he morally retracts it by an act of displeasure and
contrition, but when the sin is dead, when the habit is crucified, when the
concupiscence does not reign, but is overcome in all its former prevalencies,
then he is pardoned, and not before.

9. Rom 6.18. Ephesians. 4.22. Col. 1.13. and 3.5.10.12. Titus 2.12, 13, 14. Heb.
10.22 24. 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. and 3.11. 2 Pet. 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
these, to be dead unto sin, and to live unto righteousness. This is that which
was opposed to the righteousness of the law Romans 3.21. and 9.30, 31. Gal. 2.16.
and 3.8. Phil. 3.6, 7.
, and is called the righteousness of God: And a mistake in this affair was the
ruin of the Jews. For being ignorant of the righteousness of God, they thought
to be justified by their own righteousness which is of the law. That is, they
thought it enough to leave off to sin, without doing the contrary good, and so
hoped for the promises. This was the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, to be no adulterers, no defrauders of the rights of the Temple, no
Publicans or exacters of Tribute. But our blessed Savior assured us that there
is no hopes of heaven for us, unless our righteousness exceed this of theirs.

Now then, Seek the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof. The
Gospel has a peculiar righteousness of its own, proper to it self, without
which there is no entrance into heaven. But the righteousness of the law is
called our own righteousness, that is, such a righteousness which men by nature
know; for we all by the innate law of nature, know that we ought to abstain
from doing injury to Man, from impiety to God: But we only know by revelation
the righteousness of the kingdom which consists in holiness and purity,
chastity, and patience, humility, and self-denial. He that rests in the first,
and thinks he may be saved by it (as S. Paul's expression is) he establishes
his own righteousness, that is, the righteousness of the law, and this he does,
whosoever thinks that his evil habits are pardoned without doing that good, and
acquiring those graces which constitute the righteousness of the Gospel, that
is, faith and holiness, which are the significations, and the vital parts of
the new creature.

10. lukewarmness. For though all the old philosophy consented that virtue and
vice had no medium between them, but whatsoever was not evil, was good, and he
that did not do evil was a good man, said the old Jews, yet this they
therefore did unreprovably teach, because they knew not this secret of the
righteousness of God. For in the Evangelical justice, between the natural, or
legal good or evil there is a medium or a third, which of it self, and by the
accounts of the Law was not evil, but in the accounts of the Evangelical
righteousness is a very great one; that is, lukewarmness, or a cold, tame,
indifferent, unactive religion. Not that lukewarmness is by name forbidden by
any of the laws of the Gospel, but that it is against the analogy and design of
it. A lukewarm person does not do evil, but he is hated by God, because he does
not vigorously proceed in godliness. No law condemns him, but the Gospel
approves him not, because he does not from the heart obey this form of
doctrine, which commands a course, a habit, a state and life of holiness. It is
not enough that we abstain from evil, we shall not be crowned unless we be
partakers of a Divine nature. 2 Pet. 1.4.
For to this S. Peter enjoins us carefully. Now then we partake of a Divine
nature, when the Spirit dwells in us, and rules all our faculties, when we are
united unto God, when we imitate the Lord Jesus, when we are perfect as our
heavenly Father is perfect. Now whether this can be done by an act of
contrition, needs no further inquiry, but to observe the nature of Evangelical
Righteousness, the hatred God bears to lukewarmness, the perfection he requires
of a Christian, the design and great example of our blessed Lord, the glories
of that inheritance whither we are designed, and of the obtaining of which,
obedience to God in the faith of Jesus Christ is made the only indispensable,
necessary condition.

For let it be considered. Nec furtum feci, nec fugi, si mihi dicat
Servus, habes pretium, loris non ureris, ajo. Horat.

Non hominem occidi, non pasces in ^ruce corvos.
An innocent servant amongst the Romans might escape the Furca, or the Mill, or
the Wheel; but unless he was useful, he was not much made of. So it is in
Christianity. For that which according to Moses was called righteousness,
according to Christ is poverty and nakedness, misery and blindness, as appears
in the reproof which the Spirit of God sent to the Bishop and Church of
Laodicea. Rev. 3.15.
He thought himself rich when he was nothing; that is, he was harmless, but not
profitable, innocent according to the measures of the law, but not rich in good
works. So the Pharisees also thought themselves just by the justice of the law,
that is, by their abstinence from condemned evils, and therefore they refused
to buy of Christ the Lord, gold purified in the fire, whereby they might become
rich; that is, they would not accept of the righteousness of God, the justice
Evangelical, and therefore they were rejected. And thus to this very day do we.
Even many that have the fairest reputation for good persons and honest men,
reckon their hopes upon their innocence and legal freedoms, and outward
compliances: that they are no liars nor swearers, no drunkards nor gluttons, no
extortioners or injurious, no thieves nor murderers; but in the mean time they
are unprofitable servants, not instructed, not thoroughly prepared to every good
work; not abounding in the work of the Lord, but blind, and poor, and naked;
just, but as the Pharisees; innocent, but as Heathens: In the mean time they
are only in that state to which Christ never made the promises of eternal life
and joys hereafter.

Now if this be true in one period, Luke 17.10.
When ye have done all things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable
servants; that is, when ye have done all things which are commanded [in the
law] he says not [all things which I shall command you] for then we are not
unprofitable servants in the Evangelical sense. For he that obeys this form of
doctrine is a good servant. He is the friend of God. If ye do whatsoever I
command you, ye are my friends; Joh. 15.14, 15.
and that is more then profitable servants: For I will not call you servants,
but friends, says our blessed Lord; and for you, a crown of righteousness is
laid up against the day of recompenses. These therefore cannot be called
unprofitable servants, but friends, sons and heirs; for he that is an
unprofitable servant shall be cast into outer darkness. * To live therefore in
innocence only, and according to the righteousness of the law, is to be a
servant, but yet unprofitable, and that in effect is to be no heir of the
Promises; for to these, Piety, or Evangelicall Righteousness is the only
title. Godliness is profitable to all things, having the promise of this life,
and of that which is to come. For upon this account, the works of the law
cannot justify us: for the works of the law at the best were but innocence and
ceremonial performances: but we are justified by the works of the Gospel, that
is, faith and obedience. For these are the righteousness of God, they are his
works, revealed by his Spirit, effected by his Grace, promoted by his Gifts,
encouraged by special Promises, sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and accepted
through Jesus Christ to all the great purposes of Glory and Immortality.

Since therefore a constant innocence could not justify us, vices contrary to
be righteousness of God, can ever hope to be justified by those little arrests
of his sin, and his beginnings to leave it upon his deathbed, and his sorrow
for it, then when he cannot obtain the righteousness of God, or the holiness of
the Gospel. It was good counsel that was given by a wise Heathen, Dimidium
facti qui coepit habet, Horat. ep. 2. l. 1.
sapere aude:
Incipe: qui recte vivendi prorogat horam
Rusticus, expectat dum defluat amnis: at ille
Labitur, and labetur in omne volubilis aevum.
It is good for a man to begin. The Clown that stands by a river side expecting
till all the water be run away, may stay long enough before he gets to the
other side. He that will not begin to live well till he has answered all
objections, and has no lusts to serve, no more appetites to please, shall
never arrive at happiness in the other world. Be wise, and begin betimes.

. 5. Consideration of the objections against the former Doctrine.
1. dull methods of natural opposition. Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus sancti
gratia. Without the Divine Grace we cannot work any thing of the righteousness
of God; but if he gives us his grace, does not he make us chaste and patient,
humble and devout, and all in an instant? For thus the main Question seems to
be confessed and granted, that a habit is not remitted but by the introduction
of the contrary: but when you consider what you handle, it is a cloud and
nothing else; for this admission of the necessity of a habit, enjoins no more
labor nor care, it requires no more time, it introduces no active fears, and
infers no particular caution, and implies the doing of no more then to the
remission of a single act of one sin.

To this I answer, semen Dei spoken of by S. John, the seed of God thrown into
the furrows of our hearts, springing up (unless we choke it) to life eternal.
By these assistances we being helped can do our duty, and we can expel the
habits of vice, and get the habits of virtue: But as we cannot do Gods work
without Gods grace; so Gods grace does not do our work without us. For grace
being but the beginnings of a new nature in us, gives nothing but powers and
inclinations. The Spirit helps our infirmities; so S. Paul explicates this
mystery. Romans 8.26.
And therefore when he had said, By the grace of God I am what I am; that is,
all is owing to his grace: he also adds, I have baboured more then they all,
yet not I; that is, not I alone; sed gratia Dei mecum; the grace of God that is
with me. For the grace of God stands at the door and knocks; but we must attend
to his voice, and open the door, and then he will enter and sup with us, and we
shall be with him. The grace of God is like a graff put into a stock of another
nature; it makes use of the faculties and juice of the stock and natural root,
but converts all into its own nature. But,

2. etc.] is to say that he has in an instant infused into us to have done the
acts of that grace frequently. For it is certain by experience, that the
frequent doing the actions of any grace, increases the grace, and yet the grace
or aids of Gods Spirit are as necessary for the growth, as for the beginnings
of grace. We cannot either will or do without his help; he works both in us,
that is, we by his help alone are enabled to do things above our nature. But
then we are the persons enabled; and therefore we do these works as we do
others, not by the same powers, but in the same manner.

When God raises a Cripple from his couch, so as eyes that did see naturally.
So it is in habits. For it is a contradiction to say that a perfect habit is
infused in an instant: For if a habit were infused, it must be infused as a
habit is acquired; for else it is not a habit. Habitus infusi insunduntur per
modum acquisitorum. Regul. Scholast.
As if a motion should be infused, it must still be successive as well as if it
were natural.

But this device of infused habits, Paul is highly convincing and
demonstrative: Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling; Phil. 2.12,
13.
for it is God which works in you both to will and to do of his good
pleasure, (...), according to our desire: so it is better read; that is, fear
not at all, but (...), thoroughly do your duty Magis operamini. Syrus. Augescite
in opere. Arabs.
; for according as you desire and pray, God will be present to you with his
grace, to bear you through all your labors and temptations. And therefore our
conversion, and the working our salvation, is sometimes ascribed to God,
sometimes to men 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8. 2 Timothy 2.21. Jam. 4.8. Ep^^ 4.22, 23, 24. Col.
3 9, 10.
; to God as the prime and indeficient cause, to man (...), as to the
fellow-worker with God; it is the expression of S. Paul. The Scripture mentions
no other effect of Gods grace, but such as I have now described. But that Grace
should do all our work alone, and in an instant, that which costs the Saints so
much labor, and fierce contentions, so much sorrow and trouble, so many
prayers and tears, so much watchfulness and caution, so much fear and
trembling, so much patience and long-suffering, so much toleration and
contradiction, and all this under the conduct of the Spirit, in the midst of
all the greatest helps of grace, and the inhabitation of the holy Spirit of
God; that all this labor and danger should be spared to a vile person, who
has grieved and extinguished Gods holy Spirit, and a way contrived for him
that he should enjoy the pleasures of this world, and the glories of the next,
is such a device, as if it had any ground or colorable pretense for it, would,
without the miracles of another grace, destroy all piety from the face of the
earth. And in earnest, it seems to me a strange thing, that the Doctors of the
Church of Rome should be so loose and remiss in this Article, when they are so
sierce in another that takes from such persons all manner of excuse. It is (I
say) very strange that it should be so possible, and yet withal so unncessary
to keep the Commandments.

Obj. 2. deathbed without effect, without a being accepted to pardon and
salvation. 3. When things are come to that sad state, let the man hope as much
as he can; God forbid that I should be Author to him to despair. The purpose of
this discourse is, that men in health should not put things to that desperate
condition, or make their hopes so little and afflicted, that it may be disputed
whether they be alive or no. 4. But this objection is nothing but a temptation
and a snare; a device to make me confess that the former arguments (for fear
men should despair) ought to be answered, and are not perfectly convincing. I
intended them only for institution and instruction, not to confute any person
or any thing, but to condemn sin, and to resoue men from danger. But truly, I
do think they are rightly concluding (as moral propositions are capable;) and
if the consequent of them be, that dying persons after a vicious life cannot
hope (ordinarily) for pardon, I am truly sorrowful that any man should fall
into that sad state of things; as I am really afflicted and sorrowful that any
man should live vilely, or perish miserably; but then it ought not to be
imputed to this doctrine that it makes men despair, for the purpose and proper
consequent of it, is, that men are warned to live so, that they may be secured
in their hopes, that is, that men give diligence to make their calling and
election sure, that they may take no desperate courses, and fall into no
desperate condition. And certainly, if any man preach the necessity of a good
life, and of actual obedience, he may as well be charged to drive men to
despair; for the sum of the foregoing doctrine is nothing else, but that it
is necessary we should walk before God in all holy conversation and godliness.
But of this I shall give a large account in the fifth.

Obj. 3. But if things be thus, it is not good or safe to be a criminal Judge,
and all the Discipline of War will be unlawful and highly displeasing to God.
For if any one be taken in an act of a great sin, and as it happens in War, be
put to death suddenly, without leisure and space of repentance, by the measures
of this doctrine, the man shall perish, and consequently the power by which he
falls is uncharitable.

I answer; That in an act of sin the case is otherwise then in an habit, as I
have already demonstrated in its proper place: It must be a habit that must
extirpate a habit; but an act is rescinded by a less violence and abode of
duty: and it is possible for an act of duty to be so heroical, or the
repentance of an hour to be so pungent and dolorous, and the fruits of that
repentance putting forth by the sudden warmths and fervor of the spirit, be so
goodly and fair, as through the mercies of God in Jesus Christ, to obtain
pardon of that single sin, if that be all.

2. But it is to be considered, whether the man be otherwise a vicious person,
or was he a good man, but by misfortune and carelessness overtaken in a fault?
If he was a good man, his spirit is so accustomed to good, that he is soon
brought to an excellent sorrow, and to his former state, especially being
awakened by the sad arrest of a hasty death: and if he accepts that death
willingly, making that which is necessarily enforced upon him, to become
voluntary by his acceptance of it, changing the judgment into penance, I make
no question but he shall find mercy. But if the man thus taken in a fault was
otherwise a vicious person, it is another consideration. It is not safe for him
to go to war; but the Officers may as charitably and justly put such a person
to death for a fault, as send him upon a hard service. The doing of his duty
may as well ruin him, as the doing of a fault; and if he be reprieved a week,
he will find difficulty in the doing what he should, and danger enough besides.

3. The discipline of war, if it be only administered where it is necessary,
not only in the general rule, but also in the particular instance, cannot be
reproved upon this account. Because by the laws of war sufficiently
published, every man is sufficiently warned of his danger; which if he either
accept, or be bound to accept, he perishes by his own fault, if he perishes at
all. For as by the hazard of his employment he is sufficiently called upon to
repent worthily of all his evil life past, so is he by the same hazardous
employment, and the known laws of war, cautioned to beware of committing any
great sin: and if his own danger will not become his security, then his
confidence may be his ruin, and then nothing is to be blamed but himself.

4. But yet it were highly to be wished, that when such cases do happen, and
that it can be permitted in the particular without the dissolution of
discipline, such persons should be pitied in order to their eternal interest.
But when it cannot, the Minister of justice, is the Minister of God, and
dispenses his power by the rules of his justice, at which we cannot quarrel,
though he cuts off sinners in their acts of sin, of which he has given them
sufficient warning, and has a long time expected their amendment: to whom that
of Seneca may be applied, Vnum bonum tibi superest, repraesentabimus mortem.
Nothing but death will make some men cease to sin; and therefore, quo uno modo
possunt, desinant mali esse. God puts a period to the increase of their ruin
and calamity, by making that wickedness shorter, which if it could would have
been eternal. When men are incorrigible, they may be cut off in charity as well
as justice; and therefore as it is always just, so it is sometimes pity, though
a sad one, to take a sinner away with his sins upon his head. (...). When it is
impossible to have it otherwise, this is the only good that he is capable of
Ingeniis tal^bus vitae exitus remedium est: optimumque est abire ei qui ad se
nunquam rediturus est. Senec. de Benef. 7.10.
, to be sent speedily to a lesser punishment then he should inherit, if he
should live longer. But when it can be otherwise, it were very well it were so
very often. And therefore the customs of Spain are in this highly to be
commended, who to condemned criminals give so much respite till the Confessor
gives them a been discessit, and supposes them competently prepared. But if the
Lawgivers were truly convinced of this doctrine here taught, it is to be
hoped, they would more readily practice this charity.

Obj. A contrite and broken heart, O God, thou will not despise. And, I said,
Psa. 51.17.
I will confess my sins unto the Lord: Psalm. 32.6.
and so thou forgavest the wickedness of my sin. And the prodigal was pardoned
immediately upon his confession, and return. Coeperat dicere, and mox illum
pater complectitur, Homil. de poenit.
said S. Basil; His Father embraces him when he began to speak. And S.
Chrysostom, In that moment (says he) he wipes away all the sins of his life.
And S. Austin upon that of David before quoted; My confession came not so far
as my mouth, and God heard the voice of my heart.

To this I answer, David. Then concerning the examples. 1. Concerning
contrition, that it is a good beginning of repentance, is certain, and in its
measure acceptable to God, and effective of all its proper purposes. But
contrition can have but the reward of contrition, but not of other graces which
are not parts but effects of it. God will not despise the broken and contrite
heart; no, for he will receive it graciously, and bind up the wounds of it,
and lead it on in the paths of righteousness, and by the waters of comfort.

2. contrition. He that goes to break a rock, does something toward it by
every blow, but every blow does not break it. A man's heart is not so easily
broken; I mean broken from the love of sin, and its adherence to it. Every act
of temperance does not make a man temperate; and so I fear will it be judged
concerning contrition.

3. God indeed does not despise this, but he requires more. God did not despise
Ahabs repentance, but it did not do all his work for him. He does not despise
patience, nor meekness, nor resignation, nor hope, nor confession, nor any
thing that himself commands. But he that commands all, will not be content with
one alone; every grace shall have its reward, but it shall not be crowned
alone. Faith alone shall not justify, and repentance alone, taken in its
specifical, distinctive sense, shall not suffice; but faith, and repentance,
and charity, and patience, and the whole circle and rosary of graces and duties
must adorn our heads.

4. continual and permanent graces. Joh. 4.14.
He that drinks of the water which I shall give him, shall never thirst again.
6.58.
He that eats of this bread shall live for ever. He that believes in me, rivers
of living waters shall flow from his belly. 7.38.
He that confesses his sins and forsakes them shall have mercy. Repent and
believe, and wash away your sins. Now these words of (...), are of extended and
produced signification (as Divines observe) and signify a state of duty, such
as includes patience and perseverance. Such also are these. 1 John 2.17. 1 John
1.9.
He that does the will of my Father abides for ever. If we confess our sins,
he is just and faithful to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
iniquity; Gal. 5.21.
and they that do such things shall possess the kingdom of Heaven. And, I
will deliver him because he has put his trust in me. And, If we love him he
also will love us. And, Forgive and ye shall be forgiven. These and many more,
do not intend that any one grace alone is sufficient, much less any one act of
one grace, proceeding from the Spirit of God, can be sufficient to wipe off our
leprosies. But these signify states of duty, and integrity; not transient
actions, or separate graces. And besides the infinite reasonableness of the
thing, this truth is consigned to us plainly in Scripture: Romans 2.6, 7.
[God] will render to every man according to his deeds: To them who by patient
continuance in well doing seek for glory and honor and immortality, eternal
life. And if men had pleased, they might as well have fallen upon this
proposition, that an act of humility would have procured our pardon, as well as
that an act of contrition will do it: because of the words of David, Psa.
34.17.
The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart; and will save such as
be of an humble spirit. Salvation is as much promised to humility alone, as to
contrition alone; that is, to neither separately, but in the conjunction with
other parts of duty.

5. contrition when it is taken for a sufficient disposition to pardon and
salvation, signify as much as repentance does; and repentance signify the whole
duty of a converted sinner? Unless it does, repentance it self, that is, as it
is one single grace, cannot suffice, as I proved but now: And therefore how
shall contrition alone, much less, an act of contrition alone do it? For my
part, I should be very glad it were so, if God so pleased; for I have as much
need of mercy as any man, and have as little reason to be consident of the
perfection of my repentance, as any returning sinner in the world. But I would
not willingly deceive my self, nor others, and therefore I must take the surest
course, and follow his measures who has described the lines and limits of his
own mercy. * But it is remarkable that the manner of the Scripture is to
include the consequents in the antecedents. Joh. 8.47.
He that is of God, hears Gods word. That is, not only hears but keeps it.
For, not the hearer, Apoc. 19.9.
but the doer is blessed. So S. John in the Revelation; Blessed are they that
are called to the marriage of the Lamb. They which are called are blessed; that
is, They which being called, come, and come worthily, having on the wedding
garment. For without this the meaning of the Spirit is not full. For many are
called, but few are chosen. And thus also it is in the present instance: God
will not despise the contrite heart; that is, the heart which being bruised
with sorrow returns to duty, and lives in holiness; for in order to holiness,
contrition was accepted.

But one thing I shall remark before I leave this. In the definition of
Contrition, all the Schools of Theology in the world that I know of, put the
love of God. Contrition is not only sorrow, but a love of God too. Now this
doctrine, if they themselves would give men leave rightly to understand it, is
not only an excellent doctrine, but will also do the whole business of this
great Question. Without Contrition our sins cannot be pardoned. It is not
Contrition, unless the love of God be in it. Add then but these; Our love to
God does not consist in an act of intuition or contemplation, nor yet directly
and merely of passion; but it consists in obedience. If ye love me, keep my
Commandments: That Is our love of God. So that Contrition is a detestation of
our past sin, and a consequent obedience to the Divine Commandments: Only as
the aversion has been, so must be the conversion; It was not one act of
disobedience only which the habitual sinner is to be contrite for, but many;
and therefore so must his contrition be, a lasting hatred against sin, and an
habitual love, that is, an habitual obedience to the Divine Commandment.

6. David and the Prodigal, and the sudden pronunciation of their pardon, there
is something particular to be said. The Parable of the Prodigal can prove
nothing but Gods readiness to receive every returning sinner: but neither the
measures nor the times of pardon are there described. As for David, his pardon
was pronounced suddenly, but it was but a piece of pardon; the sentence of
death which by Moses law he incurred, that only was remitted: but after this
pardon, David repented bitterly in sackcloth and ashes, he fasted and prayed,
he lived holily and wisely, he made amends as he could; and yet the child died
that was born to him, his Son and Subjects rebelled, his Concubines were
dishonored in the face of the Sun, and the Sword never departed from his
house. 2. But to both these and all other instances that are or can be of the
like nature, I answer, That there is no doubt but Gods pardon is as early and
speedy as the beginnings of our repentance; but then it is such a pardon as is
proportionable to the Repentance, a beginning Pardon, to a beginning
Repentance. It is one degree of pardon to be admitted to Repentance; To have
more grace given, to have hopes of final absolution, to be continued in the
work of the Lord, to be helped in the mortification of our sins, to be invited
forwards, and comforted, and defended, and blessed, still are further
progressions of it, and answer to the several parts and perseverance of
Repentance. And in this sense those sayings of the old Doctors are true, but in
no other that I know of. To this purpose they are excellent words which were
spoken by S. Austin, Sermon. 181. de tempore, c. 16.
Nunquam Deus spernit poenitentiam, si ei sincere and simpliciter offeratur;
suscipit, libenter accipit, amplectitur omnia quatenus eum ad priorem statum
revocet. God never does despise repentance that is sincerely offered to him; he
takes all, he embraces all, that he may bring the man to his former state.

Obj. contrition or something like it. Thus the Author of the book De coena
Domini, attributed to S. Cyprian, Sed and in eodem articulo temporis cum jam
anima festinat ad exitum, and egrediens ad labia expirantis emerserit,
poenitentiam clementissimi Dei benignitas non aspernatur: nec serum est quod
verum, nec irremissibile quod voluntarium, and quaecunque necessitas cogat ad
poenitudinem, nec quantitas criminis, nec brevitas temporis, nec horae
extremitas, nec vitae enormitas, si vera contritio, si pura fuerit voluptatum
mutatio, excludit a venia, sed in amplitudine sinus sui matter charitas prodigos
suscipit revertentes, and velit nolit Novatus haereticus omni tempore Dei
gratia recipit poenitentes. Truly this is expressly against the severity of the
former doctrine; and if S. Cyprian had been the Author of this book, I should
have confessed him to be an adversary in this question. For this Author
affirms, that then when the soul is expiring, God rejects not the contrition of
him who but then returns: Though the man be compelled to repentance, though the
time be short, and the iniquity was long and great, yet in the last hour, if he
be truly contrite, God will not refuse him. To this I say, that he that said
these words was Arnoldus Abbas.
one that lived not very long since; then, when Discipline was broken, and
Piety was lost, and Charity was waxen cold; and since the man's authority is
nothing, I need say no more, but that I have been reproving this opinion all
this while. But there are words in S. Cyprians book to Demetrianus, which are
confessedly his, and yet seem to promise pardon to dying penitents. Nec
quisquam aut peccatis retardetur aut annis, quo minus veniat ad consequendam
salutem. In isto adhuc mundo manenti poenitentia nulla seraest. Patet ad
indulgentiam Dei aditus, and quaerentibus atque intelligentibus veritatem
facilis accessus est. Tu sub ipso licet exitu and vitae temporalis occasu pro
delictis roges: and Deum qui unus and verus est, confessione and fide
agnitionis ejus implores. Venia confitenti datur, and credenti indulgentia
salutaris de Divina pietate conceditur, and ad immortalitatem sub ipsa morte
transitur. These words are indeed very expressly affirmative of the efficacy of
a very late, even of a deathbed repentance, if it should so happen. But the
consideration of the person wholly alters the case, and makes it unapplicable
to the case of dying Christians. For Demetrianus was then a Pagan, and a cruel
persecutor of Christians. Nec saltem contentus es dolorum nostrorum compendio,
and simplici ac veloci brevitate poenarum: admoves laniandis corporibus longa
tormenta. Innoxios, justos, Deo charos domo privas, patrimonio spolias, catenis
premis, carcere includis, bestiis, gladio, ignibus punis. This man S. Cyprian,
according to the Christian Charity which teaches to pray for our persecutors,
and to love our enemies, exhorts passionately to believe in Christ, to become a
Christian, and though he was very old, yet to repent even then would not be too
late. Hujus Sacramento and signo censeamur; Hunc (si fieri potest) sequamur
omnes. Let us all follow Christ; let us all be consigned with his sign and his
Sacrament. Now there is no peradventure but new converted persons, Heathens
newly giving up their Names to Christ and being baptized, if they die in an
hour, and were baptized half an hour after they believe in Christ, are heirs of
salvation. And it was impossible to be otherwise; for when the Heathen world
was to be converted, and the Gospel preached to all persons, old men, and dying
men, it must either be effective to them also of all the promises, or by
nothing could they be called to the Religion. They who were not Christians,
were not to be judged by the Laws of Christ. But yet Christians are; and that is
a full account of this particular, since the Laws of our Religion require of us
a holy life; but the Religion could demand of strangers nothing but to believe,
and at first to promise to obey, and then to do it accordingly if they shall
live. Now to do this, was never too late; and this is all which is affirmed by
S. Cyprian.

S. Hierome Epist. ad Letam. and ad Paulum and Sabinianum.
affirmed, Nunquam sera est conversio, latro de cruce transiit ad Paradisum.
And S. Sermon. 11. de verb. Dom, and Sermon. 58. de tempore.
Austin, De nullo desperandum est, quamdiu patientia Dei ad poenitentiam
adducit: and again, De quocunque pessimo in hac vita constituto utique non est
desper andum. Nec pro illo imprudenter oratur, de quo non desperatur.
Concerning the words of S. Hierome, the same answer will serve which I gave to
the words of S. Cyprian; because his instance is of the Thief upon the Cross,
who then came first to Christ: and his case was as if a Heathen were new
converted to Christianity. Baptizatus ad horam securus hinc exit, was the Rule
of the Church. Vide Hist. of the life of the holy Jesus. Pa^s 2. Disc. 9.
But God requires more holiness of Christians then he did of strangers; and
therefore he also expects a longer and more laborious Repentance. But of this I
have given account in the case of Demetrianus. S. Austins words press not at
all: All that he says is this, We must despair of no man, so long as the mercy
of God leads him to repentance. It is true, we must not absolutely despair;
but neither must we presume without a warrant; nay, hope as long as God calls
effectually. But when the severity of God cuts him off from repentance, by
allowing him no time, or not time enough to finish what is required, the case
is wholly differing.

But S. Chrysostom speaks words which are not easy to be reconciled to the
former doctrine. The words of S. Chrysostom are these: Take heed of saying, Ad
Theodorum lupsum.
that there is a place of pardon only for them that have sinned but little.
For if you please suppose any one abounding with all maliciousness, and that
has done all things which shut men from the Kingdom; let this man be (not a
Heathen, but) a Christian and accepted of God, but afterward an Whoremonger,
an Adulterer, an effeminate person, unnaturally lustful, a thief, a drunkard,
a slanderer, and one that has diligently committed such crimes, truly I will
not be to him an author of despairing, although, he had persevered in these
wickednesses to an extreme old age. Truly neither would I. But neither could he
nor any man else be forward to warrant his particular. But if the remaining
portion of his old age be well employed, according as the time is, and the
spending of that time, and the earnestness of the repentance, and the greatness
of the grief, and the heartiness of the return, and the fullness of the
restitution, and the zeal of amends, and the abundance of charity, and the
largeness of the devotion, so we approach to very many degrees of hope. But
there is difference between the case of an extreme old age, and a deathbed.
That may have more time, and better faculties, and fitted opportunities, and a
clearer choice, and a more perfect resistance between temptation and grace. But
for the state of deathbed, although there is in that also some variety, yet the
best is very bad, and the worst is stark naught; but concerning the event of
both, God only is the Judge. Only it is of great use that Chrysostom says in
the same Letters to Theodorus, Quodque est majoris facilitatis argumentum,
etiamsi non omnem prae se fert poenitentiam, brevem illam and exiguo tempore
factam non abnuit, sed magna mercede compensat. Even a dying person ought not
to despair, and leave off to do those little things of which only there is
then left to him a possibility; because even that imperfect Repentance, done in
that little time, God rejects not, but will give to it a great reward. So he
did to Ahab. And whatsoever is good, shall have a good, some way or other it
shall find a recompense: but every recompense is not eternal glory, and every
good thing shall not be recompensed with heaven. To the same purpose is that of
Coelestinus, Epist. 1.
reproving them that denied repentance to persons, qui obitus sui tempore hoc
animae suae cupiunt remedio subveniri, who at the time of their death desired
to be admitted to it. Horremus fateor tantae impietatis aliquem reperiri, ut de
Dei pietate desperet; quasi non posset ad se quovis tempore concurrenti
succurrere, and periclitantem sub onere peccatorum hominem, pondere quo se
expedire desiderat, liberare. I confess (says he) we abhor that any one should
be found to be of so great impiety as to despair of Gods mercy; as if he could
not at any time relieve him that comes to him, and ease him that runs to be
eased of the burden of his sins. Quid hoc rogo aliud est, etc. What else is
this but to add death to the dying man, and to kill his soul with cruelty, by
denying that he can be absolved, since God is most ready to help, and inviting
to repentance, thus promises, saying, In what day soever the sinner shall be
converted, his sins shall not be imputed to him; and again, I would not the
death of a sinner; but that he should be converted and live? He therefore takes
salvation from a man, who denies him his hoped for repentance in the time of
his death; and he despairs of the clemency of God, who does not believe it
sufficient to help the dying man in a moment of time. The thief on the Cross
hanging on Christ's right hand had lost his reward, if the repentance of one
hour had not helped him. When he was in pain he repented and obtained Paradise
by one discourse. Therefore the true conversion to God of dying persons, is to
be accounted of by the mind rather then by time. Thus far S. Coelestine, The
sum of which is this; That dying persons must not be thrust into despair:
Because Gods mercy is infinite, and his power is infinite. He can do what he
please, and he may do more then we know of, even more then he has promised;
and therefore they that are spiritual must not refuse to do all that they can
to such miserable persons. And in all this there is nothing to be reproved, but
that the good man by incompetent arguments goes about to prove what he had a
mind to. If the hindering such persons to despair be all that he intends, it is
well; if more be intended, his arguments will not do it.

Afterward in the descending ages of the Church things grew worse, Lib. 2. c.
14. de summo bono.
Isidore; Nullus desperare debet veniam, etiamsi circa finem vitae ad
poenitentiam convertatur. Vnumquemque enim Deus de suo fine, non de vita
praeterita judicat. God judges a man by his end, not by his past life; and
therefore no man must despair of pardon, though he be not converted till about
the end of his life. but in these words there is a lenitive, Circa finem vitae]
if he be converted about the end of his life; that is, in his last o^ declining
years: which may contain a fair portion of time, like those who were called in
the eleventh hour, that is circa finem vitae, but not in fine; about, not in
the end of their life. c. 80.
But S. Austin, or Gennadius, or whoever is Author of the book De
Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus, speaks home to the Question, but against the former
doctrine. Poenitentia aboleri peccata indubitanter credimus, etiamsi in ultimo
vitae spiritu admissorum poeniteat, and publica lamentatione peccata prodantur,
quia propositum Dei quo decrevit salvare quod perierat, stat immobile: and ideo
quia voluntas ejus non mutatur, sive emendatione vitae si tempus conceditur,
sive supplici confessione, si continuo vita exceditur, venia peccatorum
fideliter praesumatur ab illo qui non vult mortem peccatoris, sed ut
convertatur a perditione poenitendo, and salvatus miseratione Domini vivat. Si
quis aliter de justissima Dei pietate sentit, non Christianus sed Novatianus
est. That sins are taken off by repentance, though it be but in the last breath
of our life, we believe without doubting. He that thinks otherwise is not a
Christian but a Novatian. If we have time, our sins are taken away by amendment
of life; but if we die presently, they are taken off by humble confession. This
is his Doctrine. And if he were infallible, there were nothing to be said
against it. But to balance this, we have a more sober discourse of S. Austin
in these words. Lib. 50. Hom. 41.
[ If any man placed in the last extremity of sickness, would be admitted to
repentance, and is presently reconciled, and so departs, I confess to you, we
do not deny to him what he asks, but we do not presume that he goes hence
well. I do not presume, I deceive you not, I do not presume. A faithful man
living well, goes hence securely. He that is baptized but an hour before goes
hence securely. He that repents and afterward lives well, goes hence securely.
He that repents at last and is reconciled, whether he goes hence securely I am
not secure. Where I am secure, I tell you, and give security; where I am not
secure, I can admit to repentance, but I cannot give security... And a little
after. Attend to what I say. I ought to explain clearly what I say, lest any
one should misunderstand me. Do I say he shall be damned? I do not say it. Do
I say he shall be pardoned? I do not say it. And what say you to me? I know
not. I presume not, I promise not, I know not. Will you free your self from
doubt? Will you avoid that which is uncertain? Repent while thou art in health.
For if you do penance while you are well, and sickness find you so doing, run
to be reconciled; and if you do so, you are secure. Why are you secure? Because
you repented at that time when you could have sinned. But if you repent then
when you cannot sin, thy sins have left thee, thou have not left them. But how
know you that God will not forgive him? You say true. How? I know not. I know
that, I know not this. For therefore I give repentance to you, because I know
not. For if I knew it would profit you nothing, I would not give it you. And if
I did know that it would profit you, I would not affright you. There are but
these two things. Either thou shall be pardoned, or thou shall not. Which of
these shall be in thy portion I know not. Therefore keep that which is certain,
and let go that which is uncertain. Some suppose these to have been the words
of S. Ambrose, not S. Austin. But S. Austin has in his Sermons de tempore
something more decretory then the former discourse. Ser. 57.
He that is polluted with the filth of sins, let him be cleansed exomologesis
satisfactione, with the satisfactions of repentance. Neither let him put it
off, that he do not require it till his deathbed, where he cannot perform it.
For that persuasion is unprofitable. It is nothing for a sinner to repent,
unless he finish his repentance. For the voice of the penitent alone is not
sufficient for the amendment of his faults: for in the satisfaction for great
crimes, not words, but works are looked after. Truly repentance is given in the
last, because it cannot be denied; but we cannot affirm, that they who so ask,
ought to be absolved. For how can the lapsed man do penance? How shall the
dying man do it? How can he repent, who cannot do works of satisfaction or
amendment of life? And therefore that repentance which is required by sick men,
is it self weak; that which is required by dying men, I fear lest that also
die. And therefore whosoever will find mercy of God, let him do his
repentance in this world, that he may be saved in the world to come. Higher yet
are the words of Paulinus Bishop of Nola, to Faustus of Rhegium, Epist. 1.
Bibl. SS. Pp. tom. 3.
inquiring what is to be done to deathbed penitents? Inimica persuasione
mentitur, qui maculas longa aetate contractas subitis and inutilibus abolendas
gemitibus arbioratur: quo tempore confessio esse potest, satisfactio esse non
potest. He lies with the persuasion of an enemy, who thinks that those stains
which have been long contracting, can be suddenly washed off with a few
unprofitable sighings, at that time when he can confess, but never make amends.
And a little after; Circa exequendam interioris hominis sanitatem, non solum
accipiendi voluntas, sed agendi expectatur utilitas: And again, Hujusmodi
medicina sicut ore poscenda, ita opere consummanda est. Then a man repents
truly, when what he affirms with his mouth, he can finish with his hand; that
is, not only declaim against sin, but also mortify it. To which I add the
words of Asterius Bishop of Amasea. Homil. de Divit. and Lazaro.
At cum debitum tempus adveniet, and indeprecabile decretum corporis and animae
nexum dissolvet, reputatio fubibit eorum quae in vita patrata sunt, and
poenitentia sera and nihil profitura. Tunc enim demum poenitentia prodest, cum
poenitens emendandi facultatem habet; sublata vero copia recte faciendi,
inutilis est dolor, and irrita poenitentia. When the set time shall come, when
the irrevocable decree shall dissolve the union of soul and body, then shall
the memory of those things return which were done in our life time, and a late
repentance that shall profit nothing. For then repentance is profitable, when
the penitent can amend his fault: But when the power of doing well is taken
away, grief is unprofitable, and the repentance vain. Now to the words of
Gennadius before quoted, I answer, That they are a fierce reproof of the
Novatian doctrine, and too great an earnestness of going so far from them, that
he left also the severity which wise and good men did at that time teach, and
ought always to press. He went to cure one error by another, never thinking any
contradictory sufficient, unless it were against every thing that the Novatians
did say, though also it was said and believed by the Orthodox. But I shall
resume this discourse in the following Chapters, where upon another occasion I
shall give account of the severity of the Primitive Church in this article;
which at first was at least as strict as the severest part of this discourse,
till by degrees it lessened and shrunk into the licenciousness and dissolution
of the present age.

Obj. 6. cum potentia ad oppositum; if it be not chosen it is not virtue, nor
rewardable. And the case is almost the same to all persons young or old, who
have not opportunity of acting those graces, in the matter of which they have
formerly prevaricated.

To this I answer many things, Paul speaks of the (...), men that being past
feeling, yet were given to lasciviousness; (...), half men, half boys,
pruri^ntes in sepulchro. For it is not the body but the soul that is wanton;
And an evil man may sin with ineffective lusts; as he that lusts after a woman
whom he cannot have, sins with his soul. Now where ever these unlawful desires
can be, there also they can be mortified; and an old man can love to talk of
his past vanities, or not rescind them by repentance, or desire that he were
young and active in wickedness; and therefore if he chooses not to do so, and
therefore avoids these and the like, out of hatred of his old impurities, he
does the proper works of that grace, which he also may do the easier, because
then his temptations to the contrary are not so strong: but this advantage is
not worth staying for so long. They that do so, venture damnation a long time
together, and may also have an evil proper to that state, greater then this
little advantage I instance.

2.

3.

4. When a vicious habit is to be extirpated, in that instance; but it is not
always required, that contrary acts be done by the body. Suppose Origin had
been a lustful person before his castration, yet he might have been habitually
chaste afterward, by doing spiritual acts of a corporal chastity. And there are
many sins whose scene lies in the body, to which the body afterward cannot
oppose a bodily act in the same instance; as he that by intemperate drinking
once or oftener, falls into a loathing of wine; he that dismembers himself and
many others; for which a repentance is possible and necessary, but yet a
contrary specific act cannot be opposed. In these cases it is sufficient that
the habit be placed in the soul, and a perfect contrary quality superinduced,
which is to be done by a frequent repetition of the acts of repentance proper
to the sin.

5. Redime peccata tua eleemosynis, Dan. 4.27.
said Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, Redeem thy sins with alms, and thy iniquities
by showing mercy to the poor. Our English Bibles read this, Break off thy sins
by alms; as if alms were directly contrary to pride, or lust, or gluttony, or
tyranny; and the showing mercy to the poor a direct intercision and
interruption of the sin. He that gives alms that he may keep his lust, loses
his soul and his money too. But he that leaves his lust, or is driven from it,
and gives alms to obtain Gods favor for his pardon, by doing something that is
gracious in his eyes, this man is a good penitent; if his alms be great and
proportionable, given freely and without constraint, when he can keep them, and
receive and retain the temporal advantage and be assisted by all those other
acts and habits of which his present state is capable. It cannot be said, that
to give alms can in all such cases be sufficient; as it will be hard to say
that so many acts of the contrary grace will suffice to get a habit, or obtain
a pardon; but it is true, that to give alms is a proper action of repentance in
such cases, and is in order to pardon. For,

6. As there is a supreme habit of vice, malice, and this is charity. When a
man has this grace habitually, although it may be so that he cannot produce
the proper specific habit opposite to his sin for which he specially repents,
yet his supreme habit does contain in it the specific habit virtually and
transcendently. An act of this charity will not do this, but the habit will.
For he that does a single act of charity, may also do a single act of malice;
and he that denies this, knows not what he says, nor ever had experience of
himself or any man else. For if he that does an act of charity, that is, he who
by a good motion from Gods Spirit does any thing because God has commanded, to
say that this man will do every thing which is so commanded, is to say that a
good man can never fall into a great sin, which is evidently untrue. But if he
that does one act in obedience to God, or in love to him, (for obedience is
love) will also do more, then every man that does one act to please his
senses, may as well be supposed that he will do more; and then no man's life
should have in it any variety, but be all of a piece, entirely good, or
entirely evil. I see no difference in the instances, neither can there be, so
long as a man in both states has a power to choose. But then it will follow,
that a single act of contrition, or of charity cannot put a man into the state
of the Divine favor, it must be the grace, or habit of charity; and that is a
magazine of habits by equivalency, and is formally the state of grace. And upon
these accounts, if old men will repent, and do what they can do, and are
enabled in that state, they have no cause to be afflicted with too great fears
concerning the instances of their habits, or the sins of their youth.
Concerning persons that are seized upon by a lingering sickness, I have nothing
peculiar to say, save this only. That their case is in something better then
that of old men, in some things worse. It is better, because they have in many
periods of their sickness more hopes of returning to health and long life, then
old men have of returning to strength and youth, and a protracted age: and
therefore their repentance if it be hearty, has in it also more degrees of
being voluntary, and relative to a good life. But in this their case is worse.
An old man that is healthful is better seated in the station of penitents, and
because he can choose contraries, is the more acceptable if he chooses well.
But the sick man though living long in that disadvantage, cannot be indifferent
in so many instances as the other may: and in this case, it is remarkable what
S. Austin said, Si autem vis agere poenitentiam quando jam peccare non potes,
peccata te dimiserunt, non tu illa. To abstain from sin when a man cannot sin,
is to be forsaken by sin, not to forsake it. At the best it is bad enough: But
I doubt not but if they do what they can do, there is mercy for them, which
they shall find in the day of recompenses.

Obj. 7. if it be necessary that he get the habits of virtue, and extirpate the
habits of vice; that is, if by habits God do, and we are to make judgments of
our repentance, who can be certain that his sins are pardoned, and himself
reconciled to God, and that he shall be saved? The reasons of his doubts and
fears are these. 1. Because it is a long time before a habit can be lost, and
the contrary obtained. 2. Because while one habit lessens, another may
undiscernibly increase, and it may be a degree of covetousness may expel a
degree of prodigality. 3. Because a habit may be lurking secretly, and for want
of opportunity of acting in that instance, not betray it self, or be
discovered, or attempted to be cured. For he that was not tempted in that kind
where he sinned formerly, may for ought he knows, say that he has not sinned
only because he was not tempted; but if that be all, the habit may be
resident, and kill him secretly. These things must be accounted for.

1. Love God with all thy heart, and all thy strength, do it heartily, and do
it always. If the thing be brought to pass clearly and discernibly, the pardon
is certain, and not orious: But if it be in a middle state, between ebb and
flood, so is our pardon too, and if in that undiscerned state it be in the
thing certain that thou art on the winning and prevailing side, if really thou
do belong unto God, he will take care both of thy intermediall comfort, and
final interest. * But when people are too inquisitive after comfort, it is a
sign their duty is imperfect. In the same proportion also it is not well when
we enquire after a sign for our state of grace and holiness. If the habit be
complete and entire, it is as discernible as light, and we may as well enquire
for a sign to know when we are hungry and thirsty, when you can walk, or play
on the lute. The thing it self is its best indication.

2. Peter and S. Paul. * But however, both they, and better men then they, must
be content with those glorious measures of the Divine mercy which are
described, and upon any terms be glad to be pardoned, and to hope and fear, to
mourn and to be afflicted, to be humbled and to tremble, and then to work out
their salvation with fear and trembling.

3. to the man; and there are degrees of hope concerning the final event of our
souls: For suppose it cannot be told to the habitual sinner, that his habits of
sin are overcome, and that the Spirit rules in all the regions of his soul; yet
is he sure that his vicious habits do prevail? is he sure that sin does reign
in his mortal body? If he be, then let him not be angry with this doctrine; for
it is as bad with him, as any doctrine can affirm. But if he be not sure that
sin reigns, then can he not hope that the Spirit does rule? and if so, then
also he may hope that his sins are pardoned, and that he shall be saved. And if
he look for greater certainty then that of a holy and a humble hope, he must
stay till he have a revelation, it cannot be had from the certainty of any
proposition in Scripture applicable to his case and person.

4.

5. holy desires. If all these be spent, and nothing remain besides the
desires, that is another consideration, and must receive its sentence by the
measures of the former doctrine. But for the present, a man ought not to
conclude against his hopes, because he finds propensities and inclinations to
the former courses remaining in him, even after his conversion. For so it will
be always, more or less, and this is not only the remains of a vicious habit,
but even of natural inclination in some instances.

6. He that is justified, let him be justified still; but whether just now if
he dies he shall be saved or not, we cannot answer, or give accounts of every
period of his new life. In what minute or degree of Repentance his sins are
perfectly pardoned, no man can tell; and it is unreasonable to reprove a
doctrine that infers a man to be uncertain, where God has given no certain
notices or measures. If a man will be certain, he must die as soon as he is
worthily baptized, or live according to his promises then made. If he breaks
them, he is certain of nothing but that he may be saved if he returns speedily,
and effectively does his duty. But concerning the particulars, there can no
rules be given sufficient to answer every man's case beforehand. If he be
uncertain how Gods judgment will be of him, let him be the more afraid, and
the more humble, and the more cautious, and the more penitent. For in this
case, all our security is not to be derived from signs, but from duty. Duty is
the best signification, and Gods infinite boundless mercy is the best ground of
our Confidence.

. 6. The former Doctrine reduced to Practice.
IT now remains that we account concerning the effect of this Doctrine; and
first, concerning them that are well and vigorous. 2. Them that are old. 3.
Them that are dying. All which are to have several usages and receptions,
proper entertainments and exercises of Repentance.

The manner of Repentance and usage of Habitual sinners, who convert in their
timely and vigorous years. 1. arm. Every little thing disorders the new health,
and unfinished recovery. So that every new sin to such a person is a double
damage, it pulls him back from all his hopes, and makes his labors vain, and
he is as far to seek, and as much to begin again as ever, and more. For so may
you see one climbing of a Rock, with a great contention and labor and danger,
if when he has got from the foot to the shoulder, he then lets his hold go, he
falls lower then where he first set his foot, and sinks deeper by the weight of
his own fall. So is the new converted man who is laboring to overcome the
rocks and mountains of his habitual sins; every sin throws him down further,
and bruises his very bones in the fall. To this purpose therefore is the wise
advice of the son of Sirach, Have thou sinned? do so no more, but ask pardon
for thy former fault: Add not sin to sin, for in one a man shall not be
unpunished.

Ergo ne pietas sit victa cupidine ventris, Metamorp. 15.

Parcite, vaticinor, cognat as caede nefanda
Exturbare animas, ne sanguine sanguis alatur.
Let not blood touch blood, nor sin touch sin; for we destroy our souls with
impious hands, when a crime follows a habit, like funeral processions in the
pomps and solennities of death.

2. not in all; the Grace of God will as much assist the customs and labors
of virtue, as Nature does the habits of vice. And choose whether you will. Take
any institution or course of life, let it at first be never so violent, use
will make it pleasant. And therefore we may make virtue as certain as vice is,
as pleasing to the spirit, as hard to be removed, as perfective of our nature
as the other is destructive; and make it by assuefaction as impossible to be
vicious, as we now think it difficult and impossible to overcome flesh and
blood. * But let him remember this also, that it will be a strange shame, that
he can be in a state of sin and death from which it will be very hard to
remove, and to confess our natures so caitiff and base, that we cannot as
easily be united unto virtue; that he can become a Devil, and cannot be like an
Angel; that he can decline to the brutishness of beasts, and yet never arise up
to a participation of the excellent beauties of the intellectual world.

3. and commands by the habit; and therefore as there can be no Repentance
while the affections remain, so neither can there be safety as long as the
habit has a natural being. The first begins with a moral revocation of the
sin; and the same has also its progression, perfection, and security, by the
extinction of the inherent quality.

4. Mount Ebal and view it. They resolve they will not commit the sin, they
will not be overcome, but they would fain be tempted. If these men will but
observe the contingencies of their own own state, they shall find that when
they have set the house on fire, they cannot prescribe its measures of burning.
* But there is a secret iniquity in it. For he that loves to stand and stare
upon the fire that burnt him formerly, is pleased with the warmth and
splendor, and the temptation it self has some little correspondencies to the
appetite. The man dares not fornicate, but loves to look upon the beauties of a
woman, or sit with her at the wine, till his heart is ready to drop asleep. He
will not enter into the house, because it is infected with the plague, but he
loves to stand at the door, and fain would enter if he durst; It is impossible
that any man should love to abide by a temptation for a good end. There is some
little sensuality in being tempted: And the very consideration concerning it,
sometimes strikes the fancy too unluckily, and pleases some faculty or other,
as much as the man dares admit. * I do not say, that to be tempted is always
criminal, or in the neighborhood of it; but it is the best indication of our
love to God, for his sake to deny its importunity, and to overcome it: but that
is only, when it is unavoidable and from without, against our wills, or at
least besides our purposes. * For in the declination of sin, and overcoming
temptation, there can be but these two things by which we can signify our love
to God. 1. To stand in a temptation when we could not avoid it. 2. And to run
from it, when we can. This has in it more of prudence, and the other of force
and spiritual strength: and we can best signify the sense of our weakness, and
our carefulness by avoiding the occasions; but then we declare the excellency
of our purposes, and pertinacious love to God, when we serve him in hard
battles, when we are tempted as before, but fall not now as we did then. Indeed
this is the greatest trial; and when God suffers us so to be tried, we are
accepted if we stand in that day, and in such circumstances. But he that will
choose that state, and dwell near his danger, loves not to be safe; and either
he is a vain person in the confidences of his own strength, or else he loves
that which is like a sin, and comes as near it as he dare; and very often, the
event of it is, that at last he dies like a fly about a candle. But he that
has fallen by such a neighborhood, and still continues the cause, may as well
hope to cure his fever by full draughts of the new vintage, as return to life
upon that account. * A vicious habit is maintained at an easy rate, but not
cured without a mighty labor and expense: any thing can feed it, but nothing
can destroy it, if there be any thing near it, whereby it can be kept alive. If
therefore you will cure a vicious habit dwell far from danger, and tempt not
death with which you have been so long in love.

5. Balaam did, he also would have offered to go back. Now when God does not
punish a sinner early, though it has in it more of danger and less of safety,
yet we may in some measure supply the want of Divine mercy smiting and hindering
a sinner, by considering that impunity is no mark of innocence, but very often
it is an indication of Gods extremest and final anger. Therefore be sure, ever
to suspect a prosperous sin. For of it self prosperity is a temptation, and it
is granted but to few persons to be prosperous and pious. The poor and the
despised, the humble and necessitous; he that daily needs God with a sharpness
of apprehension, that feeds upon necessity, and lives in hardships, that is
never flattered, and is never cheated out of virtue for bread, those persons
are likely to be wise and wary; and if they be not, nothing can make them so;
for he that is impatient in want is impotent in plenty; for impatience is
pride, and he that is proud when he is poor, if he were rich he would be
intolerable; and therefore it is easier to bear poverty temperately then
riches. Securo nihil est te Naevole pejus, Epigr. l. 4. ep. 84.
eodem
Sollicito nihil est Naevole te melius.
and Passienus said of Caligula, Nemo fuit servus melior, nemo Dominus
deterior. He was the best Servant, and the worst Master that ever was. Poverty
is like a girdle about our loins, it binds hard, but it is modest and useful.
But a heap of riches is a heap of temptations, and few men will escape, if it
be always in their hand what can be offered to their heart. And therefore to
be prosperous has in it self enough of danger. But when a sin is prosperous
and unpunished, there are left but few possibilities and arguments of
resistance, and therefore it will become or remain habitual respectively. S.
Paul taught us this secret, that sins are properly made habitual upon the stock
of impunity. Romans 7.7.
Sin taking occasion by the law wrought in me all concupiscence, (...),
apprehending impunity (...), by occasion of the Commandment, viz. so expressed
and established as it was. Because in the Commandment forbidding to lust or
covet, there was no penalty annexed, or threatened in the sanction or in the
explication. Murder was death, and so was adultery, and rebellion. Theft was
punished severely too; and so other things in their proportion; but the desires
God left under a bare restraint, and affixed no penalty in the law. Now sin,
that is, men that had a mind to sin, taking occasion hence, that is, taking
this impunity for a sufficient warrant, prevailed by frequent actions up to an
evil custom and a habit, and so ruled them who were not renewed and overruled
by the holy Spirit of grace. (...) signifies a caution in law, or a security;
so Suidas and Phavorinus. It is used also for impunity in Demosthenes, though
the Grammarians note it not. But as to the thing. When ever you see a sin
thrive, start back suddenly and with a trembling fear: for it does nurse the
sin from a single action to a filthy habit, and that always dwells in the
suburbs of the horrible regions. No man is so much to be pitied, as he that
thrives and is let alone in his sin: there is evil toward that man. But then
God is kind to a sinner when he makes his sin to be uneasy and troublesome.

6. Paul commends in all holy penitents, it is also a way to take off the
pleasure of the sin by which it would fain make abode and seizure upon the
will. A man will not so soon delight, or love to abide with that which brings
him affliction in present, and makes his life miserable. This advice I learn
from Maimonides. Morch Nevocin 341.
Ab inolita peccandi consuetudine non posse hominem avelli nisi gravibus
poenis. Nothing so good to cure an evil custom of sinning, as the inflicting
great smart upon the offender. He that is going to cure his habitual
drunkenness; if ever he be overtaken again, let him for the first offense fast
two days with bread and water; and the next time double his smart; and let the
man load himself till he groans under it, and he will be glad to take heed.

7. opportunity of beginning to break his evil habit; He that has committed
fornication, and repents, if ever he be tempted again (not to seek for it, but)
to act it, and may enter upon the sin with ease and readiness, then let him
refuse his sin so dressed, so ready, so fitted for action, and the event will
be this, that besides it is a great indication and sign of an excellent
repentance, it discountenances the habit, and breaks the combination of its
parts, and disturbs its dwelling; but besides it is so signal an action of
repentance, and so pleasing to the Spirit of God, and of a good man, that it is
apt to make him do so again, and proceed to crucify that habit, upon which he
has had so lucky a day, and so great a victory and success. It is like giving
to a person, and obliging him by some very great favor. He that does so, is
for ever after ready and apt to do that obliged person still more kindness,
lest the first should perish. When a man has gotten an estate together, he is
apt (says Plutarch) to save little things, and be provident even of the
smallest sum, because that now if it be saved will come to something, it will
be seen and preserved in his heap. But he that is poor cannot become rich with
those little arts of providence; and therefore he ^ets them go for his
pleasure, since he cannot keep them with hopes to improve his bank: so is such
an earnest and entry into piety; it is such a stock of holiness that it is
worth preserving; and to have resisted once so bravely, does add confidence to
the spirit that it can overcome, and makes it probable that he may get a crown.
However it falls out, it is an excellent act and signification of a hearty
repentance and conversion.

(...) Philemon.

(...).
He is a just man, not whosoever does no wrong, but he that can and will not.
Maimonides says excellently to the same purpose* For to the Question, Quaenam
tandem est poenitentia perfecta? He answers, This is true and perfect
repentance, Can^n. poenit. cap. 2.1.
Cum quis ad manum habet, quo prius peccavit, and jam penes ipsum est, idem
perpetrare, recedens tamen illua non committit poenitentiae causa, neque timore
cohibitus neque defectu virium. When the power and opportunity is present, and
the temptation (it may be) ready and urging, when it is in a man's hand to do
the same thing, yet retiring he commits it not, only for piety or repentance
sake, not being restrained by fear or want of powers.

8. prove and act his repentance without it. But therefore he that is not so
tried and put to it, must do all that which he is put to, and execute his
fierce anger against the sin and by proper instances of mortification endeavor
the destruction of it; and although every man has not so glorious a trial and
indication of his Repentance as in the former instance, yet he that denies
himself in any instance of his sin, and so in all that he can or is tempted in,
does the same thing; all the same duty, and with less danger, and with less
gloriousness. * But if it happen that his sin urge him not at all as formerly,
or the occasion is gone, and the matter is subtracted, he is to follow the
measures of old men, described in the next.

9. is it that you are cured of prodigality, and then die by covetousness?

Quid te exempta juvat spinis de millibus una? It is not this or that alone
that is contrary to God. Every vicious habit is equally his enemy; and he that
exterminates one vice and entertains another, has destroyed the vice, but not
the viciousness; he has quitted the instance, but not the irregularity; he
has served the interest of his fortune or his pleasure, his fame or his quiet,
his passion or his humor, but not his virtue and relations to God. By changing
his vice for another he is convinced of his first danger, but enters not into
safety; He is only weary of his fever, and changes it into the ease of a dead
palsy; and it is in them as in all sharp sicknesses, that is always worst that
is actually upon him; and the man dies by his imaginary cure, but real sickness.

10. Origin took an ill course to do it, but resolved he would mortify his
lust, and made himself an Eunuch. But a solemn vow were an excellent
instrument to restrain the violences of a frequent temptation, if the person
were to be trusted with it; that is, if he were a constant person, not giddy
nor easy to revolt, but of a pertinacious nature, or of so tender conscience,
that he durst not for the world break his vow. But this remedy is dangerous
where the temptations return strongly. But there are some others which are
safer. Cut off the occasion wholly. Defy the Concubine publicly, and disgrace
her, make it impossible for her to consent to thee if thou should ask her.
If thy Lord or Master tempts thee to drunkenness, quit his service, or openly
deny him. Make thy face unpleasant, and tear off the charms from thy beauty,
that thou may not be courted any more. This is a fierceness and zeal of
repentance, but very fit to be used when milder courses will not cure thee.

-- Scelerum si been poenitet, Horat.

Eradenda cupidinis pravi sunt elementa,
Et tenerae nimis mentes asperioribus
Formandae studiis --
If thou repentest truly, pluck up sin by the roots, take away its principle,
strangle its nurse, and destroy every thing that can foment it.

11. in heaven, and there will abide to procure the blessing, and toward the
accounts of Eternity. But then it is to be observed, that those transient acts
of devotion, or other volatile and fugitive instances of Repentance, are not
the proper and proportioned remedy to the evil of vicious habits. There must be
something more permanent. Therefore let the penitent make no sudden
resolutions, but first consider them well, and imprint them upon his spirit,
and renew them often, and call them to mind constantly and at certain periods;
let him use much meditation upon the matter of his repentance and remedy; and
let his prayers be the same, passionate, material, alike expressed, and made
the business of much of our time. For our spirit by use must be made holy, and
by assiduity of reading, of praying, of meditating, and acts of self-denial,
be accustomed to the yoke of Jesus: for let the habit be firm as a rock, united
and hard as a stone, it will be broken and made soft by a continual dropping.

The proper Repentance and usage of sinners, who return not till their old age.
1.

Dum tempus ad eam rem tulit, Andria. Act 1. Scen. 2.
sivi animum ut expleret suum.
Nunc hic dies aliam vitam adfert, alios mores postulat.
Dehinc postulo, sive aequum est, te oro Dave, ut redeat jam in viam.
And God does so to us. And therefore follies of old age are upbraidings of a
man, and confusions to his spirit.

-- Lateranus ad illos
Thermarum calices, inscriptaque lintea vadit,
Maturus bello Armeniae --
To have a grave wise man wrangle for nutshels, and a Judge scramble for
apples, is an undecency bigger then the sin, and dishonours him by the
disproportion.

Quaedam cum prima res^centur crimina barba. Lateranus should have gone to the
Armenian wars, or been charging a Parthian horsman, when he went to the baths,
and hired an unfortunate woman standing under the titles: And every old man
should have been gray with sorrow and carefulness, and have passed many stages
of his Repentance long before he now begins; and therefore he is not only
straightned for want of time, but has a greater work to do, by how much the
longer he has staid, and yet is the more unable to do it. The greatness of his
need has diminished his power; and the more need he has of grace, the less he
shall have. But however with such helps as they have, they must instantly set
upon their work.

-- Breve sit quod turpiter audes. But they have abode in their sin too long;
let them now therefore use such abbreviatures and hastnings of return as can be
in their power.

2. ashamed at their number and burden. For even a good man will have cause to
be ashamed of himself, if the single sins respersed over his whole life were
drawn into a body of articles, and united in the accusation; but then for a man
who is grown old in iniquity, to see in one entire view the scheme of his
impiety, the horrible heaps of damnation amassed together; will probably have
this event, it will make him extremely ashamed, it will make himself most ready
to judge and condemn himself, it will humble him to the earth, and make him cry
mightily for pardon, and these are good dispositions toward it.

3. God will not take any thing in exchange for that duty which may be paid in
kind.

4. kinds of sin, yet it cannot be so particularly done to the numbers of the
actions; not only because it will be impossible for such persons to know their
numbers, but because there is not time left to make little minute proportions:
If he had fewer, all his time and all his powers would be little enough for the
Repentance; and therefore having many, it is well if upon any terms, if upon
the expense of all his faculties and labor he can obtain pardon. Only this:
The greater the numbers are, the more firm the habit is supposed; and therefore
there ought in general to be made the more vigorous opposition; and let the
acts of Repentance be more frequently exercised in the proper matter of that
virtue which is repugnant to that proper state of evil. And let the very number
be an argument to thee of a particular humiliation; let it be inserted into thy
confessions, and become an aggravation of thy own misery, and of Gods loving
kindness if he shall please to pardon thee.

5.

Cogimur a suetis animum suspendere rebus, Cornel. Gal.

Atque ut vivamus vivere desinimus.
He must unlearn what he had learned before, and break all his evil customs,
doing violence to his own and to his superinduced nature. But therefore this
man must not go moderately in his return, but earnestly, vigorously, zealously;
and can have no other measures but to do all that he can do. For in his case
every slow progression is a sign of the apprehension of his danger and
necessity, but it is also a sign that he has no affection to the business,
that he leaves his sins as a Merchant does his goods in a storm, or a wounded
man endures his arm to be cut off; when there is no help for it, the thing must
be done, but he is not pleased with the employment.

6.

7. Heb. 13.16.
To do good and to communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices (...) God
is well pleased; it is like a propitiatory sacrifice, and therefore proper for
this man's necessities. The proper arguments to endear this, are reckoned in
their own place; but the reason why this is most apposite to the state of an
old man's repentance, is because they are excellent suppletories to their other
defects, and by way of impetration obtain of God to pardon those habits of vice
which in the natural way they have now no external instrument to extinguish.

8. he has purchased a good degree in the station of penitents, and has given
an excellent indication of a true Repentance, and conversion from sin to God.
Let old men (if there be need) be apt to learn, and so mortify that pride and
morosity that usually do attend their age; who think their gray hairs title
enough to wisdom, and sufficient notices of things. Let them be gentle to
others, patient of the evil accidents of their state, bountiful and liberal, as
full of good example as they can; and it is more then probable, that if they
yield not to that by which they can then be tempted, they have quit all their
affections to sin, and it is enough that they are found faithful in that in
which they are now tried.

9. recolligere annos in amaritudine, call to mind their past years in the
bitrerness of their soul, so when they speak of any thing of it, they must not
tell it as a merry story, lest they be found to laugh at their own damnation.

-- Mutatus Horat. lib. 4. Od. 10.

Dices, Hou! (quoties te in speculo videris alterum)
Quae men's est hodie, our eadem non puero fuit?
Vel cur his animis incolumes non redeunt genae?
Trouble and sorrow will better become the spirit of an old sinner, because he
was a fool when he was young, and weak when he is wise; that his strengths must
be spent in sin, and that for God and wise courses nothing remains but weak
hands, and dim eyes, and trembling knees.

10. Paul, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course; nothing can
bring consummation to his work till the day of his death, because it is all the
way an imperfect state, having in it nothing that is excellent or laudable, but
only upon the account of a great necessity and misery on one side, and a great
mercy on the other. It is like a man condemned to perpetual banishment; he is
always in his passive obedience, but is a debtor to the law until he be dead.
So is this penitent; he has not finished his work, or done a Repentance in any
measure proportionable to his sins, but only because he can do no more; and
yet he did something, even before it was too late.

11.

12. not so much to account concerning his hopes, or the performance of his
duty, by abstaining from sin, as by doing of good. For besides that such a not
committing of evil may be owing to weak or insufficient principles, this not
committing evil in so little a time, cannot make amends for the doing it so
long together, according to the usual accounts of Repentance, unless that
abstaining be upon the stock of virtue and labor, of mortification and
resistance; and then every abstinence is also a doing good, for it is a
crucifying of the old man with the affections and lusts. But all the good that
by the grace of God he superadds, is matter of choice, and the proper actions
of a new life.

13. Sermon. 28. de temp.
Austin said: Peradventure some will think that he has committed such grievous
faults, that he cannot now obtain the favor of God. Let this be far from the
conceits of all sinners. O man, whosoever thou art, that attendest that
multitude of thy sins, wherefore do thou not attend to the Omnipotency of
the Heavenly Physician? For since God will have mercy because he is good, and
can because he is Almighty, he shuts the gate of the Divine Goodness against
himself, who thinks that God cannot or will not have mercy upon him, and
therefore distrusts either his Goodness or his Almightiness.

The proper Repentance and usage of sinners who repent not until their
deathbed.
The inquiry after this article consists in these particulars.

1. What hopes are left to a vicious ill lived man that repents on his
deathbed and not before. 2. What advices are best, or can bring him most
advantage?
That a good life is necessary; of the Christian Religion. * That the grace of
God does leave those that use it not. * That therefore the necessity of dying
men increases, and their aids are lessened and almost extinguished. * That they
have more to do then they have either time or strength to finish. * That all
their vows and holy purposes are useless and ineffective as to their natural
production, and that in their case they cannot be the beginnings of a
succeeding duty and piety, because for want of time it never can succeed. *
That there are some conditions and states of life, which God has determined
never to pardon. * That there is a sin unto death, for which because we have no
encouragement to pray, it is certain there is no hope; for it is impossible but
it must be very fit to pray for all them to whom the hope of pardon is not
precluded. * That there is in Scripture mention made of an ineffective
repentance, and of a repentance to be repented of, and that the repentance of
no state is so likely to be it as this. * That what is begun and produced
wholly by affrightment is not esteemed matter of choice, nor a pleasing
sacifice to God. * That they who sow to the flesh, shall reap in the flesh, and
the final judgment shall be made of every man according to his works. * That
the full and perfect descriptions of repentance in Scripture are heaps and
conjugations of duties which have in them difficulty, and require time, and ask
labor. * That those insinuations of duty in Scripture, of the need of
patience, and diligence, and watchfulness, and the express precepts of
perseverance, do imply, that the office and duty of a Christian is of a long
time, and business, and a race. * That repentance being the renewing of a holy
life, it should seem that on our deathbed the day for repentance is past,
since no man can renew his life when his life is done, no man can live well,
when he cannot live at all; * and therefore to place our hopes upon a deathbed
repentance only, is such a religion as satisfies all our appetites, and
contradicts none, and yet promises heaven at last. * These things, I say, are
all either notorious and evident, or expressly affirmed in Scripture; and
therefore that in the ordinary way of things, in the common expectation of
events, such persons are in a very sad condition.

So that it remains, Austin brings in open pretense against desperation. O homo
quicunque illam multitudinem peccatorum attendis, cur and omnipotentiam
coelestis medici non attendis? Thy sins are great, but Gods mercies are
greater. But this does represent the man's condition at the best to be such,
that God may if he will have mercy upon him; but whether he will or no, there
is as yet no other certainty or probability, but that he can if he please:
which proposition to an amazed timorous person that fears a hell the next hour,
is so dry a story, so hopeless a proposition, that all that can be said of
this, is, that it is very fit that no man should ever put it to the venture.
For upon this argument, we may as well comfort our selves upon him that died
without repenting at all. But the inquiry must be further.

2. of this easiness of men, thereby to retain so much hope as to make them
call upon God, and not to neglect what can then be done. Spem retine, spes una
hominem nec morte relinquit. As long as there is life there is hope, and when a
man dies, let him not despair; for there is a life after this, and a hope
proper to that; and amidst all the evils that the Ancients did fabulously
report to be in Pandora's box, they wittily placed Hope on the utmost lip of
it, and extremity. Vivere spe vidi qui moriturus erat. And S. Cyprian exhorts
old Demetrianus to turn Christian in his old age, and promises him salvation in
the name of Christ: and though his case, and that of a Christian who entered
into promises and Covenants of obedience, be very different; yet ad
immortalitatem sub ipsa morte transitur, a passing from such a repentance to
immortality, although it cannot be hoped for upon the just accounts of express
promise, yet it is not too great to hope from Gods mercy: and until that which
is infinite has a limit, a repenting man's hopes in this world cannot be wholly
at an end.

3. Maccabees, some persons who fought on the Lords side, and were slain in the
sight, were found having on their breasts (...), or pendants consecrate to the
idols of the Samnenses, and yet the good people of their party made oblation
for them, hoping that they might be partakers of a blessed resurrection. They
that repent heartily but one hour, are in a better condition then the other
that died in their sin, though with the advantage of fighting in a good cause:
and if good people will not leave hoping for such persons, it is not fit that
themselves should.

4. Nec ad rem pertinet ubi inciperet, quod placuerat ut fieret, and he will
not consider when that begins, which he loves should be done. * And that he is
our Father, and paulum supplicii satis est Patri, a Father will chastise, but
will not kill his son. * And that it is therefore seasonable to hope, because
it is a duty, and the very hope it self God delights to reward; for so said the
Apostle, Cast not away your confidence, Heb. 10.35.
which has great recompense of reward, * And the Church of God imitating the
mercies of our gracious God and Father, Council. Nicen. can. 13.
has denied to give the Sacrament of peace and mercy to none that seek it:
Viaticum omnibus in morte positis non est negandum. Council. Agath. c. 11.
And in the saddest consideration of things that can be, suppose it be with him
as with Simon Magus, suppose that he is in the gall of bitterness, in the state
of damnation, in the guilt of a sin which we know not whether God will pardon
or not, yet still it is wise and pious counsel, that he should pray, if
peradventure he may be forgiven. He (I say) that considers these things, will
have cause to be very earnest and very busy to lose no time, to remit no
labor, to quit no hope, but humbly, passionately, diligently set upon that
duty of repentance, which should have long ago come to some perfection. Now
because I have (as I suppose) said enough to make men afraid to put off their
repentance to their deathbed, yet in behalf of those who have been
unfortunately lost in their lives, or less instructed, or violently tempted, or
unhappily betrayed, and are upon their deathbeds, because though nothing can
be ascertained to them, yet it is not to be suffered that they should utterly
despair, I have thought fit to transcribe out of the writings of the ancient
Doctors, such exhortations as may both instruct and comfort, promote duty, and
give some little door of hope, but not add boldness in defiance of all the
laws of holiness.

In an epistle of Celestine Bishop of Rome in S. Austins time, Vera ad Deum
conversio in ultimis positorum, mente potius aestimanda est quam tempore....
Quum ergo Dominus sit cordis inspector, quovis tempore non est deneganda
poenitentia postulanti, quum ille se obliget Judici, cui occulta omnia noverit
revelari. True conversion is to be accounted of by the mind, rather then by
time. Therefore repentance is not to be denied to him, who at any time asks it.
And he despairs of the clemency of God who thinks it not sufficient, or that it
cannot relieve the sinner in an instant. Donec sumus in hac vita quantacunque
nobis acciderint peccata, possibile est omnia ablui per poenitentiam, said S.
Austin. Sermon. 181. de temp. c. 16.
As long as we are alive, so long it is possible that the vilest sins that are
may be washed off by repentance. Si vulneratus es, adhibe tibi curam dum vivis,
dum spiras, etiam in ipso lecto positus, etiam si dici potest animam efflans ut
jam de hoc mundo exeas. In Psa. 50. hom. 2.
Non impeditur temporis angustia misericordia Dei. Quid enim est peccatum ad
Dei misericordiam? tela araneae quae vento flante nusquam comparet. So S.
Chrysostom. If thou art wounded in thy soul, take care of it while thou
live, even so long as thou can breath, though thou be now breathing thy
last, yet take care still. The mercy of God cannot be hindered by time. For what
is thy sin to Gods mercy? even as a spiders web, when the wind blows it is
gone in an instant. Many more there are to the same purpose, who all speaking
of the mightiness of the Divine mercy, do insinuate their meaning to be
concerning a miraculous or extraordinary mercy. And therefore I shall oppose
nothing against this; only say, that it is very sad when men put their hopes
of being saved upon a miracle, and that without a miracle they must perish. But
yet then to despair is entering into hell before their time, and even a course
of the greatest imprudence in the world, next to that they are already guilty
of, that is, a putting things to that extremity. Dandum interstitium
poenitentiae, said Tacitus. And, Inter vitae negotia and diem mortis oportere
aliquid spatium intercedere, said Charles the Emperor. For, Nemo mortem
venientem hilaris excepit, nisi qui se ad eam diu composuerat, said Seneca,
Repentance must have a space of time; and from the affairs of the world to rush
into the arms of death, is too quick a change for him that would fain be saved.
If he can, in the midst of all these disadvantages, it is well; but he cannot
with cheerfulness and joy receive his death, unless he bestowed much time and
care in preparations against that sad solemnity.

Now concerning these instruments of hope, I am yet to give another account,
lest this either seem to be an easiness and flattery of souls, and not
warrantable from any revelation from God; or if it be, that it is also a
perfect destruction of all the former doctrine. For if it be inquired thus;
Has God declared that deathbed penitents shall not be saved, or that they may
be saved, or has he said nothing at all of it? If he has said they cannot be
saved, why then do I bid them hope, and so abuse them with a false persuasion?
If he has said that they may be saved, why do I dispute against it, and make
them fear, where God by a just promise has given them reason to be confident,
and has obliged them them to believe they shall be saved? If he has said
nothing of it, why are not they to be comprehended within the general rules of
all returning penitents? especially, since there was one case specially made
for their interest, the example of the Thief upon the Cross? To this I shall
give a clear and plain answer.

That God has required such conditions of pardon, and that the duty of
repentance is of such extent and burden, that it cannot be finished and
performed by dying persons after a vicious life, is evident from all the former
arguments: and therefore if we make dying men's accounts upon the stock of Gods
usual dealing, and open revelation, their case is desperate for the preceding
reasons. But why then do I bid them hope, if their case be desperate? Either
God threatening death to all impenitent persons, means not to exact death of
all, but of some only; or else when his holy Spirit describes Repentance in
severe characters, he secretly means to take less then he says. For if it be
such a work that cannot possibly be done on a deathbed, how then can dying
persons be called upon to repent? for it is vain to repent, if it be impossible
to hope; but if it be possible to do the work of Repentance on our deathbed,
but only that it is very difficult, there is in this affirmative no great
matter: Every one confesses that, and all evil men put it to the venture.

For the first part of the dilemma, I affirm nothing of it; God threatening
death to all the impenitent, excepts none; Except ye repent ye shall all
likewise perish. Neither does God exacting or describing Repentance in severe
lines, use any respect of persons, but with the same measures he will deal with
all. For when there is a difference in the Divine mercy, it is in giving time
and grace to repent, not in sparing one and condemning another, who die equally
criminal and impenitent. Those little lines of hopes are not upon either of
these foundations. For whatsoever is known or revealed, is against these
persons, and does certainly condemn them. Why then are they bidden to hope and
repent? I answer, once for all; It is upon something that we know not. And if
they be not saved we know not how, they cannot expect to be saved by any thing
that is revealed in their particular. When S. Peter had declared to Simon Magus
that he was in the gall of bitterness; and yet made him pray, if peradventure
the thought of his heart might be forgiven him: he did not by any thing that
was revealed know that he should be pardoned; but by something that he did not
know, there might be hope. It is at no hand to be dissembled out of tenderness
and pity to such persons, but to be affirmed openly; there is not revealed any
thing to them that may bid them be in any degree confident. But he that has a
deadly wound, whom the Surgeons affirm to be hopeless, yet is willing to
receive Cordials, and to be dressed.

2. If in the measures of life and death which are described in large
characters, there be any lines so indefinite and comprehensive, that they who
preach and declare the doctrines, do not fully take in all that God intends,
upon the account of our weakness and ignorance, there may be some little rushes
and twigs to support their sinking hopes. For although the matters of duty, and
the conditions of life and death are so plain and legible, that we can all
understand our obligation, yet things are seldom so described, that we can
give the final sentence concerning others. There is a secret in these things,
which nothing shall open but the day of Judgment. No man may judge his
brother; that is, no man can or ought to say, This man is damned; and yet we
know that he that dies an impenitent Traitor, or Rebel, or Adulterer, is
damned. But yet that adulterous Natta, or the Rebel Cinna, or the Traitor
Catiline is actually damned, that we know not. The reason is, because our duty
is described for us to guide and walk our selves by, not to judge and sentence
others. And even the judgment of the Church, who has authority to judge and
sentence, yet it is only for amendment, it is universal, it is declarative, it
is conditional; not personal, final, decretory, and eternal. For otherwise does
man judge, otherwise does God.

3. There is some variety in the case, and in the person, and in the degrees of
Repentance. There is a period, beyond which God will not admit a man to pardon;
but when it is we know not. There is a minimum Religionis, the least measure of
Religion, the lowest degree of acceptability; but what it is, we cannot tell.
There is also a proper measure for every one, but no man can fathom it. And the
duties and parts of Repentance consist in the terms of a great distance and
latitude; and we cannot tell when a man first begins to be safe, and when he is
newly escaped from the regions of sin, and when he begins his state of grace.
Now as God abates great measures of his wrath, and forgives all that is past if
we return betimes, and live twenty years in piety and repentance; so he does if
the man do so nineteen year, and eighteen, and still shortning till you come to
a year, or any the least time that can do the work of Repentance, and
exterminate his vicious habit. Now because Abraham begged for the pardon of
Sodom, if there should be found fifty righteous there, and then abated five,
and then five more, and then ten more, till he came to ten alone, and it is
supposed that Abraham first gave out, and that God would have pardoned the City
for one righteous man's sake, if Abraham had still persevered to ask: if any man
will suppose that it may be done so in the abatements of time to be made to a
returning sinner; though I say it is a strange diminution to come from years to
one day, yet I will say nothing against it; but that length or shortness of
time makes nothing to the mercies of God, but it makes very much to the duty of
man, because every action requires some time, and every habit much more: Now we
have reason to say that the condition of a dying penitent after a whole wicked
life, is desperate, because so far as we understand things, habits are not to
be extinguished, and the contraries acquired but with long time and study. But
if there be any secret way by which the Spirit of God does work faster, and
produce undiscerned miracles, we ought to adore that goodness by which it is
so; and they that can believe this, may hope the other: In the mean time,
neither the one nor the other is revealed; and so it stands as it did in the
whole Question.

4. We find in the instance of Abraham's faith, that against hope he believed
in hope; that is, that he had great arguments on both sides, and therefore that
in defiance of one, he would hope in the other, because this could not fail
him, but the other could. If it can be brought to pass that a dying man can
hope after a wicked life, it is a hope against hope; and of this all that I can
say is, that it is no contradiction in the thing, to affirm that a dying
penitent who has contracted vicious habits, has not time left him to perform
that repentance which God requires of habitual sinners under the pains of
eternal death; and yet to bid such a person do what he can do, and pray, if
peradventure God will be entreated. Because that little hopes which he is bid
to have are not warranted, or relying upon pretense of any particular
revelation, contrary to the so many expressions of severe duty and stricter
conditions; but are placed upon the foundation of the Divine Power, and such
little proportions and similitudes of things, and guesses and conjectures of
kind persons, as can only be sufficient to make the dying man try what can be
done.

5. The first ages of the Church did exactly use this method of Doctrine and
Discipline. In some cases (whereof I shall afterward give account) they
refused to declare them pardoned, to minister Gods pardon to dying penitents;
but yet would not bid them despair, but refer them to the Divine judgment:
which if it be reduced to the causes of things, if we believe they proceeded
reasonably, must mean this, that they knew of no revesation concerning the
pardon of such persons; but whether God would or no pardon them, they knew not,
but bid them hope well. And when they did admit dying penitents to the peace of
the Church, they did it de been esse, that it might do as much good as it
could. But they knew not what that was. Poenitentiam dare possumus, securitatem
dare non possumus. They are S. Austins words. Now if I were to ask of him an
account, it would be in the same way of objection as I am now untying. For did
God promise pardon to dying penitents after a wicked life; or are there fearful
threatenings in Scripture against such sinners as certainly all in their case
are? or has God said nothing at all concerning them? If God did promise pardon
to such, then why did not the Church give security, as well as penance? If God
did threaten fearfully all such persons, why do they admit such to repentance
whom God will not admit to pardon, but has threatened with eternal death? If he
has said nothing of them, they are to be judged by the measures of others; and
truly that will too sadly ring their passing bell. For men in health who have
contracted vicious habits, cannot be pardoned so long as their vicious habit
remains; and they know that to overcome and mortify a vicious habit, is a work
of time and great labor; and if this be the measure of dying penitents, as
well as of living and healthful, they will sink in judgment that have not time
to do their duty. But then why the Church of those ages, and particularly S.
Austin, should hope and despair at the same time for them, that is, knew no
ground of revelations upon which to fix any hope of pardon for them, and yet
should exhort them to Repentance, which without hopes of pardon is to no
purpose, there is no sensible account to be given but this, that for ought they
knew God might do more then they knew, and more then he had promised; but
whether he would or not, they knew not, but by that means they thought they
fairly quit their hands of such persons.

6. But after all this strict survey of answers, if we be called to account for
being so kind, it must be confessed that things are spoken out of charity and
pity, more then of knowledge. The case of these men is sad and deplorable, and
it is piety when things are come to that state and saddest event, to show mercy
by searching all the corners of revelation for comfort, that God may be as much
glorified, and the dying men assisted as much as may be. I remember the Jews
are reproved by some for repealing the last verse but one in the book of
Isaiah, and setting it after the last of all. That being a verse of mercy, this
of sorrow and threatening; as if they would be more merciful then God himself,
and thought it unfit to end so excellent a book with so sad a cursing. Indeed
Gods ways are best, and his measures the surest; and therefore it is not good
to promise where God has not promised, and to be kind where he is angry, and
to be free of his pardon, where he has shut up and sealed his treasures. But
if they that say God has threatened all such sinners as dying penitents after
wicked life are, and yet that they must not despair, are to be reproved as too
kind; then they much more, who confidently promise heaven at last. It is
indeed a compliance with humane misery, that makes it fit to speak what hopeful
things we can; but if these hopes can easily be reproved, I am sure the former
severity cannot so easily be confuted. That may, this cannot.

1. Repentance the dying penitent is obliged to, will be of no great
difficulty. Qui dicit omnia nihil excipit. He that is tied to all can be
excused from none. All that he can do is too little, if God shall deal with him
according to the conditions of the Gospel which are described, and therefore he
must not inquire into measures, but do all, absolutely all that he can in that
sad period. Particularly

2.

3.

4.

5. S. Aug. and habetur de poen did. 7
In this case the Church can give the Sacrament, but cannot give security.

Meditations and Prayers to be used in all the foregoing cases.
CAn the Ethiopian change his skin, Jer. 13.23.
or the Leopard his spots? then may ye learn to do good that are accustomed to
do evil.

This is thy lot, the portion of thy measures, Ver. 25.
from me (says the Lord) because thou have forgotten me.

Give glory to the Lord your God before he cause darkness, Ver. 16.
and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, lest while you look for
light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness.

What will thou say when he shall punish? Ver. 21.
shall not sorrow take thee as a woman in travel?

And if thou say in thine heart, Ver. 22.
Wherefore came these things upon me? for the greatness of thine iniquity are
thy skirts discovered, and thy heels made bare.

I have seen thine adulteries, and thy neighings, Ver. 27.
the lewdness of thy whoredoms, and thine abominations, Woe unto thee, will thou
not be made clean? when shall it once be? says the Lord God.

Thus says the Lord unto this people, Jer. 14.10.
Thus have they loved to wander, they have not refrained their feet, therefore
the Lord does not accept them, he will now remember their iniquity and visit
their sins.

Then says the Lord, Ver. 11, 12.
Pray not for this people for their good. When they fast, I will not hear their
cry, and when they offer an oblation, I will not accept them, but I will
consume them by the sword, and by famine, and by the pestilence.

Therefore thus says the Lord, Jer. 15.19.
if thou return, then will I bring thee again, and thou shall stand before me:
and if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth. I
am with thee to save thee and to deliver thee, says the Lord.

And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, Ver. 21.
and I will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.

Learn before thou speak, Ecclus. 18.19.
and use Physic or ever thou be sick.

Before judgment examine thy self, Ver. 20.
and in the day of visitation thou shall find mercy.

Humble thy self before thou be sick, Ver. 21.
and in the time of sins show repentance.

Let nothing hinder thee to pay thy vows in due time, Ver. 22.
and defer not until death to be justified.

I made haste, Psalm. 119.
and prolonged not the time to keep thy Commandments.

Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, Amend your ways and your
doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place.

Trust not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord.

For if you thoroughly amend your ways, and your doings, if you thoroughly
execute judgment;

If ye oppress not the stranger and the widow, Jer. 7.
then shall ye dwell in the land.

Thus says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 11.18.
I will give you the land, and they shall take away all the detestable things
thereof, and all the abominations thereof from thence.

And I will give them one heart, Ver. 19.
and I will put a new spirit within you, and I will take the stony heart out of
their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh.

That they may walk in my statutes, Ver. 20.
and keep mine ordinances, and do them, and they shall be my people and I will
be their God.

But as for them whose heart walks after their detestable things, and their
abominations; Ver. 21.
I will recompense their way upon their own heads, says the Lord God.

They have seduced my people, saying, Peace, Ezekiel. 13.10.
and there was no peace, and one built up a wall, and others daubed it with
untemper'd mortar.

Will ye pollute me among my people for handfuls of barley, and pieces of
bread, Ver. 19.
to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive that should
not live by your lying unto my people that hear your lies?

Therefore I will judge you, o house of Israel, Ezekiel. 18.30.
every one according to your ways, says the Lord God, repent and turn your
selves from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall not be your ruin.

Cast away from you all your transgressions whereby you have transgressed, Ver.
31.
and make you a new heart and a new spirit; for why will ye die, o house of
Israel?

For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God:
Ver. 32.
wherefore turn your selves and live ye.

Ye shall remember your ways, Ezekiel. 20.43.
and all your doings wherein ye have been defiled, and ye shall loath your
selves in your own sight for all your evils, that ye have committed.

Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with
a cart-rope. Isa. 5.18.


Woe unto them that justify the wicked for a reward, Ver. ^3.
and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him.

And when ye spread forth your hands, Isa. 1.15.
I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when you make many prayers, I will not
hear: your hands are full of blood.

Wash ye, Isa. 1.16.
make ye clean, put away the evil of your doing from before mine eyes, cease to
do evil,

Learn to do well, Ver. 17.
seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the
widow.

Come now and let us reason together, Ver. 18.
says the Lord; Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as
snow, though they be red as crimson, they shall be as wool.

If ye be willing and obedient, Ver. 19.
ye shall eat the fruit of the land.

But if ye refuse and rebel, Ver. 20.
ye shall be devoured with the sword; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

She has wearied her self with lies, Ezekiel. 24.
therefore have I caused my fury to light upon her.

Sow to your selves in righteousness, Hos 10.12.
and reap in mercy; break up your fallow ground, for it is time to seek the
Lord, till he come and rain righteousness upon you.

Turn thou unto thy God; Mos. 12.6.
keep mercy and judgment, and wait on thy God continually.

O Israel, Hos. 13.9.
thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help.

Return to the Lord thy God, Hos. 24.
for thou have fallen by thine iniquity. Take with you words, and turn to the
Lord, say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: so will
we render the calves of our lips. For in thee the fatherless finds mercy. I
will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely, for mine anger is turned
away.

Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, Isa. 55.6.
call ye upon him while he is near.

Let the wicked forsake his way, Ver. 7.
and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

For thus says the high and lofty One, Isa. 57.15.
that inhabits eternity, whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy
place; with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the
spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.

For I will not contend for ever, Ver. 16.
neither will I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail before me, and
the souls which I have made.

For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth and smote him: I hid me and
was wroth, Ver. 17.
and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart.

I have seen his ways and will heal him: Ver. 18.
I will lead him also, and restore comfort to him and to his mourners.

I create the fruit of the lips; peace, Ver. 19.
peace to him that is afar off, and to him that is near, says the Lord, and I
will heal him.

But the wicked are like the troubled sea when it cannot rest, Ver. 20.
whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

There is no peace, says my God, Ver. 21.
to the wicked.

It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth. Lam. 3.26, 27.
It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of
the Lord.

Who is a God like unto thee, Micah 7.18.
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of
his heritage? he retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in
mercy.

He will turn again, Mic. 7.19.
he will have compassion upon us: he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will
cast all our sins into the depth of the sea.

Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, Eccles. 12.1.
while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I
have no pleasure in them.

A PSALM.
O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us, have mercy upon us for thy
Names sake: for our backslidings are many, we have sinned against thee.

O the hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in time of trouble, why should
thou be a stranger to us, and as a wayfaring-man that turns aside to tarry
for a night?

Why should thou be as a man astonished, as a mighty man that cannot save? yet
thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy name, leave us
not.

We acknowledge, O Lord, our wickedness, and the iniquity of our fathers, for
we have sinned against thee.

Do not abhor us for thy Names sake, Jer. 14.7, 8, 9.
do not disgrace the Throne of thy Glory; remember, break not the Covenant with
us.

I will no more sit in the assembly of mockers, Jer. 15.17.
nor rejoice; I will sit alone because of thy hand, for thou have filled me
with indignation.

Why is my pain perpetual, Ver. 18.
and my wound incurable which refuses to be healed? will thou be altogether
unto me as waters that fail?

O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is not in man that
walks to direct his steps.

O Lord, correct me, but with judgment, not in thine anger, lest thou bring me
to nothing.

O Lord, the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall be ashamed, because
they have forsaken the Lord the fountain of living waters.

Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, Jer. 17.13.
and I shall be saved: for thou art my praise.

Be not a terror unto me, Ver. 17.
thou art my hope in the day of evil.

Behold, O Lord, for I am in distress: Lam. 1.20.
my bowels are troubled, mine heart is turned within me, for I have grievously
rebelled.

For these things I weep; mine eye, Ver. 15.
mine eye runs down with water, because the Comforter that should relieve my
soul is far from me.

Hear me, O Lord, and that soon, Psalm. 14 3.
for my spirit waxes faint: hide not thy face from me, lest I be like unto
them that go down into the pit.

O let me hear thy loving kindness betimes, for in thee in is my trust; show
thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto thee.

Teach me the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God: let thy loving
Spirit lead me forth into the land of righteousness.

Quicken me, O Lord, for thy Names sake, and for thy righteousness sake bring
my soul out of trouble.

The Lord upholdeth all such as fall, Psalm. 142.9.
and lifts up those that be down.

I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost: O seek thy servant, for I do not
forget thy Commandments.

O do well unto thy servant, that I may live and keep thy word.

O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength, before I go hence, and be
no more seen.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
A Prayer for a sinner returning after a long impiety.
I. OEternal Judge of Men and Angels, Father of Mercy, and the great lover of
Souls, I humbly acknowledge that the state of my soul is sad and deplorable,
and by my fault, by my own grievous fault, I am in an evil condition; and if
thou should now enter into judgment with me, I have nothing to put in bar
against the horrible sentence, nothing of my own, nothing that can ease thy
anger, or abate the fury of one stroke of thy severe infliction. I do (O God)
judge and condemn my self, and justify thee, for thou art righteous, and
whatsoever thou do is good and true. But O my God, when the guilty condemns
himself, nothing is left for the offended party but to return to graciousness
and pardon. I (O Lord) have done thy severe and angry work, I have sentenced a
vile man to a sad suffering; and if I so perish as I have deserved, thou art
just and righteous, and thou ought for ever to be glorified.

II. But O my God, though I know that I have deserved evils that I know not,
and hope I shall never feel, yet thou art gracious and holy, and love more to
behold thy glory reflected from the floods and springs of mercy, then to see it
refracted from the troubled waters of thy angry and severe displeasure: And
because thou love it so highly to show mercy, and because my eternal interest
is served in it, I also ought to desire what thou love, and to beg of thee
humbly and passionately that I may not perish; and to hope with a modest
confidence that thou have mercy in store for him, to whom thou have given grace
to ask for it: for it is one degree of pardon to be admitted to the station of
penitent beggars; it is another degree of pardon that thou have given me grace
to hope, and I know that in the fountains of thy own graciousness thou have
infinite arguments and inducements to move thee to pity me and to pardon.

III. O My God, pity me for thy Names sake, even for thy own goodness sake, and
because I am miserable and need it. And because I have nothing of my own to be
a ground of confidence, give thy servant leave to place my hopes on thee
through Jesus Christ; thou have commanded me to come to the Throne of Grace
with boldness, that I may find mercy in time of need; and thou have promised
to give thy holy Spirit to them that ask him. O dear God, give me pardon, and
give me thy Spirit, and I am full and safe, and clothed and healed, and all
that I desire to be, and all that I ought to be.

IV. I Have spent much time in vanity, and in undoing my self; grant me thy
grace, that I may recover my loss, and employ all the remaining portion of my
time in holy offices and duties of Repentance. My understanding has been
abused by false persuasions and vain confidences. But now, O God, I offer up
that imperious faculty wholly to the obedience of Christ; to be governed by his
Laws, to be instructed by his Doctrine, to be bended by all his arguments. My
will has been used to crookedness and peevish morosity in all virtuous
employments, but greedy and fierce in the election and prosecution of evil
actions and designs: But now O God, I have no will but what is thine, and I
will rather die then consent and choose any thing that I know displeases thee.
My heart, O God, was a fountain of evil thoughts, ungracious words, and
irregular actions, because my passions were not obedient nor orderly, neither
temperate, nor governed, neither of a fitting measure, nor carried to a right
object: But now, O God, I present them unto thee, not as a fit oblation, but as
the Lepers and the blind, the lame and the crooked were brought unto the holy
Jesus, to be made straight and clean, useful and illuminate; and when thou have
taken into thy possession what is thine, and what I stole from thee, or
detained violently, and which the Devil did usurp, then thou will sanctify and
save it, use it as thine own, and make it to be so for ever.

V. BLessed God, refuse not thy returning son: I have prodigally wasted my
talents, and spent my time in riotous and vain living; but I have not lost my
title and relation to thee my Father. O my God, I have the sorrow of an humble
penitent, the purposes of a converted sinner, the love of a pardoned person,
the zeal of an obliged and redeemed prisoner, the hope of him that feels thy
present goodness, and longs for more. Reject me not, O my God, but do thou work
all my works within me. My heart is in thy hands, and I know that the way of
man is not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his steps: But
do thou guide me into the way of righteousness; work in me an excellent
Repentance, a great caution and observance, an humble fear, a prudent and a
religious hope, and a daily growing charity; work in me to will and to do of
thy good pleasure: Then shall I praise thy name, and love thy excellencies, and
obey thy Commandments, and suffer thy impositions, and be what thou would
have me to be, that I being rescued from the possession of the Devil, and the
torments of perishing souls, may be admitted to serve thee, and be a Minister
of thy honor in the Kingdoms of Grace and Glory, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for an old person returning after a wicked life.
I. O Eternal God, give me leave to speak for my self before I die: I would
fain live and be healed, I have been too long thine enemy, and would not be so
for ever. My heart is broken within me, and all my fortunes are broken without;
I know not how to speak, and I must not, I dare not hold my tongue.

II. O My God, can yesterday be recalled, and the flying hours be stopped? In
my youth I had not the prudence and caution of old age; but is it possible that
in my old age I may be restored to the hopes and opportunities of youth? Thou
did make the Sun to stand still at the prayer of Joshua, and return back at
the importunity of Hezekiah. O do thou make a new account for me, and reckon
not the days of my youth; but from this day reckon the beginnings of my life,
and measure it by the steps of duty, and the light of the Sun of Righteousness
now rising upon my heart.

III. I Am ashamed, O God, I am ashamed that I should betray my reason, shame
my nature, dishonor all my strengths, debauch my understanding, and baffle all
my faculties for so base, so vile affections, so unrewarding interests. O my
God, where is all that vanity which I sucked so greedily as the wild Asses do
the wind? whither is that pleasure and madness gone which so ravished all my
senses, and made me deaf to the holy charms of thy divinest Spirit? Behold, O
God, I die for that which is not; and unless thy mercy be my rescue, for ever I
shall suffer torments insufferable, still to come, still to succeed, for having
drunk of unsatisfying perishing waters, which had no current, no abode.

IV. O Dear God, smite me not yet; respite me one portion of time, I dare not
say how much, but even as much as thou please. O stay a while, and try me but
this once: It is true, O God, I have lost my strength, and given my vigorous
years to that which I am ashamed to think on. But yet, O Lord, if thou
please, my soul can be as active, and dutiful, and affectionate, and humble,
and sorrowful, and watchful as ever. Thou do not save any for his own
worthiness, but eternal life is a gift; and thou can if thou please give it
unto me. But why does my soul run thither, with all its loads of sin and shame
upon it? That is too great, yet to be thought of. O give me pardon, and give me
sorrow, and give me a great, a mighty grace, to do the duty of a whole life in
the remaining portion of my days.

V. O My gracious Lord, whatever thy sentence be, yet let me have the honor to
serve thee. Let me contribute something to thy glory, let me converse with thy
Saints and Servants in the entercourses of piety; let me be admitted to be a
servant to the meanest of thy servants, to do something that thou love. O God
my God, do what thou please, so I may not for ever die in the sad and
dishonorable impieties of the damned. Let me but be admitted to thy service in
all the degrees of my soul, and all the days of my short life, and my soul
shall have some comfort, because I signify my love and duty to thee for whom I
will not refuse to die. O my God, I will not beg of thee to give me comfort,
but to give me duty and employment. Smite me if thou please, but smite me
here; kill me if thou please, I have deserved it, but I would fain live to
serve thee, and for no other reason, but that thou may love to pardon and to
sanctify me.

VI. O Blessed Jesus, do thou intercede for me; thy Father hears thee in all
things, and thou know our infirmities, and have felt our miseries, and did
die to snatch us from the intolerable flames of Hell; and although thou give
thy gifts in differing proportions to thy servants, yet thou do equally offer
pardon to all thy enemies that will come unto thee and beg it. O give me all
faith, and all charity, and a spirit highly compunctive, highly industrious,
passionate, prudent and indefatigable in holy services. Open thy fountains,
gracious Lord, and bath my stained soul in thy blood. Wash the Ethiop, cleanse
the Leper, dress the strangers wounds, and forgive thy enemy.

VII. I Will not, O my God, I dare not distrust those infinite glories of thy
mercy and graciousness, by which thou art ready to save all the world. The sins
of all mankind together are infinitely less then thy mercy, and thou who did
redeem the Heathen world, wilt also I hope rescue me who am a Christian. This
is my glory and my shame, my sins had not been so great if I had not disgraced
so excellent a title, and abused so mighty a grace; but yet if the grace which
I have abused had not been so great, my hopes had been less. One deep, O God,
calls upon another. O let the abyss of thy mercy swallow up the puddles of my
impurity; let my soul no longer sink in the dead sea of Sodom, but in the laver
of thy blood and my tears and sorrow; wash me who come to thee to be cleansed
and purified. It is not impossible to have it done, for thy power has no
limit: It is not unusual for thee to manifest such glories of an infinite
mercy; thou do it daily. O give me a fast, a tenacious hope on thee, and a
bitter sorrow for my sins, and an excellent zeal of thy glory; and let my
repentance be more exemplary then my sins, that the infiniteness of that mercy
which shall save me may be conspicuous to all Saints and Angels, and may endear
the return of all sinners to thee the fountain of Holiness and Mercy. Mercy,
dear God, pity thy servant, and do thy work of grace speedily, and mightily
upon me, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Ejaculations and short Prayers to be used by dying or sick Penitents after a
wicked life.
I. O Almighty Father of men and Angels, I have often been taught that thy
mercies are infinite, and I know they are so; and if I be a person capable of
comfort, this is the fountain of it: for my sins are not infinite, only
because they could not be so, my desires were only limited by my Nature, for I
would not obey the Spirit.

II. THou, O God, gave mercy to the Thief upon the Cross, and from pain thou
did bring him to Paradise, from sin to repentance, from shame to glory. Thou
were the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, and art still slain in all
the periods of it. O be thou pleased to adorn thy passion still with such
miracles of mercy; and now in this sad conjunction of affairs, let me be made
the instance.

III. THou art angry if I despair; and therefore thou command me to hope: My
hope cannot rest upon my self, for I am a broken reed, and an undermined wall.
But because it rests upon thee, it ought not to be weak, because thou art
infinite in mercy and power.

IV. HE that has lived best, needs mercy, and he that has lived worst, even
I, O Lord, am not wounded beyond the efficacy of thy blood, O dearest sweetest
Savior Jesus.

V. I Hope it is not too late to say this. But if I might be suffered to live
longer, I would by thy grace live better, spending all my time in duty, laying
out all my passion in love and sorrow, employing all my faculties in Religion
and Holiness.

VI. O My God, I am ready to promise any thing now, and I am ready to do or to
suffer any thing that may be the condition of mercy and pardon to me. But I
hope I am not deceived by my fears, but that I should, if I might be tried, do
all that I could, and love thee with a charity, great like that mercy by which
I humbly pray that I may be pardoned.

VII. MY comfort O God is, that thou can if thou will: and I am sure thy
mercy is as great as thy power, and why then may not I hope that thou will have
mercy according to thy power? Man, only Man is the proper subject of thy mercy,
and therefore only he is capable of thy mercy, because he has sinned against
thee. Angels and the inferior creatures rejoice in thy goodness, but only we
that are miserable and sinful can rejoice in thy mercy and forgiveness.

VIII. I confess I have destroyed my self; but in thee is my help; for thou
gettest glory to thy name by saving a sinner, by redeeming a captive slave, by
inlightning a dark eye, by sanctifying a wicked heart, by pardoning innumerable
and intolerable transgressions.

IX. O My Father, chastise me if thou please, but do not destroy me: I am a
son, though an Absalom and a Cain, an unthankful, a malicious, a revengeful,
uncharitable person; Thou judge not by time, but by the measures of the
Spirit. The affections of the heart are not to be weighed in the balance of
the Sanctuary, nor repentance to be measured by time, but by the Spirit and by
the measures of thy mercy.

X. O My God, Hope is a word of an uncertain sound when it is placed in
something that can fail, but thou art my hope and my confidence, and thy
mercies are sure mercies which thou have revealed to man in Christ Jesus, and
they cannot fail them who are capable of them.

XI. O Gracious Father, I am as capable of mercy as I was of being created; and
the first grace is always so free a grace, so undeserved on our part, that he
that needs and calls, is never forsaken by thee.

XII. BLessEd Jesus, give me leave to trust in thy promises, in the letter of
thy promises; this letter kills not, for it is the letter of thy Spirit, and
saves and makes alive. Ask and you shall have; so thou have said, O my God,
they are thy own words; and whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord shall
be saved.

XIII. THere are, O blessed Jesus, many more; and one tittle of thy word shall
not pass away unaccomplished: and nothing could be in vain by which thou did
intend to support our hopes. If we confess our sins, thou art just and
righteous to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all iniquities.

XIV. WHen David said he would confess, then thou forgavest him. When the
Prodigal was yet afar off, thou did run out to meet him, and did receive
him. When he was naked, thou did reinvest him with a precious robe; and what
O God can demonstrate the greatness of thy mercy, but such a misery as mine, so
great a shame, so great a sinfulness?

XV. But what am I, O God, sinful dust and ashes, a miserable and undone man,
that I should plead with the great Judge of all the World? Look not upon me as
I am in my self, but through Jesus Christ behold thy servant; clothe me with
the robes of his righteousness, wash me in his blood, conform me to his image,
fill me with his Spirit, and give me time, or give me pardon and an excellent
heroic spirit, that I may do all that can be done, something that is
excellent, and that may be acceptable in Jesus Christ. If I perish, I perish; I
have deserved it: but I will hope for mercy, till thy mercy has a limit, till
thy goodness can be numbered. O my God, let me not perish; thou have no pleasure
in my death, and it is impossible for man to suffer thy extremest wrath. Who
can dwell with the everlasting burning? O my God, let me dwell safely in the
embraces of thy sweetest mercy. Amen. Amen. Amen.

CHAP. VI. Of Concupiscence, and Original sin, and whether or no, or how far we
are bound to repent of it.
. 1.
ORiginal sin is so called (...), Adam, which was committed in the Original of
mankind by our first Parent, and which has influence upon all his posterity.
Nascuntur non proprie, De civit. lib. 16. c. 18.
sed originaliter peccatores. So S. Austin; and therefore S. Ignatius calls it
(...), the old impiety, Epist. ad Trallian.
that which was in the original or first Parent of mankind.

This sin brought upon Adam all that God threatened, viz. an immortal duration
and abode in this life; so neither does it appear in that angry intercourse
that God had with Adam, that he took from him or us any of our natural
perfections, but his graces only.

Man being left in this state of pure Naturals, Adam nor any of his posterity
could by any actions or holiness obtain heaven by desert, or by any natural
efficiency; for it is a gift still, and it is neque currentis, neque operantis,
neither of him that runs, nor of him that works, but of God who freely
gives it to such persons, whom he also by other gifts and graces has disposed
toward the reception of it.

What gifts and graces, Adam in his state of Innocence, we know not, God has
no where told us; and of things unrevealed we commonly make wild conjectures.
But after his fall we find no sign of any thing but of a common man. And
therefore as it was with him, so it is with us; our nature cannot go to
heaven, without the helps of the Divine grace; so neither could his: and
whether he had them or no, it is certain we have; receiving more by the second
Adam then we did lose by the first: and the sons of God are now spiritual,
which he never was that we can find.

But concerning the sin of Adam, is saddest of all, we are born enemies of God,
sons of wrath, and heirs of eternal damnation.

In the meditation of these sad stories I shall separate the certain from the
uncertain,

By one man sin came into the world] That sin entered into the world by Adam,
Romans 5.12.
is therefore certain, because he was the first man, and unless he had never
sinned, it must needs enter by him, for it comes in first by the first; and
Death by sin, that is, Death which at first was the condition of nature, became
a punishment upon that account: just as it was to the Serpent to creep upon his
belly, and to the Woman to be subject to her Husband: These things were so
before, and would have been so, for the Apostle pressing the duty of
subjection, gives two reasons why the woman was to obey. One of them only was
derived from this sin, the other was the prerogative of creation; for Adam was
first formed, 1 Timothy 2.13.
then Eve; so that before her fall, she was to have been subject to her
husband, because she was later in being; she was a minor, and therefore under
subjection; she was also the weaker vessel. But it had not been a curse, and if
any of them had been hindered by grace and favor, by Gods anger they were now
left to fall back to the condition of their nature.

Death passed upon all men; Adam. And therefore S. Paul adds that for the
reason. In as much as all men have sinned] If all men have sinned upon their
own account (as it is certain they have) then these words can very well mean,
that Adam first sinned, and all his sons and daughters sinned after him, and so
died in their own sin, by a death which at first and in the whole constitution
of affairs is natural, and a death which their own sins deserved, but yet,
which was hastened or ascertained upon them the rather for the sin of their
progenitor. Sin propagated upon that root and vicious example; or rather from
that beginning, not from that cause, but dum ita peccant, and similiter
moriuntur, If they sin so, then so shall they die; so S. Hierome.

But this is not thought sufficient, Adam, and in him we all by interpretation
sinned, and therefore think these words (...), forasmuch as all men have
sinned, ought to be expounded thus, [Death passed upon all men; In whom all men
have sinned] meaning that in Adam we really sinned, and God does truly and
justly impute his sin to us, to make us as guilty as he that did it, and as
much punished, and liable to eternal damnation. And all the great force of this
fancy relies upon this exposition of (...), to signify [in him.]

Concerning which there will be the less need of a laborious inquiry; a
distinct period by it self, without dependence or proper purpose, against the
faith of all copies, who do not make this a distinct period, and against the
usual manner of speaking. 2. This phrase of (...) is used in 2 Cor. 5.4. (...),
Not [for that] we would be unclothed; and so it is used in Polybius, Suidas,
and Var^nu^. (...), that is, ea condition, for that cause or condition; and
(...), ad quid ades, are the words of the Gospel, as Suidas quotes them. 3.
Although (...) may signify the same with (...), in whom, or in him; yet it is
so very seldom or infrequent, that it were intolerable to do violence to this
place to force it to an unnatural signification. 4. If it did always signify
the same with (...), or in him, which it does not; yet we might very well
follow the same reading we now do, and which the Apostles discourse does infer;
for even (...) does diverse times signify, forasmuch, or for that, as is to be
seen in Romans 8.3. and Heb. 2.18. But 5. supposing all that can be, and that it
did signify [in whom] yet the sense were fair enough, as to the whole article;
for by him, or in him, we are made sinners, that is, brought to an evil state
of things usually consequent to sinners: we are used like sinners by him, or in
him; just as when a sinner is justified, he is treated like a righteous person
as if he had never sinned, though he really did sin oftentimes; and this for
his sake who is made righteousness to us: so in Adam we are made sinners, that
is, treated ill and afflicted, though our selves be innocent of that sin, which
was the occasion of our being used so severely for other sins of which we were
not innocent. But how this came to pass is told in the following words.

For until the law, V. 13, 14.
but sin is not imputed when there is no law. Nevertheless death reigned from
Adam to Moses] even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression] who is the figure of him that was to come.] By which discourse
it appears, that S. Paul does not speak of all mankind, as if the evil
occasioned by Adams sin did descend for ever upon that account; but it had a
limited effect, and reached only to those who were in the interval between
Adam and Moses. This death was brought upon them by Adam; that is, death which
was threatened to Adam only, went forth upon them also who indeed were sinners,
but not after the similitude of Adams transgression; that is, who sinned not so
capitally as he did. For to sin like Adam, is used as a Tragical and a high
expression. Hos. 6.7.
So it is in the Prophet [They like men have transgressed] so we read it; but
in the Hebrew it is [They like Adam have transgressed] and yet death passed
upon them that did not sin after the similitude of Adam; for Abel, and Seth,
and Abraham, and all the Patriarchs died ( Enoch only excepted;) and therefore
it was no wonder that upon the sin of Adam death entered upon the world, who
generally sinned like Adam, since it passed on and reigned upon less sinners. *
It reigned upon them whose sins therefore would not be so imputed as Adams was,
because there was no law with an express threatening given to them as was to
Adam; but although it was not wholly imputed upon their own account, yet it was
imputed upon theirs and Adams. For God was so exasperated with Mankind, that
being angry he would still continue that punishment even to the lesser sins and
sinners, which he only had first threatened to Adam: and so Adam brought it
upon them. They indeed in rigor did themselves deserve it, but if it had not
been for that provocation by Adam, they who sinned not so bad, and had not been
so severely and expressly threatened, had not suffered so severely. * The case is
this. Jonathan and Michal were Saul's children; it came to pass that seven of
Saul's issue were to be hanged, all equally innocent, equally culpable. David
took the five sons of Michal, for she had left him unhandsomely. Jonathan was
his friend, and therefore he spared his son Mephibosheth. Here it was
indifferent as to the guilt of the persons, whether David should take the sons
of Michal, or of Jonathan; but it is likely that as upon the kindeness which
David had to Jonathan he spared his son, so upon the just provocation of Michal
he made that evil to fall upon them, of which they were otherwise capable,
which it may be they should not have suffered, if their Mother had been kind.
Adam was to God, as Michal to David.

But there was in it a further design: Adam was made a figure of Christ: So the
Apostle expressly affirms; [who is the figure of him that was to come] that as
death passed upon the posterity of Adam, though they sinned less then Adam; so
life should be given to the followers of Christ, though they were imperfectly
righteous, that is, not after the similitude of Christ's perfection.

But for the further clearing the Article depending upon the right
understanding of these words, Adams posterity, for his sake went no further
then till Moses. For after the giving of Moses law, death passed no further
upon the account of Adams transgression, but by the sanction of Moses law,
where death was anew, distinctly, and expressly threatened as it was to Adam, and
so went forward upon a new score, but introduced first by Adam; that is, he was
the cause at first, and till Moses also, he was in some sense the author, and
for ever after, the precedent; and therefore the Apostle said well, In Adam we
all die: his sin brought in the sentence, in him it began, and from him it
passed upon all the world, though by several dispensations. 2. In the discourse
of the Apostle, those that were named were not considered simply as born from
Adam, and therefore it did not come upon the account of Natural or Original
corruption, but they were considered as Sinners; just as they who have life by
Christ are not considered as merely children by title, or spiritual birth, and
adoption, but as just and faithful. But then this is the proportion and purpose
of the Apostle; as God gives to these life by Christ, which is a greater thing
then their imperfect righteousness without Christ could have expected: so here
also; this part of Adams posterity was punished with death for their own sin:
but this death was brought upon them by Adam; that is, the rather for his
provocation of God by his great transgression.

There is now remaining no difficulty but in the words of the 19 verse [By one
man's disobedience many were made sinners.] Paul calls (...), sometimes (...),
all, and many, that is, all from Adam to Moses, but they are but many, and not
all in respect of mankind; exactly answering to the All, that have life by
Christ, which are only the (...), or the (...), those many that believe, and
are adopted into the Covenant of believers: by this indeed it is perceiveable
that this was not a natural title or derivation of an inherent corruption from
Adam, for that must have included All, absolutely and universally. But that
which I here dwell and rely upon is this:

Sin is often in Scripture used for the punishment of sin; sinners, though they
be innocent. So it is in this case. By Adams disobedience many were made
sinners; that is, the sin of Adam passed upon them, and sat upon their heads
with evil effect, like that of Bathsheba; I and my son shall be accounted
sinners; 1 Kings 1.21.
that is, evil will befall us, we shall be used like sinners, like Traitors and
Usurpers. So, This shall be the sin of Egypt, Zech. 14.19.
said the Prophet: This shall be the punishment; so we read it. And Cain,
complaining of the greatness of his punishment, said, Mine iniquity is greater
then I can bear. * And to put it past all doubt, not only punishment is called
sin in Scripture, but even he that bears it. Him that knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21.
God has made sin, that we might be the righteousness of God in him: and the
Prophet Isaiah speaking of Christ, says, Posuit peccatum animam suam; Isa.
53.10.
He has made his soul a sin, that is, Heb. 9.28.
obnoxious to the punishment of sin. Thus it is said, that Christ shall appear
the second time without sin, that is, without the punishment of sin unto
salvation: for of sin formally or materially, he was at first as innocent as at
the second time; that is, pure in both. And if Christ who bare our burden,
became sin for us in the midst of his purest innocence, that we also are by
Adam made sinners, that is, suffer evil by occasion of his demerit, infers not
that we have any formal guilt, or enmity against God upon that account. Facti
peccatores in S. Paul, by Adam we are made sinners, answers both in the story
and in the expression to Christus factus peccatum pro nobis; Christ was made
sin for us, that is, was exposed to the evil that is consequent to sin, viz. to
its punishment.

For the further explication of which, was nothing but a legal impurity,
nothing moral. And the offering that was made by the leprous, or the
menstruous, or the diseased inprofluvio seminis, is called (...), an offering
for sin, and yet it might be innocent all the way.

Thus in the Epistle to the Hebrews it is said, offer first for his own sins;
Heb. 7.27.
by which word it is certain that no sin properly could be meant, for Christ
was (...), he knew no sin; but it means, the state of his infirmity, the
condition of his mortal body, which he took for us and our sins, and is a state
of misery and of distance from heaven; for flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of Heaven; whither Christ was not to go, till by offering himself he
had unclothed himself of that imperfect vesture, as they that were legally
impure might not go to the Temple before their offering: Romans 6.10.
and therefore when by death he quit himself of this condition, it is said [he
died unto sin.] Parallel to this is that of S. Paul in the fifth Chapter to the
Hebrews, where the state of infirmity is expressly called sin. Ver. 2.3.
The High-Priest] is himself also compassed with infirmity; and by reason
hereof he ought, as for the people, so also for himself to offer for sins. This
is also more expressly by S. Romans 8.3.
Paul called (...), the likeness of the sin of the flesh; and thus
Concupiscence or the first motions and inclinations to sin, is called sin, and
said to have the nature of sin, that is, (...), the likeness, it may be, the
material part of sin, or something by which sin is commonly known. And thus
Origin observes, that an oblation was to be offered, even for new born
children, (...), as if they were not clean from sin. But this being an unusual
expression among the Hebrews, bears its sense upon the palm of the hand, and
signifies only the legal impurity in which the (...), the new born babes and
their Mothers were involved. Even Christ himself who had no Original sin was
subject to this purification. So we read in S. Luke; Luke 2.22.
and when the days of [her] purification were accomplished: but in most books,
and particular in the Kings MS. it is read, (...), the days of [their]
purification. But the things of this nature being called offerings for sins,
and the expression usual among the Jews, I doubt not but has given occasion to
the Christian Writers to fancy other things then were intended.

Having now explicated those words of S. Paul, which by being misunderstood
have caused strange devices in this Article, we may now without prejudice
examine what really was the effect of Adams sin, and what evil descended upon
his posterity.

Adams sin was punished by an expulsion out of Paradise, Anthony had seized
upon Marcus Cicero's land, the Son also lost what he never had. And thus death
came in, not by any new sentence or change of nature: for man was created
mortal; and if Adam had not sinned, he should have been immortal by grace, that
is, by the use of the Tree of life; and now being driven from the place where
the Tree grew, was left in his own natural constitution, that is, to be sick
and die without that remedy. (...). Cyril. adv. Anthrop.
He was mortal of himself, and we are mortal from him. Dial. adv. Tryph.
Peccando Adam posteros morti subjecit, and universos huic delicto obnoxios
reddit, said Justin Martyr. Adam by his sin made all his posterity liable to
the sin, and subjected them to death. One explicates the other; Lib. 3. Ep. 8.
and therefore S. Cyprian calls Original sin, Malum domesticum, contagium
mortis antiquae prima nativitate contractum. His sin infected us with death,
and this infection we derive in our birth, that is, we are born mortal. Adams
sin was imputed to us unto a natural death; in him we are sinners, as in him we
die. But this sin is not real and inherent, but imputed only to such a degree.
So S. Cypriam affirms most expressly.... infans recens natus nihil peccavit nisi
quod secundum Adam carnaliter natus contagium mortis antiquae prima nativitate
contraxit. An infant has not sinned, save only that being carnally born of
Adam, in his first birth he has contracted the contagion of the old death.

This evil which is the condition of all our natures, viz. to die, was to some
a punishment, but to others not so. It was a punishment to all that sinned both
before Moses and since; upon the first it fell as a consequent of Gods anger
upon Adam (as I before discoursed) upon the latter it fell as a consequent of
that anger which was threatened in Moses law. But to those who sinned not at
all, as Infants and Innocents, it was merely a condition of their nature, and
no more a punishment, then to be a child is. It was a punishment of Adams sin;
because by his sin humane Nature became disrobed of their preternatural
immortality, and therefore upon that account they die; but as it related to the
persons, it was not a punishment, not an evil afflicted for their sin, or any
guiltiness of their own, properly so called.

We find nothing else in Scripture expressed to be the effect of Adams sin;
Adam we derive an Original ignorance, a proneness to sin, a natural malice, a
fomes, or nest of sin imprinted and placed in our souls, a loss of our wills
liberty, and nothing is left but a liberty to sin, which liberty upon the sum
of affairs is expounded to be a necessity to sin: and the effect of all is, we
are born heirs of damnation.

Concerning Original or Natural ignorance, Adam had not sinned that sin, Cain
should have been wise as soon as his Navel had been cut. Neither can we guess
at what degree of knowledge Adam had before his fall. Certainly, if he had had
so great a knowledge, it is not likely he would so cheaply have sold himself
and all his hopes, out of a greedy appetite to get some knowledge. But
concerning his posterity; indeed it is true a child cannot speak at first, nor
understand; and if (as Plato said) all our knowledge is nothing but memory, it
is no wonder a child is born without knowledge. But so it is in the wisest men
in the world; they also when they see or hear a thing first, think it strange,
and could not know it till they saw or heard it. Now this state of ignorance we
derive from Adam, as we do our Nature, which is a state of ignorance and all
manner of imperfection; but whether it was not imperfect, and apt to fall into
forbidden instances even before his fall, we may best guess at by the event;
for if he had not had a rebellious appetite, and an inclination to forbidden
things, by what could he have been tempted, and how could it have come to pass
that he should sin? Indeed this Nature was made worse by sin, and became
divested of whatsoever it had extraordinary, and was left naked, and mere, and
therefore it is not only an Original imperfection which we inherit, but in the
sense now explicated, it is also an Original corruption. And this is all: As
natural death by his sin became a curse, so our natural imperfection became
natural corruption, and that is Original sin. Death and imperfection we derive
from Adam, but both were natural to us; but by him they became actual, and
penal, and by him they became worse, as by every evil act, every principle of
evil is improved. And in this sense, this Article is affirmed by all the
Doctors of the ancient Church. We are miserable really, sinners in account or
effect, that properly, this improperly; and are fallen into so sad a state of
things which we also every day make worse, that we did need a Savior to redeem
us from it. For in Original sin we are to consider the principle, and the
effects. The principle is the actual sin of Adam. This being to certain
purposes by Gods absolute dominion imputed to us, has brought upon us a
necessity of dying and all the affections of mortality; which although they
were natural, yet would by grace have been hindered. Another evil there is upon
us, and that is Concupiscence; this also is natural, but it was actual before
the fall, it was in Adam, and tempted him. This also from him is derived to us,
and is by many causes made worse, by him and by our selves. And this is the
whole state of Original sin, so far as is fairly warrantable. But for the other
particulars the case is wholly differing.

The sin of Adam neither made us 1. Heirs of damnation: Nor 2. Naturally and
necessarily vicious.


1. Austins followers have generally left him in that point, and have descended
to this lesser proportion, that Original sin damns only to the eternal loss of
the sight of Gods glorious face. But to this, I say these things.

1. Lib. 6. in Julian. c. 4.
has warrant from the words of S. Austin. Si hoc eis non erit malum, non ergo
amabunt regnum Dei tot innocents imagines Dei? Si autem amabunt, and tantum
amabunt, quantum innocents amare debent, regnum ejus a quo ad ipsius imaginem
creantur, nihilne mali de hac ipsa separatione patientur? Here the good man and
eloquent, supposes the little babies to be innocent, to be images of God, to
love the Kingdom of God, and yet to be sentenced to hell: which (it may be) he
did, but I do not understand; save only that in the Parable we find Dives in
hell to be very charitable to his living brethren. But that which I make use of
for the present, is, that infants besides the loss of Gods presence, and the
beholding his face, are apprehensive and afflicted with that evil state of
things, whither their infelicity, not their fault, has carried him.

2. Adams sin, and upon the same account it cannot be inflicted upon any one
else. Not upon infants, because they are not capable of a law for themselves,
therefore much less of a law which was given to another, here being a double
incapacity of obedience. They cannot receive any law, and if they could, yet of
this they never were offered any notice till it was too late. Now if infants be
not capable of this, nor chargeable with it, then no man is; for all are
infants first, and if it comes not by birth, and at first, it cannot come at
all. So that although this privative hell be less then to say they are
tormented in flames besides, yet it is as unequal and unjust. There is not
indeed the same cruelty, but there is the same injustice. I deny not but all
persons naturally are so that they cannot arrive at heaven, but unless some
other principle be put into them, or some great grace done for them, must for
ever stand separate from seeing the face of God. But this is but accidentally
occasioned by the sin of Adam. That left us in our natural state, and that
state can never come to heaven in its own strength. But this condition of all
men by nature is not the punishment of our sin; for this would suppose, that
were it not for this sin superinduced, otherwise we should go to heaven. Now
this is not true; for if Adam had not sinned, yet without something
supernatural, some grace and gift, we could never go to heaven. Now although
the sin of Adam left him in his nakedness, and a mere natural man; yet
presently this was supplied, and we were never in it, but were improved and
bettered by the promise, and Christ has died for mankind, and in so doing is
become our Redeemer and Representative; and therefore this sin of Adam cannot
call us back from that state of good things, into which we are put by the
mercies of God in our Lord Jesus; and therefore now no infant or idiot, or man
or woman shall for this alone be condemned to an eternal banishment from the
sweetest presence of God. But this will be evinced more certainly in the
following periods. For if they stand for ever banished from the presence of
God, then they shall be for ever shut up in hell, with the devil and his
angels; for the Scripture has mentioned no portions but of the right and left
hand. Greg. Naz. and his Scholiast Nicetas did suppose that there should be a
middle state between heaven and hell for infants and heathens; and concerning
infants P. Innocen. 3. and some schoolmen Ambros. Catharinus Albert. Pighius.
have taken it up: but S. De verb. Apost. Sermon. 14.
Aust. has sufficiently confuted it; and it is sufficient that there is no
ground for it but their own dreams.

3. Adams heirs, and that infants dying in Original sin are eternally tormented
as Judas, or Dives, or Julian, I call to witness all the Economy of the divine
goodness, and justice and truth. The soul that sins it shall die; As I live,
says the Lord, Ezekiel. 18.
the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father; that is, he shall not be
guilty of his crime, nor liable to his punishment.

4.

5. Adam did not finally perish for that sin which himself committed; all
Antiquity thought so, Tatianus only excepted, who was a heretic accounted, and
the father of the Encratites. But then what equity is it that any innocents or
little children should? for either God pardoned Adam or condemned him. If he
pardoned him that sinned, it is not so agreeable to his goodness to exact it of
others that did not Ex tarditate si Dii sontes praetereant, and insontes
plectant, justitiam suam non sic recte resarciunt.
. For if he pardoned him, then either God took off all that to which he was
liable, or only removed it from him to place it some where else. If he removed
it from him to his posterity, that is it which we complain of as contrary to
his justice and his goodness. But if God took off all that was due, how could
God exact it of others, it being wholly pardoned? But if God did not pardon him
the eternal guilt, but took the forfeiture and made him pay the full price of
his sin, that is, all which he did threaten and intend, then it is not to be
supposed that God should in justice demand more then eternal pains as the price
to be paid by one man for one sin. So that in all senses this seems unjust.

6. To be born, was a thing wholly involuntary and unchosen, and therefore it
could in no sense be chosen, that we were born so, that is, born guilty of
Adams sin, which we knew not of, which was done so many thousand years before
we were born; which we had never heard of, if God had not been pleased by a
supernatural way to reveal to us, which the greatest part of mankind to this
day have never heard of; at which we were displeased as soon as we knew of it;
which has caused much trouble to us, but never tempted us with any pleasure.

7. It can no way be imagined how our will can be naturally included, for we
had no natural being. We had no life, and therefore no action, and therefore no
consent. For it is impossible there should be an act of will in any sense, when
there is an act of understanding in no sense. * But if by a Divine act or
decree it became so, and not by our act, then we only are said to consent,
because God would have it so; which, if we speak intelligibly, is to charge God
with making us guilty when we were not, to say, we consented when we did not.

8. in or out of its causes. But our will was not in being or actual existence
when Adam sinned; it was then in its causes. But the soul, and so the will of
man has no cause but God, it being with the soul immediately created. If
therefore we sinned, we could not sin in our selves, for we were not born; nor
could we sin in Adam, for he was not the cause of our will; it must therefore
be that we sinned in God: for as was our being, so must our action be; but our
being was then only in God, our will and our soul was in him only, tanquam in
sua causa, therefore in him was our action, or consent, or what we please to
call it. Which affirmative, what sense, or what piety, or what probability it
can have in it, I suppose, needs not much inquiry.

9.

10. or Innocents without cause, it finds out this way, that God to bring his
purposes to pass, should create a guilt for them, or bring them into an
inevitable condition of being guilty by a way of his inventing. For if he did
make any such agreement with Adam, he beforehand knew that Adam would forfeit
all, and therefore that unavoidably all his posterity should be surprised. This
is to make pretenses, and to invent justifications and reasons of his
proceedings, which indeed are all one as if they were not. For he that can make
a reason for an action otherwise unjust, Qui vult aliquid in causa vult
effectum ex ista causa profluentem.
can do it without any reason; especially when the reason it self makes the
misery as fatal as a decree without a reason: And if God cannot be supposed to
damn infants without just cause, and therefore he so ordered it that a cause
should not be wanting, but he infallibly and irresistibly made them guilty of
Adms sin; is not this to resolve to make them miserable, and then with scorn to
triumph in their sad condition? For if they could not deserve to perish without
a fault of their own, how could they deserve to have such a fault put upon
them? If it be unjust to damn them without cause, is it not also unjust to make
a cause for them whether they will or no?

11. Adam had Original righteousness, that is, not only that he was innocent
as children new born are of actual sin (which seems to be that which Divines
call Original righteousness, there being no other either taught, or reasonable)
but a rare rectitude of the inner man, a just subordination of the inferior
faculties to the superior, an excellent knowledge and clear light: and
therefore that he would sin had so little excuse, that well it might deserve
such a punishment, so great as himself suffered. Indeed if he had no such rare
perfections and rectitude, I can say nothing to the particular: but to the
Question, this; that if Adam had it not, then he could not lose it, nor his
posterity after him; as it is fiercely and mightily pretended that they did.
But if he had this rectitude and rare endowments, what equity is it that his
posterity who had no such helps to resist the sin, and were so far from
having any helps at all to resist it, that they had no notice of it, neither of
the law, nor the danger, nor the temptation, nor the action, till it was past;
I say, what equity is it that his posterity should in the midst of all these
imperfections be equally punished with him, who sinned against so great a
light, and so mighty helps?

12. Adams sin, unless it be just that their wills should be included in his
will, and his will justly become theirs by interpretation. Now if so, I ask,
Whether before that sin of Adam were our wills free, or not free? For if we had
any will at all, it must be free, or not free. If we had none at all, how could
it be involved in his? Now if our wills were free, why are they without our
act, and whether we will or no, involved in the will of another? If they were
not free, how could we be guilty? * If they were free, then they could also
dissent. If they were not free, then they could not consent; and so either they
never had, or else before Adams fall they lost their liberty.

13. Adam? could we hinder it? were we ever asked? Could we, if we had been
asked after we were born a month, have given our negative? Or could we do more
before we were born then after? were we, or could we be tied to prevent that
sin? Did not God know that we could not in that case dissent? And why then
shall our consent be taken in by interpretation, when our dissent could not be
really acted; But if at that time we could not dissent really, could we have
dissented from Adams sin by interpretation? If not, then we could dissent no
way, and then it was inevitably decreed that we should be ruined: for neither
really, nor by interpretation could we have dissented. But if we could by
interpretation have dissented, it were certainly more agreeable to Gods
goodness, to have interpreted for us in the better sense, rather then in the
worse; being we did neither, really and actually; and if God had so pleased, he
rather might with his goodness have interpreted us to have dissented; then he
could with justice have interpreted us to have consented: and therefore
certainly he did so, or would have done, if there had been need.

14. Adam, that is, as to them, for their mere natural state of which himself
was Author and Creator: that is, he will not damn them for being good. For God
saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good: and therefore so
is that state of descent from Adam. God is the Author of it, and therefore it
cannot be ill. It cannot be contraray to God because it is his work.

Upon the account of these reasons I suppose it safe to affirm, Ambrose, or
whoever is the Author of the Commentaries upon the Epistles of S. Paul
attributed to him; In cap. 5. Romans
Mors autem dissolutio corporis est, cum anima a corpore separatur. Est and
alia mors, quae secunda dicitur, in Gehenna, quam non peccato Adae patimur, sed
ejus occasion propriis peccatis acquiritur. Death is the dividing Soul and
Body. There is also another death which is in Hell, and is called the second
Death, which we do not suffer for the sin of Adam; but by occasion of it, we
fall into it by our own sins.

Next we are to inquire, whether or no it does not make us infallibly,
naturally, and necessarily vicious, by taking from us Original righteousness,
by discomposing the order of our faculties, and inslaving the will to sin and
folly, concerning which the inquiry must be made by parts.

For if the sin of Adam did debauch our Nature, Adam, or 3. By the sentence and
decree of God.

1. Adam must spoil such a portion of his Nature, that before he died, he must
be a very beast. 2. We also by degeneration and multiplication of new sins must
have been at so vast a distance from him at the very worst, that by this time
we should not have been so wise as a fly, nor so free and unconstrained as
fire. 3. If one sin would naturally and by physical causality destroy Original
righteousness, then every one sin in the regenerate can as well destroy
Habitual righteousness, because that and this differ not but in their
principle, not in their nature and constitution. And why should not a righteous
man as easily and as quickly fall from grace, and lose his habits, as Adam did?
Naturally it is all one. 4. If that one sin of Adam did destroy all his
righteousness and ours too, then our Original sin does more hurt, and is more
punished, and is of greater malice then our actual sin. For one act of sin does
but lessen and weaken the habit, but does not quite destroy it. If therefore
this act of Adam (in which certainly, at least we did not offend maliciously)
destroys all Original righteousness, and a malicious act now does not destroy a
righteous habit, it is better for us in our own malice, then in our ignorance,
and we suffer less for doing evil that we know of, then for doing that which we
knew nothing of.

2. Adam: I consider, 1. Seth should in his birth and nature be worse then
Abel, Abel be worse then Cain. 2. Upon this account all the sins of all our
progenitors will be imputed to us, because we were in their loins when they
sinned them; and every lustful father must have a lustful son, and so every
man, or no man will be lustful. For if ever any man were lustful or intemperate
when, or before he begot his child, upon this reckoning his child will be so
too, and then his grandchilde, consequent a readiness in the inferior faculties
to obey and act accordingly; and therefore sin does not infect our mere natural
faculties, but the will only, and not that in the natural capacity, but in its
moral only. 4. Marcus the son of Cicero was not so good an Orator as his
father: and how can it be then that a naughty quality should be more apt to be
disseminated then a good one; when it is not the goodness or the badness of a
quality that hinders its dissemination, but its being an acquired and
superinduced quality that makes it cannot descend naturally? Add to this, how
can a bad quality, morally bad, be directly and regularly transmitted by an
action morally good? and since neither God that is the Maker of all does amiss,
and the father that begets sins not, and the child that is begotten cannot
sin, by what conveyance can any positive evil be derived to the posterity? 6.
It is generally, Aristotle, affirming, (...); that the soul is from without,
and is a Divine substance; and therefore sin cannot descend by natural
generation, or by our being in Adams loins. And how can it be, that the father
who contributes nothing to her production, should contribute to her pollution?
that he who did not transmit life, should transmit his sin? and yet if the soul
were traduced from the parents, and begotten, yet sin could not descend,
because it is not a natural, but a superinduced quality; and if it could, then
it would follow, that we should from every vicious father derive a proper
Original sin, besides the general.

3. hard labor in them both; which S. Chrysostom thus expresses, In 5. Romans
(...). Adam falling, even they that did not eat of the Tree, were of him all
born mortal. He and all his posterity were left in the mere natural state; that
is, in a state of imperfection, in a state that was not sufficiently instructed
and furnished with abilities in order to a supernatural end, whither God had
secretly designed mankind. In this state he could never arrive at heaven, but
that was to be supplied by other means; for this made it necessary that all
should come to Christ, and is the great (...) and necessity for the baptism of
Infants, that they being admitted to supernatural promises and assistances, may
be lifted up to a state above their nature; Not only to improve their present
good, as the Pelagians affirmed, Tam Dives vero hoc donum baptismatis esse,
Vt parvis etiam vitioque carentibus omni
Congruat, ut qui sunt geniti been, sint meliores
Naturaeque bonum adjecto illustretur honor;
but to take off that evil state of things whither by occasion of the fall of
Adam they were devolved, and to give them new birth, adoption into Christ, and
the seeds of a new nature, so to become children of God and heirs of the
promises, who in their mere naturals did inherit from Adam nothing but misery,
and imperfection, and death. Coelorum regnum sperate hoc font renati,
Non recipit felix vita semel genitos.
Insons esse volens isto mundare lavacro,
Seu patrio premeris crimine, seu proprio.
So Xistus in the Verses written upon the Fount of Constantine. But 2. Adam or
his posterity, because from that time ever unto this, he by new laws has
required innocence of life, or repentance and holiness. For besides that it is
a great testimony of the Divine favor that God will still employ us, and exact
more services of us, and that there is no greater argument of joy to us in the
world, then that we are Gods servants, and there can be no greater testimony,
that God is our God; and that of this employing us in his service, there can be
no greater evidence, then the giving to us new laws: Besides this, I say, if
man could not obey, it is not consistent with the wisdom of God, to require of
man, what he knows man cannot do; nor with his justice, to punish that in man,
which he knows man cannot avoid.

But if it be objected, Adam he sinned, in him also he forfeited all his
strengths; and therefore his consequent disability being his own fault, cannot
be his excuse; and to whatsoever laws God shall be pleased afterward to
impose, he cannot plead his infirmity, because himself having brought it on
himself, must suffer for it: In being just in God to exact the law of him, even
where he is unable to keep it, because God once made him able, and he disabled
himself. I answer many things.

1. Adam had any more strengths then we have, Adam was a man, as his sons are,
and no more; and God gave him strength enough to do his duty; and God is as
just and loving to us as to him, and has promised he will lay no more upon us,
then he will make us able to bear. but for making it impossible to be done. But
that was not Adams case, so far as we know; and it is certain it was not ours
in the matter of his sin. 3. disobliged from an old law to which he was
enabled. Although God will not exceed his measures, or do wrong to a sinner,
yet by his sin he shall receive no favor, or immunity. But in laws to be
imposed afterward, the case (I say) is otherwise. Because the persons are not
capable of any such law; and God knowing they cannot perform them, cannot
intend they should, and therefore cannot justly punish them, for not doing
that, which himself did never heartily intend they should do, because he knew
they could not. The instances will make the matter to be confessed. * Suppose a
man falling into drunkenness, should by the Divine judgment fall lame; can God
afterward exact it of him that he should leap and dance in public
festivities, when he can neither go nor stand? If so, suppose yet further,
that by the Divine judgment he should fall mad; Is the mad man capable of a
new law? I suppose it will not be said he is: or if it be, suppose yet further,
that he be taken speechless, and senseless, or die: Can God still exact of him
obedience to any new Commandment? If he be dead, his day is done, he can work
no more, nor be obliged any more; and so it is, if he be mad, or any ways
disabled; the case is all one. For whatsoever the disability be, the
incapacity, and impossibility, and the excuse is the same. of an impossible
Commandment. But if the punishment of this later, be inflicted upon the sinner
for the first transgression by which he disabled himself, then in vain was the
later Commandment imposed. For since the later sin was unavoidable, and the
first sin deserved the whole damnation, what end could there be of imposing
this new law, by which God could not serve any new purpose, no not for the
manifestation of his justice in condemning him? For if the first sin deserved
condemnation, there was no need to introduce a new pretense, and to seek an
occasion to slay him. But if it did not, it is certain the new sin could not
make it just to do what was not just before, because by this new omission
there can be no new guilt contracted. But of this I shall give yet a further
account when I shall discourse in what sense God can be said to punish one sin
with another.

The consequent of the parts of this discourse is this, Adam did not debauch
our nature by any natural efficiency of the sin it self, Idem sensit Jacobus
Faber in 5. Romans Nihil nos ex Adamo trahere nisi obligationem ad mortem.
Albertus Pighius controv. 1. de peccato Orig. and Ambr. Catharinus de lapsu
hominis and peccato Orig. statuunt, Peccatum Originis non habere veram peccati
rationem, sed esse tantum reatum quo posteri primorum parentum propter
transgressionem illorum primaevam sine aliquo vitio proprio and inhaerente
naturae pravitate devincti teneantur.
nor by our being in the loins of Adam, nor yet by any sentence or decree of
God, we are not by Adams sin made necessarily and naturally vicious, and
inclined to evil, but are left in our mere nature such as it was, and such as
it is.

-- Nec si miseram [Natura] Sinonem
Finxit, vanum etiam mendacemque improba finget.
Nature makes us miserable and imperfect, Epist. ad Magnes.
but not criminal. (...). They are the words of S. Ignatius the Martyr. If any
man be a pious and a good man, he is of God; if he be impious, he is of the
Devil. Not by Nature, but made so by his own proceedings. To all which I add
this;

That in Scripture there is no signification of any corruption or depravation
of our souls by Adams sin;

. 2. Consideration of the objections against the former doctrine.
THE first is [Every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart are only evil
continually.] Gen 6.5.
I answer, it is true, they were so, but it was their own fault, not Adams; for
so it is said expressly V. 12.
, [All flesh had corrupted his way upon earth, and the earth was filled with
violence.] 2. If this corruption had been natural and unavoidable, why did God
punish all the world for it, except eight persons? why did he punish those that
could not help it? and why did others escape that were equally guilty? Is not
this ^ respect of persons, and partiality to some, and iniquity toward all?
which far be it from the Judge of all the world. 3. God might as well have
punished all the world, for sleeping once in a day, or for being hungry, as for
sinning, if so to do be natural and unavoidable. 4. If God in these words
complained of their Natural and Original corruption, why did he but then, as if
it were a new thing, complain of it, and repent that he had made man, since he
proved so bad? 5. This malice and corruption was such, that God did send Noah
the Preacher of righteousness to draw the world from it. But no man supposes
that it was fit to send a Preacher to dehort them from being guilty of Original
sin. Therefore it was good counsel, -- Denique teipsum
Concute, Horat.
numque tibi vitiorum inseverit olim
Natura, aut etiam consuetudo mala: namque
Neglectis urenda filix innascitur agris.
Blame not nature, but thy own evil customs; for thy neglect of thy fields,
will make fern, and thistles to grow. It is not only because the ground is
accursed, but because it is neglected, that it bears thorns. Errasti, si
existimas nobiscum vitia nasci: supervenerunt, ingesta sunt, said Seneca. Thou
art deceived, Epist. 94.
if thou think that vices are born with us. No, they are superinduced and
come in upon us afterward.

And by this we may the better understand the following words [I will not again
curse the ground any more for man's sake; Genesis 8.21.
for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. Concerning which,
note, that these words are not two sentences. For this is not the reason why
God gave over smiting, because man was corrupt from his youth. For if this had
been the reason, it would have come to pass, that the same cause which moved
God to smite, would also move him to forbear, which were a strange Economy.
The words therefore are not a reason of his forbearing, but an aggravation of
his kindness; as if he had said, Though man be continually evil, yet I will not
for all that, any more drown the world for man's being so evil: and so the
Hebrews note that the particle (...) sometimes signifies [although.]

But the great outcry in this Question is upon confidence of the words of David
[Behold, Psalm. 51.5.
I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.] To which
I answer, that the words are an Hebraism, and signify nothing but an
aggrandation of his sinfulness, and are intended for an high expression,
meaning, that I am wholly and entirely wicked. For the verification of which
exposition, there are diverse parallel places in the holy Scriptures. [Thou were
my hope when I hanged yet upon my mothers breasts] and [The ungodly are froward
even from their mothers womb; as soon as they be born, they go astray, and
speak lies] which because it cannot be true in the letter, must be an idiotism,
or propriety of phrase, apt to explicate the other, and signifying only a
ready, a prompt, a great, and universal wickedness. The like to this, is that
saying of the Pharisees, Joh. 5.34.
[Thou were altogether born in sin, and do thou teach us?] which phrase, and
manner of speaking being plainly a reproach of the poor blind man, and a
disparagement of him, did mean only to call him a very wicked person, but not
that he had derived his sin originally, and from his birth; for that had been
their own case as much as his; and therefore S. Chrysostom explaining this
phrase, says, (...), it is as if they should say, Thou have been a sinner all
thy life time. * To the same sense are those words of Job, Job 31.18.
[I have guided her [the widow] from my mothers womb.] And in this expression
and severity of hyperbole it is, Isa. 48.8.
that God aggravated the sins of his people, [Thou wast called a transgressor
from the womb.] And this way of expressing a great state of misery we find
used among the Heathen Writers: for so Seneca brings in Oedipus complaining;
Infanti quoque decreta mors est: Thebaid.

Fata quis tam tristia sortitus unquam!
Videram nondum diem, and jam tenebar,
Mors me antecessit, aliquis intra viscera
Materna, lethum praecocis fati tulit.
Sed numquid and peccavit? --
Something like S. Bernards, Damnatus antequam natus, I was condemned before I
was born; dead before I was alive; and death seized upon me in my mothers womb.
Some body brought in a hasty and a too forward death, but did he sin also? An
expression not unlike to this we have in Lucian, (...), Pardon me that I was
not born wicked, or born to be wicked. 2. If David had meant it literally, it
had not signified that himself was born in original sin, but that his father
and mother sinned when they begat him: which the eldest son that he begat of
Bathsheba (for ought I know) might have said truer then he in this sense. Lib.
3. Strom. extrem.
And this is the exposition of Clemens Alexandrinus, save only that by [my
mother] he understands Eva: (...). Though he was conceived in sin, yet he was
not in the sin; peccatrix concepit, sed non peccatorem; she sinned in the
conception, not David. And in the following words he speaks home to the main
article. (...). Let them tell us where an infant did fornicate, or how he who
had done nothing, could fall under the curse of Adam? meaning so as to deserve
the same evil that he did. 3. If it did relate to his own person, he might mean
that he was begotten with that sanguine disposition, and libidinous temper that
was the original of his vile adultery: and then, though David said this truly
of himself, yet it is not true of all, not of those whose temper is phlegmatic
and unactive. 4. If David had meant this of himself, and that in regard of
original sin, this had been so far from being a penitential expression, or a
confessing of his sin, that it had been a plain accusation of God, and an
excusing of himself. As if he had said, O Lord, I confess I have sinned in this
horrible murder and adultery, but thou, O God, know how it comes to pass,
even by that fatal punishment which thou did for the sin of Adam inflict on
me and all mankind above 3000. years before I was born, thereby making me to
fall into so horrible corruption of nature, that unless thou did irresistibly
force me from it, I cannot abstain from any sin, being most naturally inclined
to all. In this sinfulness has my mother conceived me, and that has produced
in me this sad effect. Who would suppose David to make such a confession, or in
his sorrow to hope for pardon for upbraiding not his own folly, but the decrees
of God? 5. But that David thought nothing of this, or any thing like it, we may
understand by the preceding words, which are as a preface to these in the
objection. [Against thee only have I sinned and done this evil in thy sight,
that thou might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.]
He that thus acquits God, cannot easily be supposed in the very next breath so
fiercely to accuse him. 6. To which also add the following words; which are a
sufficient reproof of all strange senses in the other [In sin has my mother
conceived me. But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts] as if he had
said, Though I am so wicked, yet thy laws are good, and I therefore so much the
worse, because I am contrary to thy laws: They require truth and sincerity in
the soul, but I am false and perfidious. But if this had been natural for him
so to be, and unavoidable, God who knew it perfectly well, would have expected
nothing else of him. For he will not require of a stone to speak, nor of fire
to be cold, unless himself be pleased to work a miracle to have them so.

But S. Paul affirms, Ephesians. 2.2, 3.
that by nature we were the children of wrath. True, we were so, when we were
dead in sins, and before we were quickened by the Spirit of life and grace. We
were so; now we are not. We were so by our own unworthiness and filthy
conversation; now we being regenerated by the Spirit of holiness, we are alive
unto God, and no longer heirs of wrath. This therefore as appears by the
discourse of S. Paul, relates not to our Original sin, but to the Actual; and
of this sense of the word Nature, in the matter of sinning we have Justin
Martyr, or whoever is the Anthor of the Questions and answers ad Orthodoxos to
be witness: Quaest. 88.
For answering those words of Scripture, There is not any one clean who is born
of a woman, and there is none begotten who has not committed sin; He says
their meaning cannot extend to Christ, for he was not (...), born to sin; but
he is natura ad peccandum natus, (...), by nature born to sin, who by the
choice of his own will is author to himself to do what he list, whether it be
good or evil. The following words are eaten out by time; but upon this ground
whatever he said of Infants, must needs have been to better purposes then is
usually spoken of in this Article. 2. Heirs of wrath, signifies persons liable
to punishment, heirs of death. It is an usual expression among the Hebrews. So
sons of death in the holy Scriptures are those that deserve death, or are
condemned to die. Thus Judas Iscariot is called, John 17.12. 2 Samuel 12.25.
The son of perdition: and so is that saying of David to Nathan, [The man that
has done this shall surely die.] In the Hebrew it is [He is the son of death]
And so were those Ephesians, children, or sons of wrath before their
conversion; that is, they had deserved death. 3. By nature is here most likely
to be meant that which Galen calls (...), an acquisite nature, that is, (...),
customs and evil habits. And so Suidas expounds the word in this very place;
not only upon the account of Grammar, and the use of the word in the best
Authors, but also upon an excellent reason. His words are these: (...). When
the Apostle says, we were by nature children of wrath, he means not that which
is the usual signification of nature, for then it were not their fault, but the
fault of him that made them such; but it means an abiding and vile habit, a
wicked and a lasting custom. (...), says Aristotle. Arist. R. het. l. 1. c.
11. Lib. 4. de esu anim.
Custom is like Nature. For often and always are not far asunder. Nature is
always, Custom is almost always. To the same sense are those words of
Porphiry, (...) -- The ancients who lived likest to God, and were by nature the
best, living the best life, were a golden generation. 4. By nature] means not
by birth and natural extraction, or any original derivation from Adam, in this
place: for of this these Ephesians were no more guilty then every one else, and
no more before their conversion then after; but [by nature] signifies (...), so
the Greek Scholiast renders it; [really, beyond opinion] plene and omnino,
entirely, or wholly, so the Syriack; and so S. Hierome affirms that the
Ancients did expound it: and it is agreeable to the usage of the same phrase
Gal. 4.8. Ye did service to them which by nature are no Gods, that is, which
really are none. And as these Ephesians were before their conversion, so were
the Israelites in the days of their rebellion, a wicked stubborn people,
insomuch that they are by the Prophet called [children of transgression, a seed
of falsehood.] Isa. 27.4.
But these and the like places have no force at all but what they borrow from
the ignorance of that sense and acceptance of the word in those languages
which ought to be the measure of them.

But it is hard upon such mean accounts to reckon all children to be born
enemies of God, In malice be children; 1 Cor. 14.20. Mat. 18.3.19.14.
and, unless we become like to children, we shall not enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven; and, their Angels behold the face of their Father which is in
Heaven. Heaven is theirs, God is their Father, Angels are appropriated to them;
they are free from malice, and imitable by men. These are better words then are
usually given them; and signify, that they are beloved of God, not hated,
designed for Heaven, and born to it, though brought thither by Christ, and by
the Spirit of Christ, not born for Hell; that was prepared for the Devil and
his Angels, not for innocent babes. This does not call them naturally wicked,
but rather naturally innocent, and is a better account then is commonly given
them by imputation of Adams sin.

But not concerning children, Paul complains, that his nature and his
principles of action and choice are corrupted. There is a law in my members,
Romans 7.23.
bringing me into captivity to the law of sin; and many other words to the same
purpose; all which indeed have been strangely mistaken to very ill purposes, so
that the whole Chapter so as is commonly expounded, is nothing but a temptation
to evil life, and a patron of impiety. Concerning which I have already given
account, and freed it from the common abuse. But if this were to be understood
in the sense which I then reproved, yet it is to be observed in order to the
present Question, that S. Paul does not say [This law in our members comes by
nature, or is derived from Adam.] A man may bring a law upon himself by vicious
custom, and that may be as prevalent as Nature, and more; because more men
have by Philosophy and illuminated Reason cured the disposition of their
nature, then have cured their vicious habits. * Add to this, that S. Paul puts
this uneasiness, and this carnal law in his members wholly upon the account of
being under the law, and of his not being under Christ, not upon the account of
Adams prevarication, as is plain in the analogy of the whole Chapter.

As easy also it is to understand these words of S. Paul without prejudice to
this Question [The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, 1
Cor. 2.14.
neither indeed can he know them] meaning (as is supposed) that there is in our
natures an ignorance und aversness from spiritual things, that is, a
contrariety to God. But it is observable, that the word which the Apostle uses
is (...), which is not properly rendered [Natural] but [Animal] and it certainly
means a man that is guided only by natural Reason, without the revelations of
the Gospel. (...). So Suidas. An animal man, that is, a Philosopher, or a
rational man, such as were the Greek and Roman Philosophers, upon the stock and
account of the learning of all their Schools, could never discern the
excellencies of the Gospel mysteries; as of God incarnate, Christ dying.
Resurrection of the body, and the like. For this word (...), or Animal, and
another word used often by the Apostle, (...), Carnal, are opposed to (...),
Spiritual; and are states of evil, or of imperfection, in which while a man
remains he cannot do the work of God. For animality, which is a relying upon
natural principles without revelation, is a state privatively opposed to the
Spirit; and a man in that state cannot be saved, because he wants a vital part,
he wants the spirit, which is a part of the constitution of a Christian in that
capacity, who consists of Body, and Soul, and Spirit, and therefore Anima
without Spiritus, the Soul without the Spirit is not sufficient. * For as the
Soul is a sufficient principle of all the actions of life, in order to our
natural end and persection, but it can bear us no further: so there must be
another principle in order to a supernatural end, and that is the Spirit;
called by S. Paul, (...), the new creation, by S. Peter, a divine nature; and
by this, we become renewed in the inner man: the infusion of this new nature
into us is called, Regeneration; and it is the great principle of godliness,
called, Grace or the Spirit, (...), The seed of God, and by it we are begotten
by God, and brought forth by the Church to the hopes and beginnings of a new
life, and a supernatural end. And although I cannot say, that this is a third
substance distinct from Soul and Body, yet it is a distinct principle put into
us by God, without which we cannot work, and by which we can; and therefore if
it be not a substance, yet it is more then a Metaphor, it is a real being,
permanent and inherent; but yet such as can be lessened and extinguished.

But Carnality, or the state of being in the flesh, is not only privatively
opposed, but contrarily also to the spiritual state, or the state of Grace. But
as the first is not a sin derived from Adam: so neither is the second. The
first is only an imperfection, or want of supernatural aids; The other is
indeed a direct state of sin, and hated by God, but superinduced by choice, and
not descending naturally. * Now to the spiritual state, nothing is in Scripture
opposed but these two, and neither of these when it is sinful can be pretended
upon the stock or argument of any Scriptures to descend from Adam; therefore
all the state of opposition to Grace, is owing to our selves, and not to him.
Adam indeed did leave us all in an Animal estate, but this state is not a state
of enmity, or direct opposition to God, but a state insufficient and imperfect.
No man can perish for being an Animal man, that is, for not having any
supernatural revelations, but for not consenting to them when he has, that is,
for being Carnal as well as Animal; and that he is Carnal is wholly his own
choice. In the state of animality he cannot go to Heaven; but neither will that
alone bear him to Hell: and therefore God does not let a man alone in that
state; for either God suggests to him what is spiritual, or if he does not, it
is because himself has superinduced something that is Carnal.

Having now explicated those Scriptures which have made some difficulty in this
Question, Noxa caput sequitur, The soul that sins it shall die. Neque
virtutes, neque Epist. 3. de morte Nepotian.
vitia parentum liberis imputantur, says S. Hierome. Neither the vices nor the
virtues of the parents are imputed to the children. And therefore when Dion
Chrysostomus had reproved Solon's laws, which in some cases condemn the
innocent posterity; he adds this in honor of Gods law, (...); That it does not
like the law of the Athenians punish the children and kindred of the Criminal;
but every man is the cause of his own misfortune. But concerning this, it will
not be amiss in order to many good purposes, to observe the whole Economy and
dispensation of the Divine Justice in this affair.

. 3. How God punishes the Fathers sin upon the Children.
1. Abraham's family. But the same is not the reason of favors and punishments.
For such is the nature of benefits, that he in whose power they are, may
without injustice give them why, and when, and to whom he please.

2. I know of, that God did yet ever damn an innocent son, though the father
were the vilest person, and committed the greatest evils of the world,
actually, personally, choosingly, and maliciously: and why it should by so
many, and so confidently be affirmed in a lesser instance, in so unequal a
case, and at so long a distance, I cannot suspect any reason. Plutarch in his
book against Herodotus affirms, that it is not likely they would, meaning that
it was unjust, to revenge an injury which the Samians did to the Corinthians
three hundred years before. But to revenge it for ever, upon all generations,
and with an eternal anger upon some persons, even the most innocent, cannot
without trembling be spoken or imagined of God, who is the great lover of
Souls. Whatsoever the matter be in temporal inflictions, of which in the next
propositions I shall give account, yet if the Question be concerning eternal
damnation, it was never said, never threatened by God to pass from father to the
son. When God punishes one relative for the sin of another, he does it as fines
are taken in our law, salvo contenemento; the principal stake being safe, it
may be justice to seize upon all the smaller portions; at least it is not
against justice for God in such cases to use the power and dominion of a Lord.
But this cannot be reasonable to be used in the matter of eternal interest;
because if God should as a Lord use his power over Innocents and condemn them
to Hell, he should be Author to them of more evil then ever he conveyed good to
them; which but to imagine, would be a horrible impiety. And therefore when our
blessed Savior took upon him the wrath of God due to all mankind yet Gods
anger even in that case, extended no further then a temporal death. Because for
the eternal, nothing can make recompense, and it can never turn to good.

3. Judge to the father, but as a Lord only of the son. He has absolute power
over the lives of all his creatures, and can take it away from any man without
injustice, when he please, though neither he nor his Parents have sinned; and
he may use the same right and power when either of them alone has sinned. But
in striking the son, he does not do to him as a Judge; that is, he is not
angry with him, but with the Parent: But to the son he is a supreme Lord, and
may do what seems good in his own eyes.

4. Chrysostom, Homil. 29. in 9. Genesis
to the third and fourth generation, no longer. It was threatened to endure no
longer, in the second Commandment; and so it happened in the case of Zimri and
Jehu; after the fourth generation they prevailed not upon their Masters houses.
And if it happen that the Parents die before, yet it is a plague to them that
they know, or ought to fear the evil shall happen upon their posterity; quo
tristiores perirent, as Alexander said of the Traitors whose sons were to die
after them, They die with sorrow and fear.

5. perjury, of which the oracle recited by Herodotus said, -- Impete magno
Advenit, atque omnem vastat stirpemque domumque.
And in sacrilege the anger of God uses also to be severe, of which it was
observed even by the Heathens taught by the Delphick Priests.

Sed capiti ipsorum quique enascuntur ab ipsis
Imminot; inque domo cladem subit altera clades.
Those sins which the Greeks called (...), and which the Christians called
crying sins, are such, in the punishment of which God did not only use his
severe justice as to the offending person, but for the enlargement and
extension of his justice, and the terror of the world, he used the rights of
his power and dominion over their Relatives.

6. Corah and Dathan, to Achan and Saul, to Jeroboam and Ahab; and by these and
some more expressed his severity against the like crimes sufficiently to all
ages.

7. weary of this way of proceeding. They were the terrors of the law, and God
did not delight in them. Therefore in the time of Ezekiel the Prophet, he
declared against them, and promised to use it no more, that is, not so
frequently, not so notoriously, not without great necessity and charity, Ne ad
parentum exempla succresceret improbitas filiorum. As I live, says the Lord,
Ezekiel. 18.3.
ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb in Israel, The Fathers
have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge. The soul that
sins it shall die.

8. Duritia populi ad talia remedia compulerat, ut vel posteritatibus suis
prospicientes legi Divinae obedirent, said Tertullian. Something extraordinary
was then needful to be done to so vile a people to restrain their sinfulness.
But when the Gospel was published, and hellfire threatened to persevering, and
greater sinners, the former way of punishment was quite left off. And in all
the Gospel there is not any one word of threatening passing beyond the person
offending. De Monog.
Desivit uva acerba (says Tertullian) a patribus manducata dentes filiorum
obstupefacere: unusquisque enim in suo delicto morietur. Now (that is, in the
time of the Gospel) the sour grape of the Fathers shall no more set on edge
the childrens teeth, but every one shall die in his own sin.

Upon this account alone, a graciousness as is revealed to mankind in Jesus
Christ, after the so great provisions against sin, even the horrible
threatenings of damnation, still persevere to punish Adam in his posterity, and
the posterity for what they never did.

For either the evil that falls upon us for Adams sin, Nihil est iniquius quam
aliquem haeredem paterni odii fieri, said Seneca; and Pausanias the General of
the Grecian army would not punish the children of Attagines, who persuaded the
Thebans to revolt to the Medes, (...), saying, the children were not guilty of
that revolt: and when Avidius Cassius had conspired against Mark Anthony, he
wrote to the Senate to pardon his wife and son in law; Et quid dico veniam, cum
illi nihil fecerint? but why (says he) should I say, pardon, when they had done
nothing? But if God inflicts the evil upon Adams posterity, which we suffer for
his sake, not as a punishment, that is, not making us formally guilty, but
using his own right and power of dominion which he has over the lives and
fortunes of his creatures; then it is a strange anger which God has against
Adam, that he still retains so fierce an indignation, as not to take off his
hand from striking after five thousand six hundred years, and striking him for
that of which he repented him, and which in all reason we believe he then
pardoned, or resolved to pardon, when he promised the Messiah to him. * To this
I add this consideration; That it is not easily to be imagined how Christ
reconciled the world unto his Father, if after the death of Christ, God is
still so angry with mankind, so unappeased, that even the most innocent part
of mankind may perish for Adams sin; and the other are perpetually punished by
a corrupted nature, a proneness to sin, a servile will, a filthy concupiscence,
and an impossibility of being innocent; that no faith, no Sacrament, no
industry, no prayers can obtain freedom from this punishment.

Certain it is, formal imputation of the guilt; and therefore Rabbi Simeon
Barsema said well, that when God visits the sins of the fathers upon the
children, jure dominii, non poenae utitur. He uses the right of Empire, not of
justice, of dominion, not of punishment, of a Lord, not of a Judge. Libr. de
pietate.
And Philo blames it for the worst of institutions, when the good sons of bad
Parents shall be dishonored by their Fathers stain, and the bad sons of good
Parents shall have their Fathers honor; (...); for the law praises every one
for their own, not for the virtue of their Ancestors, and punishes not the
Fathers, but his own wickedness upon every man's head. And therefore Josephus
calls the contrary way of proceeding, which he had observed in Alexander, (...),
a punishment above the measures of a man; and the Greeks and Romans did always
call it injustice. Illic immeritam maternae pendere linguae
Andromedam poenas injustus jusserat Ammon.
Ovid.
And hence it is, that all Laws forbear to kill a woman with child, lest the
Innocent should suffer for the Mothers fault: and therefore this just mercy is
infinitely more to be expected from the great Father of spirits, the God of
mercy and comfort. And upon this account Abraham was confident with God; Will thou slay the righteous with the wicked? shall not the Judge of all the world
do right? And if it be unrighteous to slay the righteous with the wicked, it
is also unjust to slay the righteous for the wicked. Cicero lib. 4. de Not.
Deor.
Ferretne ulla civitas laborem istiusmodi legis, ut condemnetur Filius aut
Nepos, si Pater aut Avus deliquissent. It were an intolerable Law, and no
community would be governed by it, that the Father or Grandfather should sin,
and the Son or Nephew should be punished. I shall add no more testimonies, but
only make use of the words of the Christian Emperors in their Laws; L.
Sancimus. C. de poenis.
Peccata igitur suos teneant auctores: nec ulterius progrediatur metus, quam
reperiatur delictum. Let no man trouble himself with unnecessary and melancholy
dreams of strange inevitable undeserved punishments, descending upon us for the
faults of others. The sin that a man does shall be upon his own head only.
Sufficient to every man is his own evil, the evil that he does, and the evil
that he suffers.

. 4. Of the causes of the Universal wickedness of Mankind.
BUt if there were not some common natural principle of evil introduced by the
sin of our Parent upon all his posterity, how should all men be so naturally
inclined to be vicious, so hard and unapt, so uneasy and so listless to the
practices of virtue? How is it that all men in the world are sinners, and that
in many things we offend all? For if men could choose and had freedom, it is
not imaginable that all should choose the same thing. As all men will not be
Physicians, nor all desire to be Merchants. But we see that all men are
sinners, and yet it is impossible that in a liberty of indifferency there
should be no variety. Therefore we must be content to say, that we have only a
liberty of adhesion or delight; that is, we so love sin that we all choose it,
but cannot choose good.

To this I answer many things. Adam? what made him to sin when he fell? He had
a perfect liberty, and no ignorance, no original sin, no inordination of his
affections, no such rebellion of the inferior faculties against the superior
as we complain of; or at least we say he had not, and yet he sinned. And if his
passions did rebel against his reason before the fall, then so they may in us,
and yet not be long of that fall. It was before the fall in him, and so may be
in us, and not the effect of it. But the truth of the thing is this, He had
liberty of choice and chose ill, and so do we: and all men say, that this
liberty of choosing ill, is still left to us. But because it is left here, it
appears that it was there before, and therefore is not the consequent of
Original sin. But it is said, that as Adam chose ill, so do we; but he was
free to good as well as to evil, but so are not we; we are free to evil, not to
good; and that we are so, is the consequent of original sin. I reply, That we
can choose good, and as naturally love good as evil, and in some instances
more. A man cannot naturally hate God, if he knows any thing of him. A man
naturally loves his Parents. He naturally hates some sort of uncleanness. He
naturally loves and preserves himself: and all those sins which are unnatural,
are such which nature hates: and the law of nature commands all the great
instances of virtue, and marks out all the great lines of justice. (...). It is
a law imprinted in the very substance of our natures, and incorporated in all
generations of reasonable creatures, not to break or transgress the laws which
are appointed by God. Here only, our nature is defective; we do not naturally
know, nor yet naturally love those supernatural excellencies which are
appointed and commanded by God as the means of bringing us to a supernatural
condition. That is, without Gods grace, and the renovation of the Spirit of
God, we cannot be saved. Neither was Adams case better then ours in this
particular. For that his nature could not carry him to heaven, or indeed to
please God in order to it, seems to be confessed by them who have therefore
affirmed him to have had a supernatural righteousness: which is affirmed by
all the Roman party. But although in supernatural instances it must needs be
that our Nature is defective; so it must needs have been in Adam: and therefore
the Lutherans (who in this particular dream not so probably as the other)
affirming that justice was natural in Adam, do yet but differ in the manner of
speaking, and have not at all spoken against this; neither can they, unless
they also affirm that to arrive at Heaven was the natural end of man. For if it
be not, then neither we nor Adam could by Nature do things above Nature; and
if God did concreate Grace with Adam, that Grace was nevertheless Grace, for
being given him as soon as he was made: For even the holy Spirit may be given
to a Chrysome child; and Christ, and S. John Baptist, and the Prophet Jeremy,
are in their several measures and proportions, instances of it. The result of
which is this; That the necessity of Grace does not suppose that our Nature is
originally corrupted; for beyond Adams mere Nature, something else was
necessary, and so it is to us.

2. instances, there had need be something to make recompense for the suffering
the displeasure of crossing that appetite. I use the common manner of speaking,
and the distinction of superior and inferior faculties: though indeed in nature
there is no such thing; and it is but the same faculty, divided between
differing objects; of which I shall give an account in the Ninth Chapter. 3.
But here I take notice of it, that it may not with prejudice be taken to the
disadvantage of this whole Article For if there be no such difference of
faculties founded in Nature, then the rebellion of the inferior against the
superior, is no effect of Adams sin. But the inclination to sensual objects
being chastis'd by laws and prohibitions, has made that which we call the
rebellion of the inferior, that is, the adherence to sensual objects; which was
the more certain to remain, because they were not at first enabled by great
promises of good things to contest against sensual temptations. And because
there was no such thing in that period of the world, therefore almost all flesh
corrupted themselves: excepting Abel, Seth, Enos, and Enoch, we find not one
good man from Adam to Noah; and therefore the Apostle calls that world, 2 Pet.
2.5.
(...), the world of the ungodly. It was not so much wonder that when Adam had
no promises made to enable him to contest his natural concupiscence, he should
strive to make his condition better by the Devils promises. If God had been
pleased to have promised to him the glories he has promised to us, it is not
to be supposed he had fallen so easily. But he did not, and so he fell, and all
the world followed his example, and most upon this account, till it pleased God
after he had tried the world with temporal promises, and found them also
insufficient, to finish the work of his graciousness, and to cause us to be
born anew, by the revelations and promises of Jesus Christ.

2. Adam, because the particular instances were postnate a long time to the
fall of man; and it was for a long time lawful to do some things which now are
unlawful. But our unwillingness and aversness came by occasion of the law
coming cross upon our nature; not because our nature is contrary to God, but
because God was pleased to superinduce some Commandments contrary to our
nature. For if God had commanded us to eat the best meats, and drink the
richest wines as long as they could please us, and were to be had, I suppose it
will not be thought that Original sin would hinder us from obedience. But
because we are forbidden to do some things which naturally we desire to do and
love, therefore our nature is hard put to it; and this is the true state of the
difficulty. Sen. lib. 3. Quaest. Nature. c. 3.
Cito nequitia subrepit: virtus difficilis inventa est. Wickedness came in
speedily; but virtue was hard and difficult.

3. But then besides these, Adams transgression, vices of Princes, wars,
impunity, ignorance, error, false principles, flattery, interest, fear,
partiality, authority, evil laws, heresy, schism, spite and ambition, natural
inclination, and other principiant causes, which proceeding from the natural
weakness of humane constitution, are the fountain and proper causes of many
consequent evils. Quis dabit mundum ab immundo, Job 14.14.
says Job, How can a clean thing come from an unclean? We all naturally have
great weaknesses, and an imperfect constitution, apt to be weary, loving
variety, ignorantly making false measures of good and evil, made up with two
appetites, that is, with inclination to several objects serving to contrary
interests, a thing between Angel and Beast, and the later in this life is the
bigger ingredient. Hominem a Natura noverca in lucem edi corpore nudo, fragili
atque infirmo animo, anxio ad molestias, humili ad timores, debili ad labores,
proclivi ad libidines, in quo Divinus ignis sit obrutus, and ingenium, and
mores. Lib. 4. contra Julianum.
So Cicero as S. Austin quotes him. Nature has like a stepmother sent man into
the world with a naked body, a frail and infirm mind, vexed with troubles,
dejected with fears, weak for labors, prone to lusts, in whom the Divine fire,
and his wit, and his manners are covered and overturned. In Sophistica. Homines
not ura sunt mali: and non possunt induci ut justitiam colant. lib. 2, de Rep.
And when Plato had fiercely reproved the baseness of men's manners, by saying,
that they are even naturally evil; he reckons two causes of it, which are the
diseases of the Soul (but contracted he knew not how) Ignorance and Improbity;
which he supposes to have been the remains of that baseness they had before
they entered into bodies, whither they were sent as to a prison. This is our
natural uncleanness and imperfection, and from such a principle we are to
expect proper and proportioned effects; and therefore we may well say with Job,
What is man that he should be clean, Job. 15.14.
and he which is born of a woman that he should be righteous? That is, our
imperfections are many, and we are with unequal strengths called to labor for a
supernatural purchase; and when our spirit is very willing, even then our flesh
is very weak: And yet it is worse if we compare our selves, as Job does, to the
purities and perfections of God; in respect of which, as he says of us men in
our imperfect state, so he says also of the Angels, or the holy Ones of God,
and of the Heaven it self, that it is also unclean and impure: for the cause
and verification of which, we must look out something besides Original sin. *
Add to this, that vice is pregnant and teeming, and brings forth new
instances, numerous as the spawn of fishes; such as are inadvertency,
carelessness, tediousness of spirit, and these also are causes of very much evil.

. 5. Of liberty of Election remaining after Adams fall.
UPon this account, besides that the causes of an universal impiety are
apparent without any need of laying Adam in blame for all our follies and
miseries, or rather without charging them upon God, who so ordered all things
as we see and feel; the universal wickedness of man is no argument to prove our
will servile, and the powers of election to be quite lost in us (excepting
only that we can choose evil.) For admitting this proposition, that there can
be no liberty where there is no variety; yet that all men choose sin, is not
any testimony that there is no variety in our choice. If there were but one sin
in the world, and all men did choose that, it were a shrewd suspicion that they
were naturally determined or strongly precipitated. But every man does not
choose the same sin, nor for the same cause; neither does he choose it always,
but frequently declines it, hates it, and repents of it: many men even among
the Heathens did so. So that the objection hinders not, but that choice and
election still remains to a man, and that he is not naturally sinful, as he is
naturally heavy, or upright, apt to laugh, or weep. For these he is always,
and unavoidably.

And indeed the contrary doctrine is a destruction of all laws, Improbitas
nullo flectitur obsequio. There would be no use of reason or of discourse, no
deliberation or counsel: and it were impossible for the wit of man to make
sense of thousands of places of Scripture, which speak to us as if we could
hear and obey, or could refuse. Why are promises made, and threatenings
recorded? Why are Gods judgments registered? to what purpose is our reason
above, and our affections below, if they were not to minister to, and attend
upon the will? But upon this account, it is so far from being true that man
after his fall did forfeit his natural power of election, that it seems rather
to be increased. For as a man's knowledge grows, so his will becomes better
attended and ministered unto. But after his fall his knowledge was more then
before; he knew what nakedness was, and had experience of the difference of
things, he perceived the evil and mischief of disobedience and the Divine
anger; he knew fear and flight, new apprehensions, and the trouble of a guilty
conscience: by all which and many other things, he grew better able, and
instructed with arguments to obey God, and to refuse sin for the time to come.
And it is every man's case; a repenting man is wiser, and has oftentimes more
perfect hatred of sin then the innocent, and is made more wary by his fall. But
of this thing God himself is witness. Ecce homo tanquam singularis, ex se ipso
habet scire bonum and malum: So the Chaldee Paraphrase reads Genesis 3.22. Our
Bibles read thus: And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of
us, to know good and evil. Now as a consequent of this knowledge, God was
pleased by ejecting him out of Paradise, to prevent his eating of the Tree of
Life: Ne forte mittat manum suam in arborem vitae. Meaning, that now he was
grown wise and apt to provide himself, and use all such remedies as were before
him. He knew more after his fall then before; therefore ignorance was not the
punishment of that sin: and he that knows more, is better enabled to choose,
and lest he should choose that which might prevent the sentence of death put
upon him, God cast him from thence where the remedy did grow. Upon the
authority of this place Rabbi Moses Ben Maimon has these words: Potest as
libera unicuique data est. Si vult inclinare se ad bonum and esse justus, penes
ipfum est: Sin vult se ad malum inclinare and esse impius, and hoc ipsum penes
est. Hoc illud est quod in lege scribitur, Ecce homo tanquam singularis, ex
seipso habet scire bonum and malum. To every man is given a power that he may
choose and be inclined to good if he please; or else if he please to do evil.
For this is written in the Law, Behold, the man is as a single one, of himself
now he knows good and evil: as if he had said, Behold, mankind is in the world
without its like, and can of his own counsel and thought know good and evil, in
either of these doing what himself shall choose. Si lapsus es, poteris surgere.
In utramvis partem habes liberum arbitrium, In 50. Psa. Hom 2.
says S. Chrysostom. If thou have fallen, thou may rise again. That which
thou art commanded to do, thou have power to do. Thou may choose either.

I might be infinite in this; Hierocles. Humane Nature is in danger to be lost,
if it diverts to that which is against Nature. For if it be immortal, it can
never die in its noblest faculty. But if the will be destroyed, that is,
disabled from choosing (which is all the work the will has to do) then it is
dead. For to live, and to be able to operate, in Philosophy is all one. If the
will therefore cannot operate, how is it immortal? And we may as well suppose
an understanding that can never understand, and passions that can never desire
or refuse, and a memory that can never remember, as a will that cannot choose.
Indeed all the faculties of the soul that operate by way of nature can be
hindered in individuals; but in the whole species never. But the will is not
impedible, it cannot be restrained at all; if there be any acts of life; and
when all the other faculties are weakest, the will is strongest, and does not
at all depend upon the body. Indeed it often follows the inclination and
affections of the body, but it can choose against them, and it can work without
them. And indeed since sin is the action of a free faculty, it can no more take
away the freedom of that faculty, then virtue can; for that also is the action
of the same free faculty. If sin be considered in its formality, as it is an
inordination or irregularity, so it is contrary to virtue; but if you consider
it as an effect or action of the will, it is not at all contrary to the will,
and therefore it is impossible it should be destructive of that faculty from
whence it comes.

Now to say that the will is not dead, Stob.
Custom is the Devil that brings in new natures upon us; Senec. ep. 94.
for nature is innocent in this particular. Nulli nos vitio natura conciliat:
nos illa integros ac liberos genuit. Nature does not engage us upon a vice. She
made us entire, she left us free, but we make our selves prisoners and slaves
by vicious habits; or as S. Cyril expresses it, Catech. 9.
(...). We came into the world without sin (meaning, without sin properly so
called) but now we sin by choice, and by election bring a kind of necessity
upon us. But this is not so in all men, and scarcely in any man in all
instances; and as it is, it is but an approach to that state in which men shall
work by will without choice, or by choice without contrariety of objects. In
heaven and hell men will do so. The Saints love God so fully, that they cannot
hate him, nor desire to displease him. And in hell the accursed spirits so
perfectly hate him that they can never love him. But in this life which is
status viae, a middle condition between both, and a passage to one of the
other, it cannot be supposed to be so, unless here also a man be already saved
or damned.

But then I consider this also,

And this is so necessary a truth, the great grounds and necessities of
obedience and holy living; and if after the fall of Adam it be not by God
permitted to us to choose or refuse, there is nothing left whereby man can
serve God, or offer him a sacrifice. It is no service, it is not rewardable, if
it could not be avoided, nor the omission punishable if it could not be done.
All things else are determined, and fixed by the Divine providence, even all
the actions of men. But the inward act of the will is left under the command of
laws only, and under the arrest of threatenings, and the invitation of
promises. And that this is left for man can no ways impede any of the Divine
decrees, because the outward act being overruled by the Divine providence, it
is strange if the Schools will leave nothing to man, whereby he can glorify God.

I have now said something to all that I know objected, Contra Celsum lib. 4.
Origin said enough to be mistaken in the Question. (...). Adams curse is
common to all. And there is not a woman on earth to whom may not be said those
things which were spoken to this woman [Eve.] Him S. Ambrose did mistake, and
followed the error about explicating the nature of Original sin, and set it
something forward. But S. Austin gave it complement and authority by his fierce
disputing against the Pelagians, whom he would overthrow by all means. Indeed
their capital error was a great one, and such against which all men while there
was need ought to have contended earnestly, but this might and ought to have
been done by truth. For error is no good confuter of error, as it is no good
conversion that reforms one vice with another. But his zeal against a certain
error, made him take in auxiliaries from an uncertain or less discerned one,
and caused him to say many things which all antiquity before him disavowed, and
which the following ages took up upon his acount. * And if such a weak
principle as his saying, could make an error spread over so many Churches, for
so many ages, we may easily imagine that so many greater causes as I before
reckoned might infect whole Nations, and consequently mankind, without
crucifying our Patriarch or first Parent, and declaiming against him (poor man)
as the Author of all our evil. Truth is, we intend by laying load upon him to
excuse our selves, and which is worse, to entertain our sins infallibly, and
never to part with them, upon pretense that they are natural, and irresistible.

. 6. The practical Question.
ANd now if it be inquired, Hierome of Florence a famous Preacher not long
since, who used this argument to prove the blessed Virgin Mary to be free from
Original sin. Because it is more likely, if the blessed Virgin had been put to
her choice, she would rather have desired of God to have kept her free from
venial actual sin then from Original. Since therefore God has granted her the
greater, and that she never sinned actually, it is to be presumed God did not
deny to her the smaller favor, and therefore she was free from Original. Upon
this many a pretty story has been made, and rare arguments framed, and sierce
contestations, whether it be more agreeable to the piety and prudence of the
Virgin Mother to desire immunity from Original sin that is deadly, or from a
venial actual sin that is not deadly. This indeed is voluntary, and the other
is not; but the other deprives us of grace, and this does not. God was more
offended by that, but we offend him more by this. The dispute can never be
ended upon their accounts; but this Gordian knot I have now untied as Alexander
did, by destroying it, and cutting it all in pieces. But to return to the
Question.

S. Austin was indeed a fierce Patron of this device, De peccatorum medicina,
Cap. 3. homil. 50.
where he endeavors largely to prove that all our life time we are bound to
mourn for the inconveniences, and evil consequents derived from Original sin. I
dare say, every man is sufficiently displeased that he is liable to sickness,
weariness, displeasure, melancholy, sorrow, folly, imperfection, and death,
dying with groans, and horrid spasms and convulsions. In what sense these are
the effects of Adams sin, and though of themselves natural, yet also upon his
account made penal; I have already declared, and need no more to dispute; my
purpose being only to establish such truths as are in order to practice and a
holy life, to the duties of repentance and amendment. But our share of Adams
sin, either being in us no sin at all, or else not to be avoided or amended, it
cannot be the matter of repentance. Neminem autem recte it a loqui poenitere
sese quod natus sit, aut poenitere quod mortalis sit, aut quod ex offenso
forte, vulnerato que corpore dolorem sentiat, Li. 17. c. 1.
said A. Gellius. A man is not properly said to repent that he was born, or
that he shall die, or that he feels pain when his leg is hurt; he gives this
reason, Quando istiusmodi rerum nec consilium sit nostrum, nec arbitrium. As
these are besides our choice, so they cannot fall into our deliberation; and
therefore as they cannot be chosen, so neither refused, and therefore not
repented of; for that supposes both; that they were chosen once, and now
refused. * As Adam was not bound to repent of the sins of all his posterity, so
neither are we tied to repent of his sins. Neither did I ever see in any
ancient Office or forms of prayer, public or private, any prayer of
humiliation prescribed for original sin. They might deprecate the evil
consequents, but never confess themselves guilty of the formal sin.

Add to this.

But yet because the Question may not render the practice insecure, I add
these Rules by way of advice and caution.

. 7. Advices relating to the matter of Original sin.
1.

* In our bodies we find weakness, wholesome. Sweet smells make the head ache,
and those smells which are medicinal in some diseases, are intolerable to the
sense. The pleasures of our body are bigger in expectation, then in the
possession; and yet while they are expected, they torment us with the delay,
and when they are enjoyed, they are as if they were not, they abuse us with
their vanity, and vex us with their volatile and fugitive nature. Our pains are
very frequent alone, and very often mingled with pleasures to spoil them; and
he that feels one sharp pain, feels not all the pleasures of the world, if they
were in his power to have them. We live a precarious life, begging help of
every thing, and needing the repairs of every day, and being beholding to
beasts and birds, to plants and trees, to dirt and stones, to the very
excrements of beasts, and that which dogs and horses throw forth. Our motion is
slow and dull, heavy and uneasy; we cannot move but we are quickly tired, and
for every days labor, we need a whole night to recruit our lost strengths; we
live like a lamp, unless new materials be perpetually poured in, we live no
longer then a fly; and our motion is not otherwise then a clock; we must be
pulled up once or twice in twenty four hours; and unless we be in the shadow of
death for six or eight hours every night, we shall be scarce in the shadows of
life the other sixteen. Heat and cold are both our enemies; and yet the one
always dwells within, and the other dwells round about us. The chances and
contingencies that trouble us, are no more to be numbered then the minutes of
eternity. The Devil often hurts us, and men hurt each other oftener, and we are
perpetually doing mischief to our selves. The stars do in their courses fight
against some men, and all the elements against every man; the heavens send evil
influences, the very beasts are dangerous, and the air we suck in does corrupt
our lungs: many are deformed, and blind, and ill colored; and yet upon the
most beauteous face is placed one of the worst sinks of the body; and we are
forced to pass that through our mouths oftentimes, which our eye and our
stomach hates. Pliny did wittily and elegantly represent this state of evil
things. Lib. 6. Prooem.
Itaque foeliciter homo natus jacet manibus pedibusque devinctis, flens, animal
caeteris imperaturum, and a suppliciis vitam auspicatur, unam tantum ob culpam
quia natum est. A man is born happily, but at first he lies bound hand and foot
by impotency and cannot stir; the creature weeps that is born to rule over all
other creatures, and begins his life with punishments, for no fault, but that
he was born. In short. The body is a region of diseases, of sorrow and
nastiness, and weakness and temptation. Here is cause enough of being humbled.

Neither is it better in the soul of man, Fertur equis Auriga, neque audit
currus habenas.
Our judgment is often abused in matters of sense, and one faculty guesses at
truth by confuting another; and the error of the eye is corrected by something
of reason or a former experience. Our fancy is often abused, and yet creates
things of it self, by tying disparate things together, that can cohere no more
then Music and a Cable, then Meat and Syllogisms: and yet this alone does many
times make credibilities in the understandings. Our Memories are so frail, that
they need instruments of recollection, and laborious artifices to help them;
and in the use of these artifices sometimes we forget the meaning of those
instruments: and of those millions of sins which we have committed, we scarce
remember so many as to make us sorrowful, or ashamed. Our judgments are
baffled with every Sophism, and we change our opinion with a wind, and are
confident against truth, but in love with error. We use to reprove one error by
another, and lose truth while we contend too earnestly for it. Infinite
opinions there are in matters of Religion, and most men are confident, and most
are deceived in many things, and all in some; and those few that are not
confident, have only reason enough to suspect their own reason. We do not know
our own bodies, not what is within us, nor what ails us when we are sick, nor
whereof we are made; nay we oftentimes cannot tell what we think, or believe,
or love. We desire and hate the same thing, speak against and run after it. We
resolve, and then consider; we bind our selves, and then find causes why we
ought no to be bound, and want not some pretenses to make our selves believe
we were not bound. Prejudice and Interest are our two great motives of
believing; we weigh deeper what is extrinsical to a question, then what is in
its nature; and oftener regard who speaks, then what is said. The diseases of
our soul are infinite; Eccles. Hier. c. 3. Part. 3.
(...), said Dionysius of Athens. Mankind of old fell from those good things
which God gave him, and now is fallen into a life of passion, and a state of
death. In sum, it follows the temper or distemper of the body, and sailing by
such a Compass, and being carried in so rotten a vessel, especially being
empty, or filled with lightness, and ignorance, and mistakes, it must needs be
exposed to the danger and miseries of every storm; which I choose to represent
in the words of Cicero. In Hortens.
Ex humanae vitae erroribus and aerumnis fit, ut verum sit illum quod est apud
Aristotelem, sic nostros animos cum corporibus copulatos, ut vivos cum mortuis
esse conjunctos. The soul joined with the body, is like the conjunction of the
living and the dead; the dead are not quickened by it, but the living are
afflicted and die.

But then if we consider what our spirit is, we have reason to lie down flat
upon our faces, and confess Gods glory and our own shame. When it is at the
best, it is but willing, but can do nothing without the miracle of Grace. Our
spirit is hindered by the body, and cannot rise up whither it properly tends,
with those great weights upon it. It is foolish and improvident; large in
desires, and narrow in abilities; naturally curious in trifles, and inquisitive
after vanities; but neither understands deeply, nor affectionately relishes the
things of God; pleased with forms, cousen'd with pretenses, satisfied with
shadows, incurious of substances and realities. It is quick enough to find
doubts, and when the doubts are satisfied, it raises scruples, that is, it is
restless after it is put to sleep, and will be troubled in despite of all
arguments of peace. It is incredibly negligent of matters of Religion, and most
solicitous and troubled in the things of the world. We love our selves, and
despise others; judging most unjust sentences, and by peevish and cross
measures; Covetousness and Ambition, Gain and Empire are the proportions by
which we take account of things. We hate to be governed by others, even when we
cannot dress our selves; and to be forbidden to do or have a thing is the best
art in the world to make us greedy of it. The flesh and the spirit perpetually
are at (...). Macar. hom 21.
strife; the spirit pretending that his ought to be the dominion, and the flesh
alleging that this is her state, and her day. We hate our present condition,
and know not how to better our selves, our changes being but like the tumblings
and tossings in a Fever, from trouble to trouble, that is all the variety. We
are extremely inconstant, and always hate our own choice: we despair sometimes
of Gods mercies, and are confident in our own follies; as we order things, we
cannot avoid little sins, and do not avoid great ones. We love the present
world, though it be good for nothing, and undervalue infinite treasures, if
they be not to be had till the day of recompenses. We are peevish, if a servant
does but break a glass, and patient when we have thrown an ill cast for
eternity; throwing away the hopes of a glorious Crown for wine, and dirty
silver. We know that our prayers, if well done, are great advantages to our
state, and yet we are hardly brought to them, and love not to stay at them, and
wander while we are saying them, and say them without minding, and are glad
when they are done, or when we have a reasonable excuse to omit them. A passion
does quite overturn all our purposes, and all our principles, and there are
certain times of weakness in which any temptation may prevail, if it comes in
that unlucky minute.

This is a little representment of the state of man; brought first upon Adam,
and so descended upon us, yet we have no cause to complain, for we lost nothing
that was ours. Praeposterum est (said Paulus the Lawyer) ante nos locupletes
dici quam acquisierimus. We cannot be said to lose what we never had; and our
fathers goods were not to descend upon us, unless they were his at his death.
If therefore they be confiscated before his death, ours indeed is the
inconvenience too, but his alone is the punishment, and to neither of us is the
wrong.

But concerning the second, I mean that which is superinduced, it is not his
fault alone, nor ours alone, and neither of us is innocent; we all put in our
accursed Symbol for the debauching of our spirits, for the besotting our souls,
for the spoiling our bodies. Ille initium induxit debiti, S. Chrysostom. in cap. 6.
Ephesians.
nos foenus auximus posterioribus peccatis, etc. He began the principal, and we
have increased the interest. This we also find well expressed by Justin
Martyr; for the Fathers of the first ages spoke prudently and temperately in
this Article, as in other things. Christ was not born or crucified because
himself had need of these things, but for the sake of mankind. (...): Dial.
cum Tryph.
which from Adam fell into death and the deception of the Serpent, besides the
evil which every one adds upon his own account. And it appears in the greatest
instance of all, even in that of natural death; which though it was natural,
yet from Adam it began to be a curse, just as the motion of a Serpent upon his
belly, which was concreated with him, yet upon this story was changed into a
malediction and an evil adjunct. But though Adam was the gate, and brought in
the head of death, yet our sins brought him in further, we brought in the body
of death. Our life was left by Adam a thousand years long almost; but the
iniquity of man brought it quickly to 500 years, from thence to 250, from
thence to 120, and at last to seventy; and then God would no more strike all
mankind in the same manner, but individuals and single sinners smart for it,
and are cut off in their youth, and do not live out half their days. And so it
is in the matters of the soul and the spirit. Every sin leaves an evil upon the
soul; and every age grows worse, and adds some iniquity of its own to the
former examples. And therefore Tertullian calls Adam mali traducem; he
transmitted the original and exemplar, and we write after his copy.
Infirmitatis ingenitae vitium; so Arnobius calls our natural baseness, we are
naturally weak, and this weakness is a vice or defect of Nature, and our evil
usages make our natures worse; like Butchers being used to kill beasts, their
natures grow more savage and unmerciful; so it is with us all. If our parents
be good, yet we often prove bad, as the wild olive comes from the branch of a
natural olive, or as corn with the chaff come from clean grain, and the
uncircumcised from the circumcised. But if our parents be bad, it is the less
wonder if their children are so; a Blackamore begets a Blackamore, as an
Epileptick son does often come from an Epileptick father, and hereditary
diseases are transmitted by generation; so it is in that viciousness that is
radicated in the body, for a lustful father oftentimes begets a lustful son;
and so it is in all those instances where the soul follows the temperature of
the body. And thus not only Adam, but every father may transmit an Original
sin, or rather an Original viciousness of his own. For a vicious nature, or a
natural improbity when it is not consented to, is not a sin, but an ill
disposition: Philosophy and the Grace of God must cure it; but it often causes
us to sin, before our reason and our higher principles are well attended to.
But when we consent to, and actuate our evil inclinations, we spoil our natures
and make them worse, making evil still more natural. For it is as much in our
nature to be pleased with our artificial delights as with our natural. And this
is the doctrine of S. Austin, speaking of Concupiscence. Lib. 1. de nupt. and
con^^p. c. 23.
Modo quodam loquendi vocatur peccatum quod peccato facta est, and peccati si
vicerit facit reum. Concupiscence or the viciousness of our Nature is after a
certain manner of speaking called sin; because it is made worse by sin, and
makes us guilty of sin when it is consented to. It has the nature of sin; so
the Article of the Church of England expresses it; that is, it is in eadem
materia, it comes from a weak principle, a naturae vitio, from the imperfect
and defective nature of man, and inclines to sin. But (that I may again use S.
Austins words) Quantum ad nos attinet, Lib 2. ad Julian.
sine peccato semper essemus donec sanaretur hoc malum, si ei nunquam
consentiremus ad malum. Although we all have concupiscence, yet none of us all
should have any sin, if we did not consent to this concupiscence unto evil.
Concupiscence is Naturae vitium, but not peccatum, a defect or fault of nature,
but not formally a sin: which distinction we learn from S. Austin; Ibid.
Non enim talia sunt vitia quae jam peccata dicenda sunt. Concupiscence is an
evil as a weak eye is, but not a sin, if we speak properly, till it be
consented to; and then indeed it is the parent of sin. (...): so S. James, it
brings forth sin.

This is the vile state of our natural viciousness and improbity, Adam had
some, but truly not the biggest share; and let this consideration sink as deep
as it will in us to make us humble and careful, but let us not use it as an
excuse to lessen our diligence, by greatning our evil necessity. For death and
sin were both born from Adam, but we have nursed them up to an ugly bulk and
deformity. But I must now proceed to other practical rules.

2. must be born again; that as by our first birth we are heirs of death, so by
our new birth we may be adopted into the inheritance of life and salvation.

3. Adam left us, in pure naturals, but in some degrees worsted by the nature
of sin in some instances, and the anger of God in all, that is, in the state of
flesh and blood, which shall never inherit the Kingdom of heaven.

4. by him alone we are saved. Giving all glory to God, will take nothing of
the reward from us.

5.

6. James affirms most wisely) every man is tempted, Jam. 1^^ 14.
when he is led away by his own concupiscence; but because he is a very evil
speaker that speaks evil things of God. Think it not therefore in thy thought,
that God has made many necessities of sinning. He that has forbidden sin so
earnestly, threatened it so deeply, hates it so essentially, prevents it so
cautiously, disswades us from it so passionately, punishes it so severely, arms
us against it so strongly, and sent his Son so piously and charitably to root
out sin (so far as may be) from the face of the earth; certainly it cannot be
thought that he has made necessities of sinning. For whatsoever he has made
necessary, is as innocent as what he has commanded; it is his own work, and he
hates nothing that he has made, and therefore he has not made sin. And no
man shall dare to say at Doomsday unto God, that he made him to sin, or made it
unavoidable. There are no two cases of Conscience, no two duties in any case so
seemingly contradictory, that which soever a man chooses he must sin: and
therefore much less is any one state a state of necessary unavoidable enmity
against God.

7. Xenocrates in Aristotle, Arist. 2. Topic. c. 3.
(...). Happy is he that has a diligent studious soul: for that is every man's
good Angel, and the principle of his felicity.

8. Alexander of Ales said of Bonaventure, Adam non peccavit in Bonaventura,
will be as truly said of young men and maidens. Impiety will not peep out so
soon. Lib. 1. c. 2.
It was wisely observed by Quintilian, who was an excellent Tutor for young
Gentlemen, that our selves with ill breeding our children are the Authors of
their evil nature. Ante palatum eorum quam os instituimus. Gaudemus si quid
licentius dixerint. Verba ne Alexandrinis quidem permittenda deliciis, risu and
osculo excipimus. We teach their palate before we instruct the tongue. And when
the tongue begins first to prattle, they can efform wantonness before words;
and we kiss them for speaking filthy things. Fit ex his consuetudo, deinde
natura. Discunt haec miseri antequam sciunt vitia esse. The poor wretches sin
before they know what it is; and by these actions a custom is made up, and
this custom becomes a nature.

. 8. Rules and measures of deportment when a curse does descend upon Children
for their Parents fault, or when it is feared.
1. Si quis paterni vitii nascitur haeres; nascitur and poenae. The heir of the
Crime, must possess the revenue of punishment.

2. Isocrat. ep. ad Tim.
(...). For most men love not to honor and praise the sons of good men so much
as the sons of wicked men, when they study to represent themselves better, and
unlike their wicked parents. Therefore,

3. punishment. (...), said Plato. For every one is submitted to his own
fortune by his own act. The fathers crime and the fathers punishment make no
real permanent blot upon the son. No man is forced to succeed in his fathers
crime; said Callistratus the Lawyer.

4.

5.

6. Gregoras lib. 5. c. 81.
We find this thing done by Andronicus Palaeologus, the Greek Emperor, who
was the son of a bad Father; and it is to be done, when the effect was
transient, or irremediable.

7. Josiah, who above all the Princes that were before or after him turned to
the Lord. 2 Kings 23.26.
Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath
wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations
that Manasseh had provoked him withal. In such a case as this we are to submit
to Gods will, and let him exercise his power, his dominion, and his kingdom as
he pleases, and expect the returns of our piety in the day of recompenses: and
it may be, our posterity shall reap a blessing for our sakes, who feel a sorrow
and an evil for our fathers sake.

8.

9. (...), Eurip. Orest.

(...),
said Electra in the Tragedy. Our nature is very bad in it self; but very good
to them that use it well.

Prayers and Meditations.
THE first Adam bearing a wicked heart transgressed and was overcome: Esdras
2.3.21.22.
and so be all they that are born of him. Thus infirmity was made permanent:
And the law also in the heart of the people with the malignity and root, so
that the good departed away, and the evil abode still.

Lo, Eccl. 7.29.
this only have I found, that God has made man upright: but they have sought
many inventions.

For there is not a just man upon earth that does good and sins not. V. 20.


Behold, Psalm. 51.5, 7, 10.
I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. Purge me with
hysop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow: create
in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

The fool has said in his heart, Psalm. 14.1, 2, 3.
There is no God, they are corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is
none that does good: The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men,
to see if there were any that did understand and seek after God. They are all
gone aside, they are all become filthy: There is not one that does good, no
not one. V. 7.
* O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! when the Lord brings
back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

Man dies and wastes away, Job 14.10, etc.
yea man gives up the ghost, and where is he? For now thou numbrest my steps:
Do thou not watch over my sin? my transgression is sealed up in a bag, and
thou sewest up iniquity. Thou destroyest the hope of man: Thou prevailest
against him for ever, and he passes: thou changest his countenance, and
sendest him away. But his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within
him shall mourn.

What is man that he should be clean, Job 15.14.
and he that is born of a woman that he should be righteous? Behold, he puts
no trust in his Saints yea the heavens are not clean in his sight. How much
more abominable and filthy is man which drinks iniquity like water?

Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid. V. 24.
they shall prevail against him as a King ready to battle. For he stretches out
his hand against God, and strengthens himself against the Almighty.

Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity, V. 31.
for vanity shall be his recompense. Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean thing? no not one.

I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin, Job 16.15.
and defiled my horn in the dust. My face is foul with weeping, and on my
eie-lids is the shadow of death. Not for any injustice in my hand: also my
prayer is pure.

Wretched man that I am, Romans 7.24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death! I thank God [I am delivered]
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

But now being made free from sin, 6.22.
and become servants of God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life: For the wages of sin is death: But the gift of God is eternal
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, V. 12,14.
that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. For sin shall not have dominion
over you: for ye are not under the law, but under grace.

The PRAYER.
O Almighty God, great Father of Men and Angels, thou art the preserver of men,
and the great lover of souls; thou did make every thing perfect in its kind,
and all that thou did make was very good: only we miserable creatures sons
of Adam have suffered the falling Angels to infect us with their leprosy of
pride, and so we entered into their evil portion, having corrupted our way
before thee, and are covered with thy rod, and dwell in a cloud of thy
displeasure; behold me the meanest of thy servants, humbled before thee,
sensible of my sad condition, weak and miserable, sinful and ignorant, full of
need, wanting thee in all things, and neither able to escape death without a
Savior, nor to live a life of holiness without thy Spirit. O be pleased to
give me a portion in the new birth: break off the bands and fetters of my sin,
cure my evil inclinations, correct my indispositions, and natural averseness
from the severities of Religion; let me live by the measures of thy law, not by
the evil example and disguises of the world; Renew a right spirit within me,
and cast me not away from thy presence, lest I should retire to the works of
darkness, and enter into those horrible regions, where the light of thy
countenance never shines.

II. I Am ashamed, O Lord, I am ashamed that I have dishonored so excellent a
Creation. Thou did make us upright, and create us in innocence. And when thou
did see us unable to stand in thy sight, and that we could never endure to be
judged by the Covenant of works, thou did renew thy mercies to us in the new
Covenant of Jesus Christ; and now we have no excuse, nothing to plead for our
selves, much less against thee; but thou art holy and pure, and just and
merciful. Make me to be like thee, holy as thou art holy, merciful as our
heavenly Father is merciful, obedient as our holy Savior Jesus, meek and
charitable, temperate and chaste, humble and patient according to that holy
example, that my sins may be pardoned by his death, and my spirit renewed by
his Spirit, that passing from sin to grace, from ignorance to the knowledge and
love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, I may pass from death to life, from
sorrow to joy, from earth to heaven, from the present state of misery and
imperfection, to the glorious inheritance prepared for the Saints and Sons of
light, the children of the new birth, the brethren of our Lord and Brother, our
Judge and our Advocate, our Blessed Savior and Redeemer JESUS. Amen.

A Prayer to be said by a Matron in behalf of her husband and family, that a
blessing may descend upon their posterity.
I. O Eternal God, our most merciful Lord, and gracious Father, thou art my
guide, the light of mine eyes, the joy of my heart, the author of my hope, and
the object of my love and worshippings, thou relievest all my needs, and
determin'st all my doubts, and art an eternal fountain of blessing, open and
running over to all thirsty and weary souls that come and cry to thee for mercy
and refreshment. Have mercy upon thy servant, and relieve my fears and sorrows,
and the great necessities of my family, for thou alone, O Lord, can do it.

II. FIt and adorn every one of us with a holy and a religious spirit, and give
a double portion to thy servant my dear husband: Give him a wise heart, a
prudent, severe, and indulgent care over the children which thou have given us.
His heart is in thy hand, and the events of all things are in thy disposition.
Make it a great part of his care to promote the spiritual and eternal interest
of his children, and not to neglect their temporal relations and necessities;
but to provide states of life for them in which with fair advantages they may
live cheerfully, serve thee diligently, promote the interest of the Christian
family in all their capacities, that they may be always blessed, and always
innocent, devout and pious, and may be graciously accepted by thee to pardon,
and grace, and glory, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

III. BLess (O God) my sons with excellent understandings, love of holy and
noble things, sweet dispositions, innocent deportment, diligent souls, chaste,
healthful and temperate bodies, holy and religious spirits, that they may live
to thy glory, and be useful in their capacities to the servants of God, and all
their neighbors, and the Relatives of their conversation. Bless my daughters
with a humble and a modest carriage, and excellent meekness, a great love of
holy things, a severe chastity, a constant, holy and passionate Religion. O my
God, never suffer them to fall into folly, and the sad effects of a wanton,
loose and indiscreet spirit: possess their fancies with holy affections, be
thou the covering of their eyes, and the great object of their hopes, and all
their desires. Blessed Lord, thou disposest all things sweetly by thy
providence, thou guidest them excellently by thy wisdom, thou unitest all
circumstances and changes wonderfully by thy power, and by thy power make all
things work for the good of thy servants; Be pleased so to dispose my
daughters, that if thou should call them to the state of a married life, they
may not dishonor their family, nor grieve their parents, nor displease thee,
but that thou will so dispose of their persons, and the accidents and
circumstances of that state, that it may be a state of holiness to the Lord,
and blessing to thy servants. And until thy wisdom shall know it fit to bring
things so to pass, let them live with all purity, spending their time
religiously and usefully. O most blessed Lord, enable their dear father with
proportionable abilities and opportunities of doing his duty and charities
toward them, and them with great obedience and duty toward him, and all of us
with a love toward thee above all things in the world, that our portion may be
in love and in thy blessings, through Jesus Christ our dearest Lord, and most
gracious Redeemer.

IV. O My God, pardon thy servant, pity my infirmities, hear the passionate
desires of thy humble servant; in thee alone is my trust, my heart and all my
wishes are toward thee. Thou have commanded me to pray to thee in all needs,
thou have made gracious promises to hear and accept me; and I will never leave
importuning thy glorious Majesty, humbly, passionately, confidently, till thou
have heard and accepted the prayer of thy servant. Amen, dearest Lord, for thy
mercy sake hear thy servant. Amen.

CHAP. VII. Of sins of Infirmity.
. 1.
1. ALL Mankind has for ever complained of their irremediable calamity, their
propensity to sin. For though by the dictates of Nature all people were
instructed in the general notices of virtue and vice, right reason being our
rule: insomuch that the old Philosophers (as Plutarch reports) said that virtue
was nothing else but (...), (...)
a disposition and force of reason. And this reason having guided the wisest,
was formed into laws for others; yet this reason served to little other
purposes, but to upbraid our follies and infelicities, and to make our actions
punishable, by representing them to be unreasonable: for they did certainly
sin, and they could no more help it, then they could prevent their being sick,
or hungry, or angry, or thirsty. Nature had made organs for some, and senses
for others, and conversation and example brought in all. So that if you
reproved a Criminal, he heard and understood you, but could not help it: as
Laius in the Tragedy; (...),
(...).
Reason taught him well, but Nature constrained him to the contrary; his
affections were stronger then his reason.

And it is no wonder that while flesh and blood is the prevailing ingredient,
the state of Nature. And therefore Lactantius brings in a Pagan complaining,
Lib. 4. Insti. c. 24.
Volo equidem non peccare, sed vincor. Indutus enim sum carne fragili, et
imbecilla. Haec est quae concupiscit, quae irascitur, quae dolet, quae mori
timet. Itaque ducor incertus, and pecco non quia volo, sed quia cogor. Sentio
me and ipse peccare; sed necessitas fragilitatis impellit, cui repugnare non
possum. I would fain avoid sin, but I am compelled. I am invested with a frail
and weak flesh: This is it which lusts, which is angry, which grieves, which
fears to die. Therefore I am led uncertainly, and I sin, not because I will,
but because I am constrained. I perceive that I do ill, but the necessity of
my weakness drives me on, and I cannot resist it. (...), Medea apud Eurip.

(...).
I know well and perceive the evils that I go upon, and they are horridones,
but my anger is greater then my reason. So Medea in the Tragedy. This is the
state of a natural man in his mere naturals, especially as they are made worse
by evil customs, and vile usages of the world.

Now this is a state of infirmity; infirmity. But this infirmity excuses no
man: for this state of infirmity is also a state of death; for by this S. Paul
expressed that state from which Christ came to redeem us: (...), when we were
yet in infirmity, or without strength, in due time Christ died for us; Romans 5.6.
that is, when we were (...), impious, or sinners, such as the world was before
it was redeemed, before Christ came. These are the sick and weak whom Christ
the great Physician of our souls came to save. This infirmity is the shadow of
death; and it signifies that state of mankind which is the state of nature,
not of original and birth, but in its whole constitution, as it signifies not
only the natural imperfection, but the superinduced evil from any principle;
all that which is opposed to Grace.

To this state of Nature being so pitiable, the measures of virtue, and by a
law made them more distinct and legible, and imposed punishments on the
transgressors. For by little and little the notices of natural reason were made
obscure, some were lost, some not attended to, all neglected some way or other;
till God by a law made express prohibition of what was unreasonable, forbidding
us to desire what before was unfit and unnatural, and threatening them that did
things unlawful. But this way, by reason of the peevishness of men, succeeded
not well, but men became worse by it. For what the law did forbid without the
threatening of any penalty, they took for an advice only, and no severe
injunction: And those Commandments which were established with a threatening to
the transgressors, they expounded only by the letter, and in the particular
instance, and in the outward act.

Before the Law, Herod did so to Herodias his brother Philips wife, even after
the law. They would not by violence snatch the estate from a young prodigal
heir, but if he were apt, they would lend him money, and nurse his vice, and
entangle his estate, and at last devour it. They would not directly deny to pay
the price of a purchase; but they would detain it or divert it, or pay it in
trifling sums, or in undesir'd commodities. This was Concupiscere rem alienam.
They did not steal, but coveted it, and so entered indirectly: and this God
seeing, forbad it by a law: Romans 7.7.
For I had not known lust or desires to be a sin (says S. Paul) but that the
law said, Thou shall not covet.

But because the law only forbad lustings, the face of an angry God: and this
Lactantius observed of them. Metus legum non scelera comprimebat, sed licentiam
submovebat. Poterant enim leges delicta punire, conscientiam munire non
poterant. Itaque quae ante palam fiebant, clam fieri coeperunt: circumscribi
etiam jura. For all the threatenings of the Law they were wicked still, though
not scandalous; vile in private, and wary in public; they did circumscribe
their laws, and thought themselves bound only to the letter, and obliged by
nothing but the penalty, which if they escaped they reckoned themselves
innocent. Thus far the law instructed them, and made them afraid. But for the
first, they grew the more greedy to do what now they were forbidden to desire.
The prohibition of the law being like a damme to the waters, the desire swells
the higher for being checked; and the wisdom of Romulus in not casting up a
bank against parricide had this effect, that until the end of the second Punick
war which was almost DC. years, there was no example of one that killed his
Father. Lucius Ostius was the first. And it is certain that the Easterlings
neither were nor had they reason to be fond of Circumcision; it was part of
that load which was complained of by the Apostles in behalf of the Jewish
Nation, which neither they nor their Fathers could bear; and yet as soon as
Christ took off the yoke, and that it was forbidden to his Disciples, the Jews
were as fond of it, as of their pleasures; and fifteen Bishops of Jerusalem in
immediate succession, were all circumcised, and no arguments, no authority
could hinder them. And for their fear, it only produced caution, and sneaking
from the face of men, and both together set them on work to corrupt the spirit
of the law by expositions too much according to the letter: so that by this
means, their natural desires, their lustings and concupiscence were not cured.

For as Lactantius brought in the Heathen complaining, Paul bring in the Jew:
That which I do I allow not, Romans 7.25, 19.
for what I would, that I do not, but what I hate that I do. I say, this is
the state of a man under the law; a man who is not regenerate and made free by
the Spirit of Christ; that is, a man who abides in the infirmities of nature:
of which the law of nature warned him first, and the superinduced law of God
warned him more; but there was not in these Covenants or Laws sufficient either
to endure or to secure obedience; they did not minister strength enough to
conquer sin, to overthrow its power, to destroy the kingdom and reign of sin:
this was reserved for the great day of triumph; it was the glory of the Gospel
the power of Christ, the strength of the Spirit which alone was able to do it;
and by this with its appendages, that is the pardon of sin and a victory over
it, a conquest by the prevailing and rule of the Spirit, by this alone the
Gospel is the most excellent above all the covenants, and states, and
institutions of the world.

But then the Christian must not complain thus; V. 15.
but it is not I, but sin that dwells in me. For that which I do, I allow
not; for what I would, that do I not, and what I hate, that do I. And if they
be tempted to a sin, they cannot be dissuaded from it, or encouraged to a noble
and pertinacious resistance, because they have this in excuse ready; V. 18.
To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good I find not.
For the good which I would, I do not, but the evil which I would not, that I
do. That is, it is my infirmity, give me leave to do it, I am the child of
God for all my sin; for I do it with an unwilling willingness. I shall do
this always, and shall never be quit of this tyranny of sin: It was thus with
S. Paul himself, and I ought not to hope to be otherwise then he, and a person
more free from sin. We find in the life of Andronicus, written by Nicetas
Choniates, the same pretense made in excuse for sin; they could not help it;
and we find it so in our daily experience; and the thing it self warranted by
many Interpreters of Scripture, who suppose that S. Paul in the seventh Chapter
to the Romans, from the fourteenth verse to the end, describes his own state
of infirmity and disability, or which is all one, the state of a regenerate
man, that it is no other but an ineffective striving and struggling against sin,
a contention in which he is most commonly worsted, and that this striving is
all that he can show of holiness to be a testimony of his regeneration.

. 2.
HOw necessary it is to free the words of S. Paul from so dangerous a sense, we
may easily believe, if we consider that to suppose a man who is regenerate by
the Spirit of Christ to be still a slave under sin, and within its power, and
that he fain would but cannot help it, is very injurious to the power of Christ
and the mightiness of the spirit of grace: when all its effect is only said to
be, that it strives, but can do nothing; that is, sin abounds more then grace,
and the man that is redeemed by Christ, is still unredeem'd, and a captive
under sin and Satan; this is not only an encouragement of evil life, 1 John
4.4.
but a reproach and scorn cast upon the holy Spirit; It is verbum dictum contra
Spiritum sanctum, a word spoken against the holy Ghost. Sermon. 43. and 45. de
tempore.
And as S. Austin calls it, it is tuba hostis, non nostra, unde ille incitetur,
non unde vincatur, the Devils trumpet to encourage him in his war against poor
mankind; but by this means he shall never be overcome. And therefore he gives
us caution of it; for speaking of these words, The good which I would, that do
I not, but the evil that I would not, that I do, advises thus, Lectio Divina
quae de Apostoli Pauli epistola recitata est, quotiescunque legitur, timendum
est ne male intellecta det hominibus quaerentibus occasionem. When ever these
words of S. Paul are read, we must fear lest the misunderstanding of them
should minister an occasion of sin to them that seek it. For men are prone to
sin, and scarce restrain themselves. When therefore they hear the Apostle
saying, I do not the good which I would, but I do the evil which I hate, they
do evil, and as it were displeasing themselves because they do it, think
themselves like the Apostle. In pursuance of this caution, I shall examine the
expositions which are pretended.

1. [I do not the good which I would, but I do the evil which I hate] are not
the words or character of a regenerate person in respect of actual good or bad.
Romans 7.15.
A regenerate man cannot say that he does frequently or habitually commit the
sin that he hates, and is against his conscience. 1. Because no man can serve
two Masters; if he be a servant of sin, he is not a servant of the Spirit. No
man can serve Christ and Belial. If therefore he be brought into captivity to
the law of sin, he is the servant of sin; and such was he whom S. Paul
describes in this Chapter. Ver. 23.
Therefore this person is not a servant of Christ; He that is a servant of
righteousness is freed from sin; and he who is a servant of sin is not a
servant of, Romans 6.20.
but freed from righteousness. A regenerate person therefore is a servant of
the Spirit, and so cannot at the same time be a servant, or a slave and a
captive under sin.

2. I do the evil which I hate, the meaning is, I do it seldom, or I do it
commonly and frequently; If it means, I do it seldom, then a man cannot use
these words so well as the contrary; he can say, The good which I would I do
regularly and ordinarily, and, the evil which I hate, I do avoid; sometimes
indeed I am surprised, and when I do neglect to use the aids and strengths of
the spirit of grace, I fall; but this is because I will not, and not because I
cannot help it; and in this case the man is not a servant or captive of sin,
but a servant of Christ, though weak and imperfect. But if it means, I do it
commonly, or constantly or frequently, which is certainly the complaint here
made, then to be a regenerate person is to be a vile person, sold under sin,
and not Gods servant. For if any man shall suppose these words to mean only
thus; I do not do so much good as I would, and do sometimes fall into evil,
though I would fain be entirely innocent, indeed this man teaches no false
doctrine as to the state or duty of the regenerate, which in this life will for
ever be imperfect; but he speaks not according to the sense and design of the
Apostle here. For his purpose is to describe that state of evil in which we are
by nature, and from which we could not be recovered by the law, and from which
we can only be redeemed by the grace of Jesus Christ; and this is a state of
death, of being killed by sin, of being captivated and sold under sin, after
the manner of slaves; as will further appear in the sequel.

3. has the Spirit of Christ. Rom 8.9. 2 Cor. 3.17.
But where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty; therefore no slavery;
therefore sin reigns no^ there. Both the propositions are the words of the
Apostle; The conclusion therefore infers that the man whom S. Paul describes in
this Chapter, is not the regenerate man, for he has not liberty, To. 7.23.
but is in captivity to the law of sin, from which every one that is Christ's,
every one that has the Spirit of Christ, is freed.

4. Paul calls being under the law, that is, a being carnal, and in the state of
the flesh; not but that the law it self is spiritual; but that we being carnal
of our selves, are not cured by the law, but by reason of the infirmity of the
flesh made much worse; Romans 7.13, 14. and 8.3.
curbed, but not sweetly won; admonished, but assisted by no spirit but the
spirit of bondage and fear. This state is opposed to the spiritual state. The
giving of the law is called the ministry of death; 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8.
the Gospel is called the ministry of the Spirit, and that is the ministration
of life; and therefore if we be led by the Spirit, Gal. 5.18. Romans 7.9.
we are not under the law: but if we be under the law, we are dead, and sin is
revived; and sin by the law brings forth fruit unto death. From hence the
argument of the Apostle is clear. The man whom he here describes, is such a one
who is under the law; but such a man is dead by reason of sin, and therefore
has not in him the Spirit of God, for that is the ministration of life. A
regenerate person is alive unto God; he lives the life of righteousness: but he
that is under the law is killed by sin; and such is the man that is here
described, as appears verse 9. and I shall in the sequel further prove;
therefore this man is not the regenerate.

5. I do that which I hate, is a man in whom sin is not mortified, and
therefore he lives after the flesh: but then he is not regenerate; for if ye
live after the flesh ye shall die (says S. Romans 8.13.
Paul) but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live.

These arguments are taken from consideration of the rule and dominion of sin
in the man whom S. Paul describes, who therefore cannot be a regenerate person.
To the same effect and conclusion are other expressions in the same Chapter. 6.
Paul here describes, who complains, [That he does not the good which he would,
but the evil that he would not] is such a one in whom sin does inhabit: It is
no more I, Verse. 20.
but sin that dwells in me. But in the regenerate sin does not inhabit: My
Father and I will come unto him, and make our abode with him. So Christ
promised to his servants; John 14.23. To. 8.11. 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 3.17. and
2.22. 2 Timothy 1.14.
to them who should be regenerate; and the Spirit of God dwells in them; the
Spirit of him that raised Jesus from the dead; and therefore the Regenerate are
called the habitation of God through the Spirit. Now if God the Father, if
Christ, if the Spirit of Christ dwells in a man, there sin does not dwell. The
strong man that is armed keeps possession; but if a stronger then he comes, he
dispossesses him. If the Spirit of God does not drive the Devil forth, himself
will leave the place. They cannot both dwell together. Sin may be in the
regenerate, and grieve Gods Spirit, but it shall not abide or dwell there, for
that extinguishes him. One or the other must depart. And this also is noted by
Saint Paul in this very place; sin dwells in me, Ver. 17, 18.
and, no good thing dwells in me: If one does, the other does not; but yet as
in the unregenerate there might be some good, such as are, good desires,
knowledge of good and evil, single actions of virtue, beginnings and
dispositions to grace, acknowledging of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, some
lightnings and flashes of the holy Ghost, a knowing of the way of
righteousness; but sanctifying, saving good does not dwell, that is, does not
abide with them, and rule; so in the regenerate there is sin, but because it
does not dwell there, they are under the Empire of the Spirit and in Christ's
Kingdom; Gal. 2.20.
or, as Saint Paul expresses it, Christ lives in them: and that cannot be
unless sin be crucified and dead in them. The sum of which is thus in S.
Paul's words: Romans 6.11, 12, 14.
Reckon your selves indeed to be dead unto sin, but alive unto God through
Jesus Christ. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should
obey it in the lusts thereof. For sin shall not have dominion over you, because
we are not under the law, but under grace.

7. Paul describes is carnal, but the regenerate is never called carnal in the
Scripture, To 7.14.
but is spiritual opposed to carnal. A man not only in pure naturals, but ever
placed under the law is called Carnal; that is, until he be redeemed by the
Spirit of Christ, he cannot be called spiritual, but is yet in the flesh. Now
that the regenerate cannot be the carnal man, is plain in the words of S. Paul:
Romans 8.7.
The carnal mind is enmity against God; and, they that are in the flesh cannot
please God. To which he adds, But ye are not in the flesh, V. 8.
but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. But the
Spirit of God does dwell in all the servants of God, in all the regenerate. V.
9.
For if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Now as these
are in Scripture distinguished in their appellatives and in their character, so
also in their operations. They that are carnal, (...), V. 5.
according to the flesh, do mind, or relish the things of the flesh: They that
are after the Spirit, do mind the things of the Spirit. And, they that are
Christ's, Gal. 5.24.
have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. Now they that have
crucified the flesh, cannot in any sense of Scripture or Religion be called
Carnal. That there is something of carnality in the regenerate is too true,
because our regeneration and spirituality in this life is imperfect. But when
carnal and spiritual are opposed in Scripture; and the Question is, Whether of
these two is to be attributed to the servants and sons of God, to the
Regenerate? it is certain by the analogy of the thing, and the perpetual manner
of speaking in Scripture, that by this word Carnal, the Spirit of God never
means the sons of God, or the spiritual; that is, the Regenerate: Romans 8.
The sons of God are led by the Spirit of God; therefore not by the flesh,
which they have crucified. Whatsoever is essential to regeneration, to new
birth, to the being the sons of God, all that is in the regenerate; for they
cannot be that thing, of which they want an essential part: as a thing cannot
be a body unless it be divisible, nor a living creature if it have not life.
Therefore regeneration is perfect in respect of its essentials or necessary
parts of constitution. But in the degrees there is imperfection, and therefore
the abatement is made by the intermixture of carnality. For it is in our new
and spiritual birth, as in our natural. The child is a man in all essential
parts, but he is as a beast in some of his operations; he has all the
faculties of a man, but not the strengths of a man, but grows to it by the
progression and increase of every day. So is the spiritual man regenerate in
his mind, his will, his affections; and therefore when carnal and spiritual
are opposed in their whole nature and definitions, the spiritual man is not the
carnal, though he still retain some of the weaknesses of the flesh, against
which he contends every day. To this purpose are those words of S. Leo. De
resu^. Dom.
Quamvis spe salvi facti sumus, and corruptionem adhuc carnemque mortalem
gestamus; recte tamen dicimur in carne non esse, si carnales nobis non
dominentur affectus; and merito ejus deponimus nuncupationem, cujus non
sequimur voluntatem. We are not to be called Carnal, though we bear about us
flesh and its infirmities; yet if carnal affections do not rule over us, well
are we to quit the name, when we do not obey the thing. Now if any man shall
contend that a man may be called Carnal, if the flesh strives against the
Spirit, though sin does not rule; I shall not draw the Saw of Contention with
him, but only say that it is not usually so in Scripture; and in this place of
which we now dispute the sense and use, it is not so: for by Carnal S. Paul
means such a person, upon whom sin reigns. I am carnal, V. 14.
sold under sin; therefore this person is not the spiritual, not the
regenerate, or the son of God. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2^3.
S. Paul uses the word Carnal in a comparative locution; for babes and infants,
or unskilful persons in the Religion; but then this carnality he proves to be
in them, wholly by their inordinate walking, by their strifes and contentions,
by their being Schismatics; and therefore he reproves them, which he had no
reason to do, if himself also had been carnal in that sense which he reproves.

The Conclusion from all these premises is, Paul does not in the seventh
Chapter to the Romans describe the state of himself really, or of a regenerate
person, neither is this state [of doing sin frequently, though against our
will] a state of unavoidable infirmity, but a state of death and unregeneration.

. 3.
St. Austin did for ever reject that interpretation, and indeed so did the
whole Primitive Church; but yet he having once expounded this Chapter of the
unregenerate, or a man under the law, not redeemed by the Spirit of Christ from
his vain conversation, he retracted this Exposition, Ver. 15. and 19.
and construed those words in question thus; Non ergo quod vult agit Apostolus,
quia vult non concupiscere, Sermon. 43. and 45. de temp.
and tamen concupiscit, ideo non quod vult agit. The Apostle does not do what
he would, because he would fain not desire; but yet because he desires, he does
what he would not. Did that desire lead him captive to fornication? God forbid:
He did strive, but was not mastered; but because he would not have had that
concupiscence left, against which he should contend, therefore he said, What I
would not, that I do; meaning, I would not lust, but I do lust. The same also
I find in Epiphanius; Nam quod dictum est, Haeres. 64. contra Origin.
Quod operor non cognosco, and facio quod odio habeo, non de eo quod operati
sumus ac perfecimus malum accipiendum est, sed de eo quod solum cogitavimus.
Now this interpretation has in it no impiety as the other has; for these
Doctors allow nothing to be unavoidable, or a sin of infirmity, and consistent
with the state of grace and regeneration, but the mere ineffective, unprocured,
desitings or lustings after evil things, to which no consent is given and in
which no delight is taken; extraneae cogitationes quas cogitavimus aliquando,
and non volentes and non scientes ex qua causa, Ibid.
as Epiphanius expresses this article. But S. Aust. may be thought to have had
some design in choosing this sense, as supposing it would serve for an argument
against the Pelagians and their sense of Free will. For by representing the
inevitability of sin, he destroyed their doctrine of the sufficiency of our
natural powers in order to heaven, and therefore by granting that S. Paul
complains thus of his own infirmity, he believed himself to have concluded
firmly for the absolute necessity of Gods grace to help us. But by limiting
this inevitability of sinning to the matter of desires or concupiscence; he
gave no allowance or pretense to any man to speak any evil words, or to delight
or consent to any evil thoughts, or to commit any sinful actions, upon the
pretense of their being sins of an unavoidable infirmity. So that though he was
desirous to serve the ends of his present question, yet he was careful that he
did not disserve the interests of Religion and a holy life. But besides that
the holy Scriptures abound in nothing more then in affirming our needs, and the
excellency of the Divine grace, and S. Austin needed not to have been put to
his shifts in this Question it is considerable that his first Exposition had
done his business better. For if these words of S. Paul be (as indeed they are)
to be expounded of an unregenerate man, one under the law, but not under grace;
nothing could more have magnified Gods grace, then that an unregenerate person
could not by all the force of nature, nor the aids of the law, nor the spirit
of fear, nor temporal hopes, be redeemed from the flavery and tyranny of sin;
and that from this state there is no redemption but by the Spirit of God, and
the grace of the Lord Jesus; which is expressly affirmed and proved by S. Paul,
if you admit this sense of the words. And therefore Irenaeus who did so, cites
these words to the same effect, viz. for the magnifying the grace of God: Lib.
3. c. 22.
Ipse Dominus erat qui salvabat eos, quia per semetipses non habebant salvari.
Et propter hoc Paulus infirmitatem hominis annuntians, ait, Scio enim quoniam
non habitat in carne m^a bonum: significans quoniam non a nobis, s^d a Dec est
bonum salutis. Et iterum: Miser ego homo, quis me liberabit de corpore mortis
hujus? Deinde infert liberatorem: Gratia Jesu Christi D^mini nestri. S. Paul's
complaint shows our own infirmity, and that of our selves we cannot be saved;
but that our salvation is of God, and the grace of our Redeemer Jesus Christ.
But whatever S. Austins design might be in making the worse choice, it matters
not much: only to the interpretation it self I have these considerations to
oppose.

1. concupis^ere; Romans 7.15. (...)
to do is more then to desire: factum, dictum, concupitum, are the several
kinds and degrees of sinning assigned by S. Austin himself, and therefore they
cannot be confounded, and one made to expound the other. (...) is also used
here by the Apostle, which in Scripture signifies sometimes to sin habitually,
never less then actually; and the other word is (...), which signifies
perficere, patrare, to finish the act at least, or to do a sin thoroughly, and
can in no sense be reasonably expounded by natural, ineffective, and
unavoidable desires. And it is observable that when S. Austin in prosecution of
this device, Ver. 18.
is to expound those words, to will is present with me, (...), but to perform
what is good, I find not, he makes the word to signify to do it perfectly;
which is as much beyond, as the other sense of the same word is short, What I
do (...), I approve not: Therefore the man does not do his sin perfectly; he
does the thing imperfectly, for he does it against his conscience, and with an
imperfect choice; but he does the thing however. So (...), must signify to do
the good imperfectly, the action it self only; for such was this man's
impotency, that he could not obtain power to do even imperfectly the good he
desired. The evil he did, though against his mind; but the good he could not,
because it was against the law of sin which reigned in him. But then the same
word must not, to serve ends, be brought to signify a perfect work, and yet
not to signify so much as a perfect desire.

2. Paul under another person complains of, is such a sin as did first deceive
him, Ver. 11.
and then slew him; but concupiscence does not kill till it proceeds further,
as S. James expressly affirms, Jam. 1.15.
that concupiscence when it has conceived brings forth sin, and sin when it is
finished brings forth death: which is the just parallel to what S. Ver. 5.
Paul says in this very Chapter: The (...)
passions of sins which were by the law, did work in our members to bring forth
fruit unto death: peccatum perpetratum, when the desires are acted, then sin is
deadly; the (...), the passions or first motions of sin which come upon us,
nobis non volentibus nec scientibus, whether we will or no, these are not
imputed to us unto death, but are the matter of virtue when they are resisted
and contradicted; but when they are consented to and delighted in, then it is
(...), sin in conception with death, and will proceed to action, unless it be
hindered from without; and therefore it is then the same sin by interpretation:
Adulterium cordis; so our blessed Savior called it in that instance, the
adultery of the heart: but till it be an actual sin some way or other, it does
not bring forth death.

3. Nolo concupiscere, or Volo non concupiscere, I will lust, or I will not
lust, i. e. I will, or I will not desire or will. For this lust or first
motions of desire are before an act of will; the first act of which is, when
these (...), these motions and passions are consented to or rejected. These
motions are natural and involuntary, and are no way in our power, but when they
are occasioned by an act of the will collaterally and indirectly, or by
applying the proper incentives to the faculty. Vellem non concupiscere; every
good man must say, I would fain be free from concupiscence; but because he
cannot, it is not subject to his will, and he cannot say, vol^, I will be free:
and therefore S. Paul's Volo and Nolo are not intended of Concupiscence or
desires.

4. Austin says the Apostle fain would, but could not perfect, or do it
perfectly, is, Non concupiscere, not to have concupiscence. Volo, non perficio;
but Concupiscere is but velle: Ver. 18.
it is not so much, and therefore cannot be more. So that when he says, to
will is present with me, he must mean, to desire well is present with me, but
to do this I find not; that is, if S. Austins interpretation be true, though
I do desire well, yet I do lust, and do not desire well, for still
concupisco; I lust, and I lust not, I have concupiscence, and I have it not:
which is a contradiction.

Many more things might be observed from the words of the Apostle to overthrow
this exposition; but the truth when it is proved will sufficiently reprove what
is not true: and therefore I shall apply my self to consider the proper
intention and design of the Apostle in those so much mistaken periods.

. 4.
COncerning which, Paul speaks not in his own person, as an Apostle, or a
Christian, a man who is regenerate; but in the person of a Jew, one under the
law, one that is not regenerate. 2. That this state which he describes, is the
state of a carnal man, under the corruption of his nature, upon whom the law
had done some change but had not cured him. 3. That from this state of evil we
are redeemed by the Spirit of Christ, by the Grace of the Gospel; and now, a
Child of God cannot complain this complaint.

1. That he puts on the person of another, by a (...), or translation (as was
usual with S. Paul in 1 Cor. 10.29, 30. and 4.6. and 6.12. and 13.2. Gal. 2.18.
very many places of his Epistles) is evident by his affirming that of the man
whom he here describes, which of himself were not true. Ver 9.
I was alive without the law once. Of S. Paul's own person this was not true;
for he was bred and born under the law, circumcised the eighth day, an Hebrew
of the Hebrews, as touching the law a Pharisee: he never was alive without the
law. But the Israelites were, whom he therefore represents indefinitely under a
single person; the whole Nation, before and under the law: I was alive once
without the law; but when the Commandment came, that is, when the law was
given, sin revived, and I died; that is, by occasion of the law, sin grew
stronger and prevailed. 2. But concerning the Christian and his present
condition, he expressly makes it separate from that of being under the law, and
consequently under sin. But now we are delivered from the law, that being dead
wherein we were held, that we should serve in newness of the spirit, and not in
the oldness of the letter. We are delivered: it is plain that some sort of men
are freed from that sad condition of things of which he there complains; and if
any be, it must be the regenerate. And so it is. For the scope of the Apostle
in this Chapter is to represent, and prove that salvation is not to be had by
the law, but by Jesus Christ; and that by that discipline men cannot be
contained in their duty, and therefore that it was necessary to forsake the
law, and to come to Christ. To this purpose he brings in a person complaining
that under the discipline of the law, he was still under the power of sin. Now
if this had been also true of a regenerate person, of a Christian renewed by
the spirit of grace, then it had been no advantage to have gone from the Law to
Christ, as to this argument; for still the Christian would be under the same
slavery, which to be the condition of one under the law, S. Paul was to urge as
an argument to call them from Moses to Christ.

2. this state which he now describes, is the state of a carnal man, Ver. 8.
under the corruption of his nature, appears, by his saying that sin had
wrought in him all manner of concupiscence; that sin revived, Ver. 5.
that the motions of sin which were by the law, did work in the members to
bring forth fruit unto death; and that this was when we were in the flesh; that
he is carnal, sold under sin; carried into captivity to the law of sin; sin
dwells in him; and is like another person, doing or constraining him to do
things against his mind; that it is a State, and a Government, a Law, and a
Tyranny; For that which I do I allow not: natural and carnal man. He sins
frequently, he sins against his conscience, he is carnal and sold under sin,
sin dwells in him, and gives him laws, he is a slave to sin, and led into
captivity. Now if this could be the complaint of a regenerate man, from what
did Christ come to redeem us? how did he take away our sins? did he only take
off the punishment, and still leave us to wallow in the impurities, and baser
pleasures, perpetually to rail upon our sins, and yet perpetually to do them?
How did he come to bless us in turning every one of us from our iniquity? Acts
3 26,
How and in what sense could it be true which the Apostle affirms; 1 Pet. 2.24.
He did bear our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead unto sin
should live unto righteousness? But this proposition I suppose my self to have
sufficiently proved in the reproof of the first exposition of these words in
question: only I shall in present add the concurrent testimony of some
Doctors of the Primitive Church.

Tertullian has these words: Lib. de pu^icit. c. 17.
Nam etsi habitare bonum in carne sua negavit, sed secundum legem literae in
qua fuit, secundum autem legem Spiritus cui nos annectit, liberat ab
infirmitate carnis. Lex enim (inquit) Spiritus vitae manumisit te a lege
delinquentiae and mortis. Licet enim ex part, ex Judaismo disputare videatur,
sed in nos dirigit integritatem and plenitudinem disciplinarum, propter quos
laborantes in lege per carnem miserit Deus filium suum in similitudinem carnis
delinquentiae, and propter delinquentiam damnaverit delinquentiam in carne.
Plainly he expounds this Chapter to be meant of a man under the law, according
to the law of the letter, under which himself had been, he denied any good to
dwell in his flesh; but according to the law of the Spirit under which we are
placed, he frees us from the infirmity of the flesh: for he says, the law of
the Spirit of life, has freed us from the law of sin and death.

Origin affirms, that when S. Paul says, In Cap. 7. ad Romans
I am carnal, sold under sin, tanquam Doctor Ecclesiae personam in semetipsum
suscipit infirmorum; he takes upon him the person of the infirm, that is, of
the carnal, and says those words which themselves by way of excuse or apology
use to speak. But yet (says he) this person which S. Paul puts on, although
Christ does not dwell in him, neither is his body the Temple of the holy Ghost,
yet he is not wholly a stranger from good, but by his will, and by his purpose
he begins to look after good things. But he cannot yet obtain to do them. For
there is such an infirmity in those who begin to be converted (that is, whose
mind is convinced, but their affections are not mastered) that when they would
presently do all good, yet an effect did not follow their desires.

S. Chrysostom has a large Commentary upon this Chapter, and his sense is
perfectly the same: Propterea and subnexuit dicens, Ego vero carnalis sum,
hominem describens sub lege, and ante legem degentem. S. Paul describes not
himself, but a man living under and before the law, and of such a one he says,
but I am carnal. Who please to see more authorities to the same purpose may
find them in S. Basil Lib. 1. de Baptism. and in moral. sum. 23. c. 2. and
quaest. 16. quaest. expl. compend.
, Theodoret In hunc locum, and in cap. 8 ad Romans
, S. Cyril Contra Julian. lib. 3. and de recta fide ad Regin. lib. 1. and in
epist. prior. ad Successum.
, Macarius Homil. 1.
, S. Ambrose In hunc locum.
, S. Hierom In cap 9. Dan.
, and Theophylact In hunc locum.
; The words of the Apostle, the very purpose and design, the whole Economy and
analogy of the 6. 7. and 8th Chapters do so plainly manifest it, that the
heaping up more testimonies, cannot be useful in so clear a case. The results
are these.

1. The state of men under the law, was but a state of carnality and of nature
better instructed, and foundly threatened and set forward in some instances by
the spirit of fear only, but not cured, but in many men made much worse
accidentally.

2. That to be pleased in the inner man, that is, in the Conscience to be
convinced, and to consent to the excellency of virtue, and yet by the flesh,
that is, by the passions of the lower man, or the members of the body to serve
sin, is the state of Unregeration.

3. To do the evil that I would not, and to omit the good that I fain would
do, when it is in my hand to do, what is in my heart to think, is the property
of a carnal, unregenerate man. And this is the state of men in nature, and was
the state of men under the law. For to be under the law, and not to be led by
the Spirit, Gal. 5.18.
are all one in S. Paul's account; for if ye be led by the Spirit ye are not
under the law, says he: And therefore to be under the law, being a state of
not being under the Spirit, must be under the government of the flesh; that is,
they were not then sanctified by the Spirit of grace and truth which came by
Jesus Christ, they were not yet redeemed from their vain conversation. Not that
this was the state of all the sons of Israel, of them that lived before the
law, or after; but that the law could do no more for them, or upon them; Gods
Spirit did in many of them work his own works, but this was by the grace of
Jesus Christ, who was the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world: this was
not by the works of the law, but by the same instruments and grace, by which
Abraham, and all they who are his children by promise were justified. But this
is the consequent of the third proposition which I was to consider.

3. From this state of evil we are redeemed by Christ, and by the Spirit of his
grace. Wretched man that I am, quis liberabit? who shall deliver me from the
body of this death? He answers, I thank God through Jesus Christ; so S
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact, S. Hierom, the Greek Scholiast, and the
ordinary Greek copies do commonly read the words; in which words there is an
(...), and they are thus to be supplied, I thank God through Jesus Christ we
are delivered, or there is a remedy found out for us. But Irenaeus, Origin, S.
Ambrose, S. Austin, and S. Hierom himself at another time, and the vulgar Latin
Bibles, in stead of (...), read (...), Gratia Domini Jesu Christi, the grace
of God through Jesus Christ. That is our remedy, he is our deliverer, from him
comes our redemption. For he not only gave us a better law, but also the
Spirit of grace, he has pardoned all our old sins, and by his Spirit enables
us for the future that we may obey him in all sincerity, in heartiness of
endeavor, and real events. From hence I draw this argument. That state from
which we are redeemed by Jesus Christ, and freed by the Spirit of his grace, is
a state of carnality, of unregeneration, that is, of sin and death: But by
Jesus Christ we are redeemed from that state in which we were in subjection to
sin, commanded by the law of sin, and obeyed it against our reason, and against
our conscience; therefore this state, which is indeed the state S. Paul here
describes, is the state of carnality and unregeneration, and therefore not
competent to the servants of Christ, to the elect people of God, to them who
are redeemed and sanctified by the Spirit of Christ. The parts of this argument
are the words of S. Paul, and proved in the foregoing periods. From hence I
shall descend to something that is more immediately practical, and clothed with
circumstances.

. 5. How far an Unregenerate man may go in the ways of piety and Religion.
TO this inquiry it is necessary that this be premised. wicked, he is presently
Regenerate. Between the two states of so vast a distance, it is impossible but
there should be many intermedial degrees; between the Carnal and Spiritual man
there is a Moral man; not that this man shall have a different event of things
if he does abide there, but that he must pass from extreme to extreme by this
middle state of participation. The first is a slave of sin; the second is a
servant of righteousness; the third is such a one as lives according to
Natural reason, so much of it as is left him, and is not abused; that is, lives
a probable life, but is not renewed by the Spirit of grace: one that does
something, but not all; not enough for the obtaining salvation. For a man may
have gone many steps from his former baseness and degenerous practices, and yet
not arrive at godliness, or the state of pardon; like the children of Israel,
who were not presently in Canaan, as soon as they were out of Egypt, but abode
long in the wilderness: (...), they begin to be instructed, that is their
state. Thou art not far from the kingdom of heaven, said our blessed Savior
to a well disposed person; but he was not arrived thither: he was not a subject
of the Kingdom. These are such whom our blessed Lord calls, The weary and the
heavy laden, that is such, who groan under the heavy pressure of their sins,
whom therefore he invites to come to him to be eased. Such are those whom Saint
Paul here describes to be under the law; convinced of sin, pressed, vexed,
troubled with it, complaining of it, desirous to be eased. Acts 1.
These the holy Scripture calls (...), ordained, disposed to life eternal, but
these were not yet the fideles or believers, but from that fair disposition
became believers upon the preaching of the Apostles.

In this third state of men, kings for ever. To reprove this state of folly and
danger, we are to observe, that there are a great many steps of this
progression, which are to be passed through, and the end is not yet; the man is
not yet arrived at the state of regeneration.

1. Paul calls a consenting to the law that it is good, and a being delighted in
it according to the inward man; even the Gentiles which have not the law, yet
show the work of the law written in their hearts: Romans 2.14.
their thoughts in the mean time accusing or excusing one another. The Jews did
more, they did rest in the law, And there are too many who being called
Christians know their Masters will, and do it not: and this consenting to the
law and approving it, is so far from being a sign of regeneration, that the
vilest and the basest of men are those who sin most against their knowledge,
and against their consciences. In this world a man may have faith great enough
to remove mountains, and yet be without charity: and in the world to come some
shall be rejected from the presence of God, though they shall ailege for
themselves, that they have prophesied in the name of Christ. * This delight in
the law which is in the unregenerate, is only in the understanding. The man
considers what an excellent thing it is to be virtuous, the just proportions of
duty, the fitness of being subordinate to God, the rectitude of the soul, the
acquiescence and appendent peace: and this delight is just like that which is
in finding out proportions in Arithmetic and Geometry, or the rest in
discovering the secrets of a mysterious proposition: a man has great pleasure
in satisfactory notices, and the end of his disquisition. So also it is in
moral things: a good man is beloved by every one; and there is a secret
excellency and measure, a music and proportion between a man's mind and wise
counsels, which impious and profane persons cannot perceive, because they are
so full of false measures and weak discourses, and vile appetites, and a rude
inconsideration of the reasonableness and wisdom of sobriety and severe
courses. But -- virtus laudatur and alget, this is all that some men do, and
there is in them nothing but a preparation of the understanding to the things
of God, a faith seated in the rational part, a conviction of the mind; which
as it was intended to lead on the will to action, and the other faculties to
obedience, so now that the effect is not acquired, it serves only to upbraid
the man for a knowing and discerning Criminal, he has not now the excuse of
ignorance. He that complies with an Usurper out of fear and interest, in
actions prejudicial to the lawful Prince, and tells the honest party, that he
is right in his heart, though he be forced to comply, helps the other with an
argument to convince him that he is a false man. He that does it heartily, and
according to a present conscience, has some excuse; but he that confesses that
he is right in his persuasion, and wrong in his practice, is (...), condemned
by himself, and professes himself a guilty person, a man whom interest and not
conscience governs. Better it is not to know at all, then not to pursue the
good we know. They that know not God, are infinitely far from him; but they who
know him, and yet do not obey him, are sometimes the nearer for their
knowledge, sometimes the further off, but as yet they are not arrived whither
it is intended they should go.

2. unregenerate man may with his will delight in goodness, and desire it
earnestly. For in an unregenerate man there is a double appetite, and there may
be the apprehension of two amabilities. The things of the Spirit please his
mind, and his will may consequently desire that this good were done because it
seems beauteous to the rational part, to his Mind: but because he has also
relishes and gusts in the flesh, and they also seem sapid and delightful, he
desires them also. So that this man fain would and he would not; and he does
sin willingly and unwillingly at the same time. We see by a sad experience,
some men all their life time stand at gaze, and dare not enter upon that course
of life which themselves by a constant sentence judge to be the best, and of
the most considerable advantage. But as the boy in the Apologue listened to the
disputes of Labor and Idleness, the one persuading him to rise, the other to
lie in bed; but while he considered what to do, he still lay in bed and
considered: so these men dispute and argue for virtue and the service of God,
and stand beholding and admiring it, but they stand on the other side while
they behold it. There is a strife between the law of the mind, and the law of
the members. But this prevails over that. For the case is thus: There are in
men three laws; 1. The law of the members. 2. The law of the mind. 3. The law
of the spirit. 1. The law of the members, that is the habit and proneness to
sin, the dominion of sin, giving a law to the lower man, and reigning there as
in its proper seat. Col. 2.18. Romans 8.7.
This law is also called by S. Paul, (...) and (...), the mind of the flesh Ab
Hebr. (...) anima sensitiva.
, the wisdom, the relish, the gust and savor of the flesh, that is, that
deliciousness and comport, that enticing and correspondencies to the appetite
by which it tempts and prevails; all its own principles and propositions which
minister to sin and folly. This subjects the man to the law of sin, or is that
principle of evil by which sin does give us laws. 2. To this law of the flesh,
the law of the mind (...) Graec. Hebraeis (...)
is opposed, and is in the regenerate and unregenerate indifferently: and it is
nothing else but the conscience of good and evil, subject to the law of God,
which the other cannot be. This accuses and convinces the unregenerate, it
calls upon him to do his duty, it makes him unquiet when he does not; but this
alone is so invalidated by the infirmity of the flesh, by the Economy of the
law, by the disadvantages of the world, that it cannot prevail, or free him
from the captivity of sin. But 3. The law of the Spirit, is the grace of Jesus
Christ, and this frees the man from the law of the members, Romans 8.2.
from the captivity of sin, from the tenure of death. Here then are three
Combatants; the Flesh, the Conscience, the Spirit. The flesh endeavors to
subject the man to the law of sin; the other two endeavor to subject him to the
law of God. The flesh and the conscience or mind contend; but this contention
is no sign of being regenerate, because the Flesh prevails most commonly
against the Mind, where there is nothing else to help it: the man is still a
captive to the law of sin. But the Mind being worsted, God sends in the
auxiliaries of the Spirit; and when that enters and possesses, that overcomes
the flesh, it rules and gives laws. But as in the unregenerate the Mind did
strive though it was overpowered, yet still it contended, but ineffectively for
the most part: so now when the Spirit rules, the flesh strives, but it prevails
but seldom, it is overpowered by the Spirit. Now this contention is a sign of
regeneration, when the flesh lusts against the Spirit; not when the flesh
lusts against the mind or conscience. For the difference is very great, and
highly to be remarked. And it is represented in two places of S. Romans 7.22, 23.
Paul's Epistles: The one is that which I have already explicated in this
Chapter; I consent to the law of God according to the inner man: But I see
another law in my members, fighting against the law of my mind, and bringing
me into captivity to the law of sin that is in my members: where there is a
redundancy in the words; but the Apostle plainly signifies that the law of sin
which is in his members prevails; that is, sin rules the man in despite of all
the contention and reluctance of his conscience or the law of his mind. So
that this strife of flesh and conscience is no sign of the regenerate, because
the mind of a man is in subordination to the flesh of the man, sometimes
willingly and perfectly, sometimes unwillingly and imperfectly.

I deny not but the mind is sometimes called Spirit, their spirit lusts
against the flesh: That is, the more rational faculties contend against the
brute parts, reason against passion, law against sin. Thus the word Spirit is
taken for the (...), the inner man, the whole mind together with its
affections, Mat. 26.4. and Acts 19.21. But in this Question, the word Romans
7.22, 23 and 8.5, 7, 9.
Spirit is distinguished from Mind; and is taken for the mind renewed by the
Spirit of God: and as these words are distinguished, so must their several
contentions be remarked. For when the mind or conscience, and the flesh fight,
the flesh prevails; but when the Spirit and the flesh fight, the Spirit
prevails. And by that we shall best know who are the litigants that like the
two sons of Rebecca strive within us. If the flesh prevails, then there was in
us nothing but the law of the mind; nothing but the conscience of an
unregenerate person: I mean, if the flesh prevails frequently or habitually.
But if the Spirit of God did rule us, if that principle had possession of us,
then the flesh is crucified, it is mortified, it is killed, and prevails not at
all but when we will not use the force and arms of the Spirit, but it does not
prevail habitually, not frequently or regularly, or by observation. This is
clearly taught by those excellent words of S. Paul, which, as many other
periods of his Epistles, have had the ill luck to be very much misunderstood.
This I say then, Gal. 5.16, 17, 18.
walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh: For the
flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, so that ye
cannot [that ye do not, or may not do, (...)] the things that ye would. But
if ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under the law. The word in the Greek may
either signify duty or event. Walk in the Spirit, and fulfill not, or, ye shall
not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. If we understand it in the Imperative sense,
then it is exegetical of the former words: He that walks in the Spirit, hoc
ipso, does not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. To do one, is not to do the
other; whoever fulfils the lusts of the flesh, and is ruled by that law, he is
not ruled by the grace of Christ, he is not regenerate by the Spirit. But the
other sense is the best reddition of the word; (...), as if he had said, Walk
in the Spirit, and then the event will be, that the flesh shall not prevail
over you, or give you laws; you shall not then fulfill the lusts thereof. And
this is best agreeable to the purpose of the Apostle. For having exhorted the
Galatians that they should not make their Christian liberty a pretense to the
flesh: Ver. 23.
as the best remedy against their enemy the flesh, he prescribes this walking
in the Spirit, which is a certain deletery and prevalency over the flesh. And
the reason follows: for the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would; that is,
though ye be inclined to, and desirous of satisfying your carnal desires, yet
being under the empire and conduct of the Spirit, ye cannot do those desires;
the Spirit overrules you, and you must, you will contradict your carnal
appetites. For else this could not be (as the Apostle designs it) a reason of
his exhortation. For if he had meant that in this contention of flesh and
Spirit, we could not do the good things that we would, then the reason had
contradicted the proposition. For suppose it thus; Walk in the Spirit, and
fulfill not the lusts of the flesh. For the flesh and the Spirit lust against
each other, so that ye cannot do the good ye would. This, I say, is not sense,
for the latter part contradicts the former. For, this thing [that the flesh
hinders us from doing the things of the Spirit] is so far from being a reason
why we should walk in the Spirit, that it perfectly discourages that design;
and it is to little purpose to walk in the Spirit, if this will not secure us
against the domineering and tyranny of the flesh. But the contrary is most
clear and consequent: If ye walk in the Spirit, ye shall not fulfill the lusts
of the flesh; for though the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and would fain
prevail, yet it cannot; for the Spirit also lusts against the flesh, and is
stronger, so that ye may not, or that ye do not, or that ye cannot (for any of
these readings as it may properly render the words of (...), so are not against
the design of the Apostle) do what ye otherwise would fain do; and therefore if
ye will walk in the Spirit, ye are secured against the flesh.

The result is this. impious, profane person sins without any contention; that
is, with a clear, ready, and a prepared will, he dies and disputes not. 2. An
animal man, or a mere moral man, that is, one under the law, one instructed and
convinced by the letter, but not sanctified by the Spirit, he sins willingly,
because he considers and chooses it; but he also sins unwillingly, that is, his
inclinations to vice, and his first choices are abated, and the pleasures
allayed, and his peace disturbed, and his sleeps broken; but for all that, he
sins on when the next violent temptation comes. The contention in him is
between Reason and Passion, the law of the mind and the law of the members,
between conscience and sin, that weak, this prevailing. 3. But the Regenerate
has the same contention within him, and the temptation is sometimes strong
within him, yet he overcomes it, and seldom fails in any material and
considerable instances. Because the Spirit is the prevailing ingredient in the
new Creature, in the constitution of the regenerate, and will prevail. For
whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world, 1 John 9.4, 5.
and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even your faith; that is,
by the faith of Jesus Christ, by him you shall have victory and redemption; and
again, Resist the devil, and he will flee from you; Jam. 4.7. 1 John 4.
for he that is within you is stronger then he that is in the world; and, Put
on the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6.11, 13.
that ye may stand against the snares of the devil, that ye may resist in the
evil day, and having done all, to stand; for, Mark 9.23.
All things are possible to him that believes; and, Through Christ that
strengthens me I can do all things; Phil. 4.13.
and therefore in all these things we are more then conquerours: for, Ephesians.
3.20. Romans 8.13. (...) 37.
God is able to do above all that we can ask or think; he can keep us from all
sin, and present us unblameable in the sight of his glory. So that to deny the
power of the Spirit, in breaking the tyranny, and subduing the lusts of the
flesh, besides that it contradicts all these and diverse other Scriptures, it
denies the Omnipotency of God, Jude 24.
and of the Spirit of his grace, making sin to be stronger then it, and if
grace abound, to make sin superabound: but to deny the willingness of the
Spirit to redeem us from the captivity of sin, is to lessen the reputation of
his goodness, and to destroy the possibility, and consequently the necessity of
living holily.

But how happens it then that even the regenerate sins often, the good man is
asleep, and then the enemy takes his advantage and sows tares; for if he were
awake, and considering, and would make use of the strengths of the Spirit, he
would not be overcome by sin. For there are powers enough, that is, arguments
and endearments, helps and sufficient motives to enable us to resist the
strongest temptation in the world; and this one alone, of resurrection to
eternal life, which is revealed to us by Jesus Christ, and ministered in the
Gospel, is an argument greater then all the promises and inticements of sin, if
we will attend to its efficacy and consequence. But if we throw away our arms,
and begin a fight in the Spirit, and end it in the flesh, the ill success of
the day is to be imputed to us, not to the Spirit of God, to whom if we had
attended we should certainly have prevailed. * The relics and remains of sin
are in the regenerate; but that is a sign that sin is overcome, and the
kingdom of it broken; and that is a demonstration, that when ever sin does
prevail in any single instances, it is not for want of power, but of using that
power; for since the Spirit has prevailed upon the flesh in its strengths, and
has crucified it, there is no question but it can also prevail upon all its
weaknesses.

For we must be curious to avoid a mistake here:

But as the choice of virtue is abated, Moral, or Animal man. The contention
abates the pleasure in both their choices; but in the one it ends in sin, in
the other it ends in victory. So that there is an unwillingness to sin in all
but in the impious and profane person, in the far distant stranger. But the
unwillingness to sin, that is in the Animal, or Moral man, is nothing else but
a serving sin like a grumbling servant, or like the younger son of the Farmer
in the Gospel; he said he would not, but did it for all his angry words. And
therefore that the unregerate man acts the sin against his mind, and after a
long contention against it, does not in all cases lessen it, Cause. 24. q. 1. C.
Schisma.
but sometimes increases it. Nec leviat crimen little, magis vero auget, quod
eos diurestitisse dixistis, said Pope Pelagius. To resist long, and then to
consent, has in it some aggravations of the crime, as being a conviction of
the man's baseness, a violence to reason, a breach of former resolutions, a
recession from fair beginnings, and wholly without excuse. * But if ever it
comes to pass, that in the contention of flesh and spirit, the regenerate man
does sin, he does it unwillingly, that is, by ignorance or inadvertency: The
unregenerate sins unwillingly too, but it is by reason of the dominion and rule
that sin bears over him: but still this difference distinguishes them in the
event of things, that when it comes to the question whether sin shall be done
or no, the one wills, and the other wills not, though it may happen that the
consent or dissent respectively may be with the same unwillingness by reason of
the contention and strife from the adverse, though weaker party. The
unregenerate man may be unwilling to obey sin, but he obeys it for all that;
and the unwillingness is a sign of the greater slavery; but there can be no
sign of his regeneration, but by not obeying the sin in the day of its own
power and temptation. A servant is still a servant whether he obeys with, or
against his will. His servants we are to whom we obey, says S. Paul; all
therefore that is to be considered in the Question of regeneration, is, whether
the man obeys, or not obeys? for whether he be willing or unwilling, is not
here considerable. Let no man therefore flatter himself that he is a regenerate
person, because though he is a servant to sin, and acts at the command of his
lust, and cannot resist in the evil day, or stand the shock of a temptation,
yet he finds an unwillingness within him, and a strife against sin. Hugo de S.
Victore, or else S. Austin in the Book de continentia, gave beginning or
countenance to this error. Hanc pugnam non experiuntur in semetipsis nisi
bellatores virtutum, debellatoresque vitiorum. This fight none find in
themselves, but they that fight on virtues side, and destroy vice. Which words,
though something crudely set down, and so not true, yet are explicable by the
following period; Non expugnat concupiscentiae malum, nisi continentiae bonum:
only holy and continent persons do overcome their concupiscence; and in that
sense it is true: Only the regenerate feel this fight which ends in victory.
But he whose contention ends in sin, and after a brave onset, yields basely,
frequently I mean, or habitually, every such person is a servant of sin, and
therefore not a servant of the spirit, but free from, that is, not ruled by the
law of righteousness. And this is so certain, that this unwillingness to sin,
which ends in obeying it, is so far from being a note of a regenerate person,
that it is evidently true, that no man can come from the servitude or slavery
of sin, but the first step of his going from it, is the sense and hatred of his
fetters, and then his desire of being freed: but therefore he is not free,
because he complains of his bands, and finds them heavy and intolerable, and
therefore seeks for remedy. For if an unregenerate person did always sin
willingly, that is, without this reluctance and strife within; and the
regenerate did sin as infallibly, but yet sore against his will; then the
regenerate person were the verier slave of the two: for he that obeys
willingly, is less a slave, then he that obeys in spite of his heart. --
Libertatis servaveris umbram,
Si quicquid jubeare velis --
He that delights in his fetters, has at least the shadow, and some of the
pleasure of liberty; but he has nothing of it who is kept fast, and groans
because his feet are hurt in the stocks, and the iron enters into his soul. It
was the sad state and complaint of the Romans, when by the iniquity of war, and
the evil success of their armies, they were forced to entertain their bondage.
-- tot rebus iniquis
Paruimus victi, venia est haec sola pudoris
Degenerisque metus, nil jam potuisse negari.
It was a conquest that gave them laws, and their ineffective struggling, and
daily murmurs, were but ill arguments of their liberty, which were so great
demonstrations of their servitude.

3. Natural or Moral good things, but even Spiritual and Evangelical; that is,
not only that good which he is taught by natural reason, or by civil sanctions,
or by use and experience of things, but even that also which is only taught us
by the Spirit of grace. For if he can desire the first, much more may he desire
the latter when he once comes to know it: because there is in spiritual good
things much more amability; they are more perfective of our mind, and a
greater advancer of our hopes, and a security to our greatest interest. Neither
can this be prejudiced by those words of S. Paul: 1 Cor. 2.24.
The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. For the natural man S. Paul speaks of, is one unconverted to
Christianity, the Gentile Philosophers, who relied upon such principles of
nature as they understood; but studied not the Prophets, knew not of the
Miracles of Christ and his Apostles, nor of those excellent verifications of
the things of the Spirit; and therefore these men could not arrive at spiritual
notices, because they did not go that way which was the only competent and
proper instrument of finding them. Scio incapacem te Sacramenti, impie, Prudent.

Non posse caecis mentibus mysterium
Haurire nostrum --
They that are impious, and they that go upon distinct principles, neither
obeying the proposition, nor loving the Commandment, they indeed, viz.
remaining in that indisposition, cannot receive, that is, entertain him. And
this is also the sense of the words of our blessed Savior, Joh. 14, 17.
The world cannot receive him; that is, the unbeleevers, such who will not be
persuaded by arguments Evangelical. But a man may be a spiritual man in his
notices, and yet be carnal in his affections; and still under the bondage of
sin. 2 Pet. 2, 21.
Such are they of whom S. Peter affirms, it is better they had never known the
way of righteousness, then having known it to fall away: Such are they of whom
S. Paul says, Romans 1.18.
They detain the truth in unrighteousness. Now concerning this man, it is that
I affirm, that upon the same account as any vicious man can commend virtue,
this man also may commend holiness, and desire to be a holy man, and wishes it
with all his heart, there being the same proportion between his mind, and the
things of the Spirit, as between a Jew and the Moral Law, or a Gentile and
Moral virtue; that is, he may desire it with passion and great wishings. But
here is the difference: A regenerate man does, what the unregenerate man does
but desire.

4. smart. Their temper and constitution will allow them easily to quit such
superinduced follies which out of a gay or an impertinent spirit they have
contracted, or which came to them by company or by chance, or confidence, or
violence; but if they must mortify the flesh to quit a lust, that is too hard
and beyond their powers, which are in captivity to the law of sin. * Some men
will commute a duty; and if you will allow them covetousness, they will quit
their lust, or their intemperance, according as it happens. Herod did many
things at the preaching of John the Baptist, and heard him gladly. Balaum did
some things handsomely; though he was covetous and ambitious, yet he had a
limit; he would obey the voice of the Angel, and could not be tempted to speak
a curse, when God spoke a blessing. Ahab was an imperfect penitent; he did some
things, but not enough. And if there be any root of bitterness, there is no
regeneration; Colloquintida, and Death is in the pot.

5. unregenerate man may leave some sins not only for temporal interest, but
out of reverence of the Divine law, out of fear and reverence. Under the law
there were many such: and there is no peradventure but that many men who like
Felix have trembled at a Sermon, have with such a shaking fit left off
something that was fit to be laid aside. To leave a sin out of fear of the
Divine judgment is not sinful, or totally unacceptable. All that lest sin in
obedience and reverence to the law, did it in fear of punishment, because fear
was the sanction of the law: and even under the Gospel, to obey out of fear of
punishment, though it be less perfect, yet it is not criminal, nay, rather on
the other side; The worse that men are, so much the less they are afraid of the
Divine anger and judgments. To abstain out of fear, is to abstain out of a
very proper motive: and God when he sends a judgment with a design of
emendation, or threatens a criminal, or denounces woes and cursings, intends
that fear should be the beginning of wisdom. Knowing therefore the terrors of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11.
we persuade men, says S. Paul. And the whole design of delivering criminals
over to Satan, was but a pursuance of this argument of fear; that by feeling
something, they might fear a worse, and for the present be affrighted from
their sin. And this was no other then the argument which our blessed Savior
used to the poor Paralytick: Go and sin no more, lest a worse thing happen to
thee. But besides that this good fear may work much in an unregenerate person,
or a man under the law, such a person may do some things in obedience to God,
or thankfulness, and perfect, mere choice. So Jehu obeyed God a great way: but
there was a turning, and a high style, beyond which he would not go, and his
principles could not carry him through. Few women can accuse themselves of
adultery; in the great lines of chastity they choose to obey God, and the voice
of honor; but can they say that their eye is not wanton, that they do not
spend great portions of their time in vanity, that they are not idle, and
useless, or busy-bodies, that they do not make it much of their employment to
talk of fashions and trifles, or that they do make it their business to
practice religion, to hear and attend to severe and sober counsels? If they be
under the conduct of the Spirit, he has certainly carried them into all the
regions of duty. But to go a great way, and not to nnish the journey is the
imperfection of the unregenerate For in some persons, fear or love of God is
not of it self strong enough to weigh down the scales; but there must be thrown
in something from without some generosity of spirit, or revenge, or
gloriousness and bravery, or natural pity, or interest; and so far as these, or
any of them go along with the better principle, this will prevail; but when it
must go alone it is not strong enough. But this is a great way off from the
state of sanctification or a new birth.

6. with great integrity; and so are good moral men, as the word is used in
opposition to, or rather in destrution of religion. Some are religious and not
just: some want sincerity in both: and of this, the Pharisees were a great
example. But the words of our blessed Savior are the greatest testimony in
this article; Many shall strive to enter, and shall not be able. Luke 13.14.
Either they shall contend too late like the five foolish Virgins, and as they
whom S. Paul by way of caution likens to Esau; or else they contend with
incompetent and insufficient strengths: they strive, but put not force enough
to the work. An unregenerate man has not strengths enough; that is, he wants
the spirit and activity, and perfectness of resolution. Not that he wants such
aids as are necessary and sufficient, but that himself has not purposes
pertinacious, and resolutions strong enough. All that is necessary to his
assistance from without, all that he has or may have; but that which is
necessary on his own part he has not; but that is his own fault; that he might
also have; and it is in his duty, and therefore certainly in his power to have
it. For a man is not capable of a law which he has not powers sufficient to
obey: he must be free and quit from all its contraries, from the power and
dominion of them; or at least must be so free, that he may be quit of them if
he please. For there can be no liberty, but where all the impediments are
removed, or may be if the man will.

7. of Christ's passion, purchased for us by his blood and by his intercesson;
and all good company, wise counsels, apt notices, prevailing arguments, moving
objects, and opportunities and endearments of virtue are from above, from the
Father of lights: yet the Spirit of God does also work more inwardly, and
creates in us aptnesses and inclinations, consentings, and the acts of
conviction and adherence, working in us to will and to do according to our
desire, or according to Gods good pleasure: yet this holy Spirit is oftentimes
grieved, sometimes provoked, and at last extinguished, which because it is done
only by them who are enemies of the Spirit, and not the servants of God, it
follows that the Spirit of God by his aids and assistances, is in them that are
not so, with a design to make them so: and if the holy Spirit were not in any
degree or sense in the unregenerate, how could a man be born again by the
Spirit? for since no man can be regenerate by his own strengths, his new birth
must be wrought by the Spirit of God; and especially in the beginnings of our
conversion is his assistance necessary: which assistance, because it works
within as well, and rather then without, must needs be in a man before he
operates within. And therefore to have received the holy Spirit, is not the
propriety of the regenerate; but to be led by him, to be conducted by the
Spirit in all our ways and counsels, to obey his motions, to entertain his
doctrine, to do his pleasure: This is that which gives the distinction and the
denomination. Romans 8.9.
And this is called by S. Paul, the inhabitation of the Spirit of God in us; in
opposition to the inhabitans peccatum, the sin that dwells in the
unregenerate. The Spirit may be in us, calling and urging us to holiness; but
unless the Spirit of God dwell in us, and abide in us, and love to do so, and
rule, and give us laws, and be not grieved and cast out, but entertained, and
cherished, and obeyed, unless (I say) the Spirit of God be thus in us, Christ
is not in us; and if Christ be not in us, we are none of his.

6. The Character of the Regenerate estate, or person.
FRom hence it is not hard to describe what are the proper indications of the
Regenerate. meditates in it day and night. Psalm. 1.2. Psalm. 119.77, 103.
His delight is in Gods law, not only with his mind approving, but with his
will choosing the duties and significations of the law.

2. The Regenerate not only wishes that the good were done which God commands,
but heartily sets about the doing of it.

3. He sometimes feels the rebellions of the flesh, but he fights against them
always; and if he receive a fall, he rises instantly, and fights the more
fiercely, and watches the more cautelously, and prays the more passionately,
and arms himself more strongly, and prevails more prosperously. In a regenerate
person there is flesh and Spirit, but the Spirit only rules. There is an
outward and an inward man, but both of them are subject to the Spirit. There
was a law of the members, but it is abrogated and cancelled; the law is
repealed, and does not any more inslave him to the law of sin. Aug. l. de
Contin. c. 2.
Nunc quamdiu concupiscit caro adversus spiritum, and spiritus adversus carnem,
sat est nobis non consentire malis quae sentimus in nobis. Every good man shall
always feel the flesh lusting against the Spirit; that contention he shall
never be quit of, but it is enough for us if we never consent to the suggested
evils.

4. A regenerate person does not only approve that which is best, and desire
to do it, but he does it actually, and delights to do it; he continues and
abides in it, which the Scripture calls a walking in the Spirit, and a living
after it: for he does his duty by the strengths of the Spirit; that is, upon
considerations Evangelical, in the love of God, in obedience to Christ, and by
the aids he has received from above beyond the powers of nature and education,
and therefore he does his duty upon such considerations as are apt to make it
integral and persevering. For,

5. A regenerate man does not only leave some sins but all, and willingly
entertains none. He does not only quit a lust that is against his disposition,
but that which he is most inclined to, he is most severe against, and most
watchful to destroy it; he plucks out his right eye and cuts off his right
hand, and parts with his biggest interest, rather then keep a lust: and
therefore consequently chooses virtue by the same method, S. Aug. ibid.
by which he abstains from vice. Nam ipsa continentia cum fraenat, cohibetque
libidines simul and appetit bonum, ad cujus immortalitatem tendimus: and
respuit malum cum quo in hac mortalitate contendimus; that is. He pursues all
virtue, as he refuses all vice; for he tends to the immortality of good, as he
strives against evil in all the days of his mortality. And therefore he does
not choose to exercise that virtue only that will do him reputation, or
consist with his interest, or please his humor, but entertains all virtue,
whether it be with him or against him, pleasing or displeasing; he chooses all
that God has commanded him, because he does it for that reason.

6. A regenerate person does not only contradict his appetite in single
instances, but endeavors to destroy the whole body of sin; he does not only
displease his fond appetite, but he mortifies it, and never entertains
conditions of peace with it; for it is a dangerous mistake, if we shall presume
all is well, because we do some acts of spite to our dearest lust, and
sometimes cross the most pleasing temptation, and oppose our selves in single
instances against every sin. This is not it; the regenerate man endeavors to
destroy the whole body of sin, and having had an opportunity to contest his
sin, and to contradict it this day, is glad he has done something of his duty,
and does so again to morrow and ever, till he has quite killed it; and never
entertains conditions of peace with it, nor ever is at rest till the flesh be
quiet and obedient. * For sometimes it comes to pass that the old man being
used to obey, at last obeys willingly, and takes the conditions of the
Gibeonites; it is content to do drudgery and the inferior ministeries, if it
may be suffered to abide in the land.

So that here is a new account upon which the former proposition is verifiable;
It is not the propriety of the regenerate to feel a contention within him
concerning doing good or bad. For it is not only true, that the unregenerate
oftentimes feel the fight, and never see the triumph; but it is also true, that
sometimes the regenerate do not feel this contention. They did once with great
violence and trouble; but when they have gotten a clear victory, they have also
great measures of peace. But this is but seldom, to few persons, and in them
but in rare instances, in carnal sins and temptations: for in spiritual, they
will never have an entire rest till they come into their Country. It is
Angelical perfection to have no flesh at all, but it is the perfection of a
Christian to have the flesh obedient to the spirit always, and in all things.
But if this contention be not a sign of regeneration, but is common to good and
bad, that which can only distinguish them, is victory, and perseverance; and
those sins which are committed at the end of such contentions, are not sins of
a pitiable and excusable infirmity; but the issues of death and direct
emanations from an unregenerate estate. Therefore

7. To. 8.14.
and being saved. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
sons of God. if ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if through the Spirit
ye do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. This is your
characteristick note. Our obedience to the Spirit, our walking by his light,
and by his conduct. This is the Spirit that witnesses to our spirit, To. 8.16.
that we are the sons of God. That is, if the Spirit be obeyed, if it reigns in
us, if we live in it, if we walk after it, if it dwells in us, then we are sure
that we are the sons of God. There is no other testimony to be expected, but
the doing of our duty. All things else (unless an extraregular light spring
from heaven and tell us of it) are but fancies and deceptions, or uncertainties
at the best.

. 7. What are properly and truly sins of Infirmity, and how far they can
consist with the regenerate estate.
WE usually reckon our selves too soon to be in Gods favor.

But men usually think their case is good, pardon and salvation presently. As
soon as ever a man begins heartily to mortify his sin, his hopes begin, and if
he proceeds they are certain. But if in this fight he be overcome, he is not to
ask, Whether that ill day, and that deadly blow, can consist with the state of
life? He that fights, and conquers not, but sins frequently, and to yield or be
killed is the end of the long contentions, this man is not yet alive. But when
he prevails regularly and daily over his sin, then he is in a state of
regeneration; but let him take heed, for every voluntary, or chosen sin is a
mortal wound.

But because no man in this world has so conquered,

For most men are pleased to call their debaucheries sins of infirmity, Natural
or Moral, yet because I am to cure a popular mistake, I am also to understand
the word as men do commonly, and by sins of Infirmity to mean,

Such sins which in the whole, in the worst of punishments, or punished with
eternal pains, because they cannot with the greatest moral diligence wholly be
avoided. Concerning these so described, we are to take accounts by the
following measures.

1. spiritual for his good wishes and desires of holiness, but for his actual
and habitual obedience: so no man is to be esteemed carnal or criminal for his
natural inclinations to what is forbidden. But that good men complain of their
strange propensities to sin, it is a declaration of their fears, of their
natural weakness, of the needs of grace, and the aids of Gods Spirit. But
because these desires, even when they are much restrained, do yet sometimes
insensibly go too far; therefore it is, that such are sins of infirmity,
because they are almost unavoidable. This remain is like the image of the ape
which Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria left after the breaking of the other
idols; a testimony of their folly; but as that was left for no other purpose
but to reprove them, so is this to humble us, that we may not rely upon flesh
and blood, but make God to be our confidence.

2. Mat. 26.21.
The spirit truly is willing, but the flesh is weak; The body is weary, the
eyes heavy, the fancy restless, diversions many, businesses perpetually
intervene, and all the powers of discourse and observation cannot hinder our
mind from wandering in our prayers, -- Odi artus, fragilemque hunc corporis usum
Desertorem animi --
But this being in the whole unavoidable, is therefore in many of its parts and
instances very excusable, if we do not indulge to it; if we pray and strive
against it; that is, so long as it is a natural infirmity. For although we
cannot avoid wandering thoughts, yet we can avoid delighting in them, or a
careless and negligent increasing them. For if they once seize upon the will,
they are sins of choice and malice, and not of infirmity. So that the great
scene of sins of infirmity, is in omission of degrees and portions of that
excellency of duty which is required of us. We are imperfect, and we do
imperfectly, and if we strive toward perfection, God will pity our
imperfection. There is no other help for us; but blessed be God, that is
sufficient for our need, and proportionable to our present state.

3. But in actions and matters of commission, himself against his will, or
sleep, or fall, yet without his will he cannot throw himself down, or rise
again. Every action is more or less voluntary, but every omission is not. A
thing may be let alone upon a dead stock, or a negative principle, or an
unavoidable defect, but an action cannot be done without some command or action
of the will; therefore although sins of defect are in many cases pitied and not
exacted, yet sinful actions have not so easy a sentence; but they also have
some abatements. Therefore,

4. Imperfect actions, rash, or ignorant actions, done by surprise, by
inconsideration and inadvertency; by a sudden and great fear, in which the
reason is in very many degrees made useless, and the action cannot be
considered duly. In these there is some little mixture of choice, so much as to
make the action imputable, if God should deal severely with us; but yet so
little that it shall not be imputed under the mercies of the Gospel; although
the man that does them cannot pretend he is innocent, yet he can pretend that
he does stand fair in the eye of mercy. A good man may sometimes be unwary, or
he may speak, or be put to it to resolve or do before he can well consider. If
he does a thing rashly when he can consider and deliberate, he is not excused:
but if he does it indiscreetly, when he must do it suddenly, it is his
infirmity, and he shall be relieved at the Chancery of the throne of Grace. For
it is remarkable that Gods justice is in some cases (...), exact, full and
severe: in other cases it is (...) full of equity, gentleness, and wisdom,
making abatement for infirmities, performing promises, interpreting things to
the most equal and favorable purposes. So Justice is taken in S. John [If we
confess our sins, he is righteous or just to forgive our sins] that is. Gods
justice is such as to be content with what we can do, and not to exact all
that is possible to be imposed. He is as just in forgiving the penitent, as in
punishing the refractary; as just in abating reasonably, as in weighing
scrupulously: such a justice it is, which in the same case, David calls Mercy.
For thou Lord art merciful, for thou rewardest every man according to his
works. And if this were not so, no man could be saved. Lib. 6.13.
Mortalis enim conditio non patitur esse hominem ab omni macula purum, said
Lactantius. For in many things we offend all: and our present state of
imperfection will not suffer it to be otherwise: (...), De agricultura.
said Philo. For as a runner of races at his first setting forth rids his way
briskly, and in a breath measures out many spaces; but by and by his spirit is
faint, and his body is breathless, and he stumbles at every thing that lies in
his way: so is the course of a Christian; fierce in the beginnings of
repentance, and active in his purposes; but in his progress remiss and hindered,
and starts at every accident, and stumbles at every scandal and stone of
offense, and is sometimes listless, and without observation at other times, and
a bird out of a bush that was not looked for, makes him to start aside, and
decline from the path and method of his journey. But then if he that stumbles
mends his pace, and runs more warily, and goes on vigorously, his error, or
misfortune shall not be imputed; for here Gods justice is equity, it is the
justice of the Chancery; we are not judged by the Covenant of works, that is,
of exact measures, but by the Covenant of faith and remission, or repentance.
But if he that falls, lies down despairingly or wilfully, or if he rises, goes
back, or goes aside, not only his declination from his way, but every error or
fall, every stumbling and startling in that way shall be accounted for. For
here Gods justice is (...), exact and severe; it is the justice of the Law,
because he refused the method and conditions of the Gospel.

5. The imperfect way of operating alone, is not sufficient for excuse and
pardon, unless the matter also be little and contemptible; because if the
matter be great, it cannot ordinarily be, but it must be considered and chosen.
He that in a sudden anger strikes his friend to the heart, whom he had loved as
passionately as now he smote him, is guilty of murder, and cannot pretend
infirmity for his excuse; because in an action of so great consequence and
effect, it is supposed, he had time to deliberate all the foregoing parts of
his life, whether such an action ought to be done or not; or the very horror of
the action was enough to arrest his spirit, as a great danger, or falling into
a river, will make a drunken man sober; and by all the laws of God and Man, he
was immured from the probability of all transports into such violences; and the
man must needs be a slave of passion, who could by it be brought to go so far
from reason, and to do so great evil. * If a man in the careless time of the
day, when his spirit is loose, with a less severe employment, or his heart made
more open with an innocent refreshment, spies a sudden beauty that unluckily
strikes his fancy; it is possible that he may be too ready to entertain a
wanton thought, and to suffer it to stand at the doors of his first consent;
but if the sin passes no further, the man enters not into the regions of death;
because the Devil entered on a sudden, and is as suddenly cast forth. But if
from the first arrest of concupiscence, he pass on to an imperfect consent,
from an imperfect consent, to a perfect and deliberate, and from thence to an
act, and so to a habit, he ends in death; because long before it is come thus
far, The salt water is taken in. The first concupiscence is but like rain water
it discolours the pure springs, but makes them not deadly. But when in the
progression the will mingles with it, it is like the (...) or waters of
brimstone, and the current for ever after is unwholesome, and carries you forth
into the dead Sea, the lake of Sodom, which is to suffer the vengance of
Eternal fire: But then the matter may be supposed little till the will comes.
For though a man may be surprised with a wanton eye, yet he cannot fight a duel
against his knowledge, or commit adultery against his will. A man cannot
against his will contrive the death of a man; but he may speak a rash word, or
be suddenly angry, or triflingly peevish, and yet all this notwithstanding, be
a good man still. These may be sins of Infirmity, because they are imperfect
actions in the whole; and such, in which as the man is for the present
surprised, so they are such against which no watchfulness was a sufficient
guard, as it ought to have been in any great matter, and might have been in
sudden murders. A wise and a good man may easily be mistaken in a nice
question, but can never suspect an article of his Creed to be false: a good man
may have many fears and doubtings in matters of smaller moment, but he never
doubts of Gods goodness, of his truth, of his mercy, or of any of his
communicated perfections: he may fall into melancholy, and may suffer
indefinite fears, of he knows not what himself, yet he can never explicitly
doubt of any thing which God has clearly revealed, and in which he is
sufficiently instructed. A weak eye may at a distance mistake a man for a tree;
but he who sailing in a storm, takes the Sea for dry land, or a mushrome for an
oak, is stark blind. And so is he who can think adultery to be excusable, or
that Treason can be duty, or that by persecuting Gods Prophets, he does God
good service, or that he propagates religion by making the Ministers of the
Altar poor, and robbing the Churches. A good man so remaining cannot suffer
infirmity in the plain and legible lines of duty, where he can see, and reason,
and consider.

I have now told which are sins of infirmity; and I have told all their
measures. For as for those other false opinions by which men flatter themselves
into hell, by a pretense of sins of infirmity, they are as unreasonable as they
are dangerous; and they are easily reproved upon the stock of the former
truths. Therefore,

6. Tiberius the Emperor being troubled with a fellow that wittily and boldly
pretended himself to be a Prince, at last when he could not by questions, he
discovered him to be a mean person by the rusticity and hardness of his body:
not by a callousness of his feet, or a wart upon a finger, but (...), his whole
body was hard and servile, and so he was discovered. The natural superfluities,
and accrescencies that inevitably adhere to our natures, are not sufficient
indications of a servile person, or a slave to sin; but when our natures are
abused by choice and custom, when the callousness is spread by evil and hard
usages, when the arms are brawny by the services of Egypt, then it is no longer
infirmity, but a superinduced viciousness, and a direct hostility. When nature
rules, grace does not. When the flesh is in power, the spirit is not. Therefore
it matters not from what corner the blasting wind does come, from whence
soever it is, it is deadly. Most of our sins are from natural inclinations; and
the negative precept of God, are for the most part, restraints upon them.
Therefore to pretend nature, when our selves have spoiled it, is no excuse, but
that state of evil from whence the Spirit of God is to rescue and redeem us.

7. When violence of desire or passion engages us in a sin, whither we see and
observe our selves entering, that violence or transportation is not our excuse,
but our disease: and that resolution is not accepted for innocence or
repentance: but the not performing what we did resolve is our sin, and the
violence of passion was the accursed principle.

For to resolve is a relative and imperfect duty, to resolve, and to endeavor,
are several things. To resolve, is to purpose to do what we may if we will;
some way or other the thing is in our power; either we are able of our selves,
or we are helped. No man resolves to carry an Elephant, or to be as wise as
Solomon, or to destroy a vast Army with his own hands. He may endeavor this;
for, To endeavor sometimes supposes a state of excellency, beyond our power,
but not beyond our aims. Thus we must endeavor to avoid all sin, and to master
all our infirmities; because to do so is the nobleness of a Christian courage,
and that design which is the proper effect of Charity, which is the best of
Christian graces. But we cannot resolve to do it, because it is beyond all our
powers; but may endeavor it, and resolve to endeavor it, but that is all we can
do. But if to resolve, be a duty, then to perform it, is a greater; and if a
man cannot be the child of God without resolving against all the habits of
sin, then neither can he be his child, unless he actually quit them all.

But then if from acting our resolution we be hindered by passion and violent
desires, Paul, Gal. 5.24.
He that is in Christ has crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts;
that is, the passions and desires of the flesh are mortified in all the
regenerate: and therefore a state of passion is a state of death. But whatever
the principle be, yet we must be infinitely careful we do not mistake a broken
resolution for an entire piety. He that perpetually resolves, and yet
perpetually breaks his resolution, does all the way sin against his conscience,
and against his reason, against his experience, and against his observation;
and it will be a strange offer at an excuse, for a man to hope for, or to
pretend to pardon, because he sinned against his Conscience.

There is in this Article some little difference in the case of young persons,
natural vitium aetatis, the defect and inherent inclinations of their age. 2.
And because their passions being ever strongest when their reason is weakest,
the actions of young men are imperfect and incomplete. For deliberation being
nothing else but an alternate succession of appetites, it is an unequal
intercourse that a possessing, natural, promoted passion should contest against
a weak, overborn, beginning, unexperienced, uninstructed reason: this
alternation of appetites is like the dust of a balance weighing against a
rock; the deliberation it self must needs be imperfect, because there is no
equality. And therefore the Roman Lawyers did not easily upon a man under
twenty five years of age inflict punishment, at least not extreme. They are the
words of Tryphonius: L. Auxil.. in delictis. ff. de minoribus.
In delictis autem minor annis xxv. non meretur in integrum restitutionem,
utique atrocioribus; nisi quatenus interdum miseratio aetatis ad mediocrem
poenam judicem produxerit. This I say is only a lessening of their fault, not
imputing it. God is ready to pity every thing that is pityable, and therefore
is apt to instruct them more, and to forbear them longer, and to expect and to
assist their return, and strikes them not so soon, nor so severely, but what
other degrees of pardon God will allow to their insirmities, L. Unica. Cod. si
adversus delictum.
he has no where told us. For as to the whole, it is true in all laws Divine
and Humane: In criminibus quidem aetatis suffragio minores non juvantur: etenim
malorum mores infirmitas animi non excusat. Infirmity of mind does not excuse
evil manners: and therefore in criminal actions, young persons are not excused
by their age. In delictis aetate neminem excusari constat, said Diocletian and
Maximianus. The age excuses not; well may it lessen, but it does not quite
extinguish the guilt.

8. The greatness or violence of a temptation does not excuse our sin, or
reconcile it to the state of grace and an actual consistence with Gods favor.
The man that is highly tempted and so falls, cannot say it was by an
unavoidable infirmity. For God never suffers any man to be tempted above his
strength; and therefore when he suffers him to fall into a great trial, he has
beforehand prepared him with great aides: and a temptation is not such a
formidable thing to a considering Christian. All that it can say is nothing,
but that sin is pleasant: and suppose that true; yet so is drink to an hydropic
person, and salt meats to a phantastic stomach, and yet they that are concerned
do easily abstain from these temptations, and remember that it is a greater
pleasure to be in health then with a little cold water, or a broyl'd fish to
please their palate: and therefore a temptation which can be overcome by an
argument from so small an interest, cannot stand the shock of a Noble and a
Christian resolution and discourse. But every temptation puts on its strength
as the man is. Sometimes a full meal will not prejudice our health; and at
another time half so much would be a surfeit: and some men take cold with
leaving off a half shirt, who at another time might leave off half their
clothes. The indisposition is within: and if men did not love to be tempted, it
would not prevail at all. Wine is no temptation to an abstemious man, nor all
the beauties of Potiphars wife to Joseph, the Devil could not prevail with such
trifles; but half such an offer would overthrow all the trifling purposes of
the effeminate. To say that such a temptation is great, is to say, that you
love the sin too well to which you are tempted. For temptations prevail only
by our passions and our appetites: leave to love the sin, and the temptation is
answered; but if you love it, then complain of nothing but thy self, for thou
make the temptation great, by being in love with life and sin, by preferring
vanity before eternul pleasures. In the Apophthegms of the Egyptian Anachorets,
Bibl. PP. tom. 9. p. 286.
I read of one who had an apparition in the likeness of Christ. A vain and a
proud person would have hugged himself, and entertained the illusion. But he
shutting his eyes, said, I shall see Christ in heaven, it is enough for me to
hope and to believe while I am on earth. This or the like did and did not
prevail by our weaknesses, not by their own strength: and to pretend the
strength of a temptation, is to say, we are to be excused, because we love sin
too well, and are too much delighted with baser objects, and we cannot help it,
because we love to die.

9. The smallest instance, if it be observed, ceases to be a sin of infirmity;
because by being observed, it loses its pretense and excuse, for then it is
done upon the account of the will. For here the Rule is general, and it sums
up this whole Question.

10. A man's will has no infirmity, but when it wants the grace of God; that
is, whatsoever the will chooses is imputed to it for good or bad. For the will
can suffer no violence; it is subject to no thing, and to no person, but to God
and his laws, and therefore when ever it does amiss, it sins directly against
him. The will has no necessity, but what God and her self imposes; for it can
choose in despite of all arguments and notices from the understanding. For if
it can despise an argument from reason, it can also despise an argument from
sense; if it can refuse a good argument, it can also refuse a foolish one: if
it can choose and not yield to religion, it can also choose and not yield to
interest. If it can reject profit, it can reject pleasure; if it can refuse
every argument, it can refuse all, and will because it will; it can as well be
malicious as do unreasonably: and there could be no sin at all, if the will
never did amiss but when it were deceived: and even when the will chooses
pleasure before heaven, it is not because that seems better, but because it
will choose against all reason, only upon its own account. For it is certain,
he that chooses any thing upon that which he knows is but a seeming and a
fallacious reason, may if he please do it without all reason: and so the will
can do, against reason, in despite of powers, and hopes, and interest, and
threatening. * And therefore whatsoever is voluntarily chosen, let it be taken
care of, that it be good; for if it be not, there can no excuse come from
thence.

The will is the only fountain, Latro est etiam antequam inquinet manus, said
Seneca: Fecit enim quisquam quantum voluit. If he has willed it, he has done
it before God. To this purpose is that saying of Tertullian. Voluntas facti
origo est, qua ne tunc quidem liberatur cum aliqua difficultas perpetrationem
ejus intercepit. Ipsa enim sibi imputatur, nec excusari poterit per illam
perficiendi infelicitatem, oper ata quod suum fuerat. Want of power excuses
every thing but the will, because this always has power to do its own work,
and what cannot be done besides, as it is nothing to the will, so it is nothing
to its excuse. To will is the formality of sin, and theretore what ever action
had its commission from thence, is not a sin of infirmity. For nothing is a sin
of infirmity, but what is in some sense involuntary.

The sum is this. a sin of infirmity upon no account, but upon the account of
ignorance, or something analogical to it, such as are inadvertency, or
surprise, which are to ignorance as acts are to habits. Romans 14.1, 10.
The weak brother, in S. Paul's dialect, is he that has no knowledge. For since
nothing leads the will, but the understanding, unless it goes alone, and moves
by its own act or principle; if the understanding be inculpably misled, the
will may be in error, but not in sin, it is abused, but shall not be condemned.
For no man can be tied to do more or better then he understands, for that
would be to do more then he can. If the understanding abuse the will, there is
evil in it, but no sin: but if the will abuse the understanding then it is
criminal. That is, where the man understands not, or cannot consider, or
deliberate, all his actions by being less humane are less imputable. Comoed.
ver. Gr.
(...). But where there is no knowledge, there is no power, and no choice, and
no sin. They increase and decrease by each others me^sures. Jam. 4.17
S. James his rule is the full measure of this discourse: To him that knows
to dee good, and does i^ not, to him it is sin. The same with that of Philo,
(...) To him that sins ignorantly pardon is given; that is easily: but he who
sins knowingly, has no excuse. And therefore the Hebrews use to oppose (...)
sin, to (...) ignorance; that is, the issues of a wicked from the issues of a
weak mind: according to that saying of our blessed Savior, John 10.41.
If ye were blind, ye should have no sin; that is, no great or very
unpardonable sin. Ignorance where of it self it is no sin, keeps the action
innocent; but as the principle is polluted, so also is the emanation.

. 8. Practical advices to be added to the foregoing considerations.
1. -- quae faciunt graviera coactae
Imperio sexus --
she will insult impotently, and rule tyrannically. Natures provisions of meat
and drink are to be retrenched and moderate, that she may not be luxuriant and
irregular: but yet she ought to be refreshed so as to be useful, and healthful,
and cheerful, even in the days of expiation and sorrow. For he that fasts to
kill his lust, and by fasting grows peevish, which to very many men is a
natural effect of fasting, and was sadly experimented in S. Hierome, has only
altered the signification of his evil: and it is not easily known, whether the
beast that is wanton, or the beast that is cursed be aptest to goar; and if in
such cases the first evil should be cured, yet the man is not.

But there are in nature some things which are the instruments of virtue and
vice too: A Gellius 19.12. and 17.15.
Dabo maximae famae viros, and inter admiranda propositos, quos si quis
corrigit delet. Sic enim vitia virtutibus immixta sunt, ut illas secum tractura
sint. If the natural anger of some men be taken off, you will also extinguish
their courage, or make them unfit for government. Vice and virtue sometimes go
together: in these cases that which we call vicious is in many degrees of it a
natural infirmity, and must be tempered as well as it can: but it neither can,
nor indeed ought to be extinguished: and therefore as we must take care that
nature run not into extravagancies; so for the unalterable portions of
infirmity, they ought to be the matter of humility, and watchfulness, but not
of scruple and vexation. However, we must be careful that nature be not Gods
enemy; for if a vice be incorporated into our nature, that is, if our natural
imperfections be changed into evil customs; it is a threefold cord that is not
easily broken: it is a legion of Devils, and not to be cast out without a
mighty labor, and all the arts and contentions of the Spirit of God.

2. and sin rides in triumph upon the wheels of desire, which run infinitely,
when the boy drives the chariot. But the religion of a Christian is an open war
against passion; and by the grace of meekness, if we list to study and to
acquire that, has placed us in the regions of safety.

3. Dum quid sis dubitas, jam potes esse nihil. He that is uncertain what to
do, shall never do any thing well; and there is no infirmity greater, then
that a man shall not be able to determine himself what he ought to do.

4. cured nothing of his nature and infirmity. Some lusts our temper or our
interest will part withal; but our infirmities are in those desires which are
hardest to be mastered: that is, when after a long dispute, and perpetual
contention, still there will abide some pertinacious string of an evil root;
when the lust will be apt upon all occasions to revert, when every thing can
give fire to it, and every heat can make it stir; that is the scene of our
danger, and ought to be of greatest warfare and observation.

5. constant and universal, mortal fight. He that does single spights to a
lust; as he that opposes now and then a fasting day against carnality, or some
few alms against oppression or covetousness, will find that these single acts
(if nothing else be done) can do nothing but cosen him: they are apt to
persuade easy people that they have done what is in them to cure their
infirmity, and that their condition is good; but it will not do any thing of
that work whither they are designed. We must remember that infirmities are but
the relics and remains of an old lust, and are not cured but at the end of a
lasting war. They abide even after the conquest, after their main body is
broken, and therefore cannot at all be cured by those light velitations and
picqueerings of single actions of hostility.

6. greatness of the temptation; for that accuses thee most of all: the bigger
the temptation is, it is true that oftentimes thou art the more too blame; but
at the best, it is a reproof of thy imperfect piety. He whose religion is
greater then the temptation of a 100. l. and yet falls in the temptation of a
1000. l. sets a price upon God and upon heaven; and though he will not sell
heaven for a 100. l. yet 1000. l. he thinks is a worthy purchase.

7.

8.

9. not start back when the burden pinches him; nor refuse his repentances
because they smart, nor omit his alms because they are expensive: for it is
vain to propound to our selves any end, and yet to decline the use of those
means, and instruments, without which it is not to be obtained. He that will
buy must take it at the sellers price; and if God will not give thee safety or
immunity, but upon the exchange of labor, and contradictions, fierce
contentions, and mortification of our appetites, we must go to the cost, or
quit the purchase.

10. an active prayer. For prayer without labor is like faith without charity,
dead and ineffective. A working faith, and a working prayer are the great
instruments, and the great exercise, and the great demonstration of holiness
and Christian perfection. Children can sit down in a storm, or in a danger, and
weep and die: but men can labor against it, and struggle with the danger, and
labor for that blessing which they beg. Thou do not desire it, unless thou will labor for it. He that sits still and wishes, had rather have that thing
then be without it; but if he will not use the means, he had rather lose his
desire then lose his ease, That is scarce worth having, that is not worth
laboring.

11. Italian General that quitted his vanity, and his employment upon the sight
of one that died suddenly, might upon the same consideration actually applied
and fitted to the fancy, at any time resist his lust. And therefore Epictetus
gives it in rule. (...). Enchir. c. 28.
Let death be always before thy eyes, and then thou shall never desire any base
or low thing, nor desire any thing too much. That is, the perpetual application
of so great a consideration as is death, is certainly the greatest endearment
of holiness and severity. And certain it is, that at some time or other the
greatest part of Christians have had some horrible apprehensions of hell, of
death, and consequent damnation; and it has put into them holy thoughts, and
resolutions of piety: and if ever they were in a severe sickness, and did
really fear death, they may remember with how great a regret they did then look
upon their sins; and then they thought heaven a considerable interest, and hell
a formidable state, and would not then have committed a sin for the purchase of
the world. Now every man has always the same arguments and endearments of
piety and religion: Heaven and hell are always the same considerable things;
and the truth is the same still: but then they are considered most, and
therefore they prevail most; and this is a demonstration that the arguments
themselves are sufficient, and would always do the work of grace for us, if we
were not wanting to our selves. It is impossible that any man can be moved by
any argument in the world, or any interest, any hope or any fear, who cannot be
moved by the consideration of heaven and hell. But that which I observe is
this; that the argument that wisely and reasonably prevailed yesterday, can
prevail to day, unless thou thy self be foolish and unreasonable.

12. has the least reason to pretend infirmity for his excuse, because he has
the strengths of the Spirit, and did master sin in its strengths, and in
despite of all its vigorousness and habit; and therefore certainly can do so
much rather when sin is weak and grace is strong. The result of which
consideration is this, that no man should please himself in his sin, because it
is a sin of infirmity. He that is pleased with it, because he thinks it is
indulged to him, sins with pleasure, and therefore not of infirmity; for that
is ever against our will, and besides our observation. No sin is a sin of
infirmity unless we have it, and strive against it. He that has gotten some
strength may pretend some infirmity. But he that has none is dead.

13.

14. cusable. No man sins with a pardon about his neck. But if the sin comes at
a certain time, it comes from a certain cause; and then it cannot be infirmity:
for all sins of infirmity, are sins of chance, irregular, and accidental.

15. Can any good thing come out of Galilee? And when Christ comes, no man
knows whence he is. Two or three proverbs, did in despite of all the
miracles, and holy doctrines, and rare example of Christ hinder many of the
Jews from believing in him. The words of S. Paul misunderstood, and worse
applied, have been so often abused to evil purposes, that they have almost
passed into a proverbial excuse, The evil that I would not that I do. Such
sayings as these, are to be tried by the severest measures, and all such senses
of them which are enemies to holiness of life are to be rejected, because they
are against the whole Economy and design of the Gospel, of the life and death
of Christ. But a proverb being used by every man, is supposed to contain the
opinion and belief, or experience of mankind: and then that evil sense that we
are pleased to put to them, will be thought to be of the same authority. I have
heard of diverse persons who have been strangely enticed on to finish their
revellings, and drunken conventicles by a catch, or a piece of a song, by a
humor, and a word, by a bold saying, or a common proverb: and whoever take any
measures of good evil, but the severest discourses of reason and religion, will
be like a ship turned every way by a little piece of wood; by chance, and by
half a sentence, because they dwell upon the water, and a wave of the Sea is
their foundation.

16.

17. Canaanites in the land to be thy daily exercise, and endearment of care
and of devotion; yet you must not let them alone, or entertain a treaty of
peace with them. But when you have done something, go on to finish it: It is
infinite pity that any good thing should be spent or thrown away upon a lust:
But if we sincerely endeavor to be masters of every action, we shall be of most
of them; and for the rest, they shall trouble thee, but do thee no other
mischief. We must keep the banks, that the Sea break not in upon us; but no man
can be secure against the drops of rain that fall upon the heads of all
mankind: but yet every man must get as good shelter as he can.

The PRAYER.
I. O Almighty God, the Father of Mercy and Holiness, thou art the fountain of
grace and strength, and thou blessest the sons of men by turning them from
their iniquities; show the mightiness of thy power and the glories of thy
grace, by giving me strength against all my enemies, and victory in all
temptations, and watchfulness against all dangers, and caution in all
difficulties, and hope in all my fears, and recollection of mind in all
distractions of spirit and fancy, that I may not be a servant of chance or
violence, of interest or passion, of fear or desire, but that my will may rule
the lower man, and my understanding may guide my will, and thy holy Spirit may
conduct my understanding, that in all contentions thy Spirit may prevail, and
in all doubts I may choose the better part, and in the midst of all
contradictions and temptations and infelicities, I may be thy servant
infallibly and unalterably. Amen.

II. BLessed Jesu, thou art our High Priest, and encompassed with infirmities,
but always without sin, relieve and pity me, O my gracious Lord, who am
encompassed with infirmities, but seldom or never without sin. O my God, my
ignorances are many, my passions violent, my temptations ensnaring and
deceitful, my observation little, my inadvertencies innumerable, my resolutions
weak, my dangers round about me, my duty and obligations full of variety, and
the instances very numerous; O be thou unto me wisdom and righteousness,
sanctification and redemption. Thou have promised thy holy Spirit to them that
ask him, let thy Spirit help my infirmities, give to me his strengths, instruct
me with his notices, encourage me with his promises, affright me with his
terrors, confirm me with his courage, that I being readily prepared and
furnished for every good work, may grow with the increase of God to the full
measure of the stature and fullness of thee my Savior; that though my outward
man decay and decrease, yet my inner man may be renewed day by day; that my
infirmities may be weaker, and thy grace stronger, and at last may triumph over
the decays of the old man. O be thou pleased to pity my infirmities, and
pardon all those actions which proceed from weak principles; that when I do
what I can, I may be accepted, and when I fail of that, I may be pitied and
pardoned, and in all my fights and necessities may be defended and secured,
prospered and conducted to the regions of victory and triumph, of strength and
glory, through the mercies of God, and the grace of our Lord Jesus, and the
blessed communication of the Spirit of God and our Lord Jesus. Amen.

CHAP. VIII. Of the effect of Repentance, viz. Remission of sins.
. 1.
THE law written in the Heart of man is a law of obedience, Austin says) is
written in the Heart of Angels: Lib. 6. cont. Julian. c. 9.
Vt nulla sit iniquitas impunita, nisi quam sanguis Mediatoris expiaverit. For
God the Father spares no sinner, but while he looks upon the face of his Son:
but that in him our sins should be pardoned and our persons spared, is as
necessary a consideration as any. S. Ambr. de poenit. l. 1. c. 2.
Nemo enim potest been agere poenitentiam, nisi qui speraverit indulgentiam. To
what purpose does God call us to Repentance, if at the same time he does not
invite us to pardon? It is the state and misery of the damned, to repent
without hope; and if this also could be the state of the penitent in this life,
the Sermons of Repentance were useless and comfortless, Gods mercies were none
at all to sinners, the institution and office of preaching and reconciling
penitents were impertinent and man should die by the laws of Angels, who never
was enabled to live by their strength and measures; and consequently, all
mankind were infinitely and eternally miserable, lost irrecoverably, perishing
without a Savior, tied to a law too hard for him, and condemned by unequal and
intolerable sentences.

Tertullian considering that God threatens all impenitent sinners, Lib. 2. de
poenit.
argues demonstratively: Neque enim comminaretur non poenitenti, si non
ignosceret delinquenti. If men repent not, God will be severely angry; it will
be infinitely the worse for us if we do not, and shall it be so too if we do
repent? God forbid. Frustra mortuus est Christus, si aliquos vivificare non
potest. S. Hierom. Epist. ad Ocean.
Mentitur Johannes Baptista, and digito Christum and voce demonstrans: Ecce
agnus Dei, ecce qui tollit peccata mundi, si sunt adhuc in saeculo quorum
Christus peccata non tulerit. In vain did Christ die, if he cannot give life to
all. And the Baptist deceived us when he pointed out Christ unto us, saying,
Behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world, if there were any
in the world whose sins Christ has not born.

But God by the old Prophets called upon them who were under the Covenant of
Works in open appearance, Exodus 34.6 Psa. 103. per totum. and 128. Isa. 55.7,
8. Jer. 18.7, 8. Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. and 33.11. Dan. 4.27. Mal. 3.7. Joel 2.13.
Jonah 4.2. and 3.9.
that they also should repent, and by antedating the mercies of the Gospel,
promised pardon to the penitent; He promised mercy by Moses and the Prophets;
He proclaimed his Name to be Mercy and Forgiveness; He did solemnly swear he
did not desire the death of a sinner, but that he should repent and live; and
the holy Spirit of God ha^^ respersed every book of holy Scripture with great
and legible lines of mercy, and sermons of Repentance. In short, it was the
sum of all the Sermons which were made by those whom God sent with his word
in their mouths, that they should live innocently, or when they had sinned
they should repent and be saved from their calamity.

But when Christ came into the world, doing and receiving good, this by Faith,
that by Charity. He commanded an indefinite and unlimited forgiveness of our
brother, repenting after injuries done to us seventy times seven times: and
though there could be little quostion of that, yet he was pleased to signify
to us, that as we needed more, so we should have and find more mercy at the
hands of God. And therefore he has appointed a whole order of men, whom he
maintains at his own charges, and furnishes with especial commissions, Mat.
1^.15, 16. Joh. 20.23. 2 Cor. 7.10. Gal. 6.1. Jam. 1.15, 16, 19, 20. 1 John
2.11. and 1.9. Rev. 2.5. and 3.1, 2, 3, 19, 20.
and endues with a lasting power, and imployes on his own errand, and instructs
with his own Spirit, whose business is to remit and retain, to exhort and to
restore sinners by the means of Repentance, and the word of their proper
Ministry. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted; that is their
Authority: and their Office is, to pray all men in Christ's stead to be
reconciled to God. And after all this, Christ himself labors to bring it to
effect; not only assisting his Ministers with the gifts of an excellent
Spirit, and exacting of them the account of Souls, but that it may be
prosperous and effectual, himself intercedes in Heaven before the Throne of
Grace, doing for sinners the office of an Advocate and a Reconciler. If any man
sins, 1 John 2.2, 3.
we have an Advocate with the Father, and he is the propitiation for all our
sins, and for the sins of the whole world: and therefore it is not only the
matter of our hopes, but an Article of our Creed, that we may have forgiveness
of our sins by the blood of Jesus. Qui nullum excepit, in Christo donavit
omnia. God has excepted none, and therefore in Christ pardons all.

For there is not in Scripture any Catalogue of sins set down for which Christ
died, go and sin no more. Deus distinctionem non facit, qui misericordiam suam
promisit omnibus, and relaxandi licentiam sacerdotibus suis sine ulla
exceptione concessit, Lib. 1. de poenit. c. 2.
said S. Ambrose. God excepts none, but has given power to his Ministers to
release all, absolutely all. And S. Bernard argues this Article upon the
account of those excellent examples which the Spirit of God has consigned to
us in holy Scripture. If Peter after so great a fall did arrive to such an
eminence of sanctity, In solenni Petri and Pauli Ser. 3.
hereafter who shall despair, provided that he will depart from his sins? For
that God is ready to forgive the greatest Criminals if they repent, appears in
the instances of Ahab and Manasses, of Mary Magdalen and S. Paul, of the Thief
on the Cross and the deprehended Adulteress, and of the Jews themselves, who
after they had crucified the Lord of life, were by messengers of his own
invited, passionately invited to repent, and be purified with that blood which
they had sacrilegiously and impiously spilt. But concerning this, who please
may read S. Austin discoursing upon those words, Mittet Crystallum suum sicut
buccellas; which, says he, mystically represent the readiness of God to break
and make contrite even the hearts of them that have been hardened in impiety.
Gemara de Synedrio c. 11.
Quo loco consisi^^t poenitentia^ ^^gentes, ibi justi non poterunt stare, said
the Doctors of the Jews. The just and innocent persons shall not be able to
stand in the same place where the penitent shall be. Pacem, pacem remoto and
propinquo, ait Dominus, ut sanem eum. Peace to him that is afar off, and to him
that is near, says the Lord, that I may heal him. Praeponit remotum: That Is
their observation; He that is afar off is set before the other; that is, he
that is at great distance from God, as if God did use the greater earnestness
to reduce him, Upon which place their gloss adds; Magna est virtus eorum qui
poenitentiam agunt, ita ut nulla Creatura in septo illorum consistere queat. So
great is the virtue of them that are true penitents, that no creature can stand
within their enclosure. And all this is far better expressed by those
excellent words of our blessed Savior, Luke 15.7.
There is joy in heaven over one sinner that repents, more then over ninety
nine just person that need no repentance.

I have been the longer in establishing and declaring the proper foundation of
this Article, is established upon the testimonies of the greatest certainty.

. 2. Of pardon of sins committed after Baptism.
BUt it may be our easiness of life, Stephen prayed for his persecutors, and
our blessed Lord himself on his uneasy deathbed of the Cross, prayed for them
that Crucified him, it can only prove, that these great sins are pardonable in
our first access to Christ, because they for whom Christ and his Martyr S.
Stephen prayed, were not yet converted, and so were to be saved by Baptismal
Repentance. Then the Power of the Keys is exercised, and the gates of the
Kingdom are opened, then we enter into the Covenant of mercy and pardon, and
promise faith and perpetual obedience to the laws of Jesus; and upon that
condition, forgiveness is promised and exhibited, offered and consigned, but
never after: for it is in Christianity for all great sins, as in the Civil law
for theft. L. 65. D. de furtis. and l. 1. D. de Aedili^io edicto.
Qui ea mente alienum quid contrectavit ut lucrifaceret, tametsi mutato
consilio id Domino postea reddidit, fur est: nemo enim tali peccato poenitentia
sua nocens esse desinit, said Vlpian, and Gaius. Repentance does not here take
off the punishment, nor the stain. And so it seems to be in Christianity, in
which every baptized person having stipulated for obedience, is upon those
terms admitted to pardon, and consequently if he fails of his duty, he shall
fail of the grace.

But that this objection may proceed no further, incestuous Corinthian, and the
precept of S. Paul to the spiritual man, or the Curate of souls. If any man be
overtaken in a fault, Gal. 6.1.
ye which are spiritual restore such a man in the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self lest thou also be tempted. The Christian might fall, and
the Corinthian did so, and the Minister himself, he who had the ministry of
restitution and reconciliation, was also in danger: and yet they all might be
restored. To the same sense is that of S. James, Jam. 5.15.
Is any man sick among you? let him send for the Presbyters of the Church, and
let them pray over him. (...), although he was a doer of sins, they shall be
forgiven him. For there is an (...), a sin that is not unto death. And
therefore when S. Austin in his first Book de Sermon Dei, had said that there
is some sin so great that it cannot be remitted, he retracts his words with
this clause, addendum fuit, etc. I should have added, If in so great
perverseness of mind he ends his life. For we must not despair of the worst
sinner, we may not despair of any, since we ought to pray for all.

For it is beyond exception or doubt, Acts 8.22.
So Simon Peter to Simon Magus, (...), Repent of thy wickedness; and to the
Corinthian Christians S. Paul urges the purpose of his legation, we pray you in
Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God. The Spirit of God reproved some of the
Asian Churches for foul misdemeanors, Ap^^al. 2.26.
and even some of the Angels, the Asian Bishops, calling upon them to return to
their first love, V. 5.
and to repent and to do their first works; and to the very Gnostics, and
filthiest heretics he gave space to repent, V. 21.
and threatened extermination to them if they did not do it speedily. For,

Baptism is (...), Marc the Anchoret called it, (...), the introduction to
repentance, or that state of life that is full of labor and care, and
amendment of our faults; for that is the best life that any man can live: and
therefore repentance has its progress after baptism, as it has its beginning
before: for first repentance is unto baptism, and then baptism unto repentance.
And if it were otherwise, the Church had but ill provided for the state of her
sons and daughters by commanding the baptism of infants. For if repentance were
not allowed after, then their early baptism would take from them all hopes of
repentance, and destroy the mercies of the Gospel, and make it now to all
Christendom a law of works in the greater instances; Vide Great Exemplar part
1. Dise. of Baptism page 175. etc.
because since in our infancy we neither need, nor can perform repentance, if
to them that sin after baptism, repentance be denied, it is in the whole denied
to them for ever to repent. But God has provided better things for us, and
such which accompany salvation.

For besides those many things which have been already considered, body that
was broken, and the blood that was shed for remission of sins: still it is
applied, and that application could not be necessary to be done anew, if there
were not new necessities; and still we are invited to do actions of
repentance, to examine our selves and so to eat: all which (as things are
ordered) would be infinitely useless to mankind, if it did not mean pardon to
Christians falling into foul sins even after baptism.

I shall add no more but the words of S. 2 Cor. 12, 21.
Paul to the Corinthians; Left when I come again, my God will humble me among
you, and that I shall bewail many who have sinned already, and have not
repented of the uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness which they
have committed. Here is a fierce accusation of some of them, for the foulest
and the basest crimes; and a reproof of their not repenting, and a threatening
them with censures Ecclesiastical. I suppose this article to be sufficiently
concluded from the premises. The necessity of which proof they only will best
believe, who are severely penitent, and full of apprehension and fear of the
Divine anger, because they have highly deserved it. However, I have served my
own needs in it, and the need of those whose consciences have been, or shall be
so timorous as mine has deserved to be. But against the universality of this
doctrine there are two grand objections; The one is the severer practice and
doctrine of the primitive Church, denying repentance to some kind of sinners
after baptism. The other, the usual discourses and opinions concerning the sin
against the holy Ghost. Of these I shall give account in the two following
sections.

. 3. Of the difficulty of obtaining pardon: The doctrine and practice of the
Primitive Church in this article.
NOvatianus and Novatus said,

This opinion of theirs, Montanus, De pudic. c. 5. and c. 9.
which had abused Tertullian, who fiercely declaims against the decree of Pope
Zephyrinus, because against the custom of his Decessors he admitted adulterers
to repentance, while at the same time he refused idolaters and murderers. And
this their severity did not seem to be put upon the account of a present
necessity, or their own zeal, or for the avoiding scandal, or their love of
holiness; but upon the nature of the thing it self, and the sentences of
Scripture. An old man of whom Irenaeus makes mention, said; Lib. 4. c. 45.
Non debemus superbi esse, neque reprehendere veteres, ne forte post agnitionem
Dei agentes aliquid quod non placet Deo, remissionem non habeamus ultra
delictorum, and excludamur a regno ejus. We must not be proud and reprove our
Fathers, lest after the knowledge of God, we doing something that does not
please God, we may no more have remission of our sins, but be excluded from his
Kingdom. To the same purpose is that Canon made by the Gallic Bishops against
the false accusers of their brethren; ut ad exitum ne communicent: that they
should not be admitted to the Communion or peace of the Church, no not at their
death. And Pacianus Bishop of Barcinona gives a severe account of the doctrine
of the Spanish Churches even in his time, and of their refusing to admit
idolaters, murderers, and adulterers to repentance. Paraen. ad poenit.
Other sins may be cured by the exercise of good works. But these three kill
like the breath of a Basilisk, and are to be feared like a deadly arrow. They
that were guilty of such crimes did despair. What have I done to you? was it
not in your power to have let it alone? Did no man admonish you? Did none
foretell the event? Was the Church silent? Did the Gospels say nothing? Did the
Apostles threaten nothing? Did the Priest entreat nothing of you? why do you
seek for late comforts? Then you might have sought for them, when they were to
be had. But they that pronounce such men happy do but abuse you.

This opinion and the consequent practice, Africa the decree of Zephyrinus for
the admission of penitent adulterers, was not admitted even by the Orthodox and
Catholics; S. Cyprian. ep. 52.
but they dissented placidly and modestly, and governed their own Churches by
the old severity. For there was then no thought of any necessity that other
Churches should obey the sanctions of the Pope, or the decrees of Rome, but
they retained the old Discipline. But yet the piety and the reasonableness of
the decree of Zephyrinus prevailed by little and little, and adulterers were
admitted; but the severity stuck longer upon diolaters or apostates: for they
were not to be admitted to the peace of the Church, although they should
afterward suffer martyrdom for the name of Christ: and for this they
pretended the words of S. Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6. Ubi supra.
Paul, Non possunt admitti secundum Apostolum, as S. Cyprian expressly affirms;
and the same is the sentence of the first Canon of the Council of Eliberis.

When they began to remit of this rigor (which they did in or about S. Cyprians
time) they did admit these great criminals to repentance. Once, but no more; as
appears in Tertullian De poenit.
, the Council of Eliberis Can. 7.
, the Synod at Side in Pamphylia against the Messalians, S. Ambrose Lib. 2. de
poenit. c. 10.
, S. Austin Ep. 54.
, and Macedonius Ep. 53.
; which makes it suspicious that the words of Origin are interpolated, saying,
In gravioribus criminibus semel tantum vel raro poenitentiae conceditur locus.
Hom. 15. in 25. cap. Levit.
But once or but seldom; so the words are now; but the practice of that age
was not so remiss, for they gave once and no more: as appears in the foregoing
Authors, and in the eleventh Canon of the third Council of Toledo. For as S.
Stromat. lib. 2.
Cl^mens of Alexandria affirms, Apparet, sed non est poeniten^ia saepe petere
de iis quae saepe peccantur. It is but a seeming repentance, that falls often
after a frequent return.

But this gentleness (for it was the greatest they then had) they ministered to
such only as desired it in their health, and in the days in which they could
live the lives of penitents, and make amends for their folly. For if men had
lived wickedly, and on their deathbed desired to be admitted to repentance and
pardon, they refused them utterly; as appears in that excellent Epistle of S.
Cyprian to Antonianus: Epist. 52.
Prohibendos omnino censuimus a spe communionis and pacis, si in infirmitate
atque periculo coeperint deprecari; at no hand are those to be admitted to
Church communion, who repent only in their danger and weakness, because not
repentance of their fault, but the hasty warning of instant or approaching
death compelled them: neither is he worthy in death to receive the comfort, who
did not think he was to die. And consequently to this severity, in his Sermon
de lapsis, he advises that every man should confess his sin, while his
confession can be admitted, while his satisfaction may be acceptable, and his
pardon ratified by God. The same was decreed by the Fathers in the Synod of
Arles. Arelat. 1. c. 23.


This was severe, Innocentius and S. Innocent. epist. ad Exuper.
Austin they began not only to impose penances on dying penitents, but even
after a wicked life to reconcile them. They then first began to do it; but as
it usually happens in first attempts, and insolent actions, they were fearful,
and knew not the event, and would warrant nothing. To hinder them that are in
peril of death from the use of the last remedy, is hard and impious; but to
promise any thing in so late a cure is temerarious. So Salvian: and S.
Chrysostom to Theodorus would not have such persons despaired, so neither
nourished up by hope: only it is better, nihil inexpertum relinquere quam
morientem nolle curare, Salvian.
to try every way, rather then that the dying penitent should fail for want of
help. But I sidore said plainly, He who living wickedly, repents in the time of
his death, as his damnation is uncertain, so his pardon is doubtful.

This was the most dangerous indulgence, All sinners, and at all times, and as
often as they would, might be admitted to repentance and pardon; whether they
could or could not perform the stations and injunctions of the penitents; and
this took off the edge of public and Ecclesiastical repentance; and to this
succeeded private repentance, where none but God and the Priest were witnesses;
and because this was a recession from the old discipline, and of it self an
abuse, or but the relics of discipline at the best, and therefore not
necessary because it was but an imperfect supply of something that was better,
this also is in some places laid aside, in others too much abused. But of that
in its place.

But now that I may give an account concerning the first severity:. 4.
: but for murder and adultery there were very many authorities of Scripture to
prove them pardonable, but none to prove them unpardonable. 2. What can be
pretended why idolatry, murder, and adultery, should be less pardonable (if
repented of) then Incest, Treason, Heresy, Sodomy, or Sacrilege? These were
not denied; and yet some of them are greater Criminals then some that were: but
the value is set upon crimes as men please. 3. That even in these three cases
the Church did allow Repentance in the very beginning, appears beyond exception
in Irenaeus, Lib. 1. c. 9.
who writes concerning the women seduced by the Heretic Marck, Hae saepissime
conversae ad Ecclesiam Dei confessae sunt, and socundum corpus exterminat a^ se
ab eo, velut cupidine, etc.
and so guilty of both Adulteries, carnal and spiritual, that they were
admitted to repentance. 4. S. Clemens of Alexandria affirms indefinitely,
concerning all persons lapsed after Baptism, that they may be restored and
pardoned. (...). Strom. 4.
They that fall into sins after Baptism, must be chastened. For those things
which were committed before Baptism are pardoned, but they which are committed
afterward, are to be purged. For it is certain, that God did not shut up the
fountain which he opened in Baptism. Then he smote the Rock, and the stream
flowed out, and it became a river, and ran in dry places. 5. It is more then
probable that in Egypt it was very ordinary to admit lapsed persons, and even
Idolaters to repentance, because of the strange levity of the Nation, and that
even the Bishops did at the coming of Hadrianus the Emperor devote themselves
to Serapis. Illi qui Serapim colunt Christiani sunt: and devoti sunt Serapi qui
se Christi Episcopos dicunt. Apud Spartian.
So the Emperor testifies in his letters to Servianus. For it is not to be
supposed that it was part of their persuasion that they might lawfully do it,
or that it was solemn and usual so to do; but that to avoid persecution they
did choose rather to seem unconstant and changeable then to be killed,
especially in that Nation, which was tota levis and pendula, and ad omnia famae
momenta volans (as these letters say) light and inconstant, tossed about with
every noise of fame and variety. These Bishops after the departure of Caesar,
without peradventure did many of them return to their charges, and they and
their Priests pardoned each other; just as the Libellatici and the Thurificati
did in Carthage and all Africa, as S. Cyprian relates. 6. In Ephrem Syrus there
is a form of Confession and of Prayer for the pardon of foul sins: (...). Have
mercy on my sins, my injustices, my covetousness, (which some render)
unnatural lusts, my adulteries and fornications, my idle and filthy speakings.
If these after Baptism are pardonable, Quid non speremus? the former severity
must be understood not to be their Doctrine but their Discipline.

And the same is to be said concerning their giving Repentance but to to those
whom they did admit after Baptism, their Fathers was only for Discipline and
caution. Epist. 54.
So S. Austin; The Church did cautiously and healthfully provide, that
penitents should but once be admitted, lest a frequent remedy should become
contemptible; yet who dares say, Why do ye again spare this man, who after his
first repentance is again entangled in the snares of sin?

So that whereas some of them use to say of certain sins that after Baptism, or
after the first relapse they are unpardonable, we must know, that in the style
of the Church, Unpardonable signified such to which by the Discipline and
Customs of the Church pardon was not ministered. They were called Unpardonable,
not because God would not pardon them, but because he alone could: this we
learn from those words of Tertullian, Salva illa poenitentiae specie post fidem
quae aut levioribus delictis veniam ab Episcopo consequi poterit, aut majoribus
and irremissibilibus a Deo solo. The lighter or lesser sins might obtain pardon
from the Ministry of the Bishop, Hoc satis est, ipsi caetera mando Deo, The
greatest and the Unpardonable could obtain it of God alone: So that when they
did deny to absolve some certain Criminals after Baptism, or after a relapse,
they did not affirm the sins to be unpardonable, as we understand the word.
Novatus himself did not, Lib. 4. cap. 14.
for (as Socrates reports) he wrote to all the Churches every where, that they
should not admit them, that had sacrificed, to the Mysteries, (...), but to
exhort them to repentance, and yet to leave their pardon and absolution to him
who is able, and has authority to forgive sins. And the same also was the
doctrine of Acesius his great Disciple, for which Constantine in Eusebius
reproved him. Some single men have despaired, but there was never any Sect of
men that sealed up the Divine Mercy by the locks and bars of Despair, much
less did any good Christians ever do it.

And this we find expressly verified by the French Bishops in a Synod there
held about the time of Pope Zephyrinus. sacrificant, potius legend.
sanctificant agenda ad diem mortis, non sine spe tamen remissionis, quam ab eo
plane sperare debebunt qui ejus largitatem and solus obtinet, and tam dives
misericordie est ut nemo desperet. Although the Criminal must do penance to
his dying day, that is, the Church will not absolve, or admit him to her
communion, yet he must not be without hope of pardon, which yet is not to be
hoped for from the Church, but from him, who is so rich in mercy, that no man
may despair: Epist. 31. Quos separatos a nobis derelinquimus, etc.
and not long after this, S. Cyprian said, Though we leave them in their
separation from us, yet we have and do exhort them to repent, if by any means
they can receive indulgence from him who can perform it.

Now if it be enquired, Unpardonable. For he that says, any sin is
unpardonable, does not mean that God cannot pardon it, but that he will not, or
that he has not said, he will.

And upon the same account it seemed unreasonable to S. Ambrose, that the
Church should impose penances, and not release the penitents. He complained of
the Novatians for so doing; Lib. 1. de poenit. c. 2.
Cum utique veniam negando incentivum auferant poenitentiae, the penitents
could have little encouragement to perform the injunctions of their Confessors,
when after they had done them they should not be admitted to the Churches
communion. And indeed the case was hard, when it should be remembered that
whatsoever the Church did bind on earth was bound in heaven, and if they
retained them below, God would do so above; and therefore we find in
Scripture that (...), to give repentance, being the purpose of Christ's coming
and the grace of the Gospel, does mean, to give the effect of Repentance, that
is, pardon. And since Gods method is such, by giving the grace, and admitting
us to do the duty, he consequently brings to that mercy which is the end of
that duty, it is fit, that should also be the method of the Church.

For the ballancing of this Consideration,

For after great crimes, exact the Repentance, what sorrow is sufficient, what
fruits acceptable, what is expiatory, and what rejected; Pro. 20.9.
according to the saying of Solomon, Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I
am pure from my sin? they cannot tell how long God will forbear, at what time
his anger is final, and when he will refuse to hear, or what aggravations of
the crime God looks on; nor can they make an estimate which is greater, the
example of the sin, or the example of the punishment. And therefore in such
great cases the Church had reason to refuse to give pardon, which she could
minister neither certainly, nor prudently, nor (as the case then stood) safely
or piously.

But yet she enjoined Penances, S Ambros. lib. 2. de poenit c 9.
Nonnullae ideo poscunt poenitentiam, ut statim sibi reddi communionem velint.
Hae non tam se solvere cupiunt, quam sacerdotem ligare. Some demand penances,
that they may have speedy communion. These do not so much desire themselves to
be loosed, as to have the Priest bound; that is, such hasty proceedings do not
any good to the penitent, but much hurt to him that ministers. This the
Primitive Church avoided; and this was the whole effect which that Discipline
had upon the souls of the penitents. But for their Doctrine S. Austin is a
sufficient witness: Enchir. 6.
Sed neque de ipsis criminibus quamlibe^ magnis remitttendis, in Sancta
Ecclesia Dei desperanda est misericordia agentibus poenitentiam secundum modum
sui cujusque peccati. They ought not to despair of Gods mercy, even to the
greatest sinners, if they be the greatest penitents, that is, if they repent
according to the measure of their sins. Only in the making their judgments
concerning the measures of Repentance they differed from our practices.
Ecclesiastical Repentance, and Absolution was not only an exercise of the
duty, and an assisting of the penitent in his return, but it was also a
warranting or ensuring the pardon; which because in many cases the Church could
not so well do, she did better in not undertaking it; that is, in not
pronouncing Absolution.

For the pardon of sins committed after Baptism, Paul said, I am conscious to
my self in nothing, yet I am not hereby justified: so we may say in Repentance,
I have repented, and do so, but I am not hereby justified; because that is a
secret which until the day of Judgment we shall not understand: for every
repenting is not sufficient. He that repents worthily (let his sin be what it
will) shall certainly be pardoned; but after great crimes who does repent
worthily, is a matter of harder judgment then the manners of the present age
will allow us to make; and so secret, that they thought it not amiss very often
to be backward in pronouncing the Criminal absolved.

But then all this whole affair must needs be a mighty arrest to the gayeties
of this sinful age. Spirit can sanctify all sinners, and his Church can
restore all that are capable; yet if we consider that the particulars of every
naughty man's case are infinitely uncertain; that there are no minute-measures
of repentance set down after Baptism, that there are some states of sinners
which God does reject; that the arrival to this state is by parts, and
undetermined steps of progression; that no man can tell when any sin begins to
be unpardonable to such a person; and that if we be careless of our selves, and
easy in our judgments, and comply with the false measures of any age, we may
be in before we are aware, and cannot come out so soon as we expect; and
lastly, if we consider that the Primitive and Apostolical Churches, who best
knew how to estimate the mercies of the Gospel, and the requisites of
repentance, and the malignity and dangers of sin, did not promise pardon so
easily, so readily, so quickly as we do, we may think it fit to be more afraid
and more contrite, more watchful and more severe.

I end this with the words of S. Hierome, Ad Dan.
rem temerariam faciunt qui audacter peccatoribus indulgentiam pollicentur.
Though Daniel could foretell future things, yet he durst not pronounce
concerning the King, whether God would pardon him or no; it is therefore a
great rashness boldly to promise pardon to them that have sinned. That is, it
is not to be done suddenly, according to the caution which S. Paul gave to the
Bishop of Ephesus, 1 Timothy 5.22.
Lay hands suddenly on no man, that is, absolve him not without great trial,
and just dispositions.

For though this be not at all to be wrested to a suspicion that the sins in
their kind are not pardonable, judgment, whether the sinner be a worthy
penitent or not. For there being no express stipulation made concerning the
degrees of repentance, no taxa poenitentiaria, penitential Tables and Canons
consigned by God, it cannot be told by man when after great sins, and a long
iniquity, the unhappy man shall be restored, because it wholly depends upon the
Divine acceptance.

In smaller offenses, clamorous, or scandalous, or habitual, they ought not to
be too easy in speaking peace to such persons to whom God has so fiercely
threatened death eternal. But to hold their hands, may possibly increase the
sorrow, and contrition, and fear of the penitent and returning man, and by that
means make him the surer of it. But it is too great a confidence and
presumption to dispense Gods pardon, or the Kings, upon easy terms, and without
their Commission.

For since all the rule and measures of dispensing it, analogies and
proportions, by some reason, and much conjecture; it were better by being
restrained in the Ministeries of favor to produce fears and watchfulness,
carefulness and godly sorrow, then by an open hand to make sinners bold and
many, confident and easy. Those holy and wise men who were our Fathers in
Christ, did well weigh the dangers into which a sinning man had entered, and did
dreadfully fear the issues of the Divine anger; and therefore although they
openly taught that God has set open the gates of mercy to all worthy
penitents, yet concerning repentance they had other thoughts then we have; and
that in the pardon of sinners there are many more things to be considered,
besides the possibility of having the sin pardoned.

. 4. Of the sin against the Holy Ghost; and in what sense it is or may be
Unpardonable.
UPon what account the Primitive Church did refuse to admit certain Criminals
to repentance,

The Novatians denying repentance to lapsed Christians pretended for their
warrant those words of S. Paul; Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the
good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away,
to renew them again unto repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the son
of God afresh, and put him to an open shame; and parallel to this are those
other words, Hebr. 10.26, 27.
For if we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for
of judgment, and fiery indignation which shall consume the adversaries. The
sense of which words will be clear upon the explicating what is meant by (...),
what by (...), and what by (...).

If they shall fall away, things in which they had received all the present
endearments of the Gospel, (...).
a full conviction, pardon of sins, the earnest of the Spirit, the comfort of
the promises, an antepast of heaven it self; if these men shall fall away from
all this, it cannot be by infirmity, by ignorance, by surprise; this is that
which S. Paul calls (...), to sin wilfully after they have received the
knowledge of the truth: Malicious sinners these are, who sin against the Holy
Spirit, whose influences they throw away, whose counsels they despise, whose
comforts they refuse, whose doctrine they scorn, and from thence fall, not
only into one single wasting sin, but (...), they fall away, into a contrary
state; into Heathenism, or the heresy of the Gnostics, or to any state of
despising and hating Christ; expressed here by Crucifying the Son of God
afresh, and putting him to an open shame; these are they here meant; such who
after they had worshipped Jesus, and given up their names to him, and had been
blessed by him, and felt it, and acknowledged it, and rejoiced in it, these men
afterward without cause, or excuse, without error or infirmity, choosingly,
willingly, knowingly, called Christ an Impostor, and would have crucified him
again if he had been alive, that is, they consented to his death, by believing
that he suffered justly. This is the case here described, and cannot be drawn
to any thing else but its parallel, that is, a malicious renouncing charity, or
holy life, as these men did the faith, to both which they had made their
solemn vows in Baptism; but this can no way be drawn to the condemnation, and
final excision of such persons, who after baptism fall into any great sin, of
which they are willing to repent.

There is also something peculiar in (...), (...).
renewing such men to repentance: that is, these men are not to be
redintegrate, and put into the former condition; they cannot be restored to any
other gracious Covenant of repentance, since they have despised this. Other
persons who hold fast their profession, and forget not that they were cleansed
in baptism, they, in case they do fall into sin, may proceed in the same
method, in their first renovation to repentance, that is, in their being
solemnly admitted to the method and state of repentance for all sins known and
unknown. But when this renovation is renounced, when they despise the whole
Economy; when they reject this grace, and throw away the Covenant, there is
nothing left for such but a fearful looking for of judgment: for these persons
are incapable of the mercies of the Gospel, they are out of the way. For there
being but one way of salvation, viz. by Jesus Christ whom they renounce,
neither Moses, nor Nature, nor any other name can restore them. And 2. Their
case is so bad, and they so impious and malicious, that no man has power to
persuade such men to accept of pardon by those means which they so disown. For
there is no means of salvation but this one, and this one they hate, and will
not have; they will not return to the old, and there is none left by which they
can be (...) renewed, and therefore their condition is desperate.

But the word (...), impossible, is also of special importance and
consideration: (...).
It is impossible to renew such. For [impossible] is not to be understood in
the natural sense, but in the legal and moral. There are degrees of
impossibility, and therefore they are not all absolute and supreme. So when the
law has condemned a criminal, we usually say it is impossible for him to
escape, meaning that the law is clearly against him. Magnus ab infernis
revocetur Tullius umbris, Mart. Ep. l. 4. Ep. 16.

Et te defendat Regulus ipse licet:
Non potes absolvi: --
That is, your cause is lost, you are inexcusable, there is no apology, no
pleading for you: and that the same is here meant, we understand by those
parallel words, (...), there is left no sacrifice for him; alluding to Moses
law in which for them that sinned (...) with a high hand, Heb. 10.26.
for them that despised Moses law there was no sacrifice appointed; which Ben
Maimon. expounds, saying, that for Apostates there was no sacrifice in the law.
So that it is impossible to renew such, means that it is ordinarily impossible,
we have in the discipline of the Church no door of reconciliation; If he
repents of this, he is not the same man, but if he remains so, the Church has
no promise to be heard, if she prays for him; which is the last thing that the
Church can do. To absolve him, is to warrant him; that in this case is
absolutely impossible: but to pray for him is to put him into some hopes, and
for that she has in this case no commission. For this is the sin unto death,
of which S. John speaks and gives no encouragement to pray. So that impossible
does signify in sensu forensi a state of sin, which is sentenced by the law to
be capital and damning; but here it signifies the highest degree of that
deadliness and impossibility, as there are degrees of malignity and desperation
in mortal diseases: for of all evils this state here described is the worst.
And therefore here is an impossibility.

But besides all other senses of this word, only relative to the person. It is
impossible to restore him, whose state of evil is contrary to pardon and
restitution, as being a renouncing the Gospel, that is the whole Covenant of
pardon and repentance. Such is that parallel expression used by S. John. 1 John
3.9.
He that is born of God sins not, neither indeed can he; that is, it is
impossible, he cannot sin, for the seed of God remains in him. Now this does
not signify, that a good man cannot possibly sin if he would; that is, it does
not signify a natural, or an absolute impossibility, but such as relates to the
present state and condition of the person, being contrary to sin: the same with
that of S. Paul. Be ye led by the spirit; Gal. 5.17.
for the spirit lusts against the flesh, so that ye cannot do the things
which ye would, viz. which the flesh would fain tempt you to. A good man cannot
sin, that is, very hardly can he be brought to choose or to delight in it, he
cannot sin without a horrible trouble and uneasiness to himself: so on the
other side, such Apostates as the Apostle speaks of, cannot be renewed; that
is, without extreme difficulty, and a perfect contradiction to that state in
which they are for the present lost. But if this man will repent with a
repentance proportioned to that evil which he has committed, that he ought not
to despair of pardon in the Court of Heaven, we have the affirmation of Justin
Martyr. Dial. cont. Tryph.
(...). They that confess and acknowledge him to be Christ, and for whatsoever
cause go from him to the secular conversation (viz. to Heathenism or Judaism
etc.) denying that he is Christ, and not confessing him again before their
death, they can never be saved. So that this impossibility concerns not those
that return and do confess him, but those that wilfully and maliciously reject
this only way of salvation as false and deceitful, and never return to the
confession of it again; which is the greatest sin against the Holy Ghost, of
which I am in the next place to give a more particular account.

. 5.
HE that speaks against the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 12.32.
it shall never be forgiven him in this world, nor in the world to come; so
said our blessed Savior. Origin and the Novatians after him, when the Scholars
of Novatus, to justify their Masters Schism from the Church, had changed the
good old discipline into a new and evil doctrine, said that all the sins of
Christians committed after Baptism, are sins against the Holy Ghost, by whom in
Baptism they have been illuminated, and by him they were taught in the Gospel,
and by him they were consigned in confirmation, and promoted in all the
assistances and Conduct of grace: and they gave this reason for it. Because the
Father is in all Creatures; the Son only in the Reasonable, and the Holy Spirit
in Christians; against which if they prevaricate, they shall not be pardoned,
while the sins of Heathens as being only against the Son are easily pardoned
in baptism. I shall not need to refute this fond opinion, as being already done
by S. Athanasius in a Book purposely written on this subject; and it falls
alone; for that to sin against the Holy Ghost is not proper to Christians,
appears in this, that Christ charged it upon the Pharisees: and that every sin
of Christians is not this sin against the Holy Ghost, appears, because
Christians are perpetually called upon to repent: for to what purpose should
any man be called from his sin, if by returning he shall not escape damnation?
or if he shall, then that sin is not against the Holy Ghost, or if it be, that
sin is not unpardonable; either of which destroys their fond affirmative.

S. Austin makes final impenitence to be it: against which opinion, though many
things may be opposed, yet it is openly confuted in being charged upon the
Pharisees, who were not then guilty of final impenitence. But the instance
clears the article. The Pharisees saw the light of Gods Spirit manifestly
shining in the miracles which Christ did, and they did not only despise his
Person and persecute it, which is speaking against the Son of Man, that is,
sinning against him (for speaking against, is sinning or doing against it, in
the Jews manner of expression) but they also spightfully and maliciously
blasphemed that Spirit, and that power of God, by which they were convinced,
and by which such Miracles were done. Verse. 36.
And this was that (...), that idle and unprofitable word spoken of in the
following verses, by which Christ said they should be judged at the last day;
such which whosoever should speak, he should give account thereof in that day.

Now this was ever esteemed a high and an intolerable Crime; Corah and his
Company died, who did despise and reproach the works of God, his power and the
mightiness of his hand manifested in his servant Moses. It is called sinning
with a high hand, that is, with an hand lift up on high against God. Corah and
his Company committed the sin against the Holy Spirit, for they spoke against
that Spirit and power, which God had put into Moses, and proved by the
demonstration of mighty effects: It is a denying that great argument of
Credibility, by which God goes about to verify any mission of his, to prove by
mighty effects of Gods Spirit, that God has sent such a man. When God
manifests his holy Spirit by signs and wonders extraordinary, not to revere
this good Spirit, not to confess him, but to revile him, or to reproach the
power, is that which God ever did highly punish.

Thus it happened to Pharaoh; Israel, and they were warned of it with the
highest threatening, that is, of a capital punishment [The soul that does ought
presumptuously (or with an high hand) the same reproacheth the Lord, Number. 15.30.
that soul shall be cut off from among his people: and this is translated into
the New Testament, They that do despite to the Spirit of Grace, shall fall
into the hands of the living God. That Is the sin against the Holy Ghost.

Now this sin must in all reason be very much greater under the Gospel then
under the Law. this is to do the worst thing we can, we dishonor God in that
in which he intended most to glorify himself.

Two instances of this we find in the New Testament, Ananias did not revere
the Spirit of God, so mightily appearing in S. Peter and the other Apostles,
and he was smitten and died. Simon Magus took the Spirit of God for a vendible
commodity, for a thing less then money, and fit to serve secular ends; and he
instantly fell into the gall of bitterness, that is, a sad bitter calamity: and
S. Peter knew not whether God would forgive him or no.

But it is remarkable, grieving the holy Spirit, resisting him, quenching him,
doing despite to him: all sin against the Holy Ghost, but yet they that had
done so, were all called to repentance. S. Stephens Sermon was an instance of
it, and so was S. Peter's, and so was the prayer of Christ upon the Cross, for
the malicious Jews, the Pharisees, his betrayers and murderers. But the sin it
self is of an indefinite progression, and has not physical limits and a
certain constitution, as is observable in carnal crimes, Theft, Murder, or
Adultery: for though even these are increased by circumstances, and an inward
consent and degrees of love and adhesion; yet of the crime it self we can say,
this is Murder, and this is Adultery, and therefore the punishment is proper
and certain. But since there are so many degrees of the sin against the Holy
Ghost, and it consists not in an indivisible point, but according to the nature
of internal and spiritual sins, it is like time or numbers, of a moveable
being, of a flux, unstable, immense constitution, and may be always growing,
not only by the repetition of acts, but by its proper essential increment; and
since in the particular case the measures are uncertain, the nature secret, the
definition disputable, and so many sins are like it, or reducible to it, apt to
produce despair in timorous consciences, and to discourage Repentance in lapsed
persons, it will be an intolerable proposition that affirms the sin against the
Holy Ghost to be absolutely unpardonable.

That the sin against the Holy Ghost is pardonable, Pharaoh, who all the way
from the first miracle to the tenth, sinned against the Holy Ghost, but at last
he was so bad, that God would not pardon him. Some men are come to the
greatness of the sin, or to that state and grandeur of impiety, that their
estate is desperate, that is, though the nature of their sins is such as God is
extremely angry with them, and would destroy them utterly, were he not
restrained by an infinite mercy, yet it shall not be thus for ever; for in some
state of circumstances and degrees, God is finally angry with the man, and will
never return to him.

Until things be come to this height, one sin distinguishable in its whole
nature and instance from others, which in every of its periods were
unpardonable, it is most certain it would have been described in Scripture with
clear characters and cautions, that a man might know when he is in and when he
is out. Speaking a word against the Holy Spirit is by our blessed Savior
called this great sin; but it is certain, that every word spoken against him is
not unpardonable. Simon Magus spoke a foul word against him, but S. Peter did
not say it was unpardonable, but when he bid him pray, he consequently bid him
hope; but because he would not warrant him, that is, durst not absolve him, he
sufficiently declared that this sin is of an indefinite nature, and by growth
would arrive at the unpardonable state; the state and fullness of it is
unpardonable, that is, God will to some men, and in some times and stages of
their evil life, be so angry, that he will give them over, and leave them, in
their reprobate mind. But no man knows when that time is, God only knows,
and the event must declare it.

But for the thing it self, pardonable, is very certain, because it may be
pardoned in baptism: The Novatians denied not to baptism a power of pardoning
any sin; and in this sense it is without doubt true what Zosimus by way of
reproach objected to Christian religion, it is (...) a deletery and purgative,
for every sin whatsoever. And since the unconverted Pharisees were guilty of
this sin, and it was a sin forbidden, and punished capitally in the law of
Moses, either to these Christ could not have been preached, and for them Christ
did not die, or else it is certain that the sin against the holy Spirit of God
is pardonable.

Now whereas our B. of it by the parallel words of old Heli to his sons: If a
man sin against another, 1 Samuel 2, 25.
the Judge shall judge him, placari ei potest Deus, so the vulgar latin reads
it, God may be appeased, that is, it shall be forgiven him; that is a word
spoken against the Son of man, which relates to Christ only upon the account of
his humane nature, that may be forgiven him, it shall, that is, upon easier
terms, as upon a temporal judgment, called in this place, a being judged by the
Judge. But if a man sin against the Lord who shall entreat for him? that is, if
he sin with a high hand, presumptuously, against the Lord, against his power,
and his Spirit, who shall entreat for him? it shall never be pardoned; never so
as the other, never upon a temporal judgment: that cannot expiate this great
sin, as it could take off a sin against a man, or the Son of man: for though it
be punished here, it shall be punished hereafter. But

2. It shall not be pardoned in this world, nor in the world to come] that is,
neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles. For Saeculum hoc, this World, in
Scripture is the period of the Jews Synagogue, and (...) the world to come is
taken for the Gospel, or the age of the Messiah frequently among the Jews: and
it is not unlikely Christ might mean it in that sense which was used amongst
them by whom he would be understood: But because the word was also as commonly
used in that sense in which it is understood at this day, viz. for the world
after this life; I shall therefore propound another exposition which seems to
me more probable. Though remission of sins is more plentiful in the Gospel then
under the Law, yet because the sin is bigger under the Gospel, there is not
here any ordinary way of pardoning it, no Ministry established to warrant or
absolve such sinners, but it must be referred to God himself; and yet that is
not all. For if a man perseveres in this sin, he shall neither be forgiven
here, nor hereafter; that is, neither can he be absolved in this world by the
ministry of the Church, nor in the world to come by the sentence of Christ:
and this I take to be the full meaning of this so difficult place.

For in this world properly so speaking, mercy in that day, then is the day of
our pardon from him; In the mean time if he be gracious to us here, he either
forbears to smite us, or smites us to bring us to repentance, and all the way
continues to us the use of the Word and Sacraments; that is, if he does in any
sense pardon us here, if he does not give us over to a reprobate mind, he
continues us under the means of salvation, which is the ministry of the
Church, for that is the way of pardon in this vide infra numb. 66.
World, as the blessed sentence of the right hand is the way of pardon in the
World to come. it shall not be pardoned in this World, nor in the World to
come, he means that neither shall the Ministers of the Church pronounce his
pardon, or comfort his sorrows, or restore him after his fall, or warrant his
condition, or pray for him publicly, or give him the peace and communion of
the Church: neither will God pardon him in the day of Judgment.

But all this fearful denunciation of the Divine judgment is only upon
supposition the man does not repent. said S. Athanasius. Quaest. 71. to. 2.
God did not say to him that blasphemes and repents, it shall not be forgiven,
but to him that blasphemes and remains in his blasphemy: for there is no sin
which God will not pardon to them that holily and worthily repent, S. Chrysostom. in
1 Cor, hom. 8.
(...). To be wounded is not so grievous; but it is intolerable when the
wounded man refuses to be cured. For it is considerable,

Whoever can repent may hope for pardon, begin, much less to finish (...), as
Athanasius calls it, a holy and a worthy repentance, and of such Philo affirmed
(...), in allegor^
Some unhappy souls would fain he admitted to repentance, but God permits them
not, that is, their time is past, and either they die before they can perform
it, or if they live they return to their old impieties like water from a rock.
But whoever can repent worthily, and leave their sin, and mortify it, and make
such amends as is required, these men ought not to despair of pardon: they may
hope for mercy: and if they may hope they must hope, for not to do it, were the
greatest crime of despair. For despair is no sin, but where to hope is a duty.

But if this be all, theft, or adultery, it shall neither be forgiven us in
this world, nor in the world to come, and if we do repent of the sin against
the holy Ghost, it shall not be exacted of us, but shall be pardoned: So that
to say it is unpardonable without repentance, is to say nothing peculiar of
this.

To this I answer, pardonable and unpardonable have no definite signification,
but have a latitude and increment, and a various sense; but seldom signify in
the absolute supreme sense sins of infirmity; such, I mean, which in any sense
can properly be called sins, must in some sense or other be repented of; and
they are unpardonable without repentance, that is, without such a repentance as
does disallow them and contend against them. But these are also pardonable
without repentance, by some degrees of pardon, that is, God pities our sins of
ignorance and winks at them, and upon the only account of his own pity does
bring such persons to better notices of things. And they are pardonable without
repentance, if by repentance we mean an absolute dereliction of them, for we
shall never be able to leave them quite; and therefore either they shall never
be pardoned, or else they are pardoned without such a repentance as signifies
dereliction or entire mastery over them.

2. theft, adultery, murder, are unpardonable without repentance, that is,
without such a repentance as forsakes them actually and entirely, and produces
such acts of grace as are proper for their expiation: but yet even these sins
require not such a repentance as sins against the holy Ghost do: These must
have a greater sorrow, and a greater shame, and a more severe amends, and a
more passionate lasting prayer and a bigger fear, and a more public amends,
and a sharper infliction, and greater excellency of grace then is necessary in
lesser sins. But in this difference of sins it is usual to promise pardon to
the less and not to the greater, when the meaning is, that the smaller sins are
only pardoned upon easier terms: an example of this we have in Clemens
Alexandrinus, Vid. etiam Caesar. Arelat. hom. 42. quaedam ad hanc rem
spectantia.
(...): Sins committed before Baptism are pardoned, but sins after it must be
purged, that is, by a severe repentance; which the others needed not, and yet
without repentance baptism would nothing avail vicious persons. So we say
concerning those sins which we have forgotten, they may be pardoned without
repentance, meaning without a special repentance, but yet not without a
general. Thus we find it in the Imperial Law, that they that had fallen into
heresy or strange superstitions, they were to be pardoned if they did repent:
but if they did relapse, they should not be pardoned; but they mean, L. 4. Cod.
Theod. ne sacrum baptisma iteretur.
venia eadem modo praestari non potest: so Gratian, Valens and Valentinian
expressed it. So that by denying pardon, they only mean that it shall be
harder with such persons, their pardon shall not be so easily obtained, but as
they repeat their sins, so their punishment shall increase, and at last if no
warning will serve, it shall destroy them.

For it is remarkable, Pardonable and Unpardonable signifies no more then
Mortal and Venial in the writings of the Church; of which I have given accounts
in its proper place. But when a sin is declared deadly, or killing, and
damnation threatened to such persons, we are not therefore if we have committed
any such, to lie down under the load, and die; but with the more earnestness
depart from it, lest that which is of a killing, damning nature, prove so to us
in the event. For the sin of Adultery is a damning sin, and Murder is a
killing sin, and the sin against the Holy Ghost is worse; and they are all
Unpardonable, that is, condemning; they are such in their cause, or in
themselves, but if they prove so to us in the event, or effect, it is because
we will not repent. 1 Cor. 11.27.
He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself; that is as high an expression as any; and yet there are several degrees
and kinds of eating and drinking unworthily, and some are more unpardonable
then others; but yet the Corinthians who did eat unworthily, some of them
coming to the holy Supper drunk, and others schismatically, were by S. Paul
admitted to repentance. Some sins are like deadly potions, they kill the man,
unless he speedily take an Antidote, or unless by strength of nature he work
out the poison and overcome it; and others are like a desperate disease, or a
deadly wound, the Iliacal passions, the Physicians give him over, it is a
Miserere mei Deus; of which though men despair, yet some have been cured. Thus
also in the capital and great sins, many of them are such which the Church will
not absolve, or dare not promise cure. Non est in medico semper relevetur ut
aeger;
Interdum docta plus valet art malum.
But then these persons are sent to God, and are bid to hope for favor from
thence, and may find it. But others there are whom the Church will not meddle
withal, and sends them to God, and God will not absolve them, that is, they
shall be pardoned neither by God nor the Church, neither in this world nor in
the world to come. But the reason is not, because their sin is in all its
periods of an unpardonable nature, but because they have persisted in it too
long, and God in the secret Economy of his mercies has shut the everlasting
doors; the olive doors of mercy shall not be opened to them. And this is the
case of too many miserable persons. They who repent timely, and holily, are not
in this number, whatsoever sins they be which they have committed. But this is
the case of them whom God has given over to a reprobate mind, and of them who
sin against Gods holy Spirit, when their sin is grown to its full measure: So
we find it expressed in the Proverbs, Turn ye at my reproof, Pro. 1.23, 26, 28.
I will pour out my Spirit unto you; and then it follows, Because I have called
and ye refused, I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear
comes. But this is not in all the periods of our refusing to hear God calling
by his Spirit; but when the sin of the Amalekites is full, then it is
unpardonable, not in the thing, but to that man, at that time. And besides all
the promises, this is highly verified in the words of our blessed Savior taken
out of the Prophet Isaiah; where it is affirmed, that when people are so
obstinate and wilfully blind, Mat. 12.15.
that God then leaves to give them clearer testimony and a mighty grace, lest
they should hear and see and understand; it follows, and should be converted,
and I should heal them; plainly telling us, that if even then they should
repent, God could not but forgive them; and therefore because he has now no
love left to them by reason of their former obstinacy, yet where ever you can
suppose Repentance, there you may more then suppose a pardon. But if a man
cannot, or will not repent, then it is another consideration: In the mean time,
nothing hinders but that every sin is pardonable to him that repents.

But thus we find that the style of Scripture and the expressions of holy
persons is otherwise in the threatening and the edict, of interpretations, of
dispensations and relaxation in particular cases. And so it is in the present
Article; Impossible, and Unpardonable, and Damnation, and shall be cut off, and
nothing remains but fearful expectation of judgment, are exterminating words
and phrases in the law, but they do not effect all that they there signify,
to any but the impenitent; according to the saying of Mark the Hermit, (...).
No man is ever justified but he that carefully repents, and no man is condemned
but he that despises repentance. (...), said S. Basil. The eye of God, who is
so great a lover of souls, cannot deny the intercessions and letanies of
Repentance.

. 6. The former Doctrines reduced to Practice.
1.

1. and the less of mistake there is in his case, the more of malice is
ingredient, and a greater anger is like to be his portion.

2.

(...) So did the Greeks treat Agamemnon ill, because he used them but too
well. Such persons are like Travelers who in a storm running to a fig tree,
when the storm is over they beat the branches and pluck the fruit, and having
run to an altar for sanctuary, they steal the Chalice from the holy place, and
rob the Temple that secured them. And God does more resent it, that the Lambs
which he feeds at his own table, which are as so many sons and daughters to
him, that daily suck plenty from his two breasts of Mercy and Providence, that
they should in his own house make a mutiny, and put on the fierceness of
wolves, and rise up against their Lord and Shepherd.

3. pati humanum, we do after the manner of men; but when we are recovered, and
then die again, we do facere Diabolicum, we do after the manner of Devils. For
from ignorance to sin, from passion and youthful appetites to sin, from violent
temptations and little strengths, to fall into sin, is no very great change; it
is from a corrupted nature to corrupted manners: But from grace to return to
sin, from knowledge and experience, and delight in goodness and wise notices,
from God and his Christ to return to sin, to foolish actions, and nonsense
principles, is a change great as was the fall of the morning stars when they
descended cheaply and foolishly into darkness; Well therefore may it be pitied
in a child to choose a bright dagger before a warm coat, but when he has been
refreshed by this and smarted by that, if he chooses again, he will choose
better. But men that have tried both states, that have rejoiced for their
deliverance from temptation, men that have given thanks to God for their safety
and innocence, men that have been wearied and ashamed of the follies of sin,
that have weighed both sides and have given wise sentence for God and for
religion, if they shall choose again, and choose amiss, it must be by something
by which Lucifer did in the face of God choose to defy him, and desire to turn
Devil, and be miserable and wicked for ever and ever.

4.

For we must observe carefully that there is a pardon of sins proper to this
life, Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted, and what ye bind on
earth, shall be bound in heaven. Vid. supra. Number. 53.
That is, there are two remissions, One here, the other hereafter; That here is
wrought by the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, by faith and obedience, by
moral instruments and the divine grace; all which are divisible and gradual,
and grow, or diminish, ebb or flow, change or persist, and consequently grow
on to effect, or else fail of the grace of God, that final grace which alone is
effective of that benefit which we here contend for. Here in proper speaking
our pardon is but a disposition toward the great and final pardon; a
possibility and ability to pursue that interest, to contend for that
absolution: and accordingly it is wrought by parts, and is signified and
promoted by every act of grace that puts us in order to heaven, or the state of
final pardon: God gives us one degree of pardon when he forbears to kill us in
the act of sin, when he admits, when he calls, when he smites us into
repentance, when he invites us by mercies and promises, when he abates or
defers his anger, when he sweetly engages us in the ways of holiness, these
are several parts and steps of pardon: For if God were extremely angry with us
as we deserve, nothing of all this would be done unto us: and still Gods
favors increase, and the degrees of pardon multiply, as our endeavors are
prosperous, as we apply our selves to religion and holiness, and make use of
the benefits of the Church, the ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and as
our resolutions pass into acts and habits of virtue. But then in this world we
are to expect no other pardon, but a fluctuating, alterable, uncertain pardon,
as our duty is uncertain. Hereafter it shall be finished, if here we persevere
in the parts and progressions of our repentance: But as yet it is an Embryo, in
a state of conduct and imperfection; here we always pray for it, always hope
it, always labor for it; but we are not fully and finally absolved till the
day of sentence and judgment; until that day we hope and labor. * The
purpose of this discourse is to represent in what state of things our pardon
stands here; and that it is not only conditional, but of it self and a mutable
effect, a disposition toward the great pardon, and therefore if it be not
nursed and maintained by the proper instruments of its progression, it dies
like an abortive conception, and shall not have that immortality whether it was
designed.

(...). For it was not ill said of old; he that remits of his severity and
interrupts his course, does also break it, and then he breaks his hopes, and
dissolves the golden chain which reached up to the foot of the throne of grace.

2. Sodom. It is the advice of Dion Prusaensis: He that goes to cleanse his
soul from lusts like a wild desert from beasts of prey, unless he do it
thoroughly, in a short time will be destroyed by the remaining portions of his
concupiscence: For as a Fever whose violence is abated and the malignity
lessened, and the man returns to temper and reason, to quiet nights, and
cheerful days, if yet there remains any of the unconquered humor, it is apt to
be set on work again by every cold, or little violence of chance, and the same
disease returns with a bigger violence and danger: So it is in the eradication
of our sins; that which remains behind, is of too great power to effect all
the purposes of our death, and to make us to have fought in vain, and lose all
our labors and all our hopes, and the intermedial piety being lost, will
exasperate us the more, and kill us more certainly then our former vices; as
cold water taken to cool the body inflames it more, and makes cold to be the
kindler of a greater fire.

3. Spiritual and the Curates of Souls were not the authors or incouragers of
this looseness of confidence and credulity. To confess and to absolve is all
the method of our modern repentance, even when it is the most severe. Indeed in
the Church of England I cannot so easily blame that proceeding; because there
are so few that use the proper and secret ministry of a spiritual guide, that
it is to be supposed he that does so, has long repented and done some violence
to himself and more to his sins, before he can master himself so much as to
bring himself to submit to that ministry. But there where the practice is
common, and the shame is taken off, and the duty returns at certain festivals,
and is frequently performed, to absolve as soon as the sinner confesses, and
leave him to amend afterward if he please is to give him confidence and
carelessness, but not absolution. Vide Cyprian. lib. 3. ep. 14. and l. 3. ep.
15. and 16. and de lapsis.


4. remember the words of our Lord concerning Mary Magdalen; much is forgiven
her, and she loved much. If thou fear thy sins are not pardoned, pray the
more earnestly, and mortify thy sin with the more severity; and be no more
troubled concerning the event of it, but let thy whole care and applications be
concerning thy duty. I have read of one that was much afflicted with fear
concerning his final state; and not knowing whether he should persevere in
grace, and obtain a glorious pardon at last, cried out, O si scirem, etc. Would
to God I might but know whether I should persevere or no! He was answered, What
would thou do if thou were sure? Would thou be careless, or more curious
of thy duty? If that knowledge would make thee careless, desire it not; but if
it would improve thy diligence, then what thou would do in case thou did
know, do that now thou do not know; and whatever thy notice or persuasion
be, the thing in it self will be more secure and thou shall find it in the
end. But if any man is curious of the event, and would fain know of the event
of his soul, let him reveal the state of his soul to a godly and a prudent
Spiritual Guide; and he, when he has searched diligently, and observed him
curiously, can tell him all that is to be told, and give him all the assurance
that is to be given, and warrant him, as much as himself has received a
warrant to do it. Unless God be pleased to draw the Curtains of his Sanctuary,
and open the secrets of his eternal Counsel, there is no other certainty of an
actual pardon, but what the Church does minister, and what can be prudently
derived from our selves. For to every such curious person, this only is to be
said, Do you believe the promises? That if we confess our sins and forsake
them, if we believe and obey, we shall be pardoned and saved. If so, then
enquire whether or no thou do perform the conditions of thy pardon. How
shall I know? Examine thy self, try thy own spirit, and use the help of a holy
and a wise guide. He will teach thee to know thy self. If after all this, thou
answerest, that thou can not tell whether thy heart be right, and thy duty
acceptable; then sit down and hope the best, and work in as much light and hope
as thou have; but never enquire after the secret of God, when thou do not so
much as know thy self; and how can thou hope to espy the most private
Counsels of Heaven, when thou can not certainly perceive what is in thy own
hand and heart. But if thou can know thy self, you need not enquire any
further. If thy duty be performed, you may be secure of all that is on Gods
part.

5.

6. confute himself, if he can but tell that he is sorrowful for it, and begs
for pardon and hopes for it, and desires to make amends; this man has already
obtained some degrees of pardon: and S. Paul's argument in this case also is a
demonstration; If when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death
of his Son, Romans 5.10.
much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. That is, if God to
enemies gives the first grace, much more will he give the second, if they make
use of the first. For from none to a little is an infinite distance; but from a
little to a great deal is not so much. And therefore since God has given us
means of pardon and the grace of Repentance, we may certainly expect the fruit
of pardon: for it is a greater thing to give repentance to a sinner, then to
give pardon to the penitent. Whoever repents has not committed the great sin,
the Unpardonable. For it is long of the man, not of the sin, that any sin is
unpardonable.

7. Moses law there were expiations appointed not only for error, but for
presumptuous sins.

The PRAYER.
I. OEternal God, gracious and merciful, I adore the immensity and deepest
abyss of thy Mercy and Wisdom, that thou do pity our infirmities, instruct
our ignorances, pass by thousands of our follies, invitest us to repentance,
and do offer pardon, because we are miserable, and because we need it, and
because thou art good, and delightest in showing mercy. Blessed be thy holy
Name, and blessed be that infinite Mercy which issues forth from the fountains
of our Savior, to refresh our weariness, and to water our stony hearts, and to
cleanse our polluted souls. O cause that these thy mercies may not run in vain,
but may redeem my lost soul, and recover thy own inheritance, and sanctify thy
portion, the heart of thy servant and all my faculties.

II. BLessed Jesus, thou becamest a little lower then the Angels, but thou
did make us greater, doing that for us which thou did not do for them.
Thou did not pay for them one drop of blood, nor endure one stripe to recover
the fallen stars, nor give one groan to snatch the accursed spirits from their
fearful prisons; but thou did empty all thy veins for me, and gave thy
heart to redeem me from innumerable sins and an intolerable calamity. O my God,
let all this heap of excellencies and glorious mercies be effective upon thy
servant, and work in me a sorrow for my sins, and a perfect hatred of them, a
watchfulness against temptations, severe and holy resolutions, active and
effective of my duty. O let me never fall from sin to sin, nor persevere in
any, nor love any thing which thou hate; but give me thy holy Spirit to
conduct and rule me for ever, and make me obedient to thy good Spirit, never to
grieve him, never to resist him, never to quench him. Keep me, O Lord, with thy
mighty power from falling into presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion
over me: so shall I be innocent from the great offense. Let me never despair of
thy mercies by reason of my sins, nor neglect my repentance by reason of thy
insinite loving kindness; but let thy goodness bring me and all sinners to
repentance, and thy mercies give us pardon, and thy holy Spirit give us
perseverance, and thy infinite favor bring us to glory, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

CHAP. IX. Of Ecclesiastical Penance, or, The fruits of Repentance.
. 1.
THe fruits of Repentance, Repentance which includes the faith of a Christian,
is but another word to express the same grace, or mercies of the Evangelical
Covenant; it follows, that whatsoever is the duty of a Christian and a means to
possess that grace, is in some sense or other a Repentance, or the fruits of
Gods mercy and our endeavors. And in this sense S. John the Baptist means it,
saying, Bring forth therefore fruits meet for Repentance; that is, since now
the great expectation of the world is to be satisfied, and the Lords Christ
will open the gates of mercy, and give Repentance to the world, see that ye
live accordingly, in the faith and obedience of God through Jesus Christ, That
did in the event of things prove to be the effect of that Sermon.

But although all the parts of holy life are fruits of Repentance, the state of
favor published by the Gospel; yet when Repentance is a particular duty or
virtue, the integral parts of holy life, are also constituent parts of
Repentance; and then by the fruits of Repentance must be meant, the less
necessary, but very useful effects and ministeries of Repentance, which are
significations and exercises of the main duty. And these are sorrow for sins,
commonly called, Contrition, Confession of them, and Satisfactions; by which
ought to be meant, an opposing a contrary act of virtue to the precedent act of
sin, and a punishing of our selves out of sorrow and indignation for our folly.
And this is best done by all those acts of Religion by which God is properly
appeased, and sin is destroyed, that is, by those acts which signify our love
to God, and our hatred to sin, such as are Prayer, and Alms, and forgiving
injuries, and punishing our selves, that is, a forgiving every one but our
selves.

Many of these (I say) are not essential parts of Repentance, direct abstinence
from evil, and doing what is in the Precept. But they are fruits and
significations, exercises and blessed productions of Repentance, useful to
excellent purposes of it, and such from which a man cannot be excused, but by
great accidents and rare contingencies. To visit prisoners, and to redeem
captives, and to instruct the ignorant, are acts of charity; but he that does
not act these special instances, is not always to be condemned for want of
charity, because by other acts of grace he may signify and exercise his duty:
He only that refuses any instances, because the grace is not operative, he
only is the Uncharitable, but to the particulars he can be determined only by
something from without, but it is sufficient to the grace it self that it works
where it can, or where it is prudently chosen. So it is in these fruits of
Repentance. He that out of hatred to sin abstains from it, and out of love to
God endeavors to keep his Commandments, he is a true penitent, though he never
lie upon the ground, or spend whole nights in prayer, or make himself sick with
fasting; but he that in all circumstances refuses any or all of these, and has
not hatred enough against his sin to punish it in himself, when to do so may
accidentally be necessary or enjoined, he has cause to suspect himself not to
be a true penitent.

No one of these is necessary in the special instance,

. 2. Of Contrition or godly Sorrow.
IN all repentances it is necessary that we understand some sorrow ingredient,
appendant, or beginning. To repent is to leave a sin; which because it must
have a cause to effect it, can begin no where but where the sin is for some
reason or other disliked, that is, because it does a mischief. It is enough to
leave it, that we know it will ruin us if we abide in it, but that is not
enough to make us grieve for it when it is past and quitted. For if we believe
that as soon as ever we repent of it, we shall be accepted to pardon, and that
infallibly, and that being once forsaken it does not and shall not prejudice
us, he that considers this, and remembers it was pleasant to him, will scarce
find cause enough to be sorrowful for it. Neither is it enough to say, he must
grieve for it, or else it will do him mischief. For this is not true for how
can sorrow prevent the mischief, when the sorrow of it self is not an essential
duty; or if it were so in it self, yet by accident it becomes not to be so, for
by being unreasonable and impossible, it becomes also not necessary, not a
duty. To be sorrowful is not always in our power, any more then to be merry;
and both of them are the natural products of their own objects and of nothing
else; and then if sin does us pleasure at first and at last no mischief to the
penitent, to bid them be sorrowful lest it should do mischief, is as improper a
remedy as if we were commanded to be hungry to prevent being beaten. He that
felt nothing but the pleasure of sin, and is now told he shall feel none of its
evils, and that it can no more hurt him when it is forsaken, then a Be when
the sting is out, if he be commanded to grieve, may justly return in answer,
that as yet he perceives no cause.

If it be told him, Metaphysical and a Moral evil; but unless it be also
naturally and sensibly so, it is not the object of a natural and proper grief.
It follows therefore that the state of a repenting person must have in it some
more causes of sorrow then are usually taught, or else in vain can they be
called upon to weep and mourn for their sins. Well may they wring their faces
and their hands and put on black, those disguises of passion and curtains of
joy, those ceremonies and shadows of rich widows, and richer heirs, by which
they decently hide their secret smiles: well may they rend their garments, but
upon this account they can never rend their hearts.

For the stating of this article it is considerable, that there are several
parts or periods of sorrow, which are effected by several principles. In the
beginning of our repentance sometimes we feel cause enough to grieve. For God
smites many into repentance; either a sharp sickness does awaken us, or a
calamity upon our house, or the death of our dearest relative; and they that
find sin so heavily incumbent, and to press their persons or fortunes with
feet of lead, will feel cause enough, and need not to be disputed into a
penitential sorrow. They feel Gods anger, and the evil effects of sin, and that
it brings sorrow, and then the sorrow is justly great because we have done that
evil which brings so sad a judgment.

And in the same proportion, natural cause of sorrow, where there is a real
cause of fear; and so it is ever in the beginning of repentance, and for ought
we know it is for ever so, and albeit the causes of fear lessen as the
repentance does proceed, yet it will never go quite off, till hope it self be
gone and passed into charity, or at least into a (...), into that fullness of
confidence which is given to few as the reward of a lasting and conspicuous
holiness. And the reason is plain. For though it be certain in religion, that
whoever repents shall be pardoned, yet it is a long time before any man has
repented worthily; and it is as uncertain in what manner and in what measures,
and in what time God will give us pardon. It is as easy to tell the very day
in which a man first comes to the use of reason as to tell the very time in which
we are accepted to final pardon; The progressions of one being as divisible as
the other, and less discernible. For reason gives many fair indications of it
self, whereas God keeps the secrets of this mercy in his sanctuary, and draws
not the curtain till the day of death or judgment.

Add to this that our very repentances have many allays and imperfections,

And every one that sins has so displeased God, Death is the wages; what death
God please, and therefore what evil soever God will inflict, or his mortality
can suffer: and he that knows this, has cause to fear, and he that fears has
cause to be grieved that he is fallen from that state of divine favor in which
he stood secured with the guards of angels, and covered with heaven it self as
with a shield, in which he was beloved of God and heir of all his glories.

But they that describe repentance in short and obscure characters, Securitas
delicti etiam libido est ejus. Sin takes occasion by the law it self, if there
be no penalty annexed.

But the first inlet of a godly sorrow which is the beginning of repentance is
upon the stock of their present danger and state of evil into which by their
sin they are fallen, viz. when their guilt is manifest, they see that they are
become sons of death, exposed to the wrath of a provoked Deity whose anger will
express it self when and how it please, and for ought the man knows it may be
the greatest, and it may be intolerable: and though his danger is imminent and
certain, yet his pardon is a great way off, it may be Yea, it may be No, it
must be hoped for, but it may be missed, for it is upon conditions, and they
are, or will seem very hard. Sed ut valeas multa a olenda feres: so that in the
sum of affairs, however that the greatest sinner and the smallest penitent,
are very apt, and are taught by strange doctrines to flatter themselves into
confidence and presumption, yet he will have reason to mourn and weep, when he
shall consider that he is in so sad a condition, that because his life is
uncertain, it is also uncertain whether or no he shall not be condemned to an
eternal prison of slames: so that every sinner has the same reason to be
sorrowful, as he has who from a great state of blessings and confidence, is
fallen into great fears and great dangers, and a certain guilt and liableness
of losing all he has, and suffering all that is insufferable. They who state
repentance otherwise, cannot make it reasonable that a penitent should shed a
tear. And therefore it is no wonder, that we so easily observe a great dullness
and indifferency, so many dry eyes and merry hearts, in persons that pretend
repentance, it cannot more reasonably be attributed to any cause, then to those
trifling and easy propositions of men, that destroy the causes of sorrow, by
lessening and taking off the opinion of danger. But now that they are observed
and reproved, I hope the evil will be lessened. But to proceed.

2. Odium then Dolor, it is hatred of sin, and detestation of it, a nolition, a
renouncing and disclaiming it, whose expression is a resolution never to sin,
and a pursuance of that resolution, by abstaining from the occasions, by
praying for the Divine aid, by using the proper remedies for its mortification.
This is essential to repentance, and must be in every man in the highest kind.
For he that does not hate sin so as rather to choose to suffer any evil, then
to do any, loves himself more then he loves God, because he fears to displease
himself rather then to displease him, and therefore is not a true penitent.

But although this be not grief, sorrow properly, but hatred, yet in hatred
there is ever a sorrow, if we have done or suffered what we hate; and whether
it be sorrow or no, is but a speculation of Philosophy, but no ingredient of
duty. It is that which will destroy sin, and bring us to God, and that is the
purpose of repentance.

For it is remarkable that sorrow is indeed an excellent instrument of
repentance, fear reckoned to be the beginning of wisdom, that is, of
repentance, of wise and sober counsels, by Solomon. We find sorrow to be
reckoned as the beginning of repentance by S. Paul; Godly sorrow works
repentance not to be repented of. So many ways as there are, by which God works
repentance in those whom he will bring unto salvation, to all the kinds of
these there are proper apportion'd passions: and as in all good things there is
pleasure, so in all evil there is pain, some way or other: and therefore to
love and hatred, or which is all one, to pleasure and displeasure, all passions
are reducible, as all colors are to black and white. So that though in all
repentances there is not in every person felt that sharpness of sensitive
compunction and sorrow that is usual in sad accidents of the world, yet if the
sorrow be upon the intellectual account, though it be not much perceived by
inward sharpnesses, but chiefly by dereliction and leaving of the sin, it is
that sorrow which is possible, and in our power, and that which is necessary to
repentance.

For in all inquiries concerning penitential sorrow, David grieved more for the
sickness of his child, and the rebellion of his son, so far as appears in the
story: and the Prophet Jeremy in behalf of the Jews, for the death of their
glorious Prince Josiah, and S. Paula Romana at the death of her children, were
more passionate and sensibly afflicted then for their sins against God; that
is, they felt more sensitive trouble in that then this, and yet their
repentances were not to be reproved; because our penitential sorrow is from
another cause, and seated in other faculties, and fixed upon differing objects,
and works in other manners, and has a diverse signification, and is fitted to
other purposes, and therefore is wholly of another nature. It is a displeasure
against sin which must be expressed by praying against it, and fighting against
it; but all other expressions are extrinsecal to it, and accidental, and are no
parts of it, because they cannot be under a command, as all the parts and
necessary actions of repentance are most certainly.

Indeed some persons can command their tears, Gellia in the Epigram, Si quis
adest, jussae prosiliunt lachrymae; she could cry when company was there to
observe her weeping for her Father: and so can some Orators, and many
Hypocrites: and there are some that can suppress their tears by art, and
resolution; so Ulysses did when he saw his wife weep; he pitied her, but Intra
palpebras ceu cornu immota tenebat
Lumina, vel ferrum, lachrymas astuque premebat,
he kept his tears within his eyelids, as if they had been in a phial, which
he could pour forth or keep shut at his pleasure. But although some can do
this at pleasure, yet all cannot. And therefore S. John Climacus speaks of
certain penitents, (...), who because they could not weep, expressed their
Repentance by beating their breasts: and yet if all men could weep when they
list, yet they may weep and not be sorrowful; and though they can command
tears, yet sorrow is no more to be commanded then hunger, and therefore is not
a part or necessary duty of Repentance, when sorrow is taken for a sensitive
trouble.

But yet there is something of this also to be added to our duty. intellectual
apprehensions of differing objects, unless also they find the same effect in
their Repentances, there will be some cause to suspect, that their hatred of
sin, and value of obedience, and its rewards, are not so great as they ought to
be. The Masters of spiritual life give this rule: Sciat se culpabiliter durum,
qui deflet damna temporis vel mortem amici, dolorem vero pro peccatis lachrymis
non ostendit. He that weeps for temporal losses, and does not in the same
manner express his sorrow for his sins, is culpably obdurate: which proposition
though piously intended is not true. For tears are emanations of a sensitive
trouble or motion of the heart, and not properly subject to the understanding;
and therefore a man may innocently weep for the death of his friend, and yet
shed no tears when he has told a lie, and still be in that state of sorrow and
displeasure, that he had rather die himself then choose to tell another lie.
Therefore the rule only has some proportions of probability, in the effect of
several intellectual apprehensions. As he that is apt to weep when he has done
an unhandsome action to his friend, who yet will never punish him; and is not
apt to express his sorrow in the same manner, when he has offended God: I say,
he may suspect his sorrow not to be so great or so real, but yet abstractedly
from this circumstance, to weep or not to weep is nothing to the duty of
Repentance, save only that it is that ordinary sign by which some men express
some sort of sorrow. And therefore I understand not the meaning of that prayer
of S. Austin, Domine da gratiam lachrymarum; Lord give me the grace of tears;
for tears are no duty, and the greatest sorrow oftentimes is the driest; and
excepting that there is some sweetness and ease in shedding tears, and that
they accompany a soft and a contemplative person, an easy and a good nature,
and such as is apt for religious impressions, I know no use of them, but to
signify in an apt and a disposed nature what kind of apprehensions and
trouble there is within. For weeping upon the presence of secular troubles, is
more ready and easy, because it is an effect symbolical, and of the same
nature with its proper cause. But when there is a spiritual cause, although its
proper effect may be greater and more effective of better purposes; yet unless
by the intermixture of some material and natural cause, it be more apportion'd
to a material and natural product, it is not to be charged with it, or expected
from it. Sin is a spiritual evil, and tears is the sign of a natural or
physical sorrow. Smart, and sickness, and labor, are natural or physical
evils; and hatred and nolition is a spiritual or intellectual effect. Now as
every labor and every smart is not to be hated or rejected, but sometimes
chosen by the understanding, when it is mingled with a good that pleases the
understanding, and is eligible upon the accounts of reason: So neither can
every sin which is the intellectual evil, be productive of tears or sensitive
sorrow, unless it be mingled with something which the sense and affections,
that is, which the lower man hates, and which will properly afflict him; such
as are, fear, or pain, or danger, or disgrace, or loss. The sensitive sorrow
therefore which is usually seen in new penitents, is upon the account of those
horrible apprehensions which are declared in holy Scriptures to be the
consequent of sins; but if we shall so preach Repentance, as to warrant a
freedom and a perfect escape instantly from all significations of the wrath of
God, and all dangers for the future upon the past and present account, I know
not upon what reckoning he that truly leaves his sin can be commanded to be
sorrowful, and if he were commanded, how he can possibly obey.

But when Repentance has had its growth and progression, to friend: and the
Prophet David felt it in the matter of Religion; My flesh and my heart rejoice
in the living Lord. For if a grief of mind is a consumption of the flesh, and
a cheerful spirit is a conservatory of health, it is certain that every great
impression that is made upon the mind and dwells there, has its effect upon
the body and the lower affections. And therefore all those excellent penitents
who consider the baseness of sin, * their own danger though now past in some
degrees, * the offense of God, * the secret counsels of his Mercy, * his
various manners of dispensing them, * the fearful judgments which God
unexpectedly sends upon some men, * the dangers of our own confidence, * the
weakness of our Repentance, * the remains of our sin, * the aptnesses and
combustible nature of our Concupiscence, * the presence of temptation, and the
perils of relapsing, * the evil state of things which our former sins leave us
in, * our difficulty in obeying, and our longings to return to Egypt, * and the
fearful anger of God which will with greater fierceness descend if we chance to
fall back: Those penitents (I say) who consider these things frequently and
prudently, will find their whole man so wrought upon, that every faculty shall
have an enmity against sin; and therefore even the affections of the lower man
must in their way contribute to its mortification, and that is by a real and
effective sorrow.

But in this whole affair the whole matter of question will be in the manner of
operation, real distinct faculties, in which those passions are subjected, and
from which they have emanation. The intellectual desire, and the sensual desire
are both founded in the same faculty; they are not distinguished by their
subjects, but by their objects only: they are but several motions of the will
to or from several objects. When a man desires that which is most reasonable,
and perfective, or consonant to the understanding, that we call an
intellectual, or rational appetite; but if he desires a thing that will do him
hurt in his soul, or to his best interest, and yet he desires it because it
pleases him, this is fit to be called a sensitive appetite, because the object
is sensitive, and it is chosen for a sensual reason. But it is rather appetitio
then appeti^us, that is, an act rather then a principle of action. The case is
plainer, if we take two objects of several interests, both of which are
proportioned to the understanding. S. Anthony in the desert, and S. Bernard in
the Pulpit were tempted by the spirit of pride: they resisted and overcame it,
because pride was unreasonable and foolish as to themselves, and displeasing to
God. If they had listened to the whispers of that spirit, it had been upon the
accounts of pleasure, because pride is that deliciousness of spirit which
entertains a vain man, making him to delight in his own images and reflections;
and therefore is a work of the flesh, but yet plainly founded in the
understanding. And therefore here it is plain, that when the flesh and the
spirit fight, it is not a fight between two faculties of the soul, but a
contest in the soul concerning the election of two objects. It is no otherwise
in this then in every deliberation, when arguments from several interests
contest each other. Every passion of the man is nothing else but a proper
manner of being affected with an object, and consequently a tendency to or an
aversion from it, that is, a willing or a nilling of it; which willing and
nilling when they produce several permament impressions upon the mind and body
receive the names of diverse passions: The object it self first striking the
fancy or lower apprehensions by its proper energy, makes the first passion or
tendency to the will, that is, the inclination or first concupiscence; but when
the will upon that impression is set on work, and chooses the sensual object,
that makes the abiding passion, the quality. As if the object be displeasing
and yet not present, it effects fear or hatred; if good and not present, it is
called desire; but all these diversifications are merely natural effects; as to
be warm is before the fire, and cannot be in our choice directly and
immediately. That which is the prime and proper action of the will, that only
is subject to a command; that is, to choose or refuse the sin. The passion,
that is, the proper effect or impress upon the fancy or body, that is, natural,
and is determined to the particular by the mixture of something natural with
the act of the will; as if an apprehension of future evils be mingled with the
refusing sin, that is, if it be the cause of it: then fear is the passion that
is effected by it. If the feeling some evil be the cause of the nolition, then
sorrow is the effect; and fear also may produce sorrow. So that the passion,
that is, the natural impress upon the man cannot be the effect of a
Commandment, but the principle of that passion is, we are commanded to refuse
sin, to eschew evil, that is the word of the Scripture: but because we usually
do feel the evils of sin, and we have reason to fear worse, and sorrow is the
natural effect of such a feeling, and such a fear, therefore the Scripture
calling us to repentance, that is, a new life, a dying unto sin, and a living
unto righteousness, expresses it by sorrow, and mourning, and weeping; but
these are not the duty, but the expressions, or the instruments of that which
is a duty. So that if any man who hates sin and leaves it, cannot yet find the
sharpness of such a sorrow as he feels in other sad accidents, there can
nothing be said to it, but that the duty it self is not clothed with those
circumstances which are apt to produce that passion; it is not an eschewing of
sin upon considerations of a present or a feared trouble, but upon some other
principle; or that the consideration is not deep and pressing, or that the
person is of an unapt disposition to those sensible effects. The Italian and
his wife who by chance espied a Serpent under the shade of their Vines, were
both equal haters of the little beast; but the wife only cried out, and the man
killed it, but with as great a regret and horror at the sight of it as his
wife, though he did not so express it. But when a little after they espied a
Lizard, and she cried again, he told her, That he perceived her trouble was not
always derived from reasonable apprehensions, and that what could spring only
from images of things and fancies of persons, was not considerable by a just
value. This is the case of our sorrowing. Some express it by tears, some by
penances and corporal inflictions, some by more effective and material
mortifications of it: but he that kills it is the greatest enemy. But those
persons who can be sorrowful and violently moved for a trifling interest, and
upon the arrests of fancy, if they find these easy meltings and sensitive
afflictions upon the accounts of their sins, are not to please themselves at
all, unless when they have cried out, they also kill the Serpent.

I cannot therefore at all suspect that man's repentance who hates sin, the
troubles of a mother mourning over the hearse of her only son; but yet such a
sensitive grief is of great use to these purposes.

1. If it do not proceed from the present sense of the Divine judgment, yet it
supplies that, and feels an evil from its own apprehension, which is not yet
felt from the Divine infliction.

2. It prevents Gods anger, by being a punishment of our selves, a condemnation
of the sinner, and a taking vengeance of our selves, for our having offended
God. And therefore it is, consequently to this, agreed on all hands, that the
greater the sorrow is, the less necessity there is of any outward affliction;
Vt possit lachrymis aequare labores. Virg.
According to the old rule of the Penitentiaries. Sitque modus culpae justae
moderatio poenae,
Quae tanto levior quanto contritio major.
Which general measure of repentances as it is of use in the particular of
which I am now discoursing, so it effects this persuasion, that external
mortifications and austerities are not any part of original and essential duty,
but significations of the inward repentance, unto men; and suppletories of it
before God; that when we cannot feel the trouble of mind, we may at least hate
sin upon another account, even upon the superinduced evils upon our bodies; for
all affliction is nothing but sorrow; Gravis animi poena est, quem post factum
poenitet, said Publius. To repent is a grievous punishment; and the old man in
the Comedy calls it so. Cur meam senectam hujus sollicito amentia
Pro hujus egout peccatis supplicium sufferam? Andria.

Why do I grieve my old age for his madness, that I should suffer punishment
for his sins? grieving was his punishment.

3. This sensitive sorrow is very apt to extinguish sin, it being of a
symbolical nature to the design of God, when he strikes a sinner for his
amendment: it makes sin to be uneasy to him; and not only to be displeasing to
his spirit, but to his sense, and consequently that it has no port to enter
any more.

4. It is a great satisfaction to an inquisitive conscience, to whom it is not
sufficient that he does repent, unless he be able to prove it by signs and
proper indications.

The sum is this. Conscia men's ut cuique sua est, ita concipit intra
Pectora pro meritiis, spemque metumque suis.
4. According as is the nature of that evil feared or felt, so is the passion
effected, of hatred, or sorrow. 5. Whatever the passion be it must be totally
exclusive of all affection to sin, and produce enmity and fighting against it
until it be mortified. 6. In the whole progression of this mortification, it is
more then probable that some degrees of sensitive trouble will come in at some
angle or other. 7. Though the duty of penitential sorrow it self be completed
in nolitione peccati, in the hating of sin, and our selves for doing it, yet
the more penal that hate is, the more it ministers to many excellent purposes
of repentance.

But because some persons do not feel this sensitive sorrow, humbly confident
by other images and reflections; by seeing the grace in another shape, so David,
Conoupivi desiderare justificationes tuas, I have desired to desire thy
justifications; that is, either I have prayed for that grace, or I have seen
that I have that desire, not by a direct observation, but by some other
signification. But it is certain, no man can be sorrowful for not being
sorrowful, if he means the same kind and manner of sorrow; as there cannot be
two where there is not one, and there cannot be a reflex ray where there was
not a direct.

But if there be such difficulty in the questions of our own sorrow,

. 3. Of the natures and difference of Attrition and Contrition.
ALL the passions of the irascible faculty are that sorrow in some sense or
other which will produce repentance. pleasure was the product, it was that
which nursed or begot the sin: Now as this pleasure might proceed from hope,
from possession, from sense, from fancy, from desire, and all the passions of
the concupiscible appetite; so when there is a displeasure conceived, it will
help to destroy sin, from what passion soever, of what faculty soever, that
displeasure can be produced.

If the displeasure at sin proceeds from any passion of the irascible faculty,
Attrition, that is, A resolving against sin, the resolution proceeding from any
principle that is troublesome and dolorous: and in what degree of good that is,
appears in the stating of this Question, it is acceptable to God; not an
acceptable repentance, for it is not so much; but it is a good beginning of it,
an acceptable introduction to it, and must in its very nature suppose a sorrow,
or displeasure, in which although according to the quality of the motives of
attrition, or the disposition of the penitent, there is more or less sensitive
trouble respectively, yet in all there must be so much sorrow or displeasure,
as to cause a dereliction of the sin, or a resolution, at least, to leave it.

But there are some natures so ingenuous, concupiscible appetite; such are Love
and Hope; and if these have for their object God, or the Divine promises, it is
that noblest principle of repentance or holy life, which Divines call
Contrition. For hope cannot be without love of that which is hoped for; if
therefore this hope have for its object, temporal purchases, it is or may be a
sufficient cause of leaving sin, according as the power and efficacy of the
hope shall be; but it will not be sufficient toward pardon, unless in its
progression, it join with some better principle of a spiritual grace. Temporal
Hope and temporal Fear may begin Gods work upon our spirits; but till it be
gone farther, we are not in the first step of an actual state of grace. But as
attrition proceeds from the motives of those displeasing objects, which are
threatened by God to be the evil consequents of sin, relating to eternity; so
Contrition proceeds from objects and motives of desire, which are promises and
benefits, received already, or to be received hereafter. But these must also be
more then temporal good things: for hopes and fear relating to things (though
promised or threatened in holy Scripture) are not sufficient incentives of a
holy and acceptable repentance, which because it is not a transient act, but a
state of holiness, cannot be supported by a transitory and deficient cause, but
must wholly rely upon expectation and love of things that are eternal and
cannot pass away. Attrition begins with fear, Contrition has hope and love in
it. The first is a good beginning, but it is no more; before a man can say he
is pardoned, he must be gone beyond the first, and arrived at this. The reason
is plain; because although in the beginnings of Repentance there is a great
fear, yet the causes of this fear wear away and lessen, according as the
repentance goes on, and are quite extinguished, when the penitent has
mortified his sin, and has received the spirit of adoption, the (...), the
confidence of the sons of God; but because repentance must be perfect, and must
be perpetual during this life, it must also be maintained, and supported by
something that is lasting, and will not wear off, and that is hope and love;
Sermon. 7. de tempor.
according to that of S. Austin, Poenitentiam certam non facit nisi odium
peccati and amor Dei. Hatred of sin, and the love of God make repentance firm
and sure; nothing else can do it: but this is a work of time, but such a work
that without it be done, our pardon is not perfect.

Now of this Contrition relying upon motives of pleasure and objects of
amability, product is quite differing from that of attrition, or the imperfect
repentance; for that commencing upon fear or displeasure, is only apt to
produce a dereliction or quitting of our sin, and all the servile affections of
frighted or displeased persons. But this would not effect an universal
obedience; which only can be effected by love and the affection of sons; which
is also the product of those objects, which are the incentives of the divine
love, and is called Contrition; that is, a hatred against sin as being an enemy
to God, and all our hopes of enjoying God, whom because this repenting man
loves and delights in, he also hates whatsoever God hates, and is really
grieved, for ever having offended so good a God, and for having endangered his
hopes of dwelling with him whom he so loves, and therefore now does the quite
contrary.

Now this is not usually the beginning of repentance, obedience. He that is
attrite leaves his sin; but he that is contrite obeys God, and pursues the
interests and acquists of virtue: so that Contrition is not only a sorrow for
having offended God, whom the penitent loves; that is but one act or effect of
Contrition; but Contrition loves God and hates sin, it leaves this, and adheres
to him, abstains from evil and does good; dies to sin, and lives to
righteousness, and is a state of pardon and acceptable services.

But then there is a sorrow also proper to it; Poenitet, o si quid miserorum
creditur ulli,
Poenitet, and facto torqueor ipse meo.
Cumque sit exilium, magis est mihi culpa dolori;
Estque pati poenam quam meruisse minus.
That is, not only the evil effect to himself, but the irregularity and the
displeasure to Almighty God are the incentives of his displeasure against sin;
and because in all these passions and affective motions of the mind, there is
a sorrow under some shape or other, this sorrow or displeasure is that which is
a very acceptable signification, and act of repentance, and yet it is not to be
judged of by sense, but by reason, by the caution and enmity against sin: to
which this also is to be added:

That if any man enquires, Attrition or Contrition? he is only to observe
whether he does endeavor heartily and constantly to please God by obedience;
for this is love that we keep his commandments: and although sometimes we may
tell concerning our love as well as concerning our fear; yet when the direct
principle is not so evident, our only way left to try, is by the event: That
is Contrition which makes us to exterminate and mortify sin, and endeavor to
keep the Commandments of God. For that is sorrow proceeding from love.

And now it is no wonder if to Contrition, Contrition be thus understood, and
if a single act of something like it, be mistaken for the whole state of this
grace, we shall be deceived by applying false promises to a real need, or true
promises to an incompetent and incapable state of things. But when it is thus
meant, all the sorrows that can come from this principle are signs of life. His
lacrymis vitam damus, and miserescimus ultre. No man can deny pardon to such
penitents, nor cease to joy in such tears.

The sum of the present enquiry is this: Contrition is sometimes used for a part
of repentance, sometimes taken for the whole duty. As it is a part, so it is
that displeasure at sin, and hatred of it, which is commonly expressed in
sorrow, but for ever in the leaving of it. It is sometimes begun with fear,
sometimes with shame, and sometimes with kindness, with thankfulness and love;
but Love and Obedience are ever at the latter end of it, though it were not at
the beginning: and till then it is called Attrition. But when it is taken for
the whole duty it self, as it is always when it is effective of pardon, then
the elements of it, or parts of the constitution are fides futuri saeculi and
Judicii, fides in promissis and passionibus Christi, timor Divinae majestatis,
amor misericordiae, dolor pro peccatis, spes veniae petitio pro gratia. Faith
in the promises, and sufferings of Christ, an assent to the Article of the day
of judgment, and the world to come; with all the consequent persuasions and
practices effected on the spirit, fear of the Divine Majesty, love of his
mercy, grief for our sins, begging for grace, hope of pardon, and in this sense
it is true, Cor contritum Deus non despiciet, God will never refuse to accept
of a heart so contrite.

. 4. Of Confession.
THe modern Schoolmen make Contrition to include in it, as Contrition is taken
for a part of Repentance: for it is incomplete till the Church has taken
notice of it, but by submission to the Church Tribunal, it is made complete,
and not only so, but that which was but Attrition, is now turned into
Contrition, or perfect Repentance. In the examining of this, I shall, because
it is reasonable so to do, change their manner of speaking, that the inquiry
may be more material and intelligible. That Contrition does include in it a
resolution to submit to the Church Tribunal, must either mean, that godly
sorrow does in its nature include a desire of Confession to a Priest, and then
the very word confutes the thing; or else by Contrition they meaning so much of
Repentance as is sufficient to pardon, mean also that to submit to the Keys,
or to confess to a Priest is a necessary or integral part of that Repentance,
and therefore of Contrition. Concerning the other part of their affirmative,
that Attrition is by the Keys changed into Contrition; this being turned into
words fit for men to speak, such men (I mean) that would be understood,
signifies plainly this: That the most imperfect Repentance toward God, is
sufficient if it be brought before the Church; that is, a little on the
penitent man's part, and a little on the Priests part, is disposition enough to
the receiving of a pardon: So that, provided you do all that the Church
commands you, you may make the bolder to leave out something of Gods command,
which otherwise you might not do. The Priest may do half the work for you.
These thus represented, I shall consider apart.

1. Contrition is used by David; A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou
shall not despise; that is, a penitent heart God will not reject. The same also
is the usage of Confession by S. John; 1 John 1.9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness; that is, if we repent, God has promised
us pardon and his holy Spirit, that he will justify us, and that he will
sanctify us. And in pursuance of this, the Church called Ecclesiastical
Repentance by the name of Exomologesis, which though it was a Greek word, yet
both Greeks and Latins used it. Exomolegesis est humiliandi hominis
disciplina. So Tertullian. Confession is the discipline of humiliation for a
man for his sins: and S. Ambrose calls Confession poenarum compendium, De Abel
and Cain. l. 2. c. 9.
the sum or abbreviature of penance. And this word was sometimes changed, and
called Satisfaction: which although the Latin Church in the later ages use
only for corporal austerities, which by way of appropriation they are pleased
also to call Penances, yet it was anciently used for the whole course and
offices of Ecclesiastical Repentance; as appears in the Council of Lib. 1. c.
ult.
Paris, of Cap. 37.
Agatho, and the Cap. 11.
third Council of Toledo. The result and effect of this observation is, that no
more be put upon one part or action of Repentance then upon another, to serve
ends. For pardon of sins is promised to the penitent under single words; under
Contrition, under Sorrow, under Alms, under judging our selves, under
Confession; but no one of these alone is sufficient for pardon: and when pardon
is promised to any one, they must mean the whole duty; for when the whole
effect is ascribed to a part, that part stands for the whole, and means more
then a part.

2. Confession as it is a special act of Repentance, the first thing that is to
be said of it, is that it is due only to God; for he is the person injured,
sin is the prevarication of his laws, he is our Judge, and he only can pardon,
as he only can punish eternally. Non tibi dico ut tua peccata tanquam in
pompam in publicum proferas, neque ut te accuses, sed ut pareas Prophetae
dicenti, Psa. 36.5.
Revela Domino viam tuam. Apud Deum ea confitere, apud Judicem confitere
peccata tua, orans si non lingua, saltem memoria, and ita roga ut tui
misereatur. I do not enjoin thee to betray thy self to the public ear,
bringing thy sins as into a Theater, but obey the Prophet, saying, Reveal thy
way unto the Lord. Confess to God, confess to thy Judge; praying if not with
thy tongue, yet at least with thy mind, and pray so that thou may be heard.
So S. Chrysostom. In Ep. ad Heb. hom. 31.
And upon those words of S. Paul, Let a man examine himself, he says, Non
revelavit ulcus, non in commune Theatrum accusationem produxit, etc. He did not
reveal his ulcer, he did not bring his accusation into the common Theater; he
made none witness of his sins, but in his conscience, none standing by, God
only excepted who sees all things. And again, upon that of the Psalm, My sin
is always against me; if thou art ashamed to speak it to any one, say them
daily in thy mind: I do not say that thou confess them to thy fellow servant
who may upbraid thee; say them to God. (...). Let this judicatory be without
assessors or witnesses, let God alone see thy confession. Quod si verecundia
retrahente, revelare ea coram hominibus erubescis, illi quem latere non possunt
confiteri ea jugi supplicatione non desinas, ac dicere, Iniquitatem me am
agnosco etc. qui and absque ullius verecundiae publicatione curare, and sine
improperio peccata donare consuevit. Collat. 20. c. 8.
So Cassian in the imitation of S. Ambrose In Lucae cap. 22. and Sermon. 46.
. If bashfulness call thee back, and thou art ashamed to reveal them before
men, cease not by a continual supplication to confess them to him from whom
they cannot be concealed, who without any pressing upon our modesty is wont to
cure, and without upbraiding to forgive us our sins. And the Fathers of the
Council of Cabaillon advanced this duty by diverse sentences of Scripture; Cap.
33. and habetur de poenit. did. 1. cap. 90.
-- ita duntaxat ut and Deo qui remissor est peccatorum confiteamur peccata
nostra, and cum David dicamus, Delictum meum cognitum tibi feci, and
injustitiam meam non abscondi: Dixi, cenfitebor adversum me injustitias meas
Domino, and tu remisisti impietatem peccati mei etc. God is the pardoner of
sins, and therefore let us confess to him, and say with David, I have made my
sin known unto thee, and mine unrighteousness have I not hid; I said, I will
confess mine iniquity unto Lord, and thou forgavest the wickedness of my sin.
But this thing is pressed most earnestly by Laurentius Novarriensis, who
because he was a Father of the fifth age, his words are of more use, by being a
testimony that the Ecclesiastical repentance which we find to be now pressed
by some as simply necessary, De poenit. homil. 1. Biblioth. pp. tom. 2.
was not the doctrine of those times. " From that day in which thou go out
of the Font, thou becomest to thy self a continual Font, and a daily remission.
There is no (absolute) necessity of the Priests right hand: from thence forward
God has appointed thee to be thy own judge, thy own arbiter, and has given
thee knowledge whereby of thy self thou may discern good and evil; and
because while thou remainest in the body, thou can not be free from sin, God
has after baptism placed thy remedy within thy self; he has placed pardon
within thy own choice, so that thou art not in the day of thy necessity
(indispensably) tied to seek a Priest; but thou thy self as if thou were a most
skilful Doctor and Master, may amend thy error within thee, and wash away
thy sin by repentance. The fountain is never dry, the water is within thee,
absolution is in thy choice, sanctification is in thy diligence, pardon is
within the dew of thine own tears Do not thou therefore look neither for John
nor Jordan, be thou thy own baptist, viz. in the baptism of repentance. Thou
art defiled after thou art washed, thy bowels are defiled, thy soul is
polluted; plunge thy self in the waters of repentance, cleanse thy self by
abundance of tears, let compunction be plentifully in thy bowels,.... and the
Lord himself shall baptize thee with the Holy Ghost and with fire, and shall
heap the fruits of repentance, and lay them up like wheat, but the chaff of thy
sins he shall burn with unquenchable fire. Many testimonies out of Antiquity to
the same purpose are to be seen ready collected by Gratian under the title De
poenitentia.

Now if any one shall inquire to what purpose it is that we should confess our
sins to God who already knows them all, to confess to God, will also make it
appear, not to be necessary to confess to men, in respect, I say, of any
absolute necessity of the thing, or essential obligation of the person.

I answer, that Confession of sins as it is simply taken for enumeration of the
actions and kinds of sin, can signify nothing as to God, for the reasons now
mentioned in the inquiry. But when we are commanded to confess our sins, it is
nothing else but another expression or word for the Commandment of Repentance.
For, Confess your sins, means, acknowledge that you have done amiss, that you
were in the wrong way, that you were a miserable person, wandering out of the
paths of God, and the methods of heaven and happiness, that you ought not to
have done so, that you have sinned against God, and broken his holy laws, and
therefore are liable and exposed to all that wrath of God which he will inflict
upon you, or which he threatened. Confession of sins is a justification of God,
and a sentencing of our selves. This is not only certain in the nature of the
thing it self; but apparent also in the words of David; Psalm. 51.4.
Against thee only have I done this evil; ut tu justificeris, that thou
might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged. That is,
if I be a sinner, then art thou righteous and just in all the evils thou
inflictest. So that Confession of sins is like Confession of faith, nothing but
a signification of our conviction; it is a publication of our dislike of sin,
and a submission to the law of God, and a deprecation of the consequent evils.
Confessio error is, In Ps. 135.
professio est desinendi, said S. Hilary: a confession of our sin, is a
profession that we will leave it; and again, Confessio peccati ea est, ut ia
quod a te gestum est per confessionem peccati confitearis esse peccatum. That
is confession of sins, not that we enumerate the particulars, and tell the
matter of fact to him that remembers them better then we can, but it is a
condemning of the sin it self, an acknowledging that we have done foolishly, a
bringing it forth to be crucified and killed. This is apparent also in the case
of Achan, who was sufficiently convict of the matter of fact by the Divine
disposing of lots, which was one of the ways by which God answered the secret
inquiries of the Jews; but when he was brought forth to punishment, Joshua 7.19.
Joshua said unto him, My son, give I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of
Israel, and make confession unto him; that is, acknowledge the answer of God to
be true, and his judgment upon us not to be causless. Achans reply; Indeed I
have sinned against the Lord God of Israel. There God was justified, and the
glory was given to him, that is, the glory of his Truth and his Justice; but
then Joshua adds, and tell me now what thou have done; hide it not from me.
Here it was fit he should make a particular enumeration of the fact; and so he
did to Joshua saying, Thus and thus have I done. For to confess to man; is
another thing then to confess to God. Men need to be informed, God needs it
not; but God is to be justified and glorified in the sentence and condemnation
of the sin or the sinner: and in order to it, we must confess our sin, that is,
condemn it, confess it to be a sin, and our selves guilty, and standing at
Gods mercy. S. In 1 Corhom. 28.
Chrysostom upon those words of S. Paul, If we would judge our selves, we
should not be judged, has these words, He says not, if we would chastise our
selves, if we would punish our selves, but only, if we would acknowledge our
sins, if we would condemn our selves, if we would give sentence against our
sins, we should be freed from that punishment which is due both here and there.
For he that has condemned himself, appeases God upon a double account; both
because he has acknowledged the sins past, and is more careful for the future.
To this confession of sins is opposed, the denying our sin, our hiding it from
God as Adam did, that is, either by proceeding in it, or by not considering it,
or by excusing it, or by justifying it, or by glorying in it: all these are
high provocations of Gods anger; but this anger is taken off by confession.
Psalm. 95.2.
Praeveniamus faciem eius in confessione, said the Psalmist: Let us come before
his presence with thanksgiving; so we read it; let us prevent his anger, or,
let us go before his face with confession, so the old Latin Bibles: which is a
doing as the Prodigal did, I will go unto my Father, and say unto him, Father
I have sinned against heaven and against thee: and this is the first act of
exterior repentance; but it is of that repentance that is indispensably
necessary to salvation; Acts 20.21.
this is Repentance toward God, which the Apostles preached in the first
publication of Christianity.

But then besides this, Repentance toward men, and a Confession in order to
it. If I have sinned against my brother, I must ask his pardon and confess my
error, that is, I must repent or confess to him; for he that is the injured
person has a right over me; I am his debtor, and obliged; and he can forgive
me if he please, and he may choose: that is, I must pay him the debt I owe him,
unless he will be pleased to remit it. For God in his infinite wisdom and
goodness, and justice has taken care to secure every man's interest; and he
that takes any thing from me, is bound by Gods law to restore it, and to
restore me to that state of good things from whence he forced me. Now because
for the injury which I have already suffered, he cannot make me equal amends,
because what ever he does to me for the future, still it is true that I did
suffer evil from him formerly; therefore it is necessary that I do what I can
to the reparation of that; but because what is done and past cannot be undone,
I must make it up as well as I can; that is, I must confess my sin, and be
sorry for it, and submit to the judgment of the offended party, and he is
bound to forgive me the sin; and I am bound to make just and prudent amends
according to my power; for here every one is bound to do his share. If the
offending person has done his part of duty, the offended must do his, that is,
he must forgive him that wronged him; if he will not, God will untie the
penitent man, and with the same chain fast bind him that is uncharitable.

But my brother may be hurt by me, repent to them also; that is, that we make
amends not only by confession to God, but to our brethren also. For when we
acknowledge our folly, we affright them from it; and by repentance we give them
caution, that they may not descend into the same state of infelicity. And upon
this account all public criminals were tied to a public Exomologesis or
Repentance in the Church, who by confession of their sins, acknowledged their
error, and entered into the state of repentance; and by their being separate
from the participation and communion of the mysteries, were declared unworthy
of a communion with Christ, and a participation of his promises, till by
repentance, and the fruits worthy of it, they were adjudged capable of Gods
pardon.

At the first this was as the nature of the thing exacted it, should be
repaired if she have been injured: if public satisfaction be demanded, it must
be done; if private be required only, then that is sufficient; though in case
of notorious crimes it were very well, if the penitent would make his
repentance as exemplary as Modesty, and his own and the public circumstances
can permit.

In pursuance of this in the Primitive Church, new scandals or new necessities
did arise. For though by the nature of the thing, they only could be
necessarily and essentially obliged who had done public and notorious
offenses; yet some observing the advantages of that way of repentance, the
prayers of the Church, the tears of the Bishop, the compassion of the faithful,
the joy of absolution and reconciliation, did come in voluntarily, and to do
that by choice, which the notorious criminals were to do of necessity.

Then the Priests which the penitents had chosen, did publish or enjoin them to
publish their sins in the face of the Church, but this grew into lerable, and
was left off, because it grew to be a matter of accusation before the criminal
Judge, and of upbraiding in private conversation, and of confidence to them
that sought for occasion and hardness of heart and face, and therefore they
appointed one only Priest to hear the cases, and receive the addresses of the
penitents; and he did publish the sins of them that came, only in general, and
by the publication of their penances, and their separation from the mysteries;
and this also changed into the more private; and by several steps of
progression dwindled away into private repentance toward men, that is,
confession to a Priest in private, and private satisfactions, or amends and
fruits of repentance: and now, Auricular Confession is nothing else but the
public Exomologesis, or Repentance Ecclesiastical reduced to ashes; it is the
relics of that excellent Discipline, which was in some cases necessary (as I
have declared) and in very many cases useful, until by the dissolution of
manners, and the extinction of charity it became unsufferable, and a bigger
scandal then those which it did intend to remedy. The result is this. That to
enumerate our sins before the Holy man that ministers in holy things, that is,
Confession to a Priest is not virtually included in the duty of Contrition; for
it not being necessary by the nature of the thing, nor the Divine Commandment,
is not necessary absolutely, and properly, in order to pardon; and therefore is
no part of Contrition which without this may be a sufficient disposition
toward pardon, unless by accident, as in the case of scandal, the criminal
come to be obliged. Only this one advantage is to be made of their doctrine
who speak otherwise in this article. The Divines in the Council of Trent Sess.
14. c. 4.
affirm, that they that are contrite are reconciled to God before they receive
the Sacrament of penance, (as they use to speak) that is, before Priestly
absolution. If then a man can be contrite before the Priest absolves him, as
their saying supposes, and as it is certain they may, and if the desire of
absolution be as they say included in Contrition, and consequently that nothing
is wanting to obtain pardon to the penitent even before the Priest absolves
him; it follows that the Priests absolution following this perfect disposition,
and this actual pardon, can effect nothing really; the man is pardoned
beforehand, and therefore his absolution is only declarative. God pardons the
man, and the Priest by his office is to tell him so, when he sees cause for it,
and observes the conditions completed. Indeed if absolution by the Minister of
the Church were necessary, then to desire it also would be necessary, and an
act of duty and obedience; but then if the desire (in case it were necessary to
desire it) would make Contrition to be complete and perfect, and if perfect
contrition does actually procure a pardon, then the Priestly absolution is
only a solemn and legal publication of Gods pardon already actually past in
the Court of heaven. For an effect cannot proceed from causes which are not yet
in being; and therefore the pardon of the sins for which the penitent is
contrite, cannot come from the Priests ministration which is not in some cases
to be obtained, but desired only, and afterward when it can be obtained, comes
when the work is done. God it may be accepts the desire, but the Priests
ministry afterward is not, cannot be the cause, why God did accept of that
desire; because the desire is accepted, before the absolution is in being.

But now although this cannot be a necessary duty for the reasons before
reckoned,

For the publication of our sins to the minister of holy things, said Basil,
Regul. brev. 229.
is just like the manifestation of the diseases of our body to the Physician,
for God has appointed them as spiritual Physicians; (...), to heal sinners by
the antidote of repentance, said the Fathers in the first Roman Council under
Simplicius. Their office is to comfort the comfortless, to instruct the
ignorant, to reduce the wanderers, to restore them that are overtaken in a
fault, to reconcile the penitent, to strengthen the weak, and to encourage
their labors, to advise remedies against sins, and to separate the vile from
the precious, to drive scandals far from the Church, and as much as may be to
secure the innocent lambs from the pollutions of the infected. Now in all these
regards, the penitent may have advantages from the Ecclesiastical
ministrations. There are many cases of conscience, which the penitent cannot
determine, many necessities which he does not perceive, many duties which he
omits, many abatements of duty which he ignorantly or presumptuously does make;
much partiality in the determination of his own interests; and to build up a
soul requires so much wisdom, so much severity, so many arts, such caution and
observance such variety of notices, great learning, great prudence, great
piety; that as all Ministers are not worthy of that charge, and secret
employment, and conduct of others in the more mysterious and difficult parts of
Religion; so it is certain, there are not many of the people that can worthily
and sufficiently do it themselves: and therefore although we are not to tell a
lie for a good end, and that it cannot be said that God has by an express law
required it, or that it is necessary in the nature of things; yet to some
persons it has put on so many degrees of charity and prudence, and is so apt
to minister to their superinduced needs; that although to do it, is not a
necessary obedience, yet it is a necessary charity; it is not necessary in
respect of a positive express Commandment, yet it is in order to certain ends
which cannot be so well provided for by any other instrument: it has not in it
an absolute, but it may have a relative and a superinduced necessity.
Coelestique viro, Ovid. lib. 1. Trist. eleg. 3.
quis te deceperit error,
Dicito, pro culpa ne scelus esse putet.
Now here a particular enumeration is the confession that is proper to this
ministry; because the minister must be instructed first in the particulars;
which also points out to us the manner of his assistances, and of our
obligation; it is that we may receive helps by his office and abilities, which
can be better applied, by how much more minute and particular the enumeration
or confession is; and of this circumstance there can be no other consideration:
excepting that the enumeration of shames and follies before a holy man is a
very great restraint to the gayeties of a confident, or of a tempted person:
For though a man dares sin in the presence of God, yet he dares not let his
friend or his enemy see him do a foul act: Tam facile and pronum est superos
contemnere testes,
Si mortalis idem nemo sciat --
and therefore that a reverend man shall see his shame, and with a severe and a
broad eye look and stare upon his dishonor, must needs be a great part of Gods
restraining grace, and of great use to the mortification and prevention of sin.

One thing more there is which is highly considerable in this part or ministry
of repentance; for him who needs, and for him who desires absolution
Ecclesiastical. Some do need, and some do desire it; and it is of advantage
to both. They that need it, and are bound to seek it, are such, who being
publicly noted by the Church, are bound by her Censures and Discipline: that
is, such who because they have given evil example to all, and encouragement in
evil to some, to them that are easy and apt to take; are tied by the
publication of their repentance, their open return, and public amends to
restore the Church so far as they can to that state of good things from whence
their sin did or was apt to draw her. This indeed is necessary, and can in no
regard be excused, if particular persons do not submit themselves to it, unless
the Church her self will not demand it, or advise it; and then if there be an
error, or a possibility to have it otherwise, the Governors of the Church are
only answerable. And in this sense are those decretory sayings, and earnest
advices of the ancient Doctors to be understood. Laicus si peccet, ipse suum
non potest auferre peccatum, sed indiget Sacerdote ut possit remissionem
peccatorum accipere, said Origin. Hom. 10. in Number.
If any of the people sin, himself cannot take away his own sin, but must show
himself to the Priest, that he may obtain pardon. For they who are spotted with
sins, unless they be cured with the Priestly authority, cannot be in the bosom
of the Church, said Fabianus Martyr. And as express are those words of S.
Basil; Regul. fus. explic. and Regul. brev. 228.
(...). And, (...). It behooveth every one that is under authority, to keep no
motion of their hearts secret, but to lay the secrets of their heart naked
before them who are entrusted to take care of them that are weak or sick. That
is, the (...), the public penitents, who are placed in the station of the
mourners, must not do their business imperfectly, but make a perfect narrative
of their whole case to the penitentiary Minister: and such persons who are
under discipline, or under notorious sins, must make their Exomologesis, that
is, do Ecclesiastical repentance before them who are the Trustees and Stewards
of the mysteries of God: Qua sine nullus remissione potietur, said a Father to
S. John de Gradibus: without which Exomologesis, or public Ecclesiastical
confession, or amends, no man shall obtain pardon: meaning, the peace of the
Church. Encbirid. c. 65.
For to this sense we are to understand the doctrine of the holy Fathers, and
we learn it from S. Austin. Recte constituuntur ab iis qui Ecclesiae praesunt
tempora poenitentiae, ut fiat etiam satis Ecclesiae, in qua remittuntur ipsa
peccata. Extra eam quippe non remittuntur. The times of penance are with great
reason appointed by Ecclesiastical Governors, that the Church in whose
communion sins are forgiven, may be satisfied. For out of her, there is no
forgiveness.

For in this case the Church has a power of binding, and sometimes were
forbidden to pray for certain criminals. Thus God gave to the Prophet charge
concerning Ephraim: Jer. 7.16.
Pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them,
neither make intercession for them, for I will not hear thee. Like to this was
that of S. John; There is a sin unto death. I say not that ye pray for him that
sins unto death; that is, do not admit such persons to the communion of
prayers and holy offices; at least the Church may choose whether she will or no.

The Church in her Government and Discipline had two ends, bind sinners; that
is, to deliver them over to Satan, and to sad diseases, or death it self: and
they had power to loose sinners, that is, to cure their diseases, to unloose
Satan's bands, to restore them to Gods favor and pardon.

This manner of speaking was used by our blessed Savior in this very case of
sickness and infirmity: Ought not this woman, a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan
has bound, lo these eighteen years, be loosed from this band on the Sabbath
day? The Apostles had this power of binding and loosing; and that this is the
power of remitting and retaining sins, appears without exception, in the words
of our blessed Savior to the Jews, who best understood the power of forgiving
sins by seeing the evil which sin brought on the guilty person taken away. That
ye may know that the Son of Man has power on earth to forgive sins; He says
to the man sick of the palsy, Arise, take up thy bed and walk. For there is a
power in heaven, and a power on earth to forgive sins. The power that is in
heaven, is the public absolution of a sinner at the day of judgment. The
power on earth to forgive sins, is a taking off those intermedial evils which
are inflicted in the way; sicknesses, temporal death, loss of the Divine grace,
and of the privileges of the faithful; These Christ could take off when he was
upon earth, and his heavenly Father sent him to do all this, to heal all
sicknesses, and to cure all infirmities, and to take away our sins, and to
preach glad tidings to the poor, and comfort to the afflicted, and rest to the
weary and heavy laden, The other judgment is to be performed by Christ at his
second coming.

Now as God the Father sent his Son, Peter sentenced Ananias and Saphira to a
temporal death: and S. Paul stroke Elymas with blindness, and delivered over
the incestuous Corinthian to be beaten by an evil spirit, and so also he did to
Hymenaeus and Alexander.

But this was an extraordinary power, consign a lasting truth and ministry in
ordinary. The preaching of the Gospel, that is, faith it self, at first, was
proved by miracles; and the holy Ghost was given by signs and wonders, and sins
were pardoned by the gifts of healing; and sins were retained by the hands of
an angel, and the very visitation of the sick was blessed with sensible and
strange recoveries; and every thing was accompanied with a miracle, excepting
the two Sacraments, in the administration of which we do not find any mention
of any thing visibly miraculous in the records of holy Scripture; and the
reason is plain, because these two Sacraments were to be for ever the ordinary
ministeries of those graces which at first were consigned by signs and wonders
extraordinary. For in all ages of the Church reckoning exclusively from the
days of the Apostles, all the graces of the Gospel, all the promises of God
were conveyed, or consigned, or fully ministered by these Sacraments, and by
nothing else, but what was in order to them. These were the inlets and doors by
which all the faithful were admitted into the outer Courts of the Lords Temple,
or into the secrets of the Kingdom; and the solemnities themselves were the
keys of these doors; and they that had the power of ministration of them, they
had the power of the keys.

These then being the whole Ecclesiastical power, Thessalonians who were not
furnished with a competent number of Ecclesiastical Governors, were commanded
to abstain from the company of the brethren that walked disorderly. S. John
wrote to the Elect Lady, that she should not entertain in her house false
Apostles: and when the former way did expire of it self, and by the change of
things, and the second advice was not practicable and prudent, they were
reduced to the only ordinary ministry of remitting and retaining sins, by a
direct admitting, or refusing and deferring to admit criminals to their
ministeries of pardon, which were now only left in the Church, as their
ordinary power and ministration. For since in this world all our sins are
pardoned by those ways and instruments which God has constituted in the
Church; and there are no other external rites appointed by Christ but the
Sacraments, it follows, that as they are worthily communicated or justly
denied, so the pardon is or is not ministered.

And therefore when the Church did bind any sinner by the bands of Discipline,
she did remove him from the mysteries, and sometimes enjoined external or
internal acts of repentance, to testify and to exercise the grace, and so to
dispose them to pardon; and when the penitents had given such testimonies which
the Church demanded, then they were absolved, that is, they were admitted to
the mysteries. For in the primitive records of the Church, there was no form of
absolution judicial, nothing but giving them the holy Communion, admitting them
to the peace of the Church, to the society and privileges of the faithful For
this was giving them pardon, by virtue of those words of Christ, Whose sins ye
remit they are remitted; that is, if ye who are the Stewards of my family shall
admit any one to the Kingdom of Christ on earth, they shall be admitted to the
participation of Christ's Kingdom in Heaven; and what ye bind here, shall be
bound there; that is, if they be unworthy to partake of Christ here, they shall
be accounted unworthy to partake of Christ hereafter; if they separate from
Christ's members, they also shall be separate from the head; and this is the
full sense of the power given by Christ to his Church, concerning sins and
sinners, called by S. Paul, the word of reconciliation.

For as for the other later and superinduced Ministry of pardon in judicial
forms of absolution; that is wholly upon other accounts, of good use indeed, to
all them that desire it by reason of their present persuasions and scruples,
fears and jealousies concerning the event of things. For sometimes it happens
what one said of old; Men's nostra difficillime sedatur; Deus facilius. God is
sooner at peace with us, then we are at peace with our own minds; and because
our repentances are always imperfect; and he who repents the most excellently,
and hates his sin with the greatest detestation, may possibly by his sense of
the foulness of his sin, undervalue his repentance, and suspect his sorrow, and
because every thing is too little to deserve pardon, he may think it is too
little to obtain it; and the man may be melancholy, and melancholy is fearful,
and fear is scrupulous, and scruples are not to be satisfied at home, and not
very easily abroad; in the midst of these and many other disadvantages, it will
be necessary that he whose office it is to separate the vile from the precious,
and to judge of leprosy, should be made able to judge of the state of this
man's repentance, and upon notice of particulars, to speak comfort to him or
something for institution. For then if the Minister of holy things shall think
fit to pronounce absolution, that is, to declare that he believes him to be a
true penitent and in the state of grace, it must needs add much comfort to him
and hope of pardon, not only upon the confidence of his wisdom and spiritual
learning, but even from the prayers of the holy man, and the solemnity of his
ministration; To pronounce absolution in this case, is to warrant him so far
as his case is warrantable: That is, to speak comfort to him that is in need:
to give sentence in a case which is laid before him; in which the party
interested, either has no skill, or no confidence, or no comfort. Now in this
case to dispute whether the Priests power be Judicial, or Optative, or
Declarative, is so wholly to no purpose; that this sentence is no part of any
power at all; but it is his office to do it, and is an effect of wisdom, not of
power; it is like the answering of a question, which indeed ought to be asked of
him; as every man prudently is to inquire in every matter of concernment, from
him who is skilled and experienced, and professed in the faculty. But the Priests
proper power of absolving, that is, of pardoning (which is in no case
communicable to any man who is not consecrated to the Ministry) is a giving
the penitent the means of eternal pardon, the admitting him to the sacraments
of the Church, and the peace and communion of the faithful; because that is the
only way really to obtain pardon of God; there being in ordinary no way to
heaven but by serving God in the way which he has commanded us by his Son,
that is, in the way of the Church, which is his body, whereof he is Prince and
Head. The Priest is the Minister of holy things; he does that by his Ministry,
which God effects by real dispensation; and as he gives the Spirit not by
authority and proper efflux, but by assisting and dispensing those rites, and
promoting those graces which are certain dispositions to the receiving of him:
just so he gives pardon; not as a thing does it; nor yet as a Messenger; that
is, not by way of authority and real donation; nor yet only by declaration: but
as a Rhysician gives health; that is, he gives the remedy which God appoints;
and if he does so, and if God blesses the medicines, the person recovers, and
God gives the health.

For it is certain that the holy man who ministers in repentance has no other
proper power of giving pardon then what is now described. he cannot pardon them
who are not truly penitent, and if the sinner be, God will pardon him, whether
The Priest does or no; and what can be the effect of these things, but this;
that the Priest does only minister to the pardon, as he ministers to
repentance? He tells us upon what conditions God does pardon, and judges best
when the conditions are performed, and sets forward those conditions by his
proper ministry, and ministers to us the instruments of grace, but first takes
accounts of our souls, and helps us who are otherwise too partial, to judge
severe, and righteous judgment concerning our eternal interest, and he judges
for us, and does exhort or reprove, admonish or correct, comfort or humble,
loose or bind. So the Minister of God, is the Minister of reconciliation: that
is, he is the Minister of the Gospel; for that is the Word of Reconciliation
which S. Paul affirms to be entrusted to him: in every office by which the holy
man ministers to the Gospel, in every of them he is the Minister of pardon.

But concerning that which we call Absolution, Greek Church they were never
used; and for the Latin Church in Thomas Aquinas his time they were so new
that he put it into one of his Quaestiones disputatae whether form were more
fit, the Optative or the Judicial; whether it were better to say; [God of his
mercy pardon thee] or [ by his authority committed to me, I absolve thee] and
in Peter Lombards days when it was esteemed an innocent doctrine to say that
the Priests power was only declarative, it is likely the form of absolution
would be according to the power believed; which not being then universally
believed to be Judicial, the Judicial form could not be of universal use; and
in the Pontifical there is no Judicial form at all; but only Optative or by way
of prayer. But in this affair, besides what is already mentioned; I have two
great things to say which are a sufficient determination of this whole article.

1. Carthage Can. 76. makes provision for a penitent that is near death;
reconcilietur per manus impositionem, and infundatur ori ejus Eucharistia: let
him be reconciled by the imposition of hands, and let the Eucharist be poured
into his mouth: that was all the solemnity; even when there was the greatest
need of the Churches ministry; that is, before their penances and
satisfactions were completed. The Priest or Bishop laid his hands upon him, and
prayed, and gave him the Communion. For that this was the whole purpose of
imposition of hands, we are taught expressly by S. Austin, Lib. 3. de baptism.
cap. 16.
who being to prove that imposition of hands, viz. in repentance, might be
repeated, though baptism might not; uses this for an argument, Quid enim est
aliud nisi oration super hominem? It is nothing else but a Prayer said over the
man. And indeed this is evident and notorious in matter of fact; for in the
beginning and in the progression, in the several periods of public repentance
and in the consummation of it, the Bishop or the Priest did very often impose
hands, that is, pray over the penitent; Tertio tomo con. Gall. c. 8. and 11.
as appears in Is. Ling. from the authority of the Gallican Councels: Omni
tempore jejuniis manus poenitentibus a Sacerdotibus imponantur: and again,
Criminalia peccata multis jejuniis, and crebris manus sacerdotum
impositionibus, eorumque supplicationibus juxta Canonum statuta placuit
purgari. Criminal, that is, great sins must according to the Canons be purged
with much fasting and frequent impositions of the Priests hands, and their
supplications. In every time or period of their fast, let the Priests hands be
laid upon the penitents: that is, let the Priests frequently pray with him, and
for him, or over him. The same with that which he also observes out of the
Nicene Council; Cap. 16. and 17.
Vultu and capite humiliato humiliter and ex cord veniam postulent, and pro se
or are exposcant: that is the intent of imposition of hands; let the penitent
humbly ask pardon that is, desire that the holy man and all the Church would
pray for him: This in every stage or period of repentance was a degree of
reconciliation: for as God pardons a sinner when he gives him time to repent;
he pardons him in one degree, that is, he has taken off that anger which might
justly and instantly crush him all in pieces, and God pardons him yet more when
he exhorts him to repentance, and yet more when he inclines him, and as he
proceeds, so does God, but the pardon is not full, and final till the repentance
is so too: So does the Minister of repentance and pardon: Those only are in the
unpardoned state who are cut off from all intercourse in holy things, with holy
persons, in holy offices; when they are admitted to do repentance, they are
admitted to the state of pardon; and every time the Bishop, or Minister prays
for him, he still sets him forwarder toward the final pardon; but then the
penitent is fully reconciled on earth, when having done his repentance toward
men, that is, by the commands of the Church, he is admitted to the holy
Communion; and if that be sincerely done on the penitents part, and this be
maturely and prudently done on the Priests part; as the repentance toward men
was a repentance also toward God: so the absolution before men is a certain
indication of absolution before God: But as to the main question; Then the
Church only did reconcile penitents when she admitted them to the Communion;
and therefore in the second Council of Carthage, Can. 4.
absolution is called, reconciliari Divinis altaribus, a being reconciled to
the altar of God: and in the Council of Eliberis, Communione reconciliari, a
being reconciled by receiving the Communion, Can. 72.
opposite to which in the same Canon is, Communionem non accipiat; he may not
receive the Communion, that is, he shall not be absolved. The same is to be
seen in the 8th Canon of the Council of Ancyra, in the second Canon of the
Council of Laodicea, in the 85 epistle of P. Leo; Can. 12.
and the first epistle of P. Vigilius, and in the third Council of Toledo, we
find the whole process of binding and loosing described in these words:
Because we find that in certain Churches of Spain men do not according to the
Canons but unworthily repent them of their sins, that so often as they please
to sin, so often they desire of the Priest to be reconciled: therefore for the
restraining so execrable a presumption; it is commanded by the holy Council
that repentance should be given according to the form of the ancient Canons;
that is, that he who repents him of his doings, being first suspended from the
Communion, he should amongst the other penitents often run to the imposition
of hands, that is, to the Prayers of the Bishop and the Church: but when the
time of his satisfaction is completed, according as the Priests prudence shall
approve, let him restore him to the Communion. That Is the absolution, as the
rejecting him from it was the binding him; It was an excommunication; from
which when he was restored to the Communion, he was loosed: And this was so
known, so universal a practice, and process of Ecclesiastical repentance, that
without any alteration (as to the main inquiry) it continued so in the Church
to very many ages succeeding, and it was for a long while together the custom
of penitent people in the beginning of Lent to come voluntarily to receive
injunctions of discipline and penitential offices from the Priest, and to
abstain from the holy Communion till they had done their penances, and then by
ceremonies and prayers to be restored to the Communion at Easter; without any
other form of Judicial absolution, De diverse. Offic. c. 13. and 16.
as is to be seen in Albinus and in the Roman Pontifical * To which this
consideration may be added; That the reconciling of penitents in the Primitive
Church, was not done by the Bishop or Priest only; but sometimes by Deacons, as
appears in Saint Cyprian; lib. 3. Ep. 17. 2 Cor. 2.10. de Consecra. did. 4
cap. Sanctum.
and sometimes by the people, as it was allowed by S. Paul in the case of the
incestuous Corinthian; and was frequently permitted to the Confessors in the
times of persecution; and may be done by an unbaptized Catechumen, as S. Austin
affirms. The result of which is, that this absolution of penitents in the Court
Christian, was not an act of Priestly power incommunicably; it was not a
dispensation of the proper power of the keys, but to give, or not to give the
Communion; that was an effect of the power of the keys; that was really,
properly, and in effect, the Ecclesiastical absolution; for that which the
Deacons, or Confessors, the Laics or Catechumens did, was all that, and only
that which was of rite or ceremony before the giving the Communion: therefore
that which was besides this giving the Communion was no proper absolution; it
was not a priestly act indispensably; it might be done by them that were no
Priests: but the giving of the Communion, that was a sacerdotal act, I mean the
consecration of it; though the tradition of it, was sometimes by Deacons,
sometimes by themselves at home: This therefore was the dispensation of the
keys; this was the effect of the powers of binding and loosing, of re mitting,
or retaining sins, according as the sense and practice of the Church expounded
her own power. The prayers of the Priest going before his ministration of the
Communion were called absolution; Isaac Lin. tit. 1 c. 16.
that is, the beginning, and one of the first portions of it: absolutio
Sacerdotalium precum; so it was called in ancient Councels; the Priest imposed
hands, and prayed; and then gave the Communion. This was the ordinary way. But
there was an extraordinary.

For in some cases the imposition of hands was omitted; that is, when the
Bishop or Priest was absent; and the Deacon prayed, or the Confessor: but this
was first by the leave of the Bishop or Priest, for to them it belonged in
ordinary. And 2. this was nothing else but a taking them from the station of
the penitents and a placing them amongst the faithful communicants; either by
declaring that their penances were performed, or not to be exacted.

For by this we shall be clear of an objection which might arise from the case
of dying penitents; to whom the Communion was given, and they restored to the
peace of the Church, that is, as they supposed, to Gods mercy and the pardon of
sins; for they would not choose to give the Communion to such persons whom they
did not believe God had pardoned: but these persons though communicated; Can.
78.
non tamen se credant absolutos sine manus impositione si supervixerint, were
not to suppose themselves absolved if they recovered that sickness without
imposition of hands; said the Fathers of the 4th Council of Carthage, by which
it should seem, absolution was a thing distinct from giving the Communion.

To this I answer, Arausican Council. They who having received penance depart
from the body, it pleases that they shall be communicated sine reconciliatoria
manus impositione, without the reconciling imposition of hands; that is,
because the penitential imposition of hands was imposed upon them, and they did
what they could, though the last imposition was not, though the last hand was
not put upon them, declaring that they had done their penances, and completed
their satisfactions, yet they might be communicated, that is, absolved; quod
morientis sufficit consolationi, this is enough to the comfort of the dying man
according to the definition of the Fathers who conveniently enough called such
a Communion their Viaticum, their Passeport or provision for their way. For
there were two solemn impositions of hands in repentance; The first and
greatest was in the first admission of them and in the imposition of the
Disciplne or manner of performing penances: and this was the Bishops office;
and of great consideration amongst the holy Primitives; and was never done but
by the superior Clergy, as is evident in Ecclesiastical story. The second
solemn imposition of hands was immediately before their absolution or Communion;
and it was a holy prayer and publication that he was accepted and had finished
that process: This was the less solemn, and was ordinarily done by the
superior Clergy; but sometimes by others, as I have remonstrated: other
intermedial impositions there were, as appears by the Creber recursus mentioned
in the 3d Council of Toledo above cited; the penitents were often to beg the
Bishops pardon, or the Priests prayers, and the advocations and intercessions
of the faithful; but the peace of the Church, that is, that pardon which she
could minister, and which she had a promise that God would confirm in heaven,
was the Ministry of pardon in the dispensation of the Sacrament of that body
that was broken, and that blood that was powered forth for the remission of our
sins.

The result is; absolution of sins which in the later forms and usages of the
Church is introduced, can be nothing but declarative; the office of the
preacher and the guide of souls; of great use to timorous persons, and to the
greatest penitents, full of comfort, full of usefulness, and institution; and
therefore although this very declaration of pardon may truly and according to
the style of Scripture be called pardon; and the power and office of
pronouncing the penitents pardon is in the sense of the Scripture and the
Church, a good sense and signification of power; as the Pharisees are said to
justify God, when they declare his justice; and as the preacher that converts
a sinner is said (...) to save a soul from death; yet if we would speak
properly, and as things are in their own nature and institution, this
declarative absolution is only an act of preaching, or opening and reading the
Commission; an effect of the Spirit of prudence and government entering upon the
Church; but the power of the keys is another thing; it is the dispensing all
those rites and ministeries by which heaven is opened; and that is, the word
and baptism at the first, and ever after the holy Sacrament of the supper of
the Lord, and all the parts of the Bishops and Priests advocation and
intercession in holy prayers and offices.

But as for the declarative absolution, Hierom said, In 16 Mat.
that as the Priests of the Law could only discern, and neither cause, nor
remove leprosies: so the Ministers of the Gospel when they retain or remit
sins, do but in the one judge how long we continue guilty, and in the other
declare when we are clear and free; yet this very declaration is of great use,
and in many cases of great effect. For as God did in the case of David give to
the Prophet Nathan a particular special and extraordinary commission: so to the
Ministers of the Gospel he gives one that is ordinary and perpetual. He had a
prophetical evidence; but these have a certainty of faith as to one of the
propositions, and as to the other, some parts of humane experience to assure
them 1. of Gods gracious pardon to the penitent, and 2. of the sincerity of
their repentance: and therefore can with great effect minister to the comfort
of sad and afflicted penitents: This does declare the pardon upon observation
of the just grounds and dispositions; but the dispensation of Ecclesiastical
Sacraments does really minister to it, not only by consigning it; but as
instruments of the Divine appointment to convey proper mercies to worthily
disposed persons.

2. the Priest does effect no material event or change in the penitent as to
the giving the pardon, and therefore cannot be it which Christ intended in the
giving those excellent powers of remitting and retaining sins. Now upon this
will the whole issue depend. Does the priest absolve him whom God condemns?
God is the supreme Judge, and though we may minister to his judgment, yet we
cannot contradict it; or can the Priest condemn him whom God absolves? That
also is impossible, He is near that justifies me, who will contend with me?
and if God be with us, who can be against us? Or will not God pardon, unless
the Priest absolves us? That may become a sad story For he may be malicious, or
ignorant, or interested, or covetous, and desirous to serve his own ends upon
the ruin of my soul, and therefore God dispenses his mercies by more regular,
just and equal measures then the accidental sentences of unknowing or imprudent
men: If then the Priest ministers only to repentance, by saying, I absolve
thee, what is it that he effects? For since Gods pardon does not go by his
measures; his must go by Gods measures; and the effect of that will be this,
God works his own work in us; and when his Minister observes the effects of the
divine grace, he can and ought to publish and declare to all the purposes of
comfort and institution that the person is absolved; that is he is in the state
of grace and divine favor, in which if he perseveres he shall be saved. But
all this while the work is supposed to be done before; and if it be, the Priest
has nothing left for him to do, but to approve, to warrant and to publish. And
the case in short is this.

Either the sinner has repented worthily, can by this absolution effect no new
thing. The work is done before the Priestly absolution, and therefore cannot
depend upon it. Against this, no sect of men opposes any thing that I know of,
excepting only the Roman Doctors; who yet confess the argument of value, if
the penitent be contrite. But they add this, that there is an imperfect
Contrition, which by a distinct word they call Attrition, which is a natural
grief, or a grief proceeding wholly from fear or smart, and has in it nothing
of love; and this they say does not justify the man, nor pardon the sin of it
self. But if this man come to the Priest, and confess and be absolved, that
absolution makes this attrition to become contrition, or which is all one, it
pardons the man's sins; and though this imperfect penitent cannot hope for
pardon upon the confidence of that indisposition, yet by the Sacrament of
penance, or Priestly absolution he may hope it, and shall not be deceived.

Indeed if this were true,

. 5. Attrition, or the imperfect repentance, though with absolution, is not
sufficient.
BY Attrition they mean the most imperfect Repentance;

1. attrition. Now such a person who being scared, comes to confess his sin,
may still retain his affections to it; for nothing but love to God can take
away his love from evil, and if there be love in it, it is Contrition, not
Attrition. From these premises it follows, that if the Priest can absolve him
that is attrite, he may pardon him who has affections to sin still remaining;
that is, one who fears hell, but does not love God. If it be said that
absolution changes fear into love, attrition into contrition, a Saul into a
David, a Judas into a John, a Simon Magus into Simon Peter; then the greatest
conversions and miracles of change, may be wrought in an instant by an ordinary
ministry; and when Simon Magus was affrighted by S. Peter about the horror of
his sin, and told that he was in the gall of bitterness, and thereupon desired
the Apostle to pray for him, if S. Peter had but absolved him, which he
certainly might upon that affright he put the Sorcerer in; he had made him a
Saint presently, and needed not to have spoken so uncertainly concerning him;
Pray, if peradventure the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee. For
without peradventure he might have made a quicker dispatch, and a surer work,
by giving him absolution upon his present submission, and the desire of his
prayers, and his visible apparent fear of being in the gall of bitterness, all
which must needs be as much or more then the Roman Schools define Attrition to
be. But,

2.

3. could be proved were something, but there is no tittle of it in Scripture
or Antiquity; it being no where said, that attrition and absolution alone are
sufficient, and is an unreasonable dream but of yesterday.

4. in case of necessity. For unless it be for him in case of necessity
sufficient to desire absolution, then the outward act does more then the
inward, and the ceremony were more then the grace, and the Priest could do
more then God would; for the Priest would and could pardon him, whom God would
not pardon without the Priest; and the will could not be accepted for the deed,
when the deed were impossible to be done; and God would require of us more then
we have, more then he has given us; and a man should live or die not by
himself, but should be judged by the actions of others. All which contain in
them impossible affirmatives, and therefore proceed from a false principle.

5. the Priest his friend: but as for Contrition, by this doctrine, it is more
then needs.

6. Trent) shall not do it without absolution, in act or desire; that is in
act always, Sess. 14. c. 4.
unless it be impossible: This incourages the imperfect, and discourages the
perfect, tying them both to equal laws, whether they need it, or need it not.

7. attrite, can he (I say) refuse to absolve him, can he retain his sins, till
he perceives him to be contrite? certainly in the Primitive Church when they
deferred to give him the peace of the Church for 3, for 7, for 10, for 13 years
together, their purpose then was to work in him contrition, or the most
excellent Repentance. But however, if he can refuse to absolve such a man, then
it is because absolution will not work for him what is defective in him; it
will not change it into contrition, for if it could, then to refuse to absolve
him, were highly uncharitable and unreasonable. But if he cannot refuse to
absolve such a person, it is because he is sufficiently disposed, he has done
all that God requires of him to dispose himself to it; and if so, then the
Sacrament (as they call it) that is, the Priests absolution does nothing to the
increasing his disposition, it is sufficient already. Add to this, if in the
case of attrition the Priest may not deny to absolve the imperfect penitent,
then it is certain God will absolve him, in case the Priest does not; for if
the Priest be bound and refuses to do it, this ought not, it cannot prejudice
the penitent, but himself only. He therefore shall not perish for want of the
Priests absolution; and if it could be otherwise, then the Parishioner might be
damned for the Curates fault, which to affirm were certain blasphemy and
heresy. What the Priest is bound to do, God will do, if the Priest will not.
The result is this. That if this imperfect repentance, which they call
attrition, be a sufficient disposition to absolution, then the Priests
ministry is not operative for the making it sufficient; and indeed it were
strange it should, that absolution should make contrition, and yet contrition
be necessary in order to absolution; that the form should make the matter, that
one essential or integral part should make another; that what is to be before,
must be made by that which comes after. But if this attrition be not a
sufficient disposition to absolution, then the Priest may not absolve such
imperfect penitents. So that the Priest cannot make it sufficient, if of it
self it be insufficient; and if it be of it self sufficient, then his
absolution does but declare it so, it effects it not.

8. I do by the power committed unto me, change thy attrition into contrition.
The answer to this is not yet made; for their pretense is so new, and so wholly
unexamined, that they have not yet considered any thing of it. It will
therefore suffice for our institution in this useful, material and practical
question, that no such words were instituted by Christ, nor any thing like
them; no such were used by the Primitive Church, no such power pretended. And
as this new doctrine of the Roman Church contains in it huge estrangements, and
distances from the spirit of Christianity, is another kind of thing then the
doctrine and practice of the Apostolical and succeeding ages of the Church did
publish or exercise: so it is a perfect destruction to the necessity of holy
life, it is a device only to advance the Priests office, and to depress the
necessity of holy dispositions; it is a trick to make the graces of Gods holy
Spirit to be bought and sold; and that a man may at a price become holy in an
instant, just as if a Teacher of Music should undertake to convey skill to his
Scholar, and sell the art and transmit it in an hour; it is a device to make
dispositions by art and in effect requires little or nothing of duty to God, so
they pay regard to the Priest. But I shall need to oppose no more against it,
but those excellent words, and pious meditation of Salvian. Non levi agendum
est contritione, ut debita illa redimantur quibus mors aeterna debetur, nec
transitoria opus est satisfactione pro malis illis propter quae paratus est
ignis aeternus. It is not a light contrition, by which those debts can be
redeemed to which eternal death is due; neither can a transitory satisfaction
serve for those evils, for which God has prepared the vengeance of eternal
fire.

. 6. Of Penances, or Satisfactions.
IN the Primitive Church, Satisfaction, was the whole word for all the parts
and exercises of repentance; according to those words of Lactantius,
Poenitentiam proposuit, ut si peccata nostra confessi Deo satisfecerimus,
veniam consequamur. He propounded repentance, that if we confessing our sins to
God, make amends or satisfaction, we may obtain pardon. Where it is evident,
that Satisfaction does not signify in the modern sense of the word, a full
payment to the Divine Justice; but by the exercises of repentance a deprecation
of our fault, and a begging pardon. Satisfaction and pardon are not consistent,
if satisfaction signify rigorously. When the whole debt is paid, there is
nothing to be forgiven. The Bishops and Priests in the Primitive Church would
never give pardon till their satisfactions were performed. To confess their
sins, to be sorrowful for them, to express their sorrow, to punish the guilty
person, to do actions contrary to their former sins, this was their amends or
Satisfaction; and this ought to be ours. So we sinde the word used in best
Classick Authors. So Plautus brings in Alomena angry with Amphitruo. -- Quin
ego illum aut deseram
Aut satisfaciat mihi, atque adjuret insuper
Nolle esse dicta, quae in me insontem protulit.
i.e. I will leave him, unless he give me satisfaction, and swear that he
wishes that to be unsaid, which he spoke against my innocence: for that was the
form of giving satisfaction, to wish it undone, or unspoken, and to add an
oath that they believe the person did not deserve that wrong: as we find it in
Terence Adelph: Ego vestra haec novi: nollem factum: jusjurandum dabitur, esse
te indignum injuria hac. Concerning which, who please to see more testimonies
of the true sense and use of the word Satisfactions, may please to look upon
Lambinus in Plauti Amphi^r: and Laevinus Torrentius upon Suetonius in Julio.

Exomologesis, or Confession was the word which (as I noted formerly) was of
most frequent use in the Church. Si de exomologesi retractas, gehennam in cord
considera quam tibi exomologesis extinguet. He that retracts his sins by
confessing and condemning them, extinguishes the flames of hell. De poenit. c.
12.
So Tertullian. The same with that of S. Cyprian, Deo patri, and misericordi
precibus and operibus suis satisfacere possunt. They may satisfy God our Father
and merciful, by prayers and good works: that is, they may by these deprecate
their fault, and obtain mercy and pardon for their sins: Peccatum suum
satisfactione humili and simplici confitentes; De lapsis.
So Cyprian confessing their sins with humble and simple satisfaction: plainly
intimating, that Confession or Exomologesis was the same with that which they
called Satisfaction. And both of them were nothing but the public exercise of
repentance (according to the present usages of their Churches) as appears
evidently in those words of Gennadius; L. de dogm. Eccles.
Poenitentiae satisfactionem esse causas peccatorum exscindere, nec eorum
suggestionibus aditum indulgere. To cut off the causes of sins, and no more to
entertain their whispers and temptations, is the satisfaction of repentance:
and like this is that of Lactantius, Potest reduci and liberari si eum
poeniteat actorum, and ad meliora conversus satisfaciat Deo. The sinner may be
brought back and freed, if he repents of what is done, and satisfies or makes
amends to God by being turned to better courses. And the whole process of this
is well described by Tertullian. De poenit. c. 9.
Exomologesis est qua delictum Demino nostrum confitemur, non quidem ut ignaro,
sed quatenus satisfactio confessione disponitur, confessione poenitentia
nascitur, poenitentia Deus mitigatur: we must confess our sins to God, not as
if he did not know them already, but because our satisfaction is disposed and
ordered by confession; by confession our repentance has birth and production,
and by repentance God is appeased.

Things being thus, Tertul. de poenit.
and to endeavor to obey God in the time to follow; and to take care, ut aliquo
actu administretur poenitentia, that our repentance be exercised with certain
acts proper to it. Of which these are usually reckoned as the principle.

74. Sorrow and mourning. So S. Cyprian. Sermon. de lapsis.
Satisfactionibus and lamentationibus justis peccata redimuntur. Our sins are
redeemed or washed off by the satisfactions of just sorrow or mourning. And
Pacianus gives the same advice, Paraen. ad Poenit.
Behold, I promise that if you return to your Father by a true satisfaction,
wandering no more, adding nothing to your former sins, and saying something
humble and mournful [We have sinned in thy sight, O Father, we are not worthy
of the name of sons] presently the unclean beast shall depart from thee, and
thou shall no longer be fed with the filthy nourishment of husks. And S. Hom.
in die Ciner.
Maximus calls this mourning and weeping for our sins, moestam poenitentiae
satisfactionem, the sorrowful amends or satisfaction of repentance. The meaning
of this is; That when we are grieved for our sins and deplore them, we hate
them, and go from them, and convert to God who only can give us remedy.

75. Corporal afflictions. Such as are, Fastings, watchings, hair-cloth upon
our naked bodies, lyings upon the ground, journeys on foot, doing mean offices,
serving sick and wounded persons, solitariness, silence, voluntary restraints
of liberty, refusing lawful pleasure choosing at certain times the less
pleasing meats, laborious postures in prayer, saying many and devout prayers
with our arms extended, in the fashion of Christ hanging on the Cross, which
indeed is a painful and afflictive posture, but safe and without detriment to
our body: add to these the austerities used by some of the Ancients in their
Ascetick devotions, who sometimes rolled themselves naked upon nettles, or
thorns, shut themselves in tombs, bound themselves to pillars, endured heats
and colds in great extremity, chastisements of the body, and all ways of
subduing it to the empire of the soul. Of which antiquity is infinitely full;
and of which at last they grew so fond and enamoured, that the greatest part of
their Religion was self-affliction; but I choose to propound only such prudent
severities as were apt to signify a godly sorrow, to destroy sin, and to
deprecate Gods anger in such ways of which they had experience or warrant
express, or authentic precedents; their Exomologesis being, De poenit. c. 9.
as Tertullian describes it, a discipline of humbling and throwing a man down,
conversationem in jungens misericordiae illicem, enjoining a life that will
allure to pity: de ipso quoque habitu atque victu mandat, sacco and cineri
incubare, corpus sordibus obscurare. Penitential sorrow expresses it self in
the very clothes and gestures of the body; that is, a great sorrow is apt to
express it self in every thing, and infects every part of a man with its
contact. Vt Alexandrum Regem videmus, Vide Ciceron. Tuscul. 4.
qui cum interemisset Clytum familiarem suum, vix a se abstinuit manus: tanta
vis fuit poenitendi. When Alexander had killed his friend Clytus, he scarce
abstained from killing himself: so great is the effort and violence of
repentance: and this is no other thing then what the Apostle said, If one
member of the body is afflicted, all the rest suffer with it: and if the heart
be troubled, he that is gay in any other part goes about to lessen his trouble,
and that takes off, it does not promote repentance.

76. But the use of this is material; It is a direct judging of our selves, and
a perverting the wrath of God; not that these penances are a payment for the
reserve of the temporal guilt, remaining after the sin is pardoned. That Is but
a dream, for the guilt and the punishment are not to be distinguished in any
material event: so long as a man is liable to punishment, so long he is guilty:
and so long he is unpardoned, as he is obnoxious to the Divine anger. God
cannot, will not punish him that is innocent; and he that is wholly pardoned,
is in the place and state of a guiltless person. Indeed God punishes as he
pleases, and pardons as he pleases, by parts, and as he is appeased, or as he
inclines to mercy; but our general measure is, As our repentance is, so is our
pardon, and every action of repentance does something of help to us, and this
of self-affliction, when it proceeds from a hearty detestation of sin, and
indignation against our selves for having provoked God, is a very good exercise
of repentance; of it self it profits little, but as it is a fruit of
repentance, in the virtue of it it is accepted toward its part of expiation,
and they that have refused this, have felt worse; Et qui non tulerat verbera,
tela tulit. But when God sees us smite our selves in indignation for our sins,
because we have no better way to express and act our repentances, God has
accepted it, and has himself forborne to smite us, and we have reason to
believe he will do so again. For these expressions extinguish the delicacies of
the flesh, from whence our sins have too often had their spring: and when the
offending party accuses himself first, and smites first, and calls for pardon,
there is nothing left to the offended person to do, but to pity and pardon. For
we see that sometimes God smites a sinner with a temporal curse, and brings the
man to repentance, and pardons all the rest; and therefore much rather will he
do it, when we smite our selves. For this is the highest process of
confession. God is pleased that we are ashamed of our sin, that we justify
God, and give sentence against our selves, that we accuse our selves and
acknowledge our selves worthy of his severest wrath: If therefore we go on and
punish the sinner too, it is all, it is the greatest thing we can do: and
although it be not necessary in any one instance to be done, unless where the
authority of our superior does intervene; yet it is accepted in every
instance, if the principle be good, that is, if it proceeds from our
indignation against sin, and if it be not rested in as a thing of it self, and
singly a service of God, which indeed he has no where in particular required;
and lastly, if it be done prudently and temperately. If these cautions be
observed in all things else, it is true that the most laborious repentance, if
other things be answerable, is the best, for it takes off the softness of the
flesh, and the tenderness of the lower man, it abates the love of the world,
and enkindles the love of heaven, it is ever the best token of sincerity and an
humble repentance, and does promote it too, still in better degrees effecting
what it does signify. As music in a banquet of wine, and caresses and
indications of joy and festivity are seasonable and proper expressions at a
solemnity of joy: so are all the sad accents and circumstances, and effects and
instruments of sorrow proper in a day of mourning. All nations weep not in the
same manner, and have not the same interjections of sorrow: but as every one of
us use to mourn in our greatest losses, and in the death of our dearest
relatives, so it is fit we should mourn in the dangers and death of our souls;
that they may being refreshed by such salutary and medicinal showers spring up
to life eternal.

77. In the several ages of the Church they had several methods of these
satisfactions; and they requiring a longer proof of their repentance then we
usually do, did also by consequent enjoin and expect greater and longer
penitential severities: Concerning which these two things are certain.

78. The one is, that they did not believe them simply necessary to the
procuring of pardon from God; which appears in this, that they did absolve
persons in the article of death, though they had not done their satisfactions.
They would absolve none that did not express his repentance some way or other;
but they did absolve them that could do no exterior penances, by which it is
plain that they made a separation of that which was useful and profitable only
from that which is necessary.

79. The other thing which I was to say is this. That though these corporal
severities were not esteemed by them simply necessary, but such which might in
any and in every instance be omitted in ordinary cases, and commuted for others
more fit and useful; yet they chose these austerities as the best signification
of their repentance toward men, such in which there is the greatest likelihood
of sincerity and a hearty sorrow, such which have in them the least objection,
such in which a man has the clearest power and the most frequent opportunity,
such which every man can do, which have in them the least inlet to temptation,
and the least powers to abuse a man; and they are such which do not only
signify, but effect and promote repentance. But yet they are acts of
repentance, just as beating the breasts, or smiting the thigh, or sighing, or
tears, or tearing the hair, or refusing our meat, are acts of sorrow: if God
should command us to be sorrowful, this might be done (when it could be done at
all) though none of these were in the expression and signification. The Jews
did in all great sorrows or trouble of mind rent their garments. As we may be
as much troubled as they, though we do not tear our clothes, so we may be as
true penitents as were the holy Primitives, though we do not use that (...)
that hardship which was then the manner of their penitential solemnities. But
then the repentance must be exercised by some other acts proper to the grace.

80. Prayers. Preces undique and undecunque lucrum, says one. Prayers are
useful upon all occasions; but especially in repentances and afflictive duties
or accidents. Is any man afflicted? let him pray (says S. James) and since
nothing can deserve pardon, all the good works in the world done by Gods enemy,
cannot reconcile him to God; but pardon of sins is as much a gift, as eternal
life is, there is no way more proper to obtainpardon, then a devout, humble,
persevering prayer. And this also is a part of repentance, -- poenaeque genus
vidisse precantem, When we confess our sins, and when we pray for pardon, we
concentre many acts of virtue together. There is the hatred of sin, and the
shame for having committed it; there is the justification of God, and the
humiliation of our selves; there is confession of sins, and hope of pardon,
there is fear and love, sense of our infirmity, and confidence of the Divine
goodness, sorrow for the past, and holy purposes and desires and vows of
living better in time to come. Unless all this be in it, the prayers are not
worthy fruits of a holy repentance. But such prayers are a part of amends, it
is a satisfaction to God in the true and modest sense of the word: So S.
Cyprian affirms: speaking of the three children in the fiery furnace, Domino
satisfacere nec inter ipsa gloriosa virtutum suarum martyria destiterunt. Sermon:
de lapsis.
They did not cease to satisfy the Lord in the very midst of their glorious
martyrdomes. For so says the Scripture. Stans Azarias precatus est, Azarias
standing in the flames did pray, and made his exomologesis, or penitential
confession to God with his two partners. Thus also Tertullian describes the
manner of the Primitive repentance: de paenit. cap. 9.
animum moeroribus dejicere, illa quae peccavit, tristi tractatione mutare,
caeterum pastum and potum pura nosse, non ventris scil: sed animae causa:
plerumque vero jejuniis preces alere, ingemiscere, lachrymari, and mugire dies
noctesque ad Dominum Deum suum: presbyteris advolvi and caris Dei adgeniculari:
omnibus fratribus legationes, deprecationis suae injungere, to have our minds
cast down with sorrow, to change our sins into severity, to take meat and drink
without art, simple and pure, viz. bread and water, not for the bellies sake,
but for the soul; to nourish our prayers most commonly with fasting, to sigh
and cry, and roar to God our Lord day and night; to be prostrate before the
Ministers and Priests, to kneel before all the servants of God, and to desire
all the brethren to pray to God for them. Oportet orare impensius and rogare;
so S. Cyprian, we must pray and beg more earnestly, and as Pacianus adds
according to the words of Tertullian before cited, multorum precibus adjuvare;
we must help our prayers with the assistance of others. Pray to God, said Simon
Peter to Simon Magus, if peradventure the thought of thy heart may be forgiven
thee, Pray for me, said Simon Magus to S. Peter, that the things which thou
have spoken may not happen to me, and in this case, the prayers of the Church,
and of the holy men that minister to the Church as they are of great avail in
themselves, so they were highly valued and earnestly desired and obtained by
the penitents in the first ages of the Church.

81. Alms. Alms and fasting are the wings of prayer and make it pierce the
clouds; That is, humility and charity are the best advantages and
sanctification of our desires to God. Dan. 4.
This was the counsel of Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar; Eleemosynis peccata tua
redime; redeem thy sins by alms, so the vulgar Latin reads it; Not that money
can be the price of a soul, for we are not redeemed with silver and gold, but
that the charity of alms is that which God delights in, and accepts as done to
himself, Pro. 16.6.
and procures his pardon, according to the words of Solomon; In veritate and
misericordia expiatur iniquitas; In truth and mercy iniquity is pardoned: that
is, in the confession and alms of a penitent there is pardon: for water will
quench a flaming fire; Ecclus. 3.30. 1 Pet. 4.8. Tob. 12.9.
and alms makes an atonement for sin; This is that love which, as S. Peter
expresses it, hides a multitude of sins. Alms deliver from death, and shall
purge away every sin. Those that exercise alms and righteousness shall be
filled with life, said old Tobias; which truly explicates the method of this
repentance. To give alms for what is past, and to sin no more, but to work
righteousness, is an excellent state and exercise of repentance; For he that
sins and gives alms, spends his money upon sin not upon God, and like a man in
a Calenture drinks deep of the Vintage even when he bleeds for cure.

82. But this command and the affirmation of this effect of alms we have best
from our blessed Savior. Give alms, Luke 11.41.
and all things are clean unto you: Repentance does (...), it cleanses that
which is within; for to that purpose did our blessed Savior speak that parable
to the Pharisees of cleansing cups and platters. The parallel to it is here in
S. Luke. Vide Rule of Holy Dying, c. 2. Sect. 3. Lact. l. 6.
Alms does also cleanse the inside of a man; for it is an excellent act and
exercise of repentance. Magna est misericordiae merces, cui Deus polliceturse
omnia peccata remissurum. Great is the reward of mercy, to which God has
promised that he will forgive all sins. To this of alms is reduced all actions
of piety, and a zealous kindness, (...) the labor of love, all studious
endearing of others, and obliging them by kindness, a going about seeking to do
good; such which are called in Scripture, opera justitiae the works of
righteousness, that is, such works in which a righteous and good man loves to
be exercised and employed. But there is another instance of mercy besides
alms, which is exceeding proper to the exercise of Repentance, and that is

83. Forgiving injuries. Vt absolvaris ignosce; Pardon thy brother that God may
pardon thee: Forgive, and thou shall be forgiven: so says the Gospel, and this
Christ did press with many words and arguments, because there is a great mercy
and a great effect consequent to it, he put a great emphasis and earnestness of
commandment upon it. And there is in it a great necessity; for we all have need
of pardon, and it is impudence to ask pardon, if we refuse to give pardon to
them that ask it of us: and therefore the Apostles to whom Christ gave so large
powers of forgiving or retaining sinners, were also qualified for such powers
by having given them a deep sense and a lasting sorrow, and a perpetual
repentance for and detestation of their sins; their repentance lasting even
after their sin was dead. Therefore S. Paul calls himself the chiefest or first
of sinners; and in the Epistle of S. Barnabas, the Apostle affirms, (...) that
Jesus chose for his own Apostles men more wicked then any wickedness and by
such humility and apprehensions of their own needs of mercy, they were made
sensible of the needs of others, and fitted to a merciful and prudent
dispensation of pardon.

84. Restitution. This is an act of repentance indispensably necessary;
integral part of it: if it be taken for a restitution of the simple, or
original theft or debt: for it is an abstinence from evil, or a leaving off to
commit a sin: The crime of theft being injurious by a continual efflux and
emanation; and therefore not repented of till the progression of it be stopped.
But then there is a restitution also, which is to be reckoned among'st the
fruits of repentance, or penances and satisfactions. Such as was that of
Zacheus, If I have wronged any man by false accusation, I restore him fourfold.
In the law of Moses thieves convicted by law were tied to it; but if a thief, or
an injurious person did repent before his conviction, and made restitution of
the wrong; he was tied only to the payment of one fifth part above the
principal, by way of amends for the injury; and to do this is an excellent
fruit of repentance, and a part of self-judicature, a judging our selves that
we be not judged of the Lord: and if the injured person be satisfied with the
simple restitution, then this fruit of repentance is to be gathered for the
poor.

85. These are the fruits of repentance, which grow in Paradise and will bring
health to the Nations, for these are a just (...) of sin, they oppose a good
(...) every evil; they make amend^ (...) and to the Church competently, and to
God acceptably, through his mercy in Jesus Christ. These are all we can do in
relation to what is past; some of them are parts of direct obedience, and
consequently of return to God, and the others are parts, and exercises, and
acts of turning from the sin. Now although, so we turn from sin, it matters not
by what instruments so excellent a conversion is effected; yet there must care
be taken that in our return, there be 1 hatred of sin, and 2 love of God, and 3
love of our brother. The first is served by all or any penal duty internal or
external: but sin must be confessed, and it must be left. The second is served
by future obedience, by prayer, and by hope of pardon; and the last by alms and
forgiveness: and we have no liberty or choice but in the exercise of the penal
or punitive part of repentance: but in that every man is left to himself, and
has no necessity upon him, unless where he has first submitted to a spiritual
guide; or is noted publicly by the Church. But if our sorrow be so trifling,
or our sins so slightly hated, or our flesh so tender, or our sensuality so
unmortified, that we will endure nothing of exterior severity to mortify our
sin, or to punish it, to prevent Gods anger, or to allay it; we may chance to
feel the load of our sins in temporal judgments, and have cause to suspect the
sincerity of our repentance, and consequently to fear the eternal. S. Cyptian.
epist. 8. and. ep. 26.
We feel the bitter smart of this rod and scourge [of God] because there is in
us neither care to please him with our good deeds, nor to satisfy him, or make
amends for our evil; that is, we neither live innocently, nor penitently. Let
the delicate, and the effeminate do their penances in scarlet, and Tyrian
purple and fine linen, and faring deliciously every day; but he that
passionately desires pardon, and with sad apprehensions fears the event of his
sins and Gods displeasure, will not refuse to suffer any thing that may procure
a mercy, and endear Gods favor to him; no man is a true penitent, but he that
upon any terms is willing to accept his pardon. I end this with the words of S.
Homil. 50. c. 15.
Austin; It suffices not to change our life from worse to better, unless we
make amends, and do our satisfactions for what is past. That is, no man shall
be pardoned but he that turns from sin, and mortifies it, that confesses it
humbly and forsakes it; that accuses himself and justifies God; that prays for
pardon, and pardons his offending brother; that will rather punish his flesh,
then nurse his sin; that judges himself, that he may be acquitted by God: so
these things be done, let every man choose his own instruments of
mortification, and the instances and indications of his penitential sorrow.

. 7. The former doctrine reduced to practice.
HE that will judge of his repentance by his sorrow, forced into repentance,
they are very apprehensive of their present evils, and consequent dangers, and
past follies; but if they repent more wisely, and upon higher considerations
then the affrights of women and weak persons, they will put on such affections,
as are the proper effects of those apprehensions by which they were moved. But
although this be true in the nature, and secret, and proportioned causes of
things, yet there is no such simplicity and purity of apprehensions in any
person, or any instance whatsoever, but there is something of sense mingled
with every tittle of reason, and the consideration of our selves mingles with
our apprehensions of God; and when Philosophy does something, our interest does
more; and there are so few that leave their sins upon immaterial speculations,
that even of them that pretend to do it, there is oftentimes no other reason
inducing them to believe they do so, then because they do not know the
secrets of their own hearts, and cannot discern their intentions: and therefore
when there is not a material, sensible grief in penitents, there is too often a
just cause of suspecting their repentances; it does not always proceed from an
innocent or a laudable cause, unless the penitent be indisposed in all
accidents to such effects and impresses of passion.

2.

3. it is an unspeakable horror, for a man eternally to be restless in the
vexations of an everlasting fever, and that such a fever is as much short of
the eternal anger of God, as a single sigh is of that fever; that a man cannot
think what eternity is, nor suffer with patience for one minute the pains which
are provided for that eternity; and to apply all this to himself, for ought
every great sinner knows, this shall be in his lot; and if he dies before his
sin is pardoned, he is too sure it shall be so: and whether his sin is pardoned
or no, few men ever know till they be dead; but very many men presume, and they
commonly, who have the least reason. He that often and long considers these
things, will not have cause to complain of too merry a heart: But when men
repent only in feasts, and company, and open house, and carelessness, and
inconsideration, they will have cause to repent that he has not repented.

4. penitential sorrow is rather natural then solemn; that is, it is the
product of our internal apprehensions, rather then outward order and command.
He that repents only by solemnity, at a certain period, by the expectation of
to morrows sun, may indeed act a sorrow, but cannot be sure that he shall then
be sorrowful. Other acts of repentance may be done in their proper period, by
order, and command, upon set days, and indicted solemnities; such as is,
fasting, and prayer, and alms, and confession, and disciplines, and all the
instances of humiliation: but sorrow is not to be reckoned in this account,
unless it dwells there before. When there is a natural abiding sorrow for our
sins, any public day of humiliation can bring it forth, and put it into
activity; but when a sinner is gay and intemperately merry upon Shrove-tuesday,
and resolves to mourn upon Ash Wednesday; his sorrow has in it more of the
Theater, then the Temple, and is not at all to be relied upon by him that
resolves to take severe accounts of himself.

5.

6. to be sorrowful (which is in the Commandment) is something more then an
act of sorrow; it is a permanent effect, and must abide as long as its cause is
in being; not always actual and pungent, but habitual and ready, apt to pass
into its symbolical expressions upon all just occasions, and it must always
have this signification, viz.

7. No man tells it as a merry story that he once broke his leg; or laughs when
he recounts the sad groans and intolerable sharpnesses of the stone. If there
be pleasure in the telling it, there is still remaining too much kindness
toward it, and then the sinner cannot justly pretend that ever he was a hearty
enemy to it: for the great effect of that is to hate it; to leave it, and to
hate it. Indeed when the penitent inquires concerning himself, and looks after
a sign that he may discern whether he be as he thinks he is, really a hater of
sin; the greatest and most infallible mark which we have to judge by, is, the
leasing it utterly. But yet in this thing there is some difference. For,

Some do leave sin, thing they love, but they hate the sin of it. But others
are not so innocent in their leaving of sin; They leave it, because they dare
not do it, or are restrained by some overruling accident; but like the
heifers that drew the Ark, they went lowing after their Calves left in their
stals; so do these, leave their heart behind, and if they still love the sin,
their leaving it, is but an imperfect and unacceptable service, a Sacrifice
without a heart. Therefore sin must be hated too, that is, it must be left out
of hatred to it; and consequently must be used as naturally we do what we do
really hate: that is, do evil to it, and always speak evil of it, and secretly
have no kindness for it.

8.

-- Exigit autem
Interdum ille dolor, plus quam lex ulla dolori
Concessit --
For although no sorrow is greater then our sin, yet some greatness of sorrow
may destroy those powers of serving God, which ought to be preserved to all the
purposes of charity and religion. This caution was not to be omitted, although
very few will have use of it: because if any should be transported into a
pertinacious sorrow, by great considerations of their sin, and that sorrow meet
with an ill temper of body, apt to sorrow and afflictive thoughts, it would
make Religion to be a burden, and all passions turn into sorrow, and the
service of God to consist but of one duty, and would naturally tend to very
evil consequents. For whoever upon the conditions of the Gospel can hope for
pardon, he cannot maintain a too great actual sorrow long upon the stock of his
sins. It will be allayed with hope, and change into new shapes, and be a sorrow
in other faculties then where it first began, and to other purposes then those
to which it did then minister. But if his sorrow be too great, it is because
the man has little or no hope.

9. by lessening the consideration of his sins, nor yet by comparing them with
the greater sins of others; like the grave man in the Satyr, Si nullum in
terris tam detestabile factum Sat. 13.^.

Ostendis, taceo, nec pugnis caedere pectus
Te veto, nec plana faciem contundere palma:
Quandoquidem accepto claudenda est janua damno.
For this is but an instance of the other, this lessens the sin indirectly: but
let it be done by heightning the consideration of the Divine mercy and
clemency; for even yet this will far exceed, and this is highly to be taken
heed of. For besides that there is no need of taking off his opinion from the
greatness of the sin; it is dangerous to teach a man to despise a sin at any
hand. For if after his great sorrow, he can be brought to think his sin little,
he will be the sooner brought to commit it again, and think it none at all: and
when he shall think his sorrow to have been unreasonable, he will not so soon
be brought to an excellent repentance another time. But the Prophets great
comfort may safely be applied, Misericordia Dei praevalitura est super omnem
malitiam hominis; Gods mercy is greater then all the malice of men, and will
prevail over it. But this is to be applied so as to cure only the wounds of a
conscience that ought to be healed, that is, so as to advance the reputation
and glories of the Divine mercy: but at no hand to create confidences in
persons incompetent. If the man be worthy, and capable, and yet tempted to a
prevailing and excessive sorrow; to him, in this case, and so far the
application is to be made. In other cases there is no need, but some danger.

10. rashly, or vainly, or falsely, there ought to be a particular sorrow, and a
special deprecation; but it may be another will intervene, and a third will
steal in upon you, or you are surpised in another instance; or you are angry
with your self for doing so, and that anger transports you to some undecent
expression, and as a wave follows a wave, we shall find instances of folly
crowd in upon us. If we observe strictly we shall prevent some, but we shall
observe too many to press us; If we observe not, they will multiply without
notice and without number. But in either case it will be impossible to attend
to every one of them with a special lasting sorrow: and yet one act of sorrow
is too little for any one chosen sin (as I have proved formerly.) In this case
when we have prayed for pardon of each, confessed it, acknowledged the folly of
it, deprecated the punishment, suffered the shame, and endured the sorrow, and
begged for aids against it, and renewed our force; it will fall into the heap
of the state and generality of repentance; that is, it will be added to the
portentous number of follies, for which in general and indefinite
comprehensions we must beg for pardon humbly and earnestly all the days of our
life. And I have no caution to be added here, but this only: viz. That we be
not too hasty to put it into the general heap, but according to the greatness,
or the danger, or its mischief, or its approach toward a habit, so it is to be
kept in fetters by it self alone. For he that quickly passes it into the
general heap, either cares too little for it, or is too soon surpised by a new
one, which would not so easily have happened, if he had been more severe to the
first.

11. attrition or contrition. For by this we can tell best in what state or
period of pardon we stand. I do not say, we are to enquire what motive began
our sorrow: for fear begins most commonly; but we are to regard what is the
present inducement, what continues the hatred; that is, whither our first fears
have born us? If fear only be the agent, at the best it is still imperfect;
and our pardon a great way off from being finished; and our repentance, or
state of reformation nothing promoted. But of these things I have in the former
doctrine given accounts. To which I only add this, as being an advice or
caution flowing from the former discourses.

12. Mary Magdalon; Much has been forgiven her, because she loved much; but
from a great fear to pass into love is a work of time, the effect of a long
progression in repentance, and is not easy to be done in those straitnesses of
time and grace, which is part of the evil portion of dying sinners. Therefore
besides those many and great considerations which I have before represented;
upon this account alone repentance must not be put off to our deathbed, because
our fear must pass into love, before our sins are taken off by pardon.

-- proponimus illic
Ire, fatigatas ubi Daedalus exuit alas.
We have a great way to go, a huge progression to make, a mighty work to be
done, to which, time is as necessary as labor and observation; and therefore
we must not put it off till what begins in fear cannot pass into love, and
therefore is too likely to end in sorrow; their fears overtake such men; it is
too much to be feared, that what they fear will happen to them.

13. perfect supposes that it was imperfect: but repentance is after sin, of
the same extent of signification, and contains more duties and labor to the
perfection of its parts, then Innocence. Repentance is like the Sun, which
enlightens not only the tops of the Eastern hills, or warms the wall-fruits of
Italy; it makes the little Balsam tree to weep precious tears with staring upon
its beauties; it produces rich spices in Arabia, and warms the cold Hermit in
his grot, and calls the religious man from his dorter in all the partsof the
world where holy religion dwells; at the same time it digests the American gold,
and melts the snows from the Riphaean mountains, because he darts his rays in
every portion of the air, and the smallest atome that dances in the air, is
tied to a little thread of light, which by equal emanations fills all the
capacities of every region: so is repentance; it scatters its beams and holy
influences; it kills the lust of the eyes, and mortifies the pride of life; it
crucifies the desires of the flesh, and brings the understanding to the
obedience of Jesus: the fear of it, bids war against the sin, and the sorrow
breaks the heart of it: the hope that is mingled with contrition, enkindles our
desires to return; and the love that is in it procures our pardon, and the
confidence of that pardon does increase our love, and that love is obedience,
and that obedience is sanctification, and that sanctification supposes the man
to be justified before; and he that is justified must be justified still; and
thus repentance is a holy life. But the little drops of a beginning sorrow, and
the pert resolution to live better, never passing into act and habit; the quick
and rash vows of the newly returning man, and the confusion of face espied in
the convicted sinner, if they proceed no further, are but like the sudden fires
of the night, which glare for a while within a little continent of air big
enough to make a fire-ball, or the revolution of a minutes walk. These when
they are alone, and do not actually, and with effect minister to the wise
counsels and firm progressions of a holy life, are as far from procuring
pardon, as they are from a life of piety and holiness.

. 8.
14. Confession of our sins, let us be most careful to do it so, as may most
glorify God, and advance the reputation of his wisdom, his justice and his
mercy. For if we consider it, in all Judicatories of the world, and in all the
arts and violences of men which have been used to extort confessions, their
purposes have been that justice should be done, that the public wisdom and
authority should not be dishonored; that public criminals should not be
defended or assisted by public pity, or the voice of the people sharpened
against the public rods and axes, by supposing they have smitten the innocent.
Confession of the crime prevents all these evils, and does well serve all these
good ends. Gnossius haec Rhadamanthus habet durissima regna,
Castigatque auditque dolos, subigitque fateri:
so the Heathens did suppose was done in the lower regions. The Judge did
examine and hear their crimes and crafts, and even there compelled them to
confess, that the eternal Justice may be publicly acknowledged; for all the
honor that we can do to the Divine attributes, is publicly to confess them,
and make others so to do; for so God is pleased to receive honor from us.
Therefore repentance being a return to God, a ceasing to dishonor him any
more, and a restoring him (so far as we can) to the honor we deprived him of;
it ought to be done with as much humility and sorrow, with as clear
glorifications of God, and condemnations of our selves as we can. To which
purpose,

15.

16. but it can serve no end; for God already knows all that we can say to
lessen, or to aggravate the sin: if we confess to men, then to name another, or
by any way to signify or reveal him, is a direct defamation; and unless the
naming of the sin do of it self declare the assisting party, it is at no hand
to be done, or to be inquired into: But if a man has committed incest, and
there is but one person in the world with whom he could commit it; in this case
the confessing his sin, does accuse another; but then such a Guide of souls is
to be chosen to whom that person is not known; but if by this or some other
expedient the same of others be not secured, it is best to confess that thing
to God only, and so much of the sin as may aggravate it to an equal height
with its own kind in special, may be communicated to him of whom we ask
comfort, and counsel and institution. If to confess to a Priest were a Divine
Commandment, this caution would have in it some difficulty, and much variety;
but since the practice is recommended to us wholly upon the stock of prudence,
and great charity; the doing it, ought not in any sense to be uncharitable to
others.

17. confess to him; and he that has sinned against the Church, must make
amends and confess to the Church, when she declares her self to be offended.
For when a fact is done which cannot naturally be undone, the only duty that
can remain is to rescind it morally, and make it not to be any longer or any
more. For as our conversation is a continual creation, so is the perpetuating
of a sin a continuation of its being and actings, and therefore to cease from
it, is the death of the sin for the present and for the future; but to confess
it, to hate it, to wish it had never been done, is all the possibility that is
left to annihilate the act which naturally can never be undone; and therefore
to all persons that are injured, to confess the sin, must needs be a duty,
because it is the first part of amends, and sometimes all that is left; but it
is that which God and man requires, before they are willing to pardon the
offender. For until the erring man confesses, it does not appear who is
innocent, and who is guilty, or whether the offended person have any thing to
forgive. And this is the meaning of these preceptive words of S. James, Jam.
5.16.
Confess your sins one to another; that is, to the Church who are scandalized,
and who can forgive and pray for the repenting sinner; and confess to him that
is injured, that you may do him right, that so you may cease to do wrong, that
you may make your way for pardon, and offer amends. This only, and all of this
is the meaning of the precept. (...), say the Greek Commentaries upon Acts
19.18. Every faithful man must declare or confess his sins, and must stand in
separation that he may be reproved, and that he may promise he will not do the
same again, according to that which is said, Do thou first declare thy sins,
that thou may be justified; and again, A just man in the beginning of his
speech is an accuser of himself. No man is a true penitent, if he refuses or
neglects to confess his sins to God in all cases, or to his brother if he have
injured him, or to the Church if she be offended, or where she requires it; for
wheresoever a man is bound to repent, there he is bound to Confession; which is
an acknowledgement of the injury, and the first instance and publication of
repentance. In other cases, Confession may be of great advantage; in these it
is a duty.

18. Let no man think it a shame to confess his sin; or if he does, yet let not
that shame deter him from it. There is indeed a shame in confession, because
nakedness is discovered; but there is also a glory in it, because there is a
cure too: there is repentance and amendment. This advice is like that which is
given to persons giving their lives in a good cause, requiring them not to be
afraid; that is, not to suffer such a fear, as to be hindered from dying. For if
they suffer a great natural fear, and yet in despite of that fear die
constantly and patiently, that fear as it increases their suffering, may also
accidentally increase their glory, provided that the fear be not criminal in
its cause, nor effective of any unworthy comportment. So is the shame in
confession; a great mortification of the man, and highly punitive of the sin;
and such that unless it hinders the duty, is not to be directly reproved: but
it must be taken care of that it be a shame only for the sin, which by how
much greater it is, by so much the more earnestly the man ought to fly to all
the means of remedy and instruments of expiation: and then the greater the
shame is which the sinner suffers, the more excellent is the repentance which
suffers so much for the extinction of his sin. But at no hand let the shame
affright the duty; but let it be remembered, that this confession is but the
memory of the shame, which began when the sin was acted, and abode but as a
handmaid of the guilt and goes away with it: Confession of sins opens them to
man, but draws a vail before them, that God will the less behold them. And it
is a material consideration, that if a man be impatient of the shame here, when
it is revealed but to one man, who is also by all the ties of Religion and by
common Honesty obliged to conceal them; or if he account it intolerable that a
sin public in the scandal and the infamy, should be made public by solemnity
to punish and to extinguish it, the man will be no gainer by refusing to
confess, when he shall remember that sins unconfessed are most commonly
unpardoned; and unpardoned sins will be made public before all Angels, and all
the wise and good men of the world, when their shame shall have nothing to make
it tolerable.

19. let nothing be offered to lessen the hatred, or the greatness of the sin;
lest a temptation to sin hereafter, be sowed in the furrows of the present
Repentance.

20.

But secondly, their sorrow is not holy, but very great, and they know not what
to do, because they will not ask. I have observed some such; and the only
remedy that was fit to be prescribed to such persons, was to reveal their sin
to a spiritual man, and by him to be put into such a state of remedy and
comfort as is proper for their condition. It is certain that many persons have
perished for want of counsel and comfort, which were ready for them if they
would have confessed their sin; for he that concealeth his sin, non dirigetur,
says Solomon, he shall not be counseled or directed.

And it is a very great fault amongst a very great part of Christians, Is it
lawful? Is it necessary? If they find it lawful, they will do it without
scruple or restraint; and then they suffer imperfection, or receive the reward
of folly. For it may be lawful, and yet not fit to be done. It may be it is not
expedient. And he that will do all that he can do lawfully, would, if he
durst, do something that is not lawful. And as great an error is on the other
hand in the other question. He that too strictly inquires of an action whether
it be necessary or no, would do well to ask also whether it be good? whether it
be of advantage to the interest of his soul? For if a Christian man or woman;
that is, a redeemed, blessed, obliged person, a great beneficiary, endeared to
God beyond all the comprehensions of a man's imagination, one that is less then
the least of all Gods mercies, and yet has received many great ones and hopes
for more, if he should do nothing but what is necessary, that is, nothing but
what he is compelled to; then he has the obligations of a son, and the
affections of a slave, which is the greatest undecency of the world in the
accounts of Christianity. If a Christian will do no more then what is
necessary, he will quickly be tempted to omit something of that also. And it is
highly considerable that in the matter of souls, Necessity is a divisible word,
and that which in disputation is not necessary, may be necessary in practice:
it may be but charity to one and duty to another, that is, when it is not a
necessary duty, it may be a necessary charity. And therefore it were much the
better if every man without further inquiry would in the accounts of his soul
consult a spiritual Guide, and whether it be necessary or no, yet let him do
it because it is good; and even they who will not for Gods sake do that which
is simply the best, yet for their own sakes they will, or ought to do that
which is profitable, and of great advantage. Let men do that which is best to
themselves; for it is all one to God, save only that he is pleased to take
such instances of duty and forwardness of obedience, as the best significations
of the best love. And of this nature is Confession of sins to a Minister of
Religion, it is one of the most charitable works in the world to our selves;
and in this sense we may use the words of David, If thou do well unto thy
self, men [and God] will speak good of thee, and do good to thee. He that will
do every thing that is lawful, and nothing but what is necessary, will be an
enemy when he dares, and a friend when he cannot help it.

But if the penitent person has been an habitual sinner, by numbers, but by
general significations of the time, and particular significations of the
earnestness of his choice. For this transaction being wholly in order to the
benefit and conduct of his soul, the good man that ministers must have as
perfect moral accounts as he can, but he is not to be reckoned withal by
natural numbers and measures, save only so far as they may declare the violence
of defires, and the pleasures and choice of the sin. The purpose of this advice
is this; that since the transaction of this affair is for counsel and comfort,
in order to pardon, and the perfections of repentance, there should be no
scruple in the particular circumstances of; but that it be done heartily and
wisely; that is, so as may best serve the ends to which it is designed; and
that no man do it in despite of himself, or against his will for the thing it
self is not a direct service of God immediately enjoined, but is a service to
our selves to enable us to do our duty to God, and to receive a more ready and
easy and certain pardon from him. They indeed who pretend it as a necessary
duty, have by affixing rules and measures to it of their own made that which
they call necessary, to be intolerable and impossible. Indeed it is certain
that when God has appointed a duty, he also will describe the measures, or
else leave us to the conduct of our own choice and reason in it. But where God
has not described the measures, we are to do that which is most agreeable to
the analogy of the commandment, or the principal duty, in case it be under a
command: but if it be not, then we are only to choose the particulars so as
may best minister to the end which is designed in the whole ministration.

21. Corinthians in the time of their lapsed discipline, that though there were
divisions amongst them, and no established Governors, yet from this duty they
were not to be excused, and they must in destitution of a public Minister do
it themselves (but this is in case only of such necessity) the other is
better; that is, it is of better order, and more advantage that this part of
Repentance and holy preparation be performed under the conduct of a Spiritual
Guide. And the reason is pressing. For since it is life or death that is there
administered, and the great dispensation of the keys is in that Ministry, it
were very well if he that ministers did know whether the person presented were
fit to communicate or no; and if he be not, it is charity to reject him, and
charity to assist him that he may be fitted. There are many sad contingencies
in the constitution of Ecclesiastical affairs, in which every man that needs
this help, and would fain make use of it, cannot; but when he can meet with the
blessing, it were well it were more frequently used, and more readily
entertained. I end these advices, with the words of Origin: In Psa. 36. hom. 1.
Extra veniam est qui peccatum cognovit, nec cognitum confitetur. Confitendum
autem semper est, non quod peccatum supersit ut semper sit confitendum; sed
quia peccati veteris and antiqui utilis sit indefessa confessio. He shall have
no pardon, who knows his sin and confesses it not: But we must confess always,
not that the sin always remains, but that of an old sin an unwearied
confession is useful and profitable. But this is to be understand of a general
accusation, or of a confession to God. For in confessions to men, there is no
other usefulness of repeating our confessions, excepting where such repetition
does aggravate the fault of relapsing and ingratitude, in case the man returns
to those sins for which he hoped that before he did receive a pardon.

. 9.
BUt because in all repentances there is something penal, it is not amiss that
there be some inquiries after the measures and rules of acting that part of
repentance which consists in corporal austerities, and are commonly called
Penances.

1.

2. Sic enim peccata compescenda sunt, ut supersint quos peccasse poeniteat.
For all such fierce proceedings are either superstitious, or desperate, or
indiscreet, or the effect of a false persuasion concerning them; that they are
a direct service of God, that they are simply necessary, and severely enjoined.
All which are to be rescinded, or else the penances will be of more hurt then
usefulness. Those actions are to minister to repentance; and therefore if they
contradict any duty, they destroy what they pretend to serve. For penances as
they relate to the sin that is committed, is just to be measured as
penitential sorrow is, of which it is a signification and expression. When the
sorrow is natural, sensitive, pungent, and material, the penances will be so
too. A great sorrow refuses to eat, to sleep, to be cheerful, to be in company,
according as the degree is, and as the circumstances of the persons are. But
sometimes sorrow is to be chosen, and invited by arts, and ministered to by
external instruments, and arguments of invitation; and just so are the
penances, they are then to be chosen, so as may make the person a sorrowful
mourner, to make him take no delight in sin, but to conceive, and to feel a
just displeasure: For if men feel no smart, no real sorrow or pain for their
sins, they will be too much in love with it: impunity is (...), the occasion
and opportunity of sin, as the Apostle intimates: and they use to proceed in
finishing the methods of sin and death, who Non unquam reputant quantum sibi
gandia constant, reckon their pleasures, but never put any smart, or danger, or
fears, or sorrows into the balance. But the injunction or susception of
penances is a good instrument of repentance, because a little evil takes off
the pleasure of the biggest sin in many instances, and we are too apprehensive
of the present, that this also becomes a great advantage to this ministry: we
refuse great and infinite pleasures hereafter, so we may enjoy little, and few,
and inconsiderable ones at present; and we fear not the horrible pains of hell,
so we may avoid a little trouble in our persons, or our interest. Therefore it
is to be supposed, that this way of undertaking a present punishment and smart
for our sins (unless every thing when it becomes religious is despoyl'd of all
its powers which it had in nature, and what is reason here, is not reason
there) will be of great effect and power against sin, and be an excellent
instrument of repentance. But it must be so much, and it must be no more; for
penances are like fire and water, good so long as they are made to serve our
needs; but when they go beyond that, they are not to be endured. For since God
in the severest of his anger does not punish one sin with another, let not us
do worse to our selves then the greatest wrath of God in this world will
inflict upon us. A sin cannot be a punishment from God. For then it would be
that God should be the Author of sin, for he is of punishment. If then any
punishment be a sin, that sin was unavoidable, derived from God; and indeed it
would be a contradiction to the nature of things to say, that the same thing
can in the same formality be a punishment and a sin, that is, an action, and a
passion, voluntary as every sin is, and involuntary as every punishment is;
that it should be done by us, and yet against us, by us and by another, and by
both entirely: and since punishment is the compensation or the expiation of
sin, not the aggravation of the Divine anger; it were very strange, if God by
punishing us should more provoke himself, Vide Chapt. 6. ^.42.
and in stead of satisfying his justice, or curing the man, make his own anger
infinite, and the patient much the worse. Indeed it may happen that one sin may
cause or procure another, not by the efficiency of God, or any direct action of
his: but 1. withdrawing those assistances which would have restrained a sinful
progression. 2. By suffering him to fall into evil temptation, which is too
hard for him consisting in his present voluntary indisposition. 3. By the
nature of sin it self, which may either 1 effect a sin by accident; as a great
anger may by the withdrawing Gods restraining grace be permitted to pass to an
act of murder; or 2 it may dispose to others of like nature, as one degree of
lust brings in another; or 3 it may minister matter of fuel to another sin, as
intemperance to uncleanness: or 4 on sin may be the end of another, as
covetousness may be the servant of luxury. In all these ways, one sin may be
effected by another; but in all these, God is only conniving, or at most,
takes off some of those helps which the man has forfeited, and God was not
obliged to continue. Thus God hardened Pharaohs heart, even by way of object and
occasion; God hardened him, by showing him a mercy, by taking off his fears when
he removed the judgment; and God ministered to him some hope that it be so
still. But God does not inflict the sin: The man's own impious hands do that,
not because he cannot help it, but because he chooses and delights in it. * Now
if God in justice to us will not punish one sin directly by another: let not us
in our penitential inflictions commit a sin in indignation against our sin; for
that is just as if a man out of impatience of pain in his side, should dash his
head against a wall.

3. Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem; They accused him falsely of some horrid
crimes, but in verification of their indictment bound themselves by a curse:
The first that if his accusation were false, he might be burned to death: The
second, Eusebius. li. 6. c. 7.
that he might die of the Kings evil: The third, that he might be blind. God
in his anger found out the two first, and their curse happened to them that
delighted in cursing and lies. The first was burnt alive in his own house: and
the second perished by the loathsome disease. Which when the third espied, and
found Gods anger so hasty and so heavy, so pressing and so certain, he ran out
to meet the rod of God; and repented of his sin so deeply, and wept so
bitterly, so continually, that he became blind with weeping: and the anger of
God became an instance of repentance; the judgment was sanctified, and so
passed into mercy and a pardon: he did indeed meet with his curse, but by the
arts of repentance the curse became a blessing. And so it may be to us,
Praeveniamus faciem ejus in confessione; let us prevent his anger by sentencing
our selves: or if we do not, let us follow the sad accents of the angry voice
of God, and imitate his justice, by condemning that which God condemns, and
suffering willingly what he imposes; and turning his judgments into voluntary
executions, by applying the suffering to our sins, and praying it may be
sanctified. For since God smites us that we may repent, if we repent then, we
serve the end of the Divine judgment: and when we perceive God smites our sin,
if we submit to it, and are pleased that our sin is smitten, we are enemies to
it, after the example of God; and that is a good act of repentance.

4. punitive and vindictive, they do indeed punish the man, and help so far as
they can to destroy the sin; but of these alone, S. Paul said well, Bodily
exercise profits but little; but of the later sort, he added, but Godliness
is profitable to all things, having the promise of the life that now is, and of
that which is to come: and this indeed is our exactest measure. Fastings alone,
lyings upon the ground, disciplines and direct chastisements of the body, which
have nothing in them but toleration and revenge, are of some use; they vex the
body, and crucify the sinner, but the sin lives for all them: but if we add
prayer, or any action symbolical, as meditation, reading, solitariness,
silence, there is much more done toward the extinction of the sin. But he that
adds alms, or something that not only is an act contrary to a former state of
sin, but such which is apt to deprecate the fault, to obey God, and to do good
to men, he has chosen the better part, which will not easily be taken from
him. Fasting, prayer, and alms together are the best penances, or acts of
exterior repentance in the world. If they be single, fasting is of the least
force, and alms done in obedience and the love of God is the best.

5. Cyprians, Quam magna deliquimus, tam granditer defleamus. If our sins were
great, so must our sorrow or penances be. As one is, so must be the other. For
sorrow and penances I reckon as the same thing in this question; save only
that in some instances of corporal inflictions, the sin is opposed in its
proper matter; as intemperance is by fasting; effeminacy by suffering
hardships; whereas sorrow opposes it only in general: and in some other
instances of penances, there is a duty distinctly and directly served, as in
prayer and alms. But although this rule be indefinite and unlimited, we find it
made more minuit by Hugo de S. Victore. Si in correctione minor est afflictio
quam in culpa fuit delectatio, non est dignus poenitentiae tuae fructus. Our
sorrow either in the direct passion, or in its voluntary expressions,
distinctly or conjunctly, must at least equal the pleasure we took in the
committing of a sin. And this rule is indeed very good, if we use it with these
cautions. First, that this be understood principally in our repentances for
single sins; for in these only the rule can be properly and without scruple
applied, where the measures can be best observed. For in habitual and long
courses of sin, there is no other measures but to do very much, and very long,
and until we die, and never think our selves safe, but while we are doing our
repentances. Secondly, that this measure be not thought equal commutation for
the sin, but be only used as an act of deprecation and repentance, of the
hatred of sin, and opposition to it; For he that sets a value upon his punitive
actions of repentance, and rests in them, will be hasty in finishing the
repentance, and leaving it off even while the sin is alive: For in these cases
it is to be regarded, that penances, or the punitive actions of repentance, are
not for the extinction of the punishment immediately, but for the guilt. That
is, there is no remains of punishment after the whole guilt is taken off: but
the guilt it self goes away by parts, and these external actions of repentance
have the same effect in their proportion which is wrought by the internal.
Therefore as no man can say that he has sufficiently repented of his sins by
an inward sorrow and hatred: so neither can he be secure that he has made
compensation by the suffering penances; for if one sin deserves an eternal
hell, it is well if upon the account of any actions, and any sufferings, we be
at last accepted and acquitted.

6. extend them then intend them: that is, let us rather do many single acts
of several instances, then dwell upon one with such intension of spirit as may
be apt to produce any violent effects upon the body or the spirit. In all these
cases, prudence and proportion to the end is our best measures. For these
outward significations of repentance, are not in any kind or instance
necessary to the constitution of repentance; but apt and excellent expressions,
and significations, exercises and ministeries of repentance. Prayer and alms
are of themselves distinct duties, and therefore come not in their whole nature
to this reckoning: but the precise acts of corporal punishment are here
intended. And that these were not necessary parts of repentance, the primitive
Church believed, and declared, by absolving dying persons, though they did not
survive the beginnings of their public repentance. But that she enjoined them
to suffer such severities in case they did recover, she declared that these
were useful and proper exercises and ministeries of the Grace it self. And
although inward repentance did expiate all sins, even in the Mosaical Covenant,
yet they had also a time and manner of its solemnity, their day of expiation,
and so must we have many. But if any man will refuse this way of repentance, I
shall only say to him the words of S. Paul to them who rejected the
Ecclesiastical customs and usages: We have no such Custom, neither the
Churches of God. But let him be sure that he perform his internal repentance
with the more exactness; as he had need look to his own strengths, that refuses
the assistance of auxiliaries. But it is not good to be too nice and
inquisitive, when the whole article is matter of practice. For what does God
demand of us but inward sincerity of of a returning, penitent, obedient heart,
and that this be exercised and ministered unto by fit and convenient offices to
that purpose? This is all, and from this we are to make no abatements.

The PRAYER.
O Eternal God, Gracious and Merciful, the fountain of pardon and holiness,
hear the cries, and regard the supplications of thy servant. I have gone astray
all my days, and I will for ever pray unto thee and cry mightily for pardon.
Work in thy servant such a sorrow that may be deadly unto the whole body of
sin, but the parent of an excellent repentance. O suffer me not any more to do
an act of shame; nor to undergo the shame and confusion of face, which is the
portion of the impenitent and persevering sinners at the day of sad accounts. I
humbly confess my sins to thee, do thou hide them from all the world; and
while I mourn for them, let the Angels rejoice; and while I am killing them by
the aids of thy Spirit, let me be written in the book of life, and my sins be
blotted out of the black registers of death, that my sins being covered and
cured, dead and buried in the grave of Jesus, I may live to thee my God a life
of righteousness, and grow in it till I shall arrive at a state of glory.

II. I Have often begun to return to thee; but I turned short again, and looked
back upon Sodom, and loved to dwell in the neighborhood of the horrible
regions. Now, O my God hear; now let me finish the work of a holy repentance.
Let thy grace be present with me, that this day I may repent acceptably, and to
morrow, and all my days; not weeping over my returning sins, nor deploring new
instances; but weeping bitterly for the old, loathing them infinitely,
denouncing war against them hastily, prosecuting that war vigorously;
resisting them every hour, crucifying them every day, praying perpetually,
watching assiduously, consulting spiritual guides and helps frequently, obeying
humbly, and crying mightily, I may do every thing by which I can please thee,
that I may be rescued from the powers of darkness, and the sad portions of
eternity which I have deserved.

III. O Give unto thy servant intentions so real, a resolution so strong, a
repentance so holy, a sorrow so deep, a hope so pure, a charity so sublime,
that no temptation or time, no health or sickness, no accident or interest may
be able in any circumstance of things or persons to tempt me from thee and
prevail. Work in me a holy and an unreprovable faith whereby I may overcome the
world, and crucify the flesh, and quench the fiery darts of the De^^l; and let
this faith produce charity, and my sorrow cause amendment, and my fear produce
caution, and that caution beget a holy hope: let my repentance be perfect and
acceptable, and my affliction bring forth joy, and the pleasant fruit of
righteousness. Let my hatred of sin pass into the love of God, and this love be
obedience, and this obedience be universal, and that universality be lasting
and perpetual; that I may rejoice in my recovery, and may live in health, and
proceed in holiness, and abide in thy favor, and die with a blessing, the
death of the righteous, and may rest in the arms of the Lord Jesus, and at the
day of judgment may have my portion in the resurrection of the just, and may
enter into the joy of my Lord, to reap from the mercies of God in the harvest
of a blessed eternity, what is here sown in tears and penitential sorrow, being
pardoned and accepted, and saved by the mercies of God in our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Amen. Amen. Amen.

(...).

The End.
ERRATA.
PAge 32. line 16. dele to. p. 72. l. 15. for (...) r. (...) p. 131. l. 5. for
highest r. lightest. p. 133. l. 28. for (...) r. (...) p. 328. l. 28. for
Samnenses, r. Jamnenses. p. 338. l. 16. for repealing r. repeating. p. 370. l.
36. for unusual r. usual. p. 388. l. 12. for In r. It. p. 391. l. 32. for
miseram r. miserum. p. 393. l. 16. r. numqua. p. 400. l. 16. for I have already
r. I have in the next Chapter. ibid. l. 18. for I then reproved r. I there
reprove. p. 431. l. 2. r. illud. p. 454. l. 12. for endure r. endear. p. 504,
l. 17. r. (...). p. 508. l. 11. for precept r. precepts. p. 522. l. 12. for
have it r. hate it. p. 523. l. 34. r. for good evil r. good or evil. p. 564, l.
7. after supreme sense put a period. p. 565. l. 15. for eadem r. eodem. p. 572.
l. 6. r. (...). p. 626. l. 28. for thing r. King. p. 671. l. 31. r. our
conservation is.

In the Margent.

p. 120. l. ult. r. (...). p. 133. l. 1. (...) p. 475. l. 1. r. Acts 13.48.

THE TABLE.
The numbers relate to the Page, and the marginall Numbers or Paragraphs of
each CHAPTER.
A
ABsolution: of the forms of Absolution which have been used, p. 627. number. 53
In the primitive Church there was no judicial form of absolution in their
Liturgies, 628, 54 Absolution of sins by the Priest can be no more then
declarative, 634, 58 The usefulness of that kind of absolution, 63^, 59
Judicial absolution by the Priest is not that, which Christ intended in giving
the power of remitting and retaining sins 636 Acts, what repentance single acts
of sin require, 198, 43. a single act of sin is cut off by the exercise of
contrary virtue, 199, 45 A single act of virtue is not sufficient to be opposed
against a single act of vice, 200, 46. How a single act of sin sometimes is
habitual, 202, 49. some acts of sin require more then a moral revocation or
opposing a contrary act of virtue in repentance, 202, 50. Single acts of sin
without a habit give a denomination, 185, 25 Act. Chap. 13.48. explicated, 475,
26 Adam, his sin made us not heirs of damnation, 375, 22. nor makes us
necessarily vicious, 383, 37. Adams sin did not corrupt our nature by a
physical efficiency, 383, 39 nor because we were in the loins of Adam, 384, 40
nor because of the decree of God, 386, 41 (...), what latitude of signification
it has, 552, 39 (...), what it signifies, 119, 21 (...), 170, 2 (...), 178, 15
(...), 177, 14 (...), what it signifies, 115, 21. and 125, 26 (...), what it
signifies, 551, 38 Art, how much it can change Nature, 212, 3 (...), 174, 8 and
245, 18 Alms, as a part of repentance, 654. How they operate in order to
pardon, ibid. It is one of the best penances, 684, 29 Attrition, what is is,
601. The difference between it and Contrition, ibid. Attrition joined with
absolution by the Priest, that it is not sufficient, demonstrated by many
arguments, 638 S. Augustine, his zeal against the Pelagians, to make sure work
with their doctrine, was the occasion of his mistake interpreting ( Romans 7.15)
464, 17 (...) (out of Tit. 3.11.) expl. 474.28 (...), what it signifies, 311, 5
B
BAptism: of the pardon of sins after baptism, 532, 7
C
CHarity, gives being to all virtues, 207.56 Children, how God punishes the
fathers upon the children, 403 God never imputes the fathers sin to the child,
so as to inflict eternal punishment, but temporal only, 404, 54 This he does
only in very great crimes, 406, 57 and not often, 406, 58 but before the
Gospel was published, not since, 407.8 Rules of deportment for those children,
who fear a curse descending on them from their sinful parents, 439, 17 Christ,
we are by him redeemed from the state of spiritual infirmity, 473, 25
Commandments: Of the difference between S Augustine and S. Hierome in the
proposition concerning the possibility of keeping Gods Commandments, 17
Confession, due to God, 607, 35 Why we are to confess sins to God, who knows
them before, 610. What properly is meant by it, ibid. Auricular confession
whence it descended, 615. Confession to a Priest is no part of contrition,
ibid. The benefit of confessing to a Priest, 616, 43 Rules concerning the
practice of confession, 669 shame should not hinder confession, 673 A rule to
be observed by the Minister that receives confessions, 674, 20 Of confessing
to a priest or Minister, 678, 24 Confession in preparation to the Sacrament,
678, 25 Concupiscence is not mortal, till it proceeds further, 466, 19
Conscience: the contention between the flesh and conscience no sign of
regeneration. 480, 29 How to know which prevails in this contention, 481, 29
Contrition, the efficacy of contrition in repentance, 281, 61 What contrition
is, 280, 59. and 582, 5. The difference between it and attrition, 601.
Contrition must not be mistaken for a single act, 604. 31 1 Cor. 6.12.
explained, 122, 23. and 10.23 ibid. and 2.14. expl 400, 51. and 488, 35 and
11.27. expl. 566 2 Cor. 5.21. expl. 369, 15. and 12.21. 535, 12 Corporal
austerities or penances, 680, 26. they are not simply necessary, ibid. Coloss.
2.18. expl. 478, 29 Covenant, the opposition between the new and old Covenant
is not in respect of faith and works, 42, 7 S. Cyprian was not the author of
that book under his name with the title, De coena Domini, 285, 64
D
DEath, how to treat a dying man being in despair, 277, 56 Despair, a caution
to be observed by them that minister comfort to those who are near to despair,
665, 10. Considerations to be opposed against the despair of penitent Clinicks,
329 (...), 170, 2 (...), 178, 15
E
Ephesians. 2.2, 3. expl. 397, 48 (...) sometimes was put to signify
Ecclesiastical Repentance, 6^6, 34 and 645 (...), 175, 10
F
FAther: how God punishes the fathers sin upon the children, ^03 God never
imputes the fathers sin to the children, so as to inflict eternal punishment,
but only temporal, 404, 54 This God does only in punishment of the greatest
crimes, 406, 57 and not often, 406, 58 but before the Gospel was published,
407, 8 Fasting, it is one of the best penances, 684, 29 Fear, to leave a sin
out of fear, is not sinful but may be accepted, 491 Flesh, the law of the flesh
in man, 479, 29 The contention between it and the conscience, no sign of
regeneration, 480, 29 How to know which prevails in the contention, 481, 29
Forgiving injuries, considered as a part or fruit of repentance, 956.84
G
GAlat 5.15, 16, 17, 18. expl 481 and 5.24. expl. 500, 56 and 5.17. expl. 554
Ganefis 6.5. exp. 392, 45 and 8.21. expl. 393, 46 God, no man is tempted of
God, 437, 14 Holy Ghost, what is the sin against the Holy Ghost, 535, 41 Final
impenitence proved not to be the sin against the Holy Ghost, 556, 42 That the
sin against the Holy Ghost is pardonable, 559, 48 In what sense it is affirmed
in Scripture, that the sin against the Holy Ghost shall not be pardoned in this
world nor in the world to come, 561, 51, 52 Gospel, difference between it and
the Law, 4 and 20, 23 Whether the precepts of the Gospel be impossible to be
kept, 8 What is required in the Gospel, 43, 9 The Gospel is nothing else but
faith and repentance, 74, 2 Grace, to be in the state of grace is of very large
signification, 189, 31 The just measures and latitude of a man's being in the
state of grace, 190, 52 How it works, 273, 52
H
HAbits, a single act of sin without a habit gives a denomination, 185, 25 Sins
are damnable, that cannot be habitual, 184, 24 A sinful habit has a guilt
distinct from that of the act, 228, 1 Sinful habits require a distinct manner
of repentance, 256, 31 seven objections against that assertion answered, 272,
51 Of infused habits, 71, 53 The method of mortifying vicious habits, 314, 9,
10 Hands, imposition of hands was twice solemnly had in repentance, 634 Heaven,
in a natural estate we cannot hope for heaven, 436, 10 Hebrews 9.28 expl. 369,
15 and 7.27. expl. 370, 17 and 5.23. expl. 370, 17 and 64, 5, 6 expl. 551 and
10, 26, 27 expl. ibid. Hosea 6.7. expl. 366, 11.
I
JAmes 2.10. expl. 206, 55 Ignorance, where it self is no sin the action
flowing from it is innocent, 515, 62 Infants, what punishment Adams sin can
bring upon Infants that die, 375.23 Infirmity, that state which some men call a
state of infirmity, is a state of sin and death, 473, 25 What are sins of
infirmity, 500, 47 sins of infirmity consist more in the imperfection of
obedience, then in the commission of any evil, 502, 49 A sin of infirmity
cannot be but in a small matter 505, 52 What are not sins of infirmity, 507.53
Violence of passion excuses not under the title of sins of infirmity, 508, 54
sins of infirmity not accounted in the same manner to young men as to others
510, 57 The greatness of the temptation does not make sin excusable upon the
account of sins of infirmity, 511, 58 The smallest instance if observed ceases
to be a sin of infirmity, 512, 59 A man's will has no infirmity, 512, 60
Nothing is a sin of infirmity, but what is in some sense involuntary, ^^4, 61
sins of inculpable ignorance are sins of infirmity, 514, 62 There is no
pardonable state of infirmity, 522, 76 John 8.47. expl. 284, 62. and 5.34. expl
394, 47. and 14.17. expl. 489 and 20.23. expl. 570, 66 1 John 5.17 expl. 189,
31 and 5.16, 17. expl. 553, 39 and 3.9. expl. 554 and 1.9. expl. 606, 34 Isaiah
53.10. expl. 369, 15 Impossible, a limited signification of it, 552, 39
Justice, Gods justice and mercy reconciled, about his exacting the law, 20
K
(...), 173, 6
L
LAw, in what sense said to be (...), 3 Its severity made the Gospel better
received, ibid. Difference between it and the Gospel, 4 and 20, 23 Of the
difference between S. Augustine and S. Hierome concerning the possibility of
keeping the law of God, 17 In what measures God exacteth it, 20 and 22 His
mercy and justice reconciled about that thing, ibid and 23, 35 To keep the law
naturally possible, but morally impossible, 21, 34 No man can keep the law
(...), but in a sense of favor, 34, 50 The law of Works imposed on Adam only,
39, 1 The state of men under the law, 472 A threefold law in man, Flesh or
Members, the Mind or Conscience, the Spirit, 478, 29 The contention between
the law of the flesh and conscience, no sign of regeneration, but the
contention between the law of the flesh and spirit is, 480, 29 Lawful, every
thing that is lawful, or the utmost of what is lawful, not always fit to be
done, 676, 23 Life, the necessity of good life, 325, 25 The natural evils of
man's life, 427, 4 Luke 15 7. expl. 531, 5 and 11.41. expl 654, 82 Lukewarmness,
how it comes to be a sin, 268, 47
M
MAlefactors condemned by the Customs of Spain, are allowed respite till their
Confessor supposes them competently prepared, 281, 56 Mark 12.34. exp. 475.26.
and 12.32. exp. 551, 41 Matthew 5.19. exp. 115, 18 and 5.22. 132, 34 Mercy,
Gods mercy and justice reconciled about his exacting of the law, 120 (...) and
(...), how they differ, 64 and 65 Moral, the difference between the moral,
regenerate and profane man in committing sin, 483, 31 and 579, 1 Mortification
is a precept not a counsel, 265, 44 the method of mortifying vicious habits,
314, 10, 11
N
NAture, what the phrase [by nature] means, 399, 18 In a natural estate we
cannot hope for heaven, 436, 10 Novatians, their doctrine opposed, 533, 8 A
great objection of theirs proposed, 544, 24 answered, 545, 26
O
Original sin, whether we derive from Adam original and natural ignorance,
373, 22 Adams sin made us not heirs of damnation, 375, 22 NOr makes us
necessarily vicious, 383, 37 Adams sin did not corrupt our nature by a physical
efficiency, 383, 39 Nor because we were in the loins of Adam, 384, 40 Nor
because of the will and decree of God, 386, 41 Objections out of Scripture
against this doctrine, answered, 392, 45. Vide Sin.
P
PArdon, several degrees of pardon of sin, 284, 63 As repentance is, so is our
pardon, 649 Mistakes about pardon and salvation, 499, 44 Some sins called
unpardonable in a limited sense, 542, 21 What is our state of pardon in this
life, 571, 66 In what manner and to what purposes the Church pardons
penitents by the hand of a Priest, 625, 51 (...), what it signifies, 119, 21
(...), what it sign fies, 119, 22 (...) and (...), what they signify, 551, 37
(...), 171, 4 (...), 172, 5 Passions, their violence excuses not under the
title of sins of Infirmity, 508, 54 Make it the great business of thy life to
subdue thy passions, 516, 65 Perfection, perfection of degrees and perfection
of state, 27 and 28 and 29 How perfection is consistent with repentance, Cap.
1. sect. 3. per tot. Wherein perfection of state consists, 329, 44 Perfection
in genere actus, 30, 45 what it is, 44, 13 Penances or corporal austerities,
680, 26 A rule for the measure of them, 685, 30 Which are best and rather to be
chosen, 685, 29 Fasting, prayer and alms are the best penances, 685, 29 They
are not to be accounted simply necessary, or a direct service of God, 680, 26
Philippians 2.12, 13. e^p. 274, 55 Psalm 51.5. exp. 394, 47 Prayer, of prayer
as a fruit or act of repentance, 652, 80 It is one of the best penances, 684,
29 Priest, what is the power of Priests in order to pardoning sin, 625, 51 Of
the forms of absolution, 627, 53 absolution of sins by the Priest can be no
more then declarative, 634, 58 Confession to a Priest is no part of contrition,
615 The benefit of confessing to a Priest, 616, 43 Auricular confession to a
Priest, whence it descended, 615 Of confessing to a Priest or Minister, 678, 24
Proverb, a proverb contrary to truth is a great prejudice to a man's
understanding 523, 78 avoid all proverbs by which evil life is encouraged,
ibid. Profane, the difference in committing sin between the profane, moral
and regenerate man, 483, 31 Punishment, God punishes not one sin with another,
682 (...), the use of the word, 398, 48 (...), what the word signifies, 401, 51
Questions.
Whether the practice of the Primitive Fathers, denying Ecclesiastical
repentance to Idolaters, Murderers, and Adulterers, and them only be
warrantable? 540, 20 Whether we derive from Adam original and natural
ignorance? 373, 22 Whether attrition with absolution pardons sin? 638 Whether
it be possible to keep the Law? 17 Whether perfection be consistent with
repentance? Cap. 1. Sect. 3. per tot. Whether sinful habits require a distinct
manner of repentance? 256 and 272 Whether every single deliberate act of sin
put the sinner out of Gods favor? Cap. 4. Sect. 2. per totum. Whether
disobedience that is voluntary in the cause, but not in the effect is to be
punished? 388, 43 and 490 and 489
R
REgenerate, the state of unregenerate men, 472 Between the regenerate and a
wicked person there is a middle state, 474, 26 An unregenerate man may be
convinced of, and clearly instructed in his duty, and approve the Law, 476, 28
an unregenerate man may with his will delight in goodness, and delight in it
earnestly, 478, 29 The contention between the flesh and the conscience no sign
of regeneration, but only the contention between the flesh and the spirit,
480, 29 the difference between the regenerate, profane, and moral man in their
sinning, 483, 31 whence come so frequent sins in regenerate persons, 484, 32
How sin can be consistent with the regenerate estate, 485, 33 Unwillingness to
sin no sign of regeneration, 486 An unregenerate person may not only desire to
do moral good things, but even spiritual also, 488, 35. The difference between
a regenerate and unregenerate man, 490, 35 An unregenerate man may leave many
sins not only for temporal interest, but of reverence of the Divine Law, 492
An unregenerate man may do many good things for heaven, and yet never come
there, 492, 38 An unregenerate man may have received the Spirit of God, and yet
be in a state of distance from God, 493, 39 It is not the propriety of the
regenerate to feel a contention within him concerning doing good or evil, 497,
41 The regenerate man has not only received the Spirit of God, but is wholly
led by him, 498, 42 Repentance, the covenant of repentance when it began, 4.
How repentance and perfection Evangelical are consistent, Cap. 1. Sect. 3. per
tot. That proposition rejected, that every sinner must in his repentance pass
under the terrors of the Law, 41, 6 (...) and (...) how they differ, 64 and 65,
it is a whole change of state and life, 66, 4 its parts, 71, 9 the difference
between the repentance preached to the Jews and the Gentiles, 77, 5, 6, 7 It
may be called conversion, 80, 10 Repentance only, makes sins venial, 134, 34
What repentance single acts of sin require, 198, 43 A general repentance when
sufficient, 201, 47 Some acts of sin require more then a moral revocation or
opposing a contrary act of virtue in repentance, 202, 50 That proposition
proved to be false, that no man is ordinarily bound to repent instantly of his
sin, 215, 7 The danger of deferring repentance, 218, 2 Deferring repentance
differs but by accident from final impenitence, 226, 9 Repentance of sinful
habits to be performed in a distinct manner, 256, 31 Seven objections against
that proposition answered, 272, 51 Objections against the repentance of
Clinicks, 281, 57. and 277, 56. and 284, 64 Heathens newly baptized, if they
die immediately need not repentance, 284, 64 The objection concerning the thief
on the Cross answered, 288 and 289 Testimonies of the Ancients against death
bed repentance, 292, 66 The manner of repentance in habitual sinners, who begin
repentance betimes, 305, 1 The manner of repentance, which habitual sins must
be cured by in them, who return not till old age, 317, 12 The usage of sinners,
who repent not till their deathbed, 325, 25 Considerations, showing how
dangerous it is to delay repentance, 325, 25 Considerations to be opposed
against the despair of penitent Clinicks, 329, 29 What hopes penitent Clinicks
have, taken out of the writings of the Fathers of the Church, 330, 30 The
manner how the ancient Church treated penitent Clinicks, 3^7, 5 The particular
acts and parts of repentance that are fittest for a dying man, 339, 32 The
penitent (in the opinion of the Jewish Doctors) preferred above the just and
innocent, 530, 5 The practice of the Primitive Fathers about penitent Clinicks,
539 the practice of the ancient Fathers, excluding from repentance, murderers,
adulterers, and idolaters, 540 Penitential sorrow is rather in the
understanding then the affections, 586, 12 penitential sorrow is not to be
estimated by the measures of sense, 588, 15 and 590, 17 a double solemn
imposition of hands in repentance, 633, as our repentance is, so is our pardon,
649 a man must not judge of his repentance by his tears, nor by any one manner
of expression, 658, 1 He that suspects his repentance should use that suspicion
as a means to improve his repentance, 660 Meditations that will dispose the
heart to repentance, ibid. No man can be said truly to have grieved for sins,
which at any time after he remembers with pleasure, 662, 7 the repentance of
Clinicks, 667, 13 sorrow for sin is but a sign or instrument of repentance,
668, 14 Restitution considered as a part of repentance, 656, 84 Romans 7.14.
exp. 261, 40 and 6.7. exp. 266, 44 and 7.7. exp. 311, 5 and 5.12. exp. 363, 7
and 5.13, 14. exp. 365, 11 and 7.23. exp. 400, 50 and 455, 8 and 7.15, 19. exp.
454, 6 and 456, 9 S. Aug. restrained the words of the Apostle ( R m 7.15.) to
the matter of desires and concupiscence, and excluded all evil actions from the
meaning of that text, 463, 17 reasons against the interpretation of that
Father, 465, 18 and 7.9. exp. 468, 23 and 8.7. exp. 478, 29 and 7.22, 23. exp.
480, 29 and 5.10. exp. 576, 77 Revelation 19.9. exp. 284, 62 Religion, if it be
seated only in the understanding, not accepted to salvation, 476, 28
S
SAcrament, Church of God used to deny the Sacrament to no dying penitent that
desired it, 330, 29 Of confeshon to a Minister in preparation to the Sacrament,
678, 25 1 Samuel 2.25. exp. 561, 51 Satisfaction, what it signified in the sense
of the Ancients, 644, 72 and 606, 34 and 645, the Ancients did not believe
satisfactions simply necessary to the procuring of pardon from God 651, 78 Sins
are not equal, 104, 5 How they are made greater or less, ibid. No sin is ven
al, 110:9 the smallest sins are destructive of our friendship with God, 111, 12
the Doctors of the Roman Church do not rightly define venial sins, ibid. the
smallest is against charity 123, 24 and is turning from God, 125, 26 the
smaller the sin the less excusable, if done with observation, 127, 27 Venial
sins distinguished into such as are venial, by the imperfection of the agent,
by the smalness of the matter, or venial in the whole kind, 128, 28 that no
sins are venial in their nature or whole kind, 129, 31 sins differ in degree,
but not in their essential order to punishment, 132, 33 No sins are venial but
by repentance, 134, 34 The absurdity of the Roman doctrines concerning venial
sins, 138, 39 the inconveniences following from the doctrine of venial sins,
137, 35 etc. Among the ancients the distinction of sins into mortal and venial,
means not a distinction of kind, but degree, 142, 44 some sins destroy not
holiness, 144, 45 the distinction of sins into mortal and venial, cannot have
influence on us to any good purposes, 145, 46 What sins are venial cannot be
known to us, 147, 47 we should have judged some sins venial, if it had not been
otherwise revealed in Scripture, 148, 48 sins that we account in their nature
venial, may by their multitude become damnable, 152, 52 the means of expiating
venial sins appointed by some Roman Doctors, 157, 57 Whether every single
deliberate act of sin, put the sinner out of Gods favor, 182, 22 single acts
of sin without a habit, give a denomination, 185, 25 sins are damnable, that
cannot be habitual, 184, 24 single acts of mortal sin displease God, and are
forbidden, but are not a state of death, 188, 29 what repentance single acts of
sin require, 198, 43 how a single act of sin sometimes is habitual, 202, 49 sin
often in Scripture used for the punishment of sin, 368, 15 leaving of fin the
best sign of hatred of it, 603, 7 How sin can be consistent with the regenerate
estate, 485, 33 he that leaves a sin out of fear may be accepted, 491 the
violence of a temptation does not in the whole excuse sin, 511, 58 Of the
pardon of sins after Baptism, 532, 7 some sins styled unpardonable, but in a
limited sense, 542, 21 God punishes not one sin with another, 682 One sin may
cause or procure another, ibid. Sin Original, cap 6 362, whether we from Adam
derive Original ignorance, 373, 22 Adams sin made us not heirs of damnation,
375, 22 nor makes us necessarily vicious, 383, 37 Adams sin did not corrupt our
nature by a physical efficiency, 383, 39 nor because we were in the loins of
Adam, 384, 40 nor because of the will and decree of God, 386, 41 the principles
by which sin pollutes the manners of men, 413, 66 Sins of Infirmity, cap. 7 per
tot. That which some men call a state of infirmity, is a state of sin and
death, 473, 25 Sinner, how every sinner is Gods enemy, 81.11 God is ready to
forgive all and the greatest sinners, 530. Sorrow, as a fruit of repentance,
647 Rules concerning sorrow, that is a part of repentance, 663 A caution to
those that minister comfort to such as are afflicted with immoderate sorrow for
their sins, 665, 10 sorrow for sin is but a sign or instrument of repentance,
668, 14 cautions concerning the measures of this sorrow, 686, 30 penitential
sorrow is rather in the understanding then the affections, 586, 12 Scripture,
the manner of it is to include the consequents in the antecedents, 284, 62
Spirit, the rule of the spirit in us, 481, to have received the spirit is not
an inseparable propriety of the regenerate, 493, 39 what the spirit of God does
in us, 494 the regenerate man has not only received the spirit of God, but is
wholly led by him, 498, 42 Supererogation, what it is, 49, 17
T
TEars, A man by them must not judge of his repentance, nor by any other one
way of expression, 658, 1 Temptation, every temptation to sin, if overcome,
increases not the reward, 234, 7 No man is tempted of God, 437, 10 the violence
of a temptation does not in the whole excuse sin, 511, 58 Thief on the Cross,
why his repentance was accepted, 289, 65 1 Timoth. 5.22. exp. 548, 31 Titus
3.11. (...). exp. 477, 28
V
Virtue, The difference of virtue is in relation to their objects, 206, 56
Theology finds a medium between virtue and vice, 268, 47 Understanding.
Religion if it be seated only in the understanding not accepted to salvation,
476, 28 Voluntary, whether disobedience, that is voluntary in the cause, but
not in the effect is to be punished, 388, 43 and 389 and 390, unwilingness unto
sin no sign of regeneration, 486
W
WIll, Of Freewill, 418 a man's will has no infirmity, 512, 60 the will is not
moved necessarily by the understanding, ibid. Works, covenant of works when it
began, 1. reasons showing the justice of that dispensation of Gods beginning
his intercourse with man, by the covenant of works, 6. the Law of works imposed
on Adam only, 39, 1
Y
YOung, Sins of infirmity not accounted to young men as to others, 510, 57
(...), 178, 14
The End.

