Common-Good: OR, THE IMPROVEMENT OF Commons, Forests, and Chases, BY
ENCLOSURE.

WHEREIN The Advantage of the Poor, THE Common Plenty of All, AND The Increase
and Preservation of TIMBER, With other things of common concernment, Are
Considered.

By S. T.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of the three Daggers near the Middle Temple gate, 1652.

TO THE Supreme Authority OF THIS NATION THE Parliament of England; The only
proper Counselors for COMMON-GOOD.
All Wisdom, Peace, Honor, and universal Happiness,

Is desired (of that God, whose Spirit in a mystery of Providence has been
eminently seen in you,)

BY An observing Honorer of Your Faithfulness, Silvanus Tailor.

The Contents.
SEct. 1. In the which are set down the general Exceptions against Enclosures
of Commons, with brief Answers thereunto. Sect. 2. In which is set forth the
several sorts of Commons. Sect. 3. Wherein the Common-fields near Towns and
Villages are treated of. Sect. 4. Of Commons in rich low Grounds. Sect. 5. Of
Commons which are plain Upland Grounds. Sect. 6. Of Commons which are apt for
Wood, and overspread with Bushes. Sect. 7. Of Commons cumbred with Briars,
Thorns, Heath, Moss, etc. Sect. 8. Which treats of Forests and Chases. Sect.
9. Of the way and manner of enclosing Commons. Sect. 10. Treating of the manner
of enclosing Forests and Chases, with some brief directions for planting and
preserving Wood; that so it may be a provision for our Navy to all generations.
Common-Good: OR The Improvement of Commons, Forests, and Chases, by Enclosure.
SECT. I. In which are set down the general Exceptions against Enclosures of
Commons, with brief Answers thereunto.
IT is believed, that Commons are a sixth part of the Land of England, and
being common to many consequentials, there is no personal propriety, the chief
reason that they continue still overrun with a Curse.

It is natural for all men to love propriety; the reason, because convenience
is it is adjunct, and men do delight rather to say this is mine, then this is
ours; for the one, he holds but in Common a notion of extenuation to love, the
other he is sole Lord of, and so has it at his own disposing. Man's Will (as
corrupted) would be lord paramount, and had it but wings and strength, would
quickly surmount the whole Universe, and be (as our desire is) as Gods. It was
once Adams happiness (even in the state of innocence) to dress the Garden, and
eat of the fruit thereof, but it was his great unhappiness to be thrust out
into the large field of the World: in the one were all things delightful, the
other had the curse; Briars and Thorns shall thou bring forth: Did that curse
terminate in the person of Adam? Surely no; for the same God says now to the
sons of Adam, He that will not work, let him not eat. The Turks will tell you,
the bread of Idleness is no man's. What Is the matter with us in England, that we
labor not to remove the curse, and reduce those large briary and thorny Commons
(who offer themselves) if not into a Paradise, yet into pleasant Gardens,
fruitful Orchards, goodly fields of Corn, feeding pastures for all sorts of
Cattle, stately Woods, and pleasing Groves? All which, with reasonable labor,
would be obtained. But is there not a worse curse befaln ^s, even the curse of
blind ignorance? that we cannot see nor know the great good that would redound
to this our Commonwealth, by the Enclosing of those many large, yet little
profitable Commons amongst us, that still lie under the curse; and therefore
many oppose the good, and like drunken men, labor more to be sick, then sober
men do to keep themselves in health. If you continue to be deceived, yet it
shall be my work, and truly I think it my duty, to employ my poor Talent for my
Countries good (though I bring but a little Goats hair) to undeceive those,
that either by their own weakness, or others delusions, are still kept in the
dark. Therefore the Method that I shall use, will be,

First, to set down the general Objections against Enclosing, and then to give
some brief Answers thereunto.

Secondly, I shall show the several Natures of Commons in England, and how they
are more or less commodious by enclosing.

Thirdly, and lastly, I shall treat of the way and manner of Enclosing.

The Objections are these:
1 Object. The first Objection is, That the Enclosures of Commons is the
undoing of many poor, who have their only livelihood out of them; for that a
poor man, having a wife and many children, by a cottage and Common, has the
benefit of a Cows going, and the keeping of sheep, and of getting bushes for
his fuel: And Experience tells us, that those, who have enclosed, and thrust
out the poor, have received proportionable to their demerits; for the Curse of
the poor has lighted on them, or their Families.

2 Object. That if Commons are enclosed, it will much decrease sheep, and
consequently Wool and Manufactory, by which the hands of many poor are
employed, and Merchants enriched by transporting our Cloth into many remote
parts of the World; for there will be so much converted to tillage and
pasturage for other cattle, that little will be left for sheep.

3 Object. The third Objection is, That the Free and Copyholders have now the
benefit of Commons, which if enclosed, the Lord will have a third part; so that
thereby many will be made poor, for the enriching of one, against the nature of
a Commonwealth.

To the first Objection, where it is said, That incloseing has and will be the
undoing of many poor, etc.

I answer, That did that poor man live in some other place, where himself, his
wife and children might be employed in some manufactory, or they betake
themselves to the spinning of Worsted, Woolen, Flax, or such like easy works
(which a child of six years old may profitably be employed in) certainly it
would be much more comfortable for them, and much better for the Commonwealth,
then if they (as usually now they do) should be Lazying upon a Common to attend
one Cow, and a few sheep, for we seldom see any living on Commons set
themselves to a better employment. And if the father do work sometimes, and so
get bread, yet the children are seldom brought up to any thing; but being
nursed up in idleness in their youth, they become indisposed for labor, and
then begging is their portion, or Theevery their Trade: so that though Commons
be a help to one, yet it is a ruin to many, which the Government of a Free
State abhors, in that a common plenty and liberty (the greatest advantages of
society) naturally conserve it, as the contraries do a Monarchy, which at the
best is best but for a few. And for that it is said, the curse of the poor has
lighted on the Inclosers of Commons, or their Families; I answer, That if the
way hereafter proposed for the enclosing of Commons be followed, the poor (as
they will have no cause to curse) will exceedingly bless God for the enclosing
of them.

To the second Objection, That enclosing of Common will much lessen the breed
of Sheep, etc.

I answer, That there are many grounds now in Commons so unkindly for Sheep
(which the skilful Countryman observes, and is much discouraged to put sheep
thereon) which if enclosed, then would he so sever his grounds, that he would
put Cattle in each ground most agreeable to their nature; the dry Up-land
grounds for sheep, and the low wet grounds for his other Cattle; and this would
be so far from lessening the breed of sheep, that it will much increase them:
for a good Husbandman will quickly find out what his Land his most fit for.

Again, Commons generally are overgrown with Heath, Moss, Fearn or Brackin,
Furzes or Gorst, etc. so that both sheep and other Cattle must be still picking
to keep them alive: And it is seldom seen, that those which are bred on Commons
are of any great growth; but we find by experience, that generally the
improvement of one sheep in pasture is more then of two that are kept on the
Commons.

It is further said and granted, That Wool is the great Staple Commodity of
this Nation, and therefore ought chiefly to be preserved.

I must acknowledge, that Wool is a clothing-blessing to this Nation, more then
to any other, it being eminently useful for Manufactory, and that which
Merchants trade with into many parts of the world, by which we at home are
supplied with many conveniences. But observe, that the super-abundance of that
commodity of Wool we now spare, is often exchanged for the supply of that which
is of more absolute necessity; as Corn, which by enclosing might be procured at
home. Wherefore judge, whether it be not much better to lessen our Wool, and
thereby have plenty of Corn and Cattle within our own Nation, then by selling
our Wool to buy Corn in other Countries. For known to all, that Corn is of
absolute necessity, and therefore primarily to be intended, it being by the
Spirit of life called the staff of life, and having the best concocted spirits,
and most suitable to the nature of man, it being of the immediate production of
the Earth (as man was.) Our ancient and common Law, the very life (if actuated
by the influence of Authority) of Common-Good, well provided, that distresses
on the Plough should not be made; but so much cannot be said of Wool, though it
be of good and great use. And although our Merchants are an honor to our
Nations in most parts of the World, and do bring home many necessary
Commodities, yet still it must give this honor, That Corn and Cattle are of
most absolute necessity: And that all foreign commodities and incommodities
(as Wine, Silks, Spices, and Tobacco) are purchased with that which arises out
of our own Nation, as that chiefly of Wool, Fish, Tin, and Lead; all which
(it is hoped) will be much improved to the increase of foreign Trade.

To the third Objection, That Free and Copyholders have more benefit by
Commons now, then if enclosed, etc.

I answer, This benefit is not unto all that have a right to Common, but to
some few that live near upon the Common; for others, that live but half a mile
from the Common, have but little benefit thereof: And unless the Cattle, which
are put thereon, be daily looked unto, they oftentimes stray so far (if not
lost) that the time spent in looking after them, is more then the profit of the
Commons comes to: And indeed those that have the largest purse, have the
largest share on the Commons; by which means there is a petty Tyranny
exercised: so that this Mystery of Oppression should be unravelled by the hand
of Common-Good. And surely much better would it be for them to have two Acres
enclosed, then to have a right to five Acres in Common, out of which comes
very little profit at present; and so long as it is in Common, no hopes of
improvement for the future: And therefore I desire that the name of Commons at
least may be altered; for its denomination is contrary to its nature, an old
cloud generated to darken all that have not a Perspective to look beyond
Tradition.

By that little which has been said, it may be easily discerned, that the
present benefits by Commons are not of such great worth as many men would blow
them up unto: And that, which will come far short of the good which may redound
unto the Publique-wealth, if enclosed in that manner hereafter prescribed.

SECT. II. In which is set forth the several Sorts of COMMONS.
COmmons in England are of diverse natures: As,

1. First, Common-fields, which usually are near and about Towns or Villages,
and ordinarily kept in Tillage.

2. The second sort of Commons are those low grounds of Meadows or Marshes,
that have the benefit of Rivers or Brooks, which overflowing them, make them
fruitful, or otherwise of themselves are naturally so.

3. A third sort of Commons are those that are commonly called Downs, and are
chiefly for the keeping of sheep, being dry grounds, and not much cumbred with
Bushes, Furzes, Fearn, Heath, or Moss.

4. The fourth sort are such as are apt for Wood, and are overrun with bushes,
which are most fit for the breed of young Cattle and Horses.

5. A fifth sort are that which are over-spred with Furzes, Heath, and Moss,
being such as most part of Wales does abound with, and on which are Sheep and
Cattle of all sorts bred.

6. The sixth sort are those of Forests and Chases, in which were great store
of Red and Fallow Deer preserved, to the prejudice of the Inhabitants adjoining.

My endevor herein shall be to show how each of these may be improved to each
particular man's interest, and so to the Commonwealth in general. I shall say
but little to the three first of these, but shall chiefly insist on the great
improvement that may be made on the three last: And my aim therein is Plenty,
one means of a flourishing Commonwealth: And yet I would as much as possible
preserve each man's particular interest. And that which I lay down for a ground
whereon I mean to build, and to have an eye unto throughout my Discourse, shall
be these three generals:

First, The increase of those necessary Commodities which our Country does
naturally afford, and that chiefly Corn, Cattle, and Wood.

Secondly, The increase of Manufactory, and so consequently of Trade.

The third is, of Strength and Safety.

All which, I doubt not, will find acceptance with those, whom God by his wise
Providence has now placed in Authority, for the good of the Commonwealth.

SECT. III. Wherein the Common-fields near Towns and Villages are treated of.
FOr this first sort of Commons, there is very little loss to the Public
thereby, the Owners thereof being necessitated to keep them in Tillage.

But yet if enclosed, I desire it may be considered, if these benefits would
not follow; as first, whether it would not be more profitable, if enclosed, and
that every man had all his own ground at his own disposing, to make choice of
those grounds most fit for Corn, and them to employ with less labor, less cost,
and much more increase: for oftentimes it is seen, that the Common-fields are
very much impoverished by continual plowing, especially in light, sandy, and
gravelly grounds, or in any other light ground where the soil is but shallow:
And to such Land there must be a continual help by some kind of compass or
other, else the Corn is thin and weak, and bears a small humble-Bee-Ear with
few grains therein; so that the Husbandman has very little increase in such
Common-field ground. Besides, such light ground in wet years does produce
tares, and other weeds, very destructive to the Corn; all which would be
avoided, if the Husbandman could make choice of his ground to such uses as his
experience shall find it most fit for: And then his enclosed Ground, which now
he is necessitated to keep for grazing (and is oftentimes overgrown with Moss
and other rubbish) he would convert to Tillage, which would for two or three
Crops, with little cost, bear twice so much Corn, as the Common-field-ground
usually does; if so (as I believe it will be granted by experienced Husbandmen)
then there will be a very great improvement by the enclosing of those
Common-fields; for if one Acre bear a double burden, then there is not only
saved the one half of the seed, but also the one half of the work, which would
be the Husbandmans great gain; for seed, and work to an Acre of Ground, is more
then the Rent of four Acres of such ordinary barren Field-ground (we now speak
of) comes to. Again, very much of such light ground, in two or three years
after plowing, bears better grass, then before it did, when not broken up; for
such ground calls for the plough once in twelve or fourteen years, and will
return to the Owner, not only his seed (which the Common-field Grounds come
many years short of) but also a good increase, all clean, and without weeds.

Another benefit to the Husbandman would be, that what remains after the Corn
is taken off in Harvest, would be so disposed of in such an orderly way, either
by grazing of Cattle, or otherwise, which to him would be more beneficial, then
in Common. I have often seen at the end of Harvest, that men through
covetousness of having the first of the grass in the Common-fields have thrust
in their Milch Cows, and have thought they have gained much thereby, in saving
two or three days grass, when as indeed they have lost five-fold more in their
Cows milk, then they have saved by the grass for their other Cattle. Experience
has told many, that the stubble, and grass that is usually growing amongst the
same, is of a dry benty nature, which so dries up the milk, that it is seldom
recovered at that time of the year, though again put in better pasture: the
like you shall find if you put your Cows in any Meadow presently after the
mowing thereof.

Object. But some will object, That by enclosing, much ground is taken up with
hedges and ditches; so what we get one way we lose another.

Ans. To this I answer, If there be loss of Ground, yet not such a loss as is
supposed: And that you may be better able to judge of your loss, or gain, let me
here give you the measure of my thoughts herein; for example, Here is a square
piece of Ground that is sixty perch on each side, diagram of a square measuring
sixty units on each side 60

60

which at five yards and a half to the perch, and one hundred and sixty perches
to the Acre, makes twenty two Acres and a half; the ditch round about it must
be a yard broad, from the outside of the ditch to the inside of the Quick:
There is then one thousand three hundred and twenty two yards to go round about
it, which makes of square measure of Land forty three perches and a half,
which at the rate of three shillings four pence the Acre per annum, round about
the two and twenty Acres and a half there is so much goes to the Ditch as
comes to ten pence three farthings by the year. But here observe further, that
the one half of this comes only to thy share, and the other half to thy
Neighbors on each side; so that of those twenty two Acres and a half, there is
not so much ground lost (in this fearful Ditch) as comes to thy share one
farthing the Acre by the year. And observe, that if the Pastures be bigger, it
will not hold so great a proportion by the Acre; but if they be less, it will
be greater. And if that Husbandry be used, as to plant fruit trees in the
hedges, they will not be only delightful, but profitable: And poor men that
have but half an Acre in these Common-fields, were it enclosed, would have more
employment, and more profit (by planting a nursery for fruit trees, or
employing it to Hemp, Flax, Roots, or other garden fruits) then four Acres, as
now in Common-field. As for your deep and rich soil, such as is much in
Bedfordshire, and Northern shires, there is not such like improvement by
enclosing; for there, little dunging serves the turn: And should that be
enclosed, and once turned to Pasture, they would be much discouraged to break
it up for Corn again; for that when it is left for grass, it will be fifteen or
twenty years before it comes to be well covered with a good Turf: so that if any
should enclose in such rich grounds, I think it should be with this caution,
That a Law should be made to constrain them to keep a good proportion of their
Land so enclosed constantly in Tillage, and so doing, I do not see what damage
there would be to the Commonwealth by Enclosing.

SECT. IIII. Of Commons in rich Low grounds.
FOr the second sort of Commons, which are your rich Low grounds, though very
fruitful, yet have I seen very little that might not be made more profitable to
each man's particular (that has a right thereunto) by enclosing: For though it
may be truly said of some part of this kind of land, that it brings forth as
much now, as by Art it can be forced unto; yet I dare say, it is not so orderly
disposed of for the general good, as it might be, were it enclosed: for
although it has neither Bush nor Bog, Moss nor Furze, so that the Cattle have
all the fruit; yet is not this in so orderly a way, (which Nature, as well as
Policy, does embrace) as otherwise it might be. For commonly all sorts of
cattle are put on such grounds, though all good grounds are not good for all
sorts of cattle; for some good grounds are good to feed cattle, that are not
good for Milch Cows. I know many such grounds, that if you put Milch Cows in
them, they will feed so fast, that presently they become dry, or yield very
little milk. Other grounds are good for horses and young beasts, that are not
good for sheep. And if these rich grounds are kept till the grass have a good
head, yet there is usually such thrusting in at first, that the grass is
brought so short, that horses and sheep must be put to a labor to live upon
it: so that if it were enclosed, it might be so ordered, Some for Meadowing,
and some for Pasture, and other such uses as the several owners shall find it
most fit, according to the several natures thereof.

I may compare the disorderly feeding in those Common grounds, to an unskilful
Master of a Ship, that having his ship well victualled for a long voyage, at
his first going out is so prodigal thereof, that much more then what may well
serve, is quickly wasted: but if he meet with a cross wind, (as oftentimes it
falls out) then well if they can with small allowance keep themselves from
starving; which an orderly disposing with providence at the first, would have
prevented.

SECT. V. Of Commons which are plain Upland grounds.
FOr the third sort of Commons, which are plain Upland grounds, such as the
Downs in Hampshire, Wiltshire, and many other Western Counties; which are more
fit for Sheep then any other cattle: of which there will not be such an
extraordinary benefit by enclosing, as by the other three sorts of Common next
to be treated of. And it is not my purpose to force arguments that have not
apparent reason in them; for should I do so, I should transgress my own Law.
The work in hand is of a high nature; and I know, before it comes to
application, it will be well weighed by wise men; and where the reasons given
prove but a grain too light, they shall be cast by: and I am not over-confident
of the success.

I know there are many that have set themselves against it. I have long desired
that some of more able parts then my self would have taken the discourse of
this subject upon them; and earnestly desire, that the Reasons I here give,
with their own, may be improved to the advantage of the Public, which in this
is my aim.

If this does but prepare the minds of some Countrymen (who are Common proof,
and are now led more by Tradition then Reason; who have no more to say for
this, then for their Religion; It was thought well of by our forefathers, and
they were as wise then, as you are now, etc.) to a willingness, when those that
are in Authority (and Trustees for their good) shall do them good against their
will (for against the wills of many it must be, or else it never will be) by
Commissioning such as they shall think fit in each County, for the work; if so,
then my labor will not be lost. I endeavor no more the enclosing of Commons,
then where the enclosing may redound to the Common Good. And therefore I say no
more but this, (to those that have an interest in such Commons which are of the
nature of this third sort) That enclosing by good Quick-fences, would keep the
ground warm, and it would be a good shelter in a storm: and what ground soever
of it is subject to Moss, the Plough once or twice in twenty years would better
it: and those that have had experience will tell you, that change of feeding
cattle will make the ground more fruitful: As for example, that ground you
usually keep for your Pasture, if you graze it but one or two years with sheep,
it shall be far more fruitful for milk two or three years after. Again,
oftentimes we see dainty Springs that run stealing through some pleasant
bottoms; which if enclosed, would be of very great use either for raising of
Corn, Pasturage for Cattle, or pleasant Groves.

SECT. VI. Of Commons which are apt for Wood, and overspread with Bushes.
FOr this fourth sort of Common, to wit, Wood-ground, if enclosed, the
improvement would be very great; for now there is little wood, little grass,
very few sheep, no corn; so that five acres of this land now, does not produce
so much fruit as one acre would do if enclosed; for now the ground is so
overspread with bushes, that there is little else but a shady four grass,
which is of no other use but for the breed of young beasts and horses; and
those there bred, are of small growth.

And as for the wood, it is seldom that any young plant steals through the midst
of a bush, and so escapes the cattels nipping; and if it does escape the mouth
of cattle, and come to some growth, yet it is then as seldom seen that it
escapes the (indeed violent) hands of men: for usually if it come thus far, it
must suffer a remove, either to the fire, or to the hedge, or to some other
such like uses. But if it happily escapes all these, yet it is still liable to
such lopping and topping, that it comes to be but a knotty pollard; and at
last, after it has long cumbred the ground, it serves for no more at best but
for a doted log to lie behind the fire.

And as for the young cattle that are there bred, their feed is so much upon
Hazel, Oak, or Hawthorn-bushes, that their teeth are worn to stumps before they
come to be four years old. And if some sheep are in the winter put there for
shelter, and that when deep snow is, they may feed on the bushes; yet they
leave there hanging much of their fine wool, for a requital of their safety.

Now were these Commons enclosed, it would much redound to the benefit of the
Commonwealth, and to every of those in particular that have a right therein:
for many Commons of this nature are very good grounds, and there may be found
good pastures for the rearing or feeding of sheep and all other sorts of
cattle; so that the same quantity of land which in such Commons will now
maintain but twenty cattle, (and those of small bone) would then maintain one
hundred of very large growth. There may in many places thereof be had goodly
Meadows, and other parts may be fit for Corn, and some other parts thereof not
so fit for any of the last mentioned uses, yet very apt for wood, and would
produce very gallant trees, which in a few years will be precious in this
Nation, if some speedy course be not taken for the preservation of timber.

SECT. VII. Commons cumbred with Thorns, Briers, Heath, Moss, etc.
THe fifth sort of Commons, which are cumbred with thorns, briers, furzes,
fern, heath, moss, and such like unprofitable fruit, the soil thereof is in
many places so pestilent both to cattle and sheep, by reason of those many
Gauls, Moorish Bogs, and c^nkered Puddles or Lakes, that it it occasions many
diseases, as the Mountain-evil, the Giddy, the Rot, etc. Nay, there is such an
unkindliness in many of these grounds, that it has an influence on the very
bodies of men that inhabit those parts; all which might be made both healthful
and fruitful, were they enclosed; and great increase would accrue thereby, of
all sorts of cattle, sheep, corn, and wood, to every man, both poor and rich,
that has his particular interest therein; and so be both honorable and
beneficial to the Commonwealth in general.

I dare say, that many of you that have your enclosures near those vast Commons
which are mountainous and bleak, can say that your now-enclosed grounds would
be much more fruitful, were those Commons enclosed also: for it is often seen,
that those cutting winds that have their free passage the row many vast
Commons, and also the thick mists that are occasioned by those rotten boggie
grounds, causes much unkindliness both in corn and grass: for, in the time of
your corn-blowing, you say those bleak winds blow the blossoms off (the ear)
before it be ripe, so that the grain in the ear is small and horny, and will
yield but very little flour, especially in the top and bottom thereof. And in
harvest these winds have oftentimes such a clear passage, without any
interposition (of hedges or trees) that the ripest and best corn is blown forth
before it comes to the Sickle.

Again, look on your Commons with an indifferent judgment, and tell me if you
have not seen much of it of which you can say, that that piece which now bears
little else but Moss, and rubbish matter, were it enclosed would bear excellent
Corn. And do you not look on another piece of Moorish ground that now bears
little but Peny-grass, or by some called Liver-grass (which kills many
thousands of your sheep year by year) and you find the very form and color of
it in their Livers, and can say that the sheeps feeding on such ground kills
them; and can also say, that much of that ground, were it enclosed and drained,
would be worth ten or twenty shillings the acre by the year, which now is worth
less then nothing, for that it breeds the Rot and many other diseases in your
sheep, to their great mortality, and no little loss to the Commonwealth? And I
pray tell me (if you can) of any man that ever went about to better such ground
thus in Common, by expending five shillings thereon, though so much would
better the ground five pounds twice told: for my part, I can hear of none; and
knew I any such, I would here name and commend him for a good Commonwealths
man. In this, the Proverb is good, That that which is every man's, is no man's:
for no man takes care for the bettering of Commons.

I dare say, had they such grounds in the Low Countries as many of our
unprofitable Commons are, they would build Villages, Towns, and Cities, and
maintain an hundred thous^nd families, which with us do not maintain many
thousands of persons, as now they are used.

What, has not God made us a Commonwealth as well as them? Are not we to bless
God for it, by improving those blessings he bestows on us to the best
advantage, that the many thousands unborn may bless God for the Change he has
wrought for us, by putting the opportunity of doing good in our hands? If now
then we neglect these excellent improvements, we may thank our selves; (the lot
is cast into the lap.) It puts not me alone, but all the world in admiration,
what the Lord will do by us, that has put three such great Kingdoms into this
our one Commonwealth, which naturally offer unto us such variety of
Improvements, that no one Nation of the world can parallel. Has God given us
so much rich ground that now lies Common (I may almost say useless) situate
extraordinarily convenient to many Navigable Rivers, and offer themselves very
natural and apt for the planting of Woods, whereby our Shipping may be for ever
maintained, and our Nation thereby (so far as means can go) made strong and
safe? And has God furnished us with all needful riches of Inland-commodities,
that no one part of the world has more, that are of so real a worth, and has
seated these Isles of our Commonwealth in the midst of those Seas that do
abound with such riches, that our neighbour-nation must be beholden to us for a
great part of their livelihood; I mean, the variety of Fish and Fishing, which
oothers cannot have without our leave (notwithstanding the mare liberum that
floats in so many men's brains, who indeed have no English saltitude, and
therefore too bad to have rest on a dunghill? Set up then your Fishing Busses;
and let those twice forty thousand hands in building of Busses, and making of
Nets, be an employment for our own Poor (that now are both idle and chargeable)
which our neighbour-nation has now the benefit of: and let not the greater
good, by enclosing the Commons, be neglected: for thereby will be a great
increase, and a good change, when sixty acres of your Common ground that would
not keep above sixty sheep, will then keep an hundred sheep, six beasts, and a
horse.

I pray consider, if one and twenty acres were plowed and sowed for two or
three years, and then let lie for grass again, if it would not keep more cattle
and sheep then sixty six acres would do when it lay overrun with Moss and
other rubbish.

It is verily believed by good experienced men, that the very sraw and
after-grass that would arise from fourteen acres of the one and twenty acres
kept in Tillage, will keep more cattle then all the sixty six acres would do in
such Commons as now we treat of, if wisely ordered according to the nature of
the soil, by turning Tillage into Pasture, and Pasture into Tillage; which you
may do (if enclosed) at your pleasure, to your great advantage: and the dung
that will be made of the straw, will be a constant supply to keep your ground
in continual heart.

I know very many Commons so large, that a Freeholder that has not thirty
three acres of Enclosure belonging to his tenement, would then by his right of
Common have sixtysix acres more come to his share, were the Commons enclosed.
And were then those sixty six orderly disposed of, (as thus) forty two acres
in Meadow and Pasture, and three acres to plant with Wood, and the other one
and twenty acres in Tillage, to sow yearly with Rye, Wheat, Barley, Oats, or
what other kind of grain it is most fit for. If this orderly way were taken,
the now-Freeholder, with this additional enclosure, might have a full
employment for his many children, which now in most parts are brought up very
idly, having little to do but to look after a few sheep scattering on the
Common.

The greatest Objection against the enclosing of such Commons as are
overspread with Heath, is, (say some) Our cattle and sheep will make a good
shift to live on it in a hard Winter, when fodder is scarce.

Answ. It must be granted, that Necessity will force to Endeavor, especially
where it is for life: but as for nourishment by such feeding, there is very
little in your great old Heath, which oftentimes you are necessitated to put
fire into, that so young Heath (that is tender) may come up for your Cattle, or
otherwise that they may come to a better feed, which is the grass that grows
at the bottom of such Heath. And surely you would say, that could you turn it
all to grass, it would be much better, and a more thriving feed for your
cattle. Nay, there are many, that could they have it enclosed at the worst,
(that is) if no better should grow on it then Heath; yet so, they could make
more benefit of it then as now, it lying in Common: for then, the poor man not
able to stock, may rent out his ground; the richer man may so order it, that he
may feed therein what cattle it is most agreeable unto: and then at all times
he knows where to look for his cattle; but in Common he must oftentimes look
for them two or three miles, and sometimes more, there being neither gate nor
hedge to keep them from straying: and this gives great encouragement to a
thievish heart to fall to stealing (which experience tells us in many large
Commons:) so that if in the worst condition, these and all other grounds would
be more profitable if enclosed. But I know not any but that may be improved:
there is much of this ground very good for Corn, especially where the soil is
deep, and of a fast earth. I have seen of this sort of ground, that by the
husbandry of Betting and Burning, there has been a very great increase: and
although this kind of Husbandry is destructive to many fine grounds, where the
soil is shallow, as experience tells Landlords in Hampshire, and in other
places where the soil is of the like nature, (where none but short leased
tenants have the benefit of this husbandry;) yet where the ground is cold, and
the soil deep, there this husbandry may be called good.

And if the soil be hollow, loose, and black, like your Moorish ground, it will
bear excellent good Oats (a Grain no whit inferior to that we have in most
esteem amongst us:) and the plowing of such ground does beget a very good
grass. If you look on the Forest of Windsor, in which there are many places of
it as bad grounds of this Heathy nature (as ever I saw) yet the Enclosures
adjoynining (though but a Hedge between) does produce either Corn, Grass, or
Wood; and surely the worst of that bad, where it enclosed (with husbandry)
would be much bettered; therefore seeing the worst may be much improved, be you
encouraged that God has given but one ralent of ability unto in this way of
improvement; wrap it not up in a Napkin, but exercise your parts, and be at
some little cost in setting poor laborers on work, to enclose by ditching and
setting Quick; let there be but care taken to make choice of such kinds of sets
your ground is most apt for, as also to plant it at fit seasons of the year,
and trust God with the blessing. For there is no ground in England, but, with
good Husbandry, will bear some kind of wood or other (except it be some land
near the Seaside:) The benefit that will come to many hereby, will be seen
quickly to hasten the increase of all Husbandry, Manufactory, Trade, and the
greatest Merchandise: Therefore my desire to all my Countrymen is, that you
would not content your selves to hear or see these improvements afar off, but
labor to bring it home with your own hands, and your enjoyments shall be very
great: Petition those that are in Authority that they would Commission such
that may with wisdom and all indifference draw out the lines, so to make the
Divident, that there may be no complaining; but all might rejoice to see the
poor made rich, and the rich yet more rich.

How pleasurable and how profitable would it be to see one part of the Commons
converted to Corn, another part to Meadowing, another to Pasture, and another
part to dainty Groves, and pleasant Woods; and to see the man that lived very
poor, and his many children wandering from door to door begging their bread,
now all of them employed, some plowing, some planting, some milking Cows of
their own, and joyfully eating the fruit of their own labor!

SECT. VIII. Which treats of Forests and Chases.
A Sixth sort of Commons are those of Forests and Chases. Of these I need say
but little; all men's eyes are on them, and every man's judgment can reach to
say, that Enclosures here would be of singular advantage to the Commonwealth.
If you would have asked the Countryman that lived near those Forests, and had
right of Common therein (when his honest and painful labor had raised his
hopes to a crop of good Corn) but thirty years ago, whether he would have been
willing to have the Forest enclosed, He would have said, Yea, with all his
heart. If you had asked him whether it would have been good for the
Commonwealth in general, he would then have said, Yes sure; and would have
given you many reasons for it: one reason would have been, We now lie under
Forest-laws, which are made chiefly for the preserving of Deer; which is very
prejudicial not only to us here living, in particular, but to the Commonwealth
in general. As for our own Enclosures, we cannot make the best advantage of
them; we dare not: for if we do, what with Hunting, and the Deers feeding, we
have most of our Corn spoiled: and if five hundred Deer lie in our Corn all
night, and we kill any one of them, it is a hanging matter. And if we keep but
a dog (especially with claws) to hunt them out, upon any displeasure taken by
an under Ranger, we should presently be complained of, and our punishment would
be greater then the loss of all our corn. Another reason would be, that in many
Forests sheep are no Commonable cattle; and surely this is a great prejudice to
the Commonwealth; for Wool is one of the greatest riches in England: and had we
that benefit of keeping sheep, then our servants which we are necessitated to
keep (all the year for Summers work) and our children, would have a full
employment in the Winter, by Carding, and Spinning, and Knitting: then we
should not only make Cloth for our own families (which now we buy) but for
others also; and it would be a good means to advance our Clothing for foreign
Trade, and many hands would thereby be employed.

And were the Forests and Chases enclosed, by the wise ordering of them, there
would be a great advantage to the Commonwealth: for then there may be care
taken that the Forest of Dean, so famous for Ship-timber (not to be paralleled)
might again flourish with goodly trees; which to waste, comes not far short of
Treason: and that goodly Forest of Waltham, so apt for Wood and Grass, and
lying so convenient to a Navigable River, may abound with Cattle, and gallant
Timber: And that Upland and now-Bushie Chase of Enfield, will then be loaded
with Corn and Sheep.

And do not those rich grounds in Needwood-Forest (or Chase) and that large
Forest of Sherwood, with many more of the like or better nature, all offer
themselves, with abundance of fruitfulness to this Nation, were they enclosed?

Surely the great increase of Riches to this Nation, cannot but be foreseen by
wise men, if those fruitful grounds now lying in Common, and much of it waste
and unoccupied, were once enclosed: insomuch that those good Commonwealths-men
that have their eyes upon it, will say, and do believe, that were the Commons
enclosed, there would be sufficient for a third part of people more then are
now in England. (I do not go so high.) Others think, were they enclosed, they
would maintain an eighth part more. (My thoughts are not so low.)

But many there are which do believe (of which I am one) that, were they
enclosed, there would be plenty for a fifth part more, and employment for many
hundred thousand laboring hands more then are now in England, which this
Nation (so apt for Procreation) is now necessitated to part with (for want of
employment;) and to other Plantations they go, where the Air is no whit
agreeable to their constitutions, and so they quickly return to their dust;
which for many years (till these Commons were fully peopled) by enclosing would
be in a very great measure prevented, and we should here at home enjoy the
benefit of their endeavors with us; which would greatly enrich and strengthen
us: for thereby (if need should be) there would in few years be added to our
gallant Soldiery an Auxiliary of twenty thousand men, able and ready to oppose
any foreign Enemy, either by Sea or Land.

I might have added many more Reasons, for an encouragement to the enclosing of
Commons, and answered some toyish Objections, with which I am not willing to
swell up this Book, for that it would make it more tedious to the judicious
Reader.

If that which has been said do but point out the great good to the
Commonwealth which at first I laid down in my three general grounds, I shall
therein rejoice, when others, and those many hundred thousands, shall receive
the benefit thereof.

I cannot see wherein it should be doubted of other then of a very great
increase of all necessary Commodities which our Nation does naturally afford,
if those many fruitful Commons were enclosed: for then we should have such
variety of soyls, that we might very plentifully be furnished with those
Commodities which come from other Countries, and we now are many times
necessitated to be beholden to them for, as Corn, which some years were we not
supplied with from other parts, we should be brought to great straits: which by
Gods blessing on the Husbandmans labor in those rich grounds in many Commons,
would be prevented. And much of that ground which now lies waste, would be
very apt for Hemp and Flax (commodities too much neglected amongst us) and we
thereby might employ many hands of our own, and be very plentifully furnished
with the most needful Linen, which now in a great part we have from other
Countries.

As for the benefit which will be to this Nation, by drayning and severing the
Fenns, every one may now see, as in the rich feedings, the getting of Corn,
Hemp, and Flax, the abundance of Oil, and many others, all which at the first
undertaking was very much opposed by many thousands, who do enjoy, and can
speak of (by good experience) the great commodities that those Countries
receive thereby.

Another increase of the Native Commodities by enclosing, will be in Cattle
and Wood; for much of those grounds that yield but little now (other then
Moss, Furze, Brackin, and such unfruitful matter) would then produce
fruitful grass, which would redound much to the increase of all sort of
cattle, and the increase of timber will not be the least commodity; the late
decay thereof our enemies did rejoice in, as some can well remember, when those
notable Popish Politicians (Sir ^ohn Winter, Sir Bazill Brooks, and Mr. Minn,
Rome's Agents) had designed the destruction of those goodly woods in the
Forest of Dean, and truly our friends cannot take any great joy in the great
wast that has been made since.

And what a great strength to our Nation shipping is, and what a multitude of
people are employed, and maintained thereby, is very visible to all wise men: I
dare not enter into particulars, for should I, they are so many, they would
make a great volume, and my intentions of half an hours reading would be
disappointed.

It is seen by many, that Trade and Manufactory does very much depend upon our
preserving and improveing our Native commodities; all foreign commodities must
be obtained by those of our own Country. Now those which chiefly maintain
foreign commodities, are fish (I call it ours, for we have had prescription
for many Ages, that which the Law of Nations (if it be granted that there be
any) does maintain as one of its purest begotten Issue) Wool, Tin, and Lead;
and although many of our other Native commodities are of more absolute
necessity, yet these are not to be neglected; and it is not to be doubted, but
our God, who has so wonderfully blessed our faithful Trustees with wisdom to
this day, will be still with them in their Christian care, and willing
endeavors in these so necessary works for the universal good of all (the
three Nations now united) in this our Commonwealth, and here though
collaterally to my work, I must say that that Noble Act of making conquered
Scotlond one free body with us, (and what if our Sea neighbors were thus
incorporated) a Maxim which the Roman and Venetian States never admitted, may
be more subservient to common liberty, then thirty Armies, but enough of this
dish at this season.

SECT. IX. The way and manner of enclosing Commons.
MAny will say the work of it self is good, if such a way might be found that
might preserve each man's right.

Now if I might have but this granted me, that it is but right that the poor
ought to be maintained one way or other, (which surely good men will confess)
then do but observe these my humble Proposalls, and I doubt not but
satisfaction will be given.

First, then for all those Commons in which men have an undivided right, for to
them only I shall now direct the remaining part of my discourse. Let the
Commons in England, in this I except Wales, having for them a further
intention, be divided into four equal parts, and let one of these four be
first set a part for the good of the poor, to the uses following.

Out of this fourth part, let the present Cottagers be first provided for, and
let respect be had to the number of each Family, that so allowance may be made
accordingly, and let twenty, thirty, or forty Acres, more or less be laid to
every Cottage: as for example, if there be a Common of twelve hundred Acres,
out of that let three hundred Acres be allotted for the poor. Now suppose you
have of poor four Families that are Cottagers, the one having four, the other
six, the third eight, and the fourth ten persons in their several Families, if
it shall be thought fit, let there be twenty Acres allowed to the first, thirty
Acres to the second, forty Acres to the third, and fifty Acres to the fourth,
in all one hundred and forty Acres: so of the first fourth part, there will be
one hundred and sixty Acres remaining; out of which one hundred and sixty
acres, it would do well to consider the number of poor that are in each Parish,
besides those that have Cottages on the Commons, and are maintained by the
Parish, and that one third or fourth part, more or less, be allowed to that
Parish for a constant relief of their poor.

This being done, let those Cottagers, to whom this land shall ye allotted,
have a lease thereof for term of years, or for two or three lives, and that at
a very easy rent, not to be more then the fifth part of the present truevalue,
respect being had to the charges of enclosing and fencing thereof; as thus, if
the Land be worth twenty pence the acre per annum, and there be thirty acres
laid to a Cottage, then let the Cottager pay during his life seven, eight, or
ten shillings yearly at the most, and by this means, he that is poor this year,
will be made rich in a very few years after, for there will be now employment
for the many hands in his Family, some digging and planting both in garden and
Orchard, some ploughing for Corn, Hemp, and Flax, some one way, some another,
all carefully laboring with their hands, that so they may enjoy the fruit
thereof.

Ob. But it will be asked how the rent reserved on these Cottages, as also the
improvement at the expiration of their leases, and likewise the remainder of
the fourth part of the Common shall be employed?

An. I answer, let the remainder of the fourth part, not disposed of to the
Cottagers, be let by lease, or otherwise for a yearly rent, and let that rent,
and the reserved rent on the Cottagers, with their improved rent upon the
expiration of the leases, be employed in raising workhouses, and stock to set
the poor on work in those places most needful, which I look on as a living
way, for the supply of the decaies in stock, for lack of which heretofore many
worthy undertakings have in a short time fallen to the ground; for it is not to
be expected, that the increase of such works should maintain themselves, by
reason that such works have many Overseers, and Directors that must be
maintained by a Salary; and something must be allowed to supply the defects of
those weaker hands, that cannot get sufficient for their own livelihood; and
the advantage would be great to the Commonwealth, if the labor, in some
serviceable commodittes, would maintain but the one half of those idle persons
that go wandering, and now live by filching, stealing, roguing, drabbing, and
beg from door to door.

I have many times offered to many of those idle persons, both men and women,
six pence by the day to work, they have answered, they cannot live on it, and
as good play for nothing, as work for nothing. By which it may be gathered,
that they like drones, never laboring, do spend out of that which others
labor for, each of them six pence a day, so that if there be but two hundred
thousand of these idle persons in England, and but the one half of them able
to work; there is a daily wast to the Commonwealth of two thousand five
hundred pounds, which amounts unto per annum nine hundred twelve thousand five
hundred pounds, a sum that would help well toward the maintaining of a gallant
Army. Now if but one half of this were got by their work, and the other half
supplied, it would be a great saving to this Nation yearly. If then you would
reform these great evils, enclose your Commons, and down with those many
thousands of blind Alehouses, which are fit for nothing but to uphold
drunkenness, idleness, roguery, whoredom, and increase beggary and erect
workhouses, for this is one great means to make the poor rich, and the rich
yet more rich; and were these many idle persons set to work, it would not only
be an inrichment of, but a great honor to our Nation.

Ob. But here it will be objected, that many of these Cottages are new
erections, and ought not by the Statute to be suffered or continned.

An. My answer is, that you have either given way to the building of them for
the ease of your Parish, or out of a base fear of your Lord. The Parish
sometimes wants habitation for their poor, and then with consent of the Lord
there is a new erection, and for which there are very few Lords, but contrary
to Law do receive rent, so that he cares not how many are erected. Again, many
times the Lord gives way to erect without consent, either of Free, or
Copyholder, and if such are presented, yet very seldom redressed: The Statute
does as well say, that the poor being admitted, and continued a short time in
the Parish, they have a right of habitation within the Parish, and must be
provided for: but such has been the cruelty of the former inclosers, that not
only those new Erections, but old and new all together have been thrust our,
and Might has herein (as too often) overcome right, and thereby the poor
inhabitants necessitated to seek their bread from door to door, which
doubtless has been a crying sin, and it is very like that those which have so
done, have had the curse of these poor fallen on them, or their Families:
therefore my advice is, that they all be provided for proportionably according
to the number of their Families, and then you may expect a blessing; for the
Lord has said it, Blessed are the merciful. And here cast thy bread on the
waters, and thou shall find it after many days; ages to come shall bless God
that such mercy has been shown in our days, and that common curse shall be
turned into a blessing to your childrens children for many Generations.

For the other three parts, let the one fourth go to the Lord, and the other
three to the Free and Copyholders, that have a right thereunto, or rather let
the Free and Copy holders have the whole, and pay the Lord an easy quit rent
for each acre that shall be enclosed.

But whosoever incloseth, let him be strictly enjoined, that every twentieth
acre, besides hedges, be planted with wood, which may be so ordered, that to
such grounds it will be a great good, and time may make it of much advantage to
the Commonwealth, especially where near navigable rivers, for preserving of
wood will not be the least advantage to this Nation, Country men put it in
practice? what with your hedges, and those dainty scattered little groves in
which you will not only have a great delight, but much profit; for it will keep
your ground warm, and thereby make it more fruitful, it will be a good
shelter, both to your corn, sheep, and other cattle; you may bedeck your
hedges with Pear Trees, and Apple Trees, in which you will find a great
increase, and take much pleasure. Let the example of Worcester and Hereford
shires invite you to this. Again, let the inclosers be enjoined to leave good
large high*waies, and so left to be by them maintained; but as for those large
Commons in Wales; and here may be taken in Yorkshire, Lancashire, and other of
those Northern Counties, that do abound with Commons and ignorance, I desire it
may be considered, if not requisite to a quiet in Government, that learning be
furthered, and that by dividing those large Commons into five equal parts, and
that one fifth part thereof should be subdivided, the one Moiety thereof to
maintain a free School in every Parish, to teach the English letter, which
some poor honest man or woman would undertake for a very small stipend, between
five or ten pounds per annum, and all men's children should there be taught
freely; and if the Parishes lie near and convenient, then one School may serve
two Parishes, this would encourage the poor to send their children sometimes,
when they have little to do for them, and thereby attain to some little
learning, which would tend much to the civilizing of them, and all may acquire
so much, as may make them fit for a higher School.

The other Moiety of the fifth part may be well employed for the maintenance of
a Latin free School, and these to be so seated in the several Counties, that
men need not send their children above five or six miles at farthest, if so,
then poor men would be encouraged to send their children on Monday morning,
with a loaf and a cheese, or what other provision they could afford, and have
them return home on Saturday night, whereby they may look to them themselves,
and not be at charges for others to do it, this little part of those vast
Commons thus employed, would not be lost, but found to be of great advantage to
their Posterity.

I am sure the present constitution of Schools is such, as argues a deficiency
in our young Government; and I judge the education of youth is more
influentiall than judged by many pretenders to skill in civil Government; and
there are notions of this subject, which if applied, after a few years, each of
them may be of a more conservative nature to our home-peace then thousand armed
men: and as to proficiency in learning, it is not the Genius of youth in
general, but as now the estates of a few rich parents, that force the
uninclined child to seek knowledge, not knowing that who ever is wise is born
so, and that learning is but the improvement of natural reason, which is
graduated according to the constitution.

The other four parts may be disposed of, as before is advised.

But the carrying on of this work from first to last, must be by that great
authority of Parliament; it is to be wished it might be done by these in
present power, that so this may be in the Catalogue of their other many good
works, for it will not be the least; and that by commissioning some in each
County, men both discreet and honest, a greater want then that of money, so
that with all indifferency they make the divident without partiality to each
(according to their several interests) their due proportion; if this course be
taken, the success will be good, for God will give a blessing thereunto.

SECT. X. Treating of the manner of enclosing Forests and Chaces, with some
brief directions for planting and preserving Wood, that so it may be a
provision for our Navy to all Generations.
NOw for the enclosing of Forests and Chaces, a work of very great
concernment, and ought to be warily handled by the most able and wisest men)
those that have a right of Common in these, yet have not such privileges as
those others, that have a right to most of those Commons formerly spoken of;
and therefore are not to expect so large a proportion to their own particular.
For many of such, who live within the Regard of the Forests, heretofore would
have been glad to have parted with their right of Common* upon condition they
might have freely enjoyed the like privileges as other men in their own
particular land enclosed* For besides their spoil in corn, their pastures and
mowing grass may in some sort be said to be common, for they must leave places
on purpose in their hedges for the Deer to come in, and when they were in and
lodged, they might not disturb them, and fortheir Woods they may not fall any
without license, and many such like inconveniences. But what is each man's
particular right to the soil, and what proportion ought to be allowed them, I
shall not prescribe, but leave it to their wisdom, who have a power to dispose
of more or less, to each man as they shall see good reason for.

I shall only speak to the manner of enclosing and disposing, and in that I
shall desire consideration might be had to the preserving of Timber for a
constant and certain supply of the Navy.

As first to set apart so much ground as is most apt for Wood, and most near
adjoining to a navigable river, not distant above three or four miles; and of
this ground so fit and convenient, there may be found thirty thousand acres for
that purpose; as a great part of the Forest of Dean near Severn side, some
part of the new Forest near the Sea. That which is most apt for Wood in the
Forest of Windsor near the Thames, much of Waltham Forest, and Enfield Chase,
many other places there be as convenient as these, out of which may be
preserved from sale, so much as would for after ages be sufficient to build and
maintain shipping, if carefully kept, to all Generations; for this purpose, let
there be choice made of men skillful* industrious, and faithful, to whose care
the charge of planting and preserving shall be committed. Those who are
employed for that purpose, must first see that the grounds be well fenced with
pale or quick, or rather both, with a good M^und and Dich, that all sort; of
cattle may be kept out; for if any cattle come in, before the trees are
grown so high as to be out of their reach, there will be very much spoil made,
then let there be so many acres prepared by ploughing or digging, as may be
well compassed to plant that year, and so yearly till all the ground be
planted, either by setting young sets, or sowing of acornes, but sowing of
acornes is to be preferred before the other, for they will sooner come to
perfection, and be both straight and tall: besides these springing up thick may
be removed the next year, but then with them must be taken up a good quantity
of earth, and little holes prepared for them, or rather ploughed furrows in
the place, to which you remove them: when you thus first fit your ground with
the plough, raise it up in little ridges, and then you may with a light plough
make a furrow on each side the Ridge, and if your Ridge be big enough, let
there be one furrow on the top thereof; in these furrows you may put your
acorns indifferently thick, but let your furrows be two foot asunder, that so
you may with more safety go between, to weed or remove as you still shall have
occasion. These plants should be dressed by hoeing or kybing for two or three
years, that so the weeds may be killed, and fresh earth put to the plants, till
of themselves they top the weeds or grass; but if you use the Hoe, take heed
you bruise not the plants, for if you do, they carry it with them till they
come to be trees; these may grow together to thirty years growth, and so they
will preserve each other from the winds: if the wind have a full stroke at them,
and they thin, it will bend them, and sometimes bruise them, which many times
is the cause of that in Timber which we call Cup, or VVindshakes.

At thirty years let them be garbled, taking the worst away by grubbing or
cutting, leaving the most kindly plants for Timber, which wood so taken away,
may be sold, or otherwise disposed of, as the State sh^l think fit, this would
be again done, when they come to be of seventy or eighty years growth, leaving
still the most kindly for Timber; each tree then should have ten foot of ground
to spread it self in, and so you may expect in each acre, on this account, four
hundred and eighty trees (if none miscarry) so that after two hundred years, if
you reserve thirty thousand acres, you may have one hundred and fifty acres
yearly at a good full growth for your use, which may be disposed of as the
State shall still see cause; and when great trees are made use of, it were good
they were stocked up by the roots, for if cut, then the roots will cumber the
ground so, that there cannot be a new planting till these roots are rotten,
which will be long, or else there must be a stocking after the fall, which will
be far more chargeable then if they had been stocked at the first; besides if
you cut a tree down, there is great wast of Timber; for the kirfe (if it be a
great tree) is so deep, that usually there is five or six foot of square Timber
lost, being hewed into chips, which would be saved if stocked up, and sawed
close to the root; if you cleave this great root, and make it into Charcoale,
it will pay the charge: the hole in the ground out of which the great root is
taken must be levelled with the plough, or otherwise filled up, for if you set
any plant again in that place, it seldom ever comes to be a kindly tree, the
old tree by her many great roots having sucked from the earth that which was
most fit for nourishment; therefore it should be often ploughed before it will
be fit to plant again, and if it were sowed with corn a year or two after,
before it be again planted, it would be much better: These brief directions I
thought fit to insert for the help of those not experienced skillful, if it
should happen such should be called to this work.

Ob. But it will be objected, that this way will be very chargeable to the
Commonwealth, and long before any profit will come to the same thereby.

An. I answer, it is natural for man to labor for posterity, his children
being truly said to be his more living parts, and it is God that gives man
that providence; had not God inclined man's heart to this disposition, we had
had but little Timber to build Ships with at this time. It is said of the
Indians in China, that the great Grandfather prepares the earth (that our fine
China dishes are made of) for the great Grandchild to reap the benefit of it
two hundred years after, and surely if they do this for the enriching of a
particular, we ought to do much more for a general safety, and it is better
begun once then never; some will say, that is never long, which comes at last.

Another objection is, that we have many Plantations, as New England, and
others, out of which we have very good and plenty of Timber, and we can have
this brought at a cheaper rate, then we can bring our own now growing, to our
Docks, or Wharfes.

I answer, for bringing Timber to the Wharfes or Docks, when you fetch it ten
or fifteen miles from a navigable river, it cannot be expected to come at a
cheap rate; but if this course be taken, to plant near navigable rivers, it
cannot be reasonably imagined, that it should be cheaper farther fetched, then
near at hand.

And to trust to foreign plantations for our Timber, I hope it will be the
wisdom of the State to do otherwise then rely on uncertainties deficiency; If
we should have difference with other Nations, their work would be to cut off
our supplies, which our own practice teaches; if we besiege a Town or Castle,
we presently inquire after their chief supply, and can we but cut off their
conduit pipes, we know the place will be quickly ours; it is good and sure work
to have our supplies within our selves, and if the enemies should once find
that we were defective in Timber for shipping, it would be a greater
encouragement to them, than if we were in want of money to pay our soldiers;
for the affection of man can supply this want, but nothing can the other. And
it is the wisdom of a State in all things of great concernment, to take the
safest way, and not put themselves upon uncertainties, if possible it may be
otherwise; if it be but in so small a matter as bringing the Records from the
Tower to Westminster, although they may probably come safely by water for
twelve pence, yet it is accounted prudence to have them carried by Land, though
it usually costs three or four shillings.

Ob. It is farther objected, that if our Plantations fail, yet our trade will
fetch both Timber and Ships at all times, as the Hollanders now do that have no
Timber growing, for it is usually said, that though trade be sick, it will never
die.

An. To these I answer, it is not good to adventure a sickness, when we may be
sure of a continuated health; the best use of sickness is, that we may see
there is a great happiness in health, and those that have been in some
desperate disease, will take care to prevent the falling into it again, and the
disease of sickness in trade may be such, as that it may seize not only on the
humors, but on the very spirits of a Commonwealth; in which, though those
guided by sense cannot discern, yet those of reason find it to be of a more
deadly nature then the former; thereby we may be made as unable to help our
selves as the Shechemites were. The story is famous of that almost universal
league at Cambray, by Pope Julius the second, and most of the Princes of Europe
against poor Venice, whom because emulated (which may be our case) by all the
Neighbor Nations, they would have destroyed her as at once, and so had done,
had she not most subtly complemented with the Emperor, bowed to the Pope,
strained her self to nothing, that she might have but a being in the world. If
such a league as this be within two years of this time, it will teach us such
a one may be in future ages.

The Hollanders indeed have been a provident people, and have their stores
before hand, and have kept peace with those from whom they have had their
greatest supply of Timber; but there is no such thing intailed on them, that
they shall always have trade and safety, time may come that they may have as
much need of friends hereafter, as formerly they had need of us; it is good
wisdom to keep old friends, for such friendship is not easily found; however
they have prospered, all have not done so, and though we know that want makes a
man wise, yet I never heard of that desire, that had want for it is object.
There is a possibility of wanting provisions for shipping, when only by trade
it is to be obtained from other Countries, there is a certainty we may be
provided for by our own at home, it is good to choose the surest way. I wish
that Old and New England may prosper together; but sure I am, if the Timber in
New England be once wasted near the Sea side, it will be more hard for them to
bring it out of the main Land to the Sea, then for Old-England that has it
adjoining to some navigable river, if not to the Sea it self. And as for the
goodness of it (if we can speak by experience it is well) yet I have not heard
of any better then Old-England affords. I therefore conclude, and believe it
will be most sure and safe to preserve, and improve our own Native commodities.

But in case this be not approved of, and all the Forest Lands must be sold
(as some do report) then I humbly beg leave to propose another way for the
preserving of Timber, which before sale may be provided for.

First, let there be an account taken of all the Timber, of what kind soever,
now growing in the Forests and Chaces, that are now to be sold, both quantity,
quality, and value, in each division of Forest and Chase, and let the account
be brought to those that shall be appointed for the sale thereof.

Secondly, then let it be considered, how many ships are fit to be built, and
charged yearly for thirty or forty years, more or less, and if the number of
five, six, or seven, more or less are yearly to be built, the certain number
being known, then let the Commissioners of the Navy, or some other, send unto
those which shall be appointed for sale, the several qualities useful for
shipping, whether Oak, Ash, Beech, Elm, Chestnut, or other wood, and quantity
of each quality, proportioning of each quality so many load, as in the whole
all sorts shall amount unto the full number of loads which yearly must be
expended on those ships so ascertained to be furnished out of the Forests and
Chaces. Then let those that shall be employed for sale make the apportionment,
and fix it on each Forest and Chase so much yearly for so many years as shall
be appointed for the same; and thus apportion'd, let the purchaser of those
lands give good security (by his lands) to serve in so many loads yearly of
good sound and serviceable timber at such Wharf or Wharfs as shall be first
agreed upon to be most convenient for the building of the foresaid ships; if
the State shall think fit, this may be (a kind of) a rent charged on the land
for ever. If what has been said be approved of, these benefits will ensue, as,

1. The Navy will be constantly supplied for so many years as shall be agreed
on, without any farther charge to the State.

2. Secondly, the purchaser will be encouraged (and necessitated) to preserve
his young timber, at least so so much as may enable him to serve the proportion
that shall be set upon him by way of Rent.

3. The Purchaser will be farther encouraged so to order his land, that some
may be for Corn, some for Pasture, and some for Wood.

These last Proposalls I thought good here humbly to present, not that I like
them best, but lest the other should be disliked. For surely in these weighty
businesses the safest way is the best way.

AN APPENDIX, SHOWING The chief cause of wandering poor in England, and the
remedies thereof.
THe two great Nurseries of Idleness and Beggary etc. in the Nation, are
Alehouses, and Commons. The truth of the first is seen by most, and the
hurtful wast that is to the Commonwealth thereby is such, that it amounts to
more yearly then any Assessement for one year, within these ten years last
past; and yet the moderate use of the creature, whether respect be had to
necessity or delight, not to be brought into this account.

If there were an exact account of all that sell Ale or Beer in England, there
would be found an hundred thousand. And that you may have some little to direct
you, take here what has been done in and about London, for the knowledge
thereof in the year 1646. There were then some honest men in each Parish
within the Precincts of the Militia of Westminster did bring in the number of
all the houses that sold Ale or Beer in each Parish, and by conference with
some of the ablest to judge in the Tower Hamblets, Southwark, and the City of
London, it was judged that there were not then less then six thousand within
the weekly Bills of Mortality; since that, we have little cause to believe
their decrease.

And in my observation, upon conference with knowing men of most Counties of
England, whose eyes have been upon this great evil, it may be believed, that
there are not less than two hundred thousand in England. But lest there should
be any mistake in the greater number, I will make use of the less, which is
one hundred thousand, to measure our wast, or loss by.

And that this may be more than probable (viz.) that there is no less than one
hundred thousand houses, in which Ale and Beer is sold within this Nation* I
thus compute it.

The Cities in England are twenty and six.

The Market Towns in England are six hundred and forty.

The Parishes in England, (besides what are in Cities and Market Towns) are
eight thousand at least.

The Cities (say I) have in them, one with another, five hundred, in all
thirteen thousand.

The Market Towns I judge to have in them, one with another, seventy five, in
all forty seven thousand.

The Parishes one with another have five, in all forty thousand, so then if
this account be allowed, the total will be one hundred thousand.

Having this small measure to judge by, which I believe is as small as any
measure they sell their Ale by, (comparatively) let it be either the straight
laced flaggon, or the narrow bottomed pot, the best of them is but the one half
it should be, and I believe this is the like; but however the wise will easily
judge of the greater, by this less.

I believe there is no man that looks on the many houses that sell Ale or Beer,
but will say there are too many by the one half, and that what is spent in such
houses, is too much by three parts of four, nay many will say by nine parts in
ten, (in this I agree) but I will take the thoughts of them that judge the
least, and so take but the one half of what is spent in these hundred thousand
Alehouses to be a wast, and allow the other half to go for what is of
necessity, convenience, and lawful delight; for it cannot be denied, but the
calling of it self is both lawful and necessary. And our Innes on great roads
in England, are not only very useful, but their entertainment such, that they
are an honor to our Nation; and therefore they and such Alehouses as are
conveniently placed for the refreshing of the poor Traveller, ought to have all
due encouragement.

My endeavor here, is only to show the abuse occasioned by the multitude of
unnecessary Alehouses, which if considered, will be found a great wast indeed.
I will take the least to number by, and be it granted, that there are but an
hundred thousand houses that sell Ale and Beer (besides Tavernes, another wast,
which if considered, would be found to be a very great impediment to common
good, but with them at this time I will not meddle) and what is spent in them,
the one half shall be looked upon as wast, which every drunkard in a sober fit
will allow. Now then grant but this, that each Alehouse one with another, does
sell but two barrells weekly, in this I take the least, and that each barrel
has three bushells of Barley Malt, and each bushel worth three shillings and
four pence, and this be the charge before it come to be sold for two pence the
flaggon, then there is spent in each Alehouse weekly twenty shillings, of which
the wast is ten shillings, so the wast in the hundred thousand Alehouses weekly
is fifty thousand pounds, which yearly amounts to twenty six hundred thousand
pounds.

Here note, I reckon not as it is sold at two pence the flaggon, for then it
would come to near three times this sum, nor yet the many hands that are
unnecessarily employed about this work, as the Husbandman, the Maltster the
Brewer, the Victualler, or Ale-seller, all which would find out better
employment for the good of the Commonwealth, if it were no other then to sit
spinning, or knitting of Nets for fishing, but if they all sat down idly,
and had no employment, yet then it would be less hurtful to the
Commonwealth, then so employed as to maintain drunkenness and beggary.

I think it needless here to speak of those that I have observed to come to
beggary, by frequenting of Alehouses, if it should reach to hundreds, what
would that be to the many thousand in England, that fall to beggary yearly by
this great evil!

Should I begin with Gentlemen of very good Families, who make it their only
business to sit piping and potting all the day, nay all the week, the year,
nay their life; and when their estate will not bear the Tavern, or Inns in
Towns, yet they may be found in some smoakie blind Alehouse, if it be no more
then a Cott of turfe set against a tree on some Common. And how often is it
seen that they take their children, yea their eldest son along with them, and
think it well to be the best in the company, though it be but with Raddle-men,
Tinkers, and Grate-carriers; (making them also hereby to spend their time and
neglect their markets) and so this Gentleman by misspending his estate, brings
his family, his (it may be) careful) wife and many children to utter beggary.

There are very few, but by their own observation may more fully demonstrate
the misery, that such poor souls have been brought unto; and who can think of
it without grief, to see so many good parts thus drowned in an Alehouse? And
who does not see the Country-Husbandman (in whose labor consists the welfare
of a Commonwealth) spend more time in these pestilent Alehouses then he does
on the plough, and often times runs so far on the score, that he runs himself out
of all, and then he, his wife and children must beg. Do but look on the
Tradesmen, if many of them do not spend more time in the Alehouse then in
their shops; and if a Customer come to speak with him, his careful wife many
times must hunt from Alehouse to Alehouse for her husband, (and many times
finds him speechless,) and when he should be carefully tending that which
should keep him, he is carelessly at the Alehouse spending, and so hastens to
beggary himself and whole family.

Look also on the poor Labourer (that indeed labors to bring his wife and
children to beggary, whether Carpenter, Mason, or such like) who oftentimes on
a Munday-morning going to work, are caught in an Alehouse, (which are placed
in the way as it were on purpose) which like Spiders webs, do catch daily many
of these silly creatures, who oftentimes run more on the score, before they
come thence, then they get all the rest of the week with their labor; and if
they miss this web the beginning of the week, yet at the later end when they
have got a little money, they seldom escape, but there sit drinking themselves
pennilesse, witless, and their wives and children bloudlesse; for indeed it is
very often seen, that they lie languishing at home, expecting some refreshing
on the Saturday night, when he (like a ravenous creature) lies sucking their
blood at the Alehouse.

I may instance in many more, but surely it is enough to mind all men of what
daily experience speaks, viz. that the multitude of Alehouses is the greatest
occasion of the multitude of beggars in England.

I cannot imagine a greater wast in the Commonwealth then these Alehouses are
an occasion of: Should I tell you of thirty thousand bushells of Barley daily
in England thrown upon the dunghill, it would not be such a wast; for that
would fat the earth again. Should I tell you of an hundred and twenty thousand
dozen of bread fetched by a company of wicked lewd men from several Bakers
shops, purposely to starve the poor of this Nation, and throw one dozen in one
street, and another in another; and so strew all the streets of England, till
all were thrown away, and this done day by day throughout the year, surely you
would cry out on the Magistrates, and say they were not worthy to live that
suffer such wast, as to the starving of so many thousands; yet this bad, is not
so bad as the great waste occasioned by the multitude of Alehouses, for this
bread so thrown away will find some hogs or dogs to gather it up, which at the
worst would be a preserving of some creature useful; but the other serves for
nothing, but to make men worse then dogs or hogs, that drink the fruit of many
men's labor, and wallow in their own dung: Nay let me say, that if lewd wicked
men should take thirty thousand bushells of wheat, and throw so much daily into
several rivers in England, it would not be so destructive to the well-being of
this Nation, as is the multitude of Alehouses that are in this Land at this
day; for in the first wast there would be a saving of a great labor that goes
to the fitting of it for use, which the other takes up before it coms to the
drunkard; for it must have the Maltster, the Market, the Mill; besides many
hedges must be torn by the Ale-seller to brew withal, to the hurt of many men's
Corn, which many times is more then all the Malt is worth, which the wretched
Ale-man never cares for.

And what coms of the one half of the drink that is thus spent, but to be
excremented against the wall, and so run down the channel, never do more good,
till it come to the Sea: and when drunkards drink five dozen in a day, to the
loss of the Commonwealth, the spending of time, and the wasting of his brain
and spirits, and then comes abroad vomiting and casting forth some at one
corner of a street, some at another; at last the dirty wretch tumbles himself
with the rest in the dirty channells; yet there is no complaining against the
Magistrate, (the saddest complaint of all) for the custom in this has made it
genuine to us; so that our wast is insensible, though this will (if well
considered) be far greater then any of the other here spoken of.

The other great occasion of our wandering idle beggar, is our Commons; for
there poor men, that happily themselves are honest laborers, yet their
children are brought up to idleness, having nothing to do but to tear hedges,
or some other the like pilfering employment; and when the father dies, who
during life did get them bread, they are altogether unfit for work, and then
beg they must.

There are many Commons in England, that have many hundred of such Families
living on them (in this the Commons in England are fruitful, for they send
forth yearly many thousand idle wandering beggars, which have not done a days
work (to the benefit of the Commonwealth) in their lives; for indeed if they
have not attained to the use of labor in their youth, they seldom ever betake
themselves to it when of riper years.

The remedies will be in taking away the occasion, and in putting oportunities
of being rich into their hand, whereby they may be encouraged to labor: but if
neither of these will do, then the means must be constraint.

The first and greatest remedy will be the suppressing of many thousand
Alehouses in England, and that by apportioning a certain number to each County
(a small number will serve, unless on Roads and Market Towns) not to be
exceeded upon a great penalty to be on the Justices of Peace for every Alehouse
licensed above the number appointed to that County; all Alehouses to be
licensed at a Quarter Sessions, and not otherwise, and there to be registered,
that so they may be sure to keep within the number; and let there be
Certificate sent to the chief Officer in every Parish, of the number and the
names of all such that shall be licensed in the said Parish. If any sell
without such license, or less then measure in any Parish, after notice given
to the chief Officer, he neglecting to afflict the punishment which shall be
appointed for such offenders, shall have a penalty laid on him, the one half to
go to the informer, the other to the poor of the same Parish: And let the
informer have the third penny of all fines that shall be set on Alefellers,
Tiplers, or Gamesters.

A second remedy will be enclosing of Commons, that so there be no room left
for idleness; and that those now Cottagers may have such a competent measure
of land laid to their Cottages, that may invite their children to labor.

A third remedy is the erecting of workhouses and setting up such a manufactory
that may invite to labors, not by force, but where you meet with resolute idle
persons, such constrain to the mill, or some other hard labor; then he that
will not work, let him not eat; man's nature is more easily drawn, then driven.
I have often seen in and about London Porters take up such burdens for the
rewards sake, that would have broke a good horses back, and poor men that carry
sacks of coals from the water side, that make their knees to buckle, and their
backs to bend, and these voluntarily taken up for the pays sake, is done with
much willingness; but if half that weight should have been forced on them by
authority, they would have fallen down under it, crying out upon oppression and
cruelty, as not possible to be undergone; therefore my advice is that such
works be found out, and such wages given that may invite them to a willing
endeavor. If in these workhouses they earne but half their livelihood, it will
be a great saving to the Commonwealth, as I have already shown in Section the
ninth. And I believe, if they were but for some time unwonted of their idle
course, they would then be quickly ashamed of it, and as well find out
employment themselves, as the poor in the Netherlands, or any other place do.

The several ways of employment were too long here to insist on, and should I
come to particulars (fitter for a debate then a pen) yet there must be a large
latitude still left to the wisdom of those that shall be entrusted in the
ordering of this affair: For respect herein must be had to each commodity of
an English producture, and that what of that is transported do not procure an
over-balance, and so that be said of us on this account, what was said on
another by a great master in humane affairs, to wit, that England is a great
Animal, and not to be destroyed, but by it self.

Prove. 27. 23, 24, 25. Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, and
look well to thy herds.
Thy hay appears, and the tender grass shows it self, and herbs of the
mountains are gathered.
The lambs are for thy clothing, and the goats are the price of thy field.
And thou shall have goats milk enough for thy food, for the food of thy
household, and for maintenance of thy maidens.

FINIS.

