Considerations on the Trade of Africa, Humbly Offered to the Most Honorable
House of LORDS, in behalf of the Bill now before them.
THE Trade to Africa is allowed to be of Consequence sufficient to deserve an
Extraordinary Care. The Trade of Consequence.
The present Question is not whether it should be Preserved or not. but how it
may be most Advantageous to England, and the Colonies.

To manage the Trade in a Company without a Stock seems both improper and
impracticable, Company Without a Stock impracticable.
on many Accounts; in particular, on Account of the Charge of Forts, Castles,
and Treaties with the Petty Kings of the Country, which is very Chargeable, and
always requiring Secrecy and Expedition; and also to prevent the Designs of
other Europeans, who have Forts and Castles on the same Coast: And if they
could possess themselves of our Forts and Castles, would soon become Masters of
the whole Trade, and exclude us.

And it is remarkable, All Nations support Forts and Castles by a Joynt-Stock.
That where Forts and Castles are necessary for the Preservation of the Trade,
no Nation whatsoever have a Company without a Joynt-Stock.

The Case of the Levant Company is otherwise: They need no Forts and Castles,
being under Protection of a Government willing to Treat with, and able to
Defend them.

So that were it not for the Forts and Castles, which only an Incorporated
Company, Trading upon a Joynt-Stock, can maintain, Foreigners instead of
leaving us any share in that Trade, would ingross the whole. Nor is it to be
supposed, that Private Persons can, upon their Narrow and Uncertain Funds,
contend against the Power and Craft of those other European Nations who manage
their Traffic thither by a Joynt-Stock, viz. French, Dutch, Danes,
Hamburghers, etc.

But a Company, A Company Regulated with a Joynt-Stock most beneficial.
with a Stock, to manage the Trade, allowing all Persons the Freedom of Trade,
on certain Limitations and Conditions which may put them and the Company upon
equal Charge in Trade, seems the most Reasonable and Easy Way, both to Promote
and Preserve the Trade it self in General, and the true Interest of the
Colonies and Private Traders in Particular. For,

1. By this Means the Forts and Castles, which defend the Trade, will more
certainly be Maintained, for the Company will be bound to that, to secure their
own Goods and Treasure.

2. The Colonies will be certainly bettered by it; for the supply of Negroes
will be more certain, and in greater Numbers: Nor can they be imposed upon in
Price, because they, and all other Persons, may fetch them, if they think fit.

3. If a Trade is carried on by a Company without a Stock, every Man is at
Liberty whether he will Trade or no: And if the Public Affairs should make it
very Hazardous or Unprofitable, they will decline Trade, and then the Forts and
Castles must consequently be lost. For if few Ships should be sent thither, too
little would be raised to uphold the Forts and Castles, which must always be
supplied with Men, Provision, Stores and Ammunition from England: Whereas a
Company, with a Stock, must Trade to employ their Stock in War as well as
Peace, and maintain the Forts and Castles for the Security of their Trade and
Effects in the most dangerous Times, at the greatest Expense, as the present
African Company have done in the late War.

4. A Company with a Stock, with Liberty for others to Trade on Equal Charge,
has many Advantages to the Public, by increasing Trade, and by making room
for Gentlemen, Widows, Orphans, or any Persons out of Trade, to employ their
Moneys, and will give the Private Traders opportunity to improve their Stock
and Industry, to the Advantage of themselves in particular, and the Nation in
general.

Since then the present Bill gives Liberty to all His Majesty's Subjects to
Trade at a like Charge, Present Company may deserve the Establishment by this
Bill proposed.
the Present Company seems to deserve at least this Method of Settlement in the
Bill prescribed, who have for Twenty Six Years past maintained the Trade, and
preserved the Forts and Castles at their own Charge, and have bought and built
the Forts and Castles they now possess, have as a Company paid Eleven Thousand
Five Hundred Thirty Pound Eight Shillings Taxes during this War, have sunk
their Original Stock to maintain the said Forts to support the Trade, and have
never divided above 3 per Cent. Communibus annis, and have during this War lost
above Two Hundred Thousand Pounds Sterling in endeavoring to carry on this
Trade, and notwithstanding the scarcity of Money, and the said great Losses, in
the Year 1693 raised the further Sum of Seventy Two Thousand Three Hundred and
Forty Pounds for the preserving the said Forts, Castles, and Trade, whilst some
who oppose Settling the Trade have Enjoyed it without any Charge; And since the
Peace have raised the further Sum of Fifty Seven Thousand Ninety Six Pounds for
the carrying on the said Trade. By which it is humbly conceived they have given
a very good Assurance, that under such a Company the Trade can never be lost,
but the Forts and Castles will be supplied in the most dangerous Times.

And yet by this Bill all Persons may Trade, and their Factors and their
Effects, be equally protected paying but an equal proportion for the support of
those Forts and Protection of the Common Trade.

The Company is by this Bill also obliged to give a true Account upon Oath of
all Moneys Received and Paid on the Account of the said Charge, The Company to
Account for what they Receive and Pay.
and to admit any Person on behalf of the Private Traders to inspect at all
times the Accounts of their own Export, and of Moneys laid out for the
Maintenance of the said Forts and Castles.

All which is humbly submitted to the Consideration of this Most Honorable
House.

Considerations on the Trade of Africa, Humbly Offered to the Most Honorable
House of Lords, in behalf of the Bill now before them.


