A REMONSTRANCE OF THE Kirk of Scotland, AND The Message from the States, with
diverse passages of their Proceedings concerning the KINGS Majesty, and the
Estates Answer to the Kirk of SCOTLAND.

With other Occurrences of note certified in Papers from the Scots quarters in
NEWCASTLE.

Printed by the Original papers, and published according to order of
Parliament.

London, Printed for E. E. according to Order, Anno Dom. 1646.

A REMONSTRANCE of the Kirk of Scotland, and the Message from the States, with
diverse passages of their proceedings concerning the Kings Majesty.
Noble Sir,
THe Commissioners of the Kirk at Edenborough, do much lament the death of Mr.
Hinderson; They are much troubled that the King will not pass the
Propositions, but more that Malignants have had access to his Majesty: and
whereas some have endeavored to labor so much, for the Lord Oglebie, the Lord
Seeforth and some others that have acted much mischief in the Kingdom of
Scotland, that also is a great grief to them* They have drawn up a
Remonstrance, and presented it to the Committee of Estates of Edenborough, the
substance of which is as follows;

1. That whereas diverse ill-aff^cted Malignants and seditious Incendiaries,
have from time to time carried on evil designs to destroy the Kirk and State,
they do Remonstrate unto the Committee of Estates against the countenancing of
the enemies of God, and his people, desiring them to consider what designs
they have had to destroy the people of God, and of what dangerous consequence
it is to receive such ill-affected persons into favor.

2. That whereas there has been an happy and blessed peace between the two
Kingdoms of Scotland and England, concluded and settled by both Parliaments,
that they will use all possible means that they may remain in a firm peace
and union to all posterity; And there do Remonstrate to the Estates how the
malicious enemies do daily seek (by all means they can) to deride between the
two Nations, which evil design of theirs they desire that all possible care
may be taken to prevent.

3. That whereas many ill-affected persons seek to destroy the work of
Reformation so happily (already) begun, they do desire that all possible
endeavor may be used to bring the Churches of God in the 3. Kingdoms, to the
nearest conjunction and informity in Religion and Church Government (according
to the Covenant) unto a perfect Reformation.

4. That they do desire that all possible care may be taken to perform
whatsoever is contained in the Covenant of the three Kingdoms.

To this Remonstrance (received by the Committee of Estates) they have returned
a very fair answer, assuring them that they will be careful to preserve the
union of the Kingdoms, and the keeping of the Covenants, and many other fair
promises concerning the Kirk; and what else is desired in the aforesaid
Remonstrance put up to them from the Commissioners. But for his Majesty's
proceedings here, there are many jealousies upon him, not only because of his
great int^rcourse with the French Ambassadors, but also his great estimation of
Newters, as Marquess Hamilton and others, some 2. or 3. of whose kindred his
Lordship hopes to prevail with his Majesty to have them made Vicounts, but if
his Majesty do grant any such thing, I do verily believe that the Estates will
not confer it, so they will be but tituler at the best. But his Majesty has
made 2. Worshipful Knights, one of them is Archiball Primrose, sometimes
Secretary to the Estates of Scotland, till Montrosse had him, there was a
jealousy on him formerly, that he went away purposely to Montrosse, and
carried the parchments, papers, and other writings of the Estates* to betray
them to him, but he makes this Apology for himself, that a Troop of horse
surprised him, and carried him away prisoner, and that he did not carry away
the writings but hid them; Yet when he was taken again by the Estates, he had
like to have been hanged about it; But he since pleades his innocence, and is
now made a Knight by his Majesty.

The other new made Knight is Mr. Weatherburn, who was formerlie the Town
Clerk of Dundee, upon whom was also a very great suspicion, that he was not
right to the Estates, others say that it was only an inclination toward the
King, and that when Dundee stood out against Mont^osse, and put that great
affront upon his Army at that place that this Mr. Weatherburne was the chief
man that acted in the Town; yet most say that he was always observed to be
too much inclined for the King, and therefore his Majesty has also Knighted
him since his Majesty being at Newcastle.

Now concerning his Majesty's being in these parts, and the number of the
Malignants about the Bishopric; I know not what may hinder, but that if his
Majesty should desire it, (which God forbid) both he, and they, may very
easily, either go from Newcastle by Sea to France or Ireland, or by land to
Scotland.

And for the Scottish soldiers, I understand that when they depart the
Kingdom and disband, they have thoughts (most of them) of going beyond the
Seas to serve in some other Wars, and therefore cry out for moneys presently
to be paid them, because they can only make use of what is paid forthwith, they
being resolved to pass beyond the Seas as soon as they are gone out of this
Kingdom.

There are come hither to Newcastle, nine Commissioners with a Message from the
Estates of Scotland met at Edenborough, the Lords are the Marquess Hambleton,
the Earl of Craford and the Lord Castles, with 3. of the Gentry and 3.
Commoners, it is supposed that they will do little before they hear the
resolutions of the Parliament; but their business is about requests to be made
to his Majesty in the behalf of the Kingdom of England and Scotland, to
desire his Majesty that he will yet at last take into consideration the sad
and bleeding conditions of his people, and hearken to his Parliaments in
passing the Propositions of both Kingdoms, I doubt not but all possible means
will be used with his Majesty for that purpose; we have here other godly
Ministers who preach well to persuade the King to that effect by their Sermons.

And the Scots Officers and Soldiers on their return into Scotland that are
resolved to go to Sea, when they have received their moneys from the
Parliament, they will be gone, some to France, some to Holland, some to
Flanders, there are very many of them that are of this resolution, as they
say, and the Country do much desire to be eased of their quartering upon them.

As for the resolution of his Majesty, I cannot certify you any more then
what I have already expressed, but upon the going away of the Scots, it must of
necessity appear how his Majesty is inclined by his going or staying, by the
rest you shall be advertised more at large from

Newcastle the ^4. of Sept. 1646. Your dutiful servant S. T.

FINIS.

