A TESTIMONY OF THE Ministers in the County of Stafford TO THE Truth of Jesus
Christ, AND TO The Solemn League and Covenant, As also Against the Errors,
Heresies, and Blasphemies of these times, and the Toleration of them.

Sent up to the Ministers within the Province of London, Subscribers of the
First TESTIMONY.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for George Calvert, at the sign of the
Half Moon in Watlingstreet, near Austine's Gate. 1648.

A TESTIMONY OF THE Ministers in the County of Stafford TO THE Truth of Jesus
Christ, AND TO The Solemn League and Covenant.
HAving seriously read the Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ, and to the
Solemn League and Covenant, as also against the sundry Blasphemies, Heresies,
and Errors of these times, which the Ministers of the Province of London have
put forth to public view, and that in such a juncture of time, wherein
blasphemous Heresies, and dangerous Schisms did much abound; the Patrons of
them proudly insulting, and industriously acting for a Toleration of them, we
rejoiced much in it, and blessed God for their holy boldness, and religious
Zeal in this common Cause; and since diverse other Provinces have published
their pious Testimonies to the Truth, and their abhorrency of the spreading
Errors; lest we the Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ in the County of
Stafford, should lie under the imputation of betraying the common Faith,
through our silence and neglect of concurrence with our Brethren, having the
same engagements lying upon us, as upon them; we being Ministers of the Gospel,
having lifted up our hand to the most high God; having humbled our souls in
that Solemn day appointed by the authority of Parliament, tendering the
welfare of our peoples souls: And lastly, lest that the diligence of the
Adversaries of the Truth, in promoting their pernicious Doctrines both by their
tongues and pens should condemn our negligence. We therefore, whose names are
hereunto subscribed, do declare and testify to all the Churches of Christ, to
all our Brethren in the Ministry, and to all that unfainedly love the Truth of
Jesus Christ.

First, That the sound and elaborate Confession of Faith, which the Assembly of
Divines (convened by Authority of Parliament,) have presented to the Honorable
Houses, is so consonant to the Truth contained in the Scriptures, that we do
give our full Consent unto the whole, and to each part thereof.

Secondly, That we do from our very souls abhor, all the Errors, which (to the
provoking of God to wrath against this Kingdom, to the great shame of this
Church, once famous for the maintenance of the Truth, and to the grief of all
the godly) are lately sprung up grown high, and spread far amongst us, as
Antiscripturism, Socinianism, Anabaptism, Arminianism, Antinominianism,
Q^aerism, Erastianism, and whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine.

Thirdly, That an Universal Toleration so much pleaded for, and earnestly
desired by the Sectaries is most sinful, destructive, both to truth and
godliness, and in its own nature the mother of all confusion, both in Church
and State; wherefore we cannot but bless God, that he has stirred up the
Honorable Houses of Parliament to publish an Ordinance for the punishing of
diverse Heresies, and gross Errors; praying, That all Magistrates in their
several places would be faithful and diligent in the execution of the said
Ordinance.

Fourthly, Because there cannot be a better damm to prevent the overflowing of
all Blasphemies, Heresies, Errors, Schisms, and Profaneness, then such a form of
Church Government which is agreeable to the Word of God. We declare, that we
are so fully convinced that that form of Church Government tendered by the
Assembly to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, for their civil sanction is so
agreeable to the Word of God, that we can and shall readily subject our selves
unto it, when it shall please God to stir up the hearts of those in whose power
it is to authorize the same. And because there are some who are of eminent
worth, and piety dissenting from us in this particular; we heartily desire,
that there may be a sweet Accommodation between us and them, which we conceive
would be feasible, did they abate of their love to their yet unproved opinion:
and had they an higher esteem of peace and unity; especially since they cannot
be ignorant, how God has blasted their Congregational way, with Sects,
Schisms, Separations; and Subseparations, to their shame, our grief, and the
woeful disturbance of the whole Kingdom.

Fifthly, and Lastly, Sithence God has visited persons and Nations with
exemplary Judgments for Covenant Breaking, which we also in this Kingdom may
justly fear, because of our guiltiness in that respect; the Solemn League and
Covenant being not only violated by most, but decryed by some, and unworthily
compared to an Almanac out of date; by which means some in Scotland take
advantage to pretend a just ground of waging War against us, (which God in his
mercy avert;) We therefore declare, that it is as obligatory upon us now, as at
the first taking of the same, and are resolved through Gods gracious assistance
to endeavor a sincere observance of it in all particulars all the days of our
lives; we knowing that it is not in the power of any to absolve us from it, or
to impose any other sense then what is in the plain and literal expression of
it. And we hope God will enable us to be as ready to witness a good Confession
of the Truth, being thereunto called, with our dearest blood, as now to profess
it by the signing of this with our hands.

John Tailor Minister of Gods Word at Checkley. Nicholas Paeston Pastor of
Kingswinford. Ithiel Smart Minister of Gods Word at Womborne. Thomas Burdall
Minister of Gods Word at Walsall. Joseph Sound Minister of Gods Word. John
Jackson Pastor of Madely. Robert Dowley Minister of Gods Word at Elford. George
Cross Pastor of Clifton Camville. William Brooks Assistant to the Pastor of
Clifton Camvile. Richard Bell Minister of Gods Word in Stafford. Sampson Newton
Minister of Chebsey. Thomas Lightfoote Pastor of Uttoxator. Thomas Allsop
Minister of the Gospel at Chedle. William Langley Minister of the Gospel at
Elaston. Deliverance Phynihouse Minister of Gods Word at Leigh. John Smith
Minister of Audley. Alexand. Hoce. Rector de Dreycott en lee Moors. Zachariah
Crafton Minister of Newcastle Underline. Isaac Kaeling Minister of Gods Word at
Wolstanton. Charles Win Minister of the Gospel at Pen. Edward Barton
Minister of the Gospel at Wodensbury. Richard Bourne Minister of Gods Word at
Cannocke. John Bold Pastor of Alrewas. Philip Sharp Preacher of Gods Word at
Bromley Regis. Roger Linch Minister of Gods Word at Norton Iuxta Cannock.
Edward Nevill Minister of Gods Word at Standon. Nathaniel Hind Minister of
Gods Word at Penckridg John Dolman Minister of Jesus Christ at Brewood. William
Iennings Minist. of Gods Word at Church-Eaton Henry Stubbe Rector of Bloore.
Francis Bowyer Minister of Leek. To. Ward, Minister of Horton. Christopher
Turnor de Grindon. Gawin Hamilton Minister of Alstonfield. Thomas Mounteneys
Minister of ^lon. John Bowyer Minister of Biddulph. Francis Storre
Schoolmaster at Walsall. Samuel Frankland Schoolmaster at Lichfeild.
Imprimatur James Cranford. July 14. 1648.

FINIS.

