A SERMON Preached at the Primary Visitation OF THE Most Reverend FATHER in GOD
MICHAEL Lord Archbishop of ARMAGH, PRIMATE and METROPOLITAN OF ALL IRELAND,
AND Lord High Chancellor of the Same.

Held at Drogheda, August 20. 1679.

By RICH. TENISON, Dean of Clogher.

DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Took and John Crook, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, and are to be sold at His Majesty's Printing House in
Skinner-Row. 1679.

To the most Reverend Father in God, Michael, Lord Archbishop of Armagh,
Primate and Metropolitan of all Ireland, and Lord High Chancellor of the same.
May it please your Grace,
SO great and high are your Graces zealous Affections, and just Veneration for
the best of Kings, that no Sermon which is persuasive to Allegiance can pass
unregarded by you, but receives encouragement beyond its merit; of which
observed truth, your Commands for this mean Discourse are an evident
Demonstration. I little thought, having so happily escaped your learned Ear, to
undergo the Test of your most piercing Eye: but having then preached Obedience
to others, I must practice it my self, and submit to the kind Injunctions of so
great a Superior; it is therefore laid at your Graces feet, hoping my Loyalty
will atone its many imperfections, and the daily fears of our Sovereigns
Assassination may justify its zeal and warmth; For, what tongue can be silent,
to see the Father of our Country assaulted with such variety of Deaths? To see
the Poniard at his sacred Breast, the fatal Dose preparing, and the Gun ready
to fire, must fill every true Subject with horror and resolution. He is the
Head of the Body Politic, and as in the Natural, all the Members strive to
defend the Head, and share in its pain, so should it be in this; the bloody
hand which is lift up against him must wound all loyal souls, the cursed Sword
which strikes at him must pierce their hearts; they must value the Life of
their Prince infinitely above their own, and run through the greatest
difficulties to preserve him; and if they dye in his defense, they perpetuate
their Name on Earth, and receive the Reward of their Fidelity in Heaven; which
true Protestant Principle made many thousands in the late times leap into the
midst of dangers, and run through the armed Troops of their too potent Enemies;
their greatest force could not make them yield, but they covered that Post with
their Bodies, which they could not maintain with their Arms, and willingly died
martyrs for their King, their Religion, and Country.

This (my Lord) many places can witness, but none more in this Kingdom than
this Loyal Town, in defense of which, your Graces valiant Brother (famous for
Courage and Conduct) and many hundreds more, did triumphantly lose their lives;
their blood ran in streams through our streets, and like the brave Leonidas in
the Straits of Thermopyle, they with a small number opposed an Army, and no
doubt but there are vast multitudes in each of these Kingdoms, who will imitate
those Heroic spirits, and cheerfully fall, for the King, and the Church.

And if ever good Subjects should demonstrate their Courage, it is now; if ever
Protestants should love, honor and obey their King, it is now; when the cruel
Jesuits are plotting and consulting to murder him, and subvert our Religion;
in this they are closely combined, this they hold lawful and just, as I have
proved out of many of their Books, besides Mariana, (though a Jesuit lately
executed would confess none else of that Judgment.) But alas! instead of
uniting against them, we bandy into Sects and Factions; we run into Schisms and
Divisions, and make way for them to destroy us; we forget how the Civil
Discords of our Ancestors brought our King and Country under the Subjection
of the Roman Emperor, and I wish our violent heats about Religion, do not at
last bring our Church under the vassalage of the Roman Bishop, and our State
into some imminent danger; for without an agreement in that, our Kingdoms
cannot flourish: Where men differ in Ecclesiastics, they usually clash in
Politics, and have their own intrigues and designs to promote their Opinions;
they are jealous and doubtful one of another, and like the several Factions in
Rome and Carthage, while they pretend the good of the Commonwealth, they
destroy it.

Of this, our late bloody and tragical Devastations are an undeniable Evidence,
and that we are falling into the same miseries again, is more than probable;
for seditious and fiery spirits do now (as formerly) fill the floating heads of
the vulgar, with causless fears and jealousies, and make the King and his
greatest Ministers the common Subject of their Discourse, and if all things be
not done, and timed according to their humor, (as if they knew all Reasons of
State, and had Intelligence from all parts of the world) then do they
calumniate and slander the Government; and asperse those most, who have ever
been most eminent for their Loyalty to the King and the Church, and would now
die in their defense; and thus are the people deluded, and made subservient to
some aspiring malcontents, who by their Agents and Emissaries do in all
places reflect on the Management of Affairs, and make them Patrons of Popery,
who have ever abhorred it, and were lately for their aversion to it to be
cruelly murdered, as is constantly affirmed by Dr Oats's Nar. p. 16. 23, 25.
those on whose Evidence most of our late Discoveries depend.

But your Grace well remembers, this was their method in the beginning of our
late troubles, they (according to Machiavals Advice) did boldly libel and
calumniate, and to destroy both Church and State, they subverted their
strongest Pillars, under the pretense of being corrupted and rotten with
Popery, and by clamor and noise made all Papists, who were not as rash,
furious, and disloyal as themselves. Nay those holy Prelates, whose most
learned Works will be eternal Armeries, and most impregnable Fortresses against
the whole power of Rome, were most unjustly and ingratefully branded with the
same Character; and such are now their Designs and Practices; They would
persuade the people to have an ill opinion of our Governors, that they might
the more securely carry on their own Designs; But I hope God will infuse a
spirit of Discerning into our King, our Parliaments, and Counselors, and that
all who are in any Authority will fix one Eye on those subtle Underminers both
of Church and State, that while they are most zealous and intent (and blessed
be God they are so) on the suppression of Popery, our rigid Sectaries may not
grow too numerous and formidable; for when greedy and voracious flames seize on
both ends of a Ship, the middle part is like to perish; and we know Diseases
long neglected may prove destructive. In the beginning of the Reformation, the
Genevian Infection did spread it self, and the good Queen could not easily
prevent it, her Thoughts being chiefly employed in the Extirpation of Popery,
which dangerous Evil the wise King James did soon perceive, and resolve to
redress, as appears by his Proclamations against them, and his first Speech to
his Parliament, in which, speaking of the Sectaries and Novelists, he says,
They are ever discontented with the present Government, and impatient to suffer
any Superiority, which makes their Sect unable to be suffered in any well
governed Commonwealth; yet he did not do it; for the Gunpowder Plot turned his
Eyes wholly on the Papists, and so had the Separatists an opportunity to
increase to such: prodigious number, as proved destructive to his Son, the
Church, and these Kingdoms: Which, with the two late Rebellions in Scotland,
may move our Governors to look back sometimes, and watch the motions of the
Kirk: But I presume too far; and must beg your Graces pardon, for the loss of
your minutes in viewing this rude Address, so low a Style is no way fit for
your Graces view, who are (as was said of Clem. Alex,) Inter Doctos, sum
Eloquens, inter Eloquentes, sum Doctus; In you the Piety and Zeal, the Wisdom
and Courage, and other justly admired Accomplishments of your Graces late great
Predecessors, are most happily met; You every way fill and adorn your Chair, in
which, that your Grace may long sit, and continue what you are, one of the
greatest Pillars both of Church and State, is the Prayer of,

May it please your Grace, Your Graces most Humble and Obedient Servant, RICH.
TENISON.

1 Pet. 2.17. Honor the King.
AMong the Plots and Conspiracies of the Conclave and the Consistory, amidst
the unjust Pretensions of the Roman Bishop, and the Presbyterian Kirk, to a
Superiority over Monarchs; This Apostolical Canon may not unseasonably be
discoursed on; for when the Papists have (besides all their former bloody
Treasons) now lately contrived the Murder of our Sovereign, and our disloyal
Separatists in Scotland have run again into Rebellion, and published a
traiterous Declaration, denying his Supremacy, and calling his Government an
Usurping Power (though their own Chronicles witness him to be the Hundred and
Tenth King of his Line;) it is high time for all Orthodox and Loyal Clergy men
to declare their Detestation and Abhorrency of such unchristian Tenets and
Practices, which are so directly opposite to this Injunction of St. Peter,
whose Successors, the Popes desire and glory to be esteemed, and whose
peculiar Followers, our fiery Zealots, do no less proudly boast themselves.

But I shall quote him against them, and from him prove them great Enemies to
Princes, and Invaders of the Rights of Kings; for in this Epistle, v. 13.
he more than once commands Obedience to be given unto them, and that in most
general terms, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
(...), ut ostendat, non Qualitates Personarum, sed Officium hic respici debere.
Magistracy, whether in Jew or Gentile, Christian or Infidel, was then to be
regarded; none did presume to absolve Subjects from their Allegiance; neither
was Dominion then founded in Grace, nor the Qualifications of Kings to be
judged by the People; but according to the preceptive Will of God, the very
Throne and Seat of Judicature, did exact Obedience. Which, least they being
Christians, should refuse the Pagan Monarch, who then reigned, who was so cruel
and outrageous against them; least they should fail in their Duty to him, deny
to pay him Tribute as other subjects did, or take up Arms in defense of their
Lives, he twice minds them of their Allegiance, charges them to submit unto
him, and all his Prefects, and Governors, in their several Provinces, and not
only and barely to submit to live peaceably and quietly under him; but, which
was more, to honor him, Honor the King; in discoursing of which, I shall show,

First, The meaning of the words, the Duty which arises from them, and wherein
it consists.

Secondly, Who are the great Violators of it, and their unjust Pretenses.

Thirdly, Who are the best Observers of it, and consequently the best
Christians, and the truest Subjects.

First, The meaning of the Words, and the Duty, etc,

Honor est clara cum laud Notitia, or Testificatio de Excellentia; it is that
esteem and respect, which is paid to a man in regard of the Place he is in, or
the Excellency he is endowed with; it is a deserved Fame, Advancement and
Exaltation above others, an Acknowledgment of their worth and merit, and a
suitable Reverence and Observance paid unto it. By the King is understood the
Emperor, and all his Lieutenants, and Vicegerents; so that he requires them to
give all due submission and veneration to the Supreme Magistrate; and to all
who were in Authority under him, to show them all just honor and regard in the
Observation of their Laws, and the payment of their Tribute, Imperatori summos
exhibete honores quos capit humana natura. Gro. Observatione Legum, and
Proestatione Tributorum. Esti.

And the Prince, to whom this duty was to be paid, was that Portentum hominis,
as Suetonius calls him, the inhuman Nero, who thirsted after their Blood, and
put them to the most exquisite Torments he could invent; for he wrapped them in
the skins of beasts, and let the dogs devour them, he burnt them in pitched
coats, and made them serve for Torches in the night. Even to him was this great
Honor to be given, and the Primitive Fathers do largely witness, all his
Cruelty did never make them fail therein.

From which you may soon note, That it is the Duty of all Subjects to honor
the King, be he good or Evil.

No sooner had Almighty God made Moses his Vicegerent, and settled him in the
Government of his People, but he made Laws for them to walk by, and wrote them
in Tables of Stone, to denote their perpetuity and duration: and no sooner had
he secured his own Worship in the first Table, but he fixes Honor and
Obedience to Magistrates in the front of the second, and made it the first of
those Laws which relate to humane Society; because a man cannot perform Acts of
Justice to his Inferiors and Equals, who is unnatural and disobedient to his
Superiors. And for the same reason, in the Roman Laws are the Crimes against
Magistrates, and their several Punishments first reckoned up, it being
impossible for any to be good Members of a Commonwealth, who do not first learn
and practice Obedience to Governors. The Laws will never be well observed,
where men don't honor the Magistrate; Fear may make us go, but its the true
Honor we have for our Superiors, which adds wings to our loyal inclinations,
and makes us cheerfully perform their Commands. The word is very comprehensive,
and takes in all that Loyalty and Fidelity, that Reverence and Duty, which we
owe to those above us, and by consequence, shows them their Duty to us; so that
this short Precept is the great Ligament of human Society, and the very
Foundation of all Obedience; for while we reserve that honor for the
Magistrate which we owe him, we will not violate his Laws, which are the grand
Security of our Lives, Liberties, and Estates.

And it being duly observed, it will be the Princes and the Peoples Safety, it
will be the guard and continuance of Polity and Government in the World, and
will keep Order and Regularity among us; some must be exalted above others, and
their Injunctions must be obeyed, otherwise all would tumble into Anarchy and
Confusion. The strongest Arm and the longest Sword would decide all
Controversies, and we should soon devour one another, (...). Chris. This the
Law of God does not only declare, but the Laws of Nature dictate it to all
mankind. Men are rational and sociable Creatures, they cannot live like Brutes
in Woods and Deserts. They must enter into Communities, Societies and Bodies,
for Comfort, Converse and Safety. And when they are thus convened and gathered,
all cannot Govern; so that of necessity there must be some Head to guide and
rule them, to whose Decision and Determination all Differences and Contests
(which will unavoidably happen among Numbers) must be referred and submitted.
To which having once consented, they are no longer Sui Juris, the Liberty,
Authority and Power, which before they had by Nature, is devolved upon the
Magistrate, and Him must they afterward Honor and obey.

And thus all Nations and Countries have their Kings, or other Magistrates, to
whom they pay Homage and Fealty, and mutual Relations of Superiority and
Subjection are observed among those, who are only influenced by the Light of
Nature. St. Aust.
Generale pactum est Societatis humanae Regibus obedire. Which Law of Nature,
and general Custom in all parts of the world, God has not altered or
abrogated, but most strongly ratified and confirmed; for both in the Old and
New Testament we have many strict Precepts for Honor and Obedience to
Magistrates, that so that Polity and Order which God and Nature has
established in the world may be preserved, that the Magistrates, who defend us
in our lives, may have that Love and Honor, Obedience and Maintenance; which,
for their great and restless Cares, their vast Troubles and constant Hazards,
are justly due unto them. All which grateful Returns are here included in the
word Honor; and so it is often taken in Scripture; and in that notion shall I
now discourse of it in reference to the King, and show you how you are obliged
to love and honor him, to own his Supremacy and obey his Laws, to pay him
Tribute and maintain him. In these does this Duty consist, from which none born
in his Dominions can pretend any immunity or exemption.

First, We must love and honor him.

Every man who would truly honor the King, must first love him at the highest
rate he can, and then all Duty and Veneration will soon follow; for if once the
Affections be vanquished with any object, they presently open, and all the
Faculties of the Soul are employed in their Service, all other things are less
valued and esteemed, nothing offensive or displeasing to it is committed; but
the Mind is changed and squared to the will and pleasure of that which has
overcome them. These are some of the effects and influences of true Love: and
if we would perform the several branches of our Duty to the King, as we ought,
we must first very highly love him; which that we may do, let us look on him as
the public Father and Protector of our Country, who guards us from foreign
Invasions, and domestic Rebellions; by whom Peace is preserved, Traffic and
Commerce increase, the Kingdom grows rich and flourish, and every man sits
under his own Vine, and Fig Tree; His coercive Power restraining the outrages
of the Wicked, and securing our Lives, our Religion and Property from the
encroachments of Ecclesiastical and Secular Robbers; which great Advantages may
well move us to love him, and make us willingly give all possible
demonstrations of the greatness of our Affections, in a full and perfect
Obedience to his Commands, exposing our selves to the greatest hazard to defend
his Person, and in all our words and actions paying him the most submissive
Regard.

And then will our Honor for him be the effect and concomitant of our Love,
which will soon be heightened and exalted, if we consider him, as one, whom God
has made his immediate Vicegerent, and given him Power and Authority over his
People, he has placed him in the highest Seat of Renown, and he has put a
Sword in his hand, to protect and correct his Subjects, and under both temporal
and eternal Penalties has enjoined them to obey him. Nay so jealous is he of
their Honor, that he takes all Contempts and Insurrections against them, as
done to himself, and has inseparably united our Fear to him and his
Representatives; it being impossible to fear him, without honoring those whom
he has substituted in his place. The Apostle here ingeminates it, Pro. 14.21.
to make it the more observable; and Solomon also unites them, My Son, fear
thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change.
We must then be fastened to him with the firmest chains of Affection, and next
to the Deity, whom he personates, have the highest veneration for him; a loyal
sympathy must dwell in us, our Pulse must keep time with his, and we must share
in the sickness and health, in the joys and sorrows, the safety and danger of
our Sovereign; the least injury that is done to him (our Head) must affect the
whole Body, and we must not suffer a word that tends in the least to his
dishonor, but to our utmost, seek to justify his Government, extenuate his
Failings; and endear him all we can to the People, which is now most necessary;
there being too many of the Gnostick humor, who lessen the Virtues of their
Rulers, and rob them of their just Honors, 2 Pet. 2.10.
who, as St. Peter says, are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, nor tremble
when they rayl at Glories; for so the Greek signifies.

A presumptuous sort of men, who despise Dominion, inveigh against the
Government, and insinuate an evil Opinion of it into the vulgar, which is a
forerunner of Rebellion, such Swellings rising usually before breakings out, in
the Body politic, as well as the natural. And undoubtedly, they who are more
ready to question and dispute the Commands of their Prince, than to obey them,
who are still inquiring into the Grounds and Reasons of public Actions; and,
as far as they dare, do guess and descant upon them; who call every slip a
fall, and upon all occasions inhance the Failings of the Magistrate, want only
strength and opportunity to do more. By the Eruptions of Aetna and Vesuvius, we
see what is within them; he who is a Rebel in his tongue, is certainly so in
his heart; for out of the abundance of that the mouth speaks; he that strikes
at the King, in his Honor, would have no regard for his Person.

It must be the care then of every good Subject, to countermine those secret
and hellish Engineers, who thus undermine the Throne; and, by false and
aggravating suggestions, prepare the People to rise up against the Lords
anointed, toward whom not only our words, but our very thoughts are
restrained, Eccles. 10.20. We must demonstrate our Honor for him in our just
representation of his Actions to the People, and dissuade them from the Itch of
prying into State Affairs, and censuring the Actions of Princes, and their
faithful Ministers; they are beyond our Ken, and we cannot judge rightly of them;
weak and false Optics may fancy every molehill a mountain, and the ignorant
will think Stars fall, when they only shoot, or glance: soon may our Senses be
deceived, when we look at inadequate Objects, and at too great a distance.

Persuade we men then, to move Regularly in their own spheres, to mind their
own business, and not to judge of those above them; and let us never, without
just indignation and reproof, hear the least Reflection on our Governors: It Is
not generous to hear those we love, ill spoken of, and it is unnatural, and
disloyal, to suffer the least Pasquil against our Prince, the common Parent of
our Country; we should vindicate him, and his Substitutes from all factious
and seditious Aspersions, and suffer none to revile the Gods, Exo. 22.28.
nor curse the Rulers of our People, but always show the greatness of our Love
to them, in being zealous for their Honor, in raising them all we can in the
Esteem of the World, and cheerfully paying all Tribute and Taxes; which is
another Demonstration of our Honor to them, and next to be discoursed on.

2. Praestatio Tributorum, or Maintenance, is contained in the word Honor; and
all who pretend Honor for the King, must willingly perform it; It Is the
signification of the word 1 Timothy 5.17. The Elders that rule well, be accounted
worthy of double Honor; i.e. Esteem and Maintenance; alluding to the Elder
Brothers Portion which was double; Deutr. 21.17.
Princes then must be supported by their Subjects, Tribute and Custom must be
conscienciously paid unto them, for which you have Christ's Command and Example,
Matthew. 22.21. where he orders them not to give, but to render or restore unto
the King his Taxes; not as Gift, but as Debt, as the just Reward of that
Protection, and Safety, which we have from him; and so it is explained and
confirmed, Romans 13.6. And so observant was Christ in it, that he wrought a
Miracle to perform it: and Justin Martyr and Tertullian declare the great
readiness of the Primitive Christians to pay Tribute in the midst of all their
Persecutions. And if you reflect on the great Care, and Disquietude, which
continually attend the Throne; the vast and unavoidable Expenses which must
support its Glory; the public Dangers, and private Assassinations, which they
are subject to, and their Readiness to hazard their Royal Persons in your
defense; you cannot, without the greatest violations of duty and gratitude, deny
your proportion of Taxes: Their whole life is full of trouble, and their days
are spent in misery; like the Lamp, to give light to others they wast
themselves; They stand in slippery places, and the Throne is covered with Ice;
their Crown is surrounded with Thorns, and has often proved so very ponderous,
and uneasy, that many of our own, and Foreign Princes have groaned under its
insupportable pressures; the Conservation of their Fame at home and abroad,
their watching the Actions and Designs of all neighboring States, and the
ballancing or suppressing the Factions and Intrigues of their own aspiring,
covetous, and unruly Subjects, give them but few quiet and refreshing slumbers.
Nay, in the greatest confluence of Enjoyments, when they have been sated with
Victories; so troublesome have their very Laurels been, that they have deserted
their Thrones, longing for a quiet Retirement, and secure Obscurity; and some
have complained, they never had one days ease, after their Heads were incircled
with the Royal Diadem. In a word, they spend their whole life in consulting our
good; and let us therefore pay Tribute to maintain them, their inferior
Magistrates, and Armies, by whose care and vigilance we sleep in safety, and
let us honor them most, who bear the greatest share in the Troubles of
Government, and are most assisting to the King. To raise great Sums when the
support of his Grandeur, and the Kingdoms Honor require it, is but a just sign
of our Gratitude and Loyalty unto him, and let the next be, our Obedience to
all his lawful Commands, for that also is included in the word Honor.

3. We must show our Honor to the King in obeying him.

The Law of God, and the Law of Nature, and the Laws of all Nations, give Kings
Supremacy, and Authority over their native Subjects; and without a manifest
breach of those, we cannot resist their lawful Commands. And such all are to be
esteemed, which do not plainly thwart, and positively contradict, the revealed
Law of God; for if the thing which the Magistrate requires, be undetermined by
the Law of God, and indifferent in it self, his Command in such cases must be
binding to us, and obtain our Obedience: as for instance, Reason, and the
Custom of all places shows, there must be a Determination of Circumstances in
every Society, otherwise there will be nothing but Confusion. Now if the
decision of these, be not plain in Scripture, the Governors, who have the
Charge over us, may do it, to promote Regularity, and certainty of time and
place in the Worship of God, according to the Apostles Canon, Let all things be
done decently and in order, (...), according to Command, or Appointment; Res
ordinatim in Ecclesia faciendae, is Mr: Cartwrights own gloss upon it. In
matters both real and ritual, substantial and ceremonial Decency and Order is
to be observed; and when they have determined such Circumstances, and
Ceremonies, in Gods Service, as are not contrary to Scripture, nor forbidden by
it; but are harmless in themselves, and undecided by the Law of God, we ought
to observe them. The very Commands of lawful Magistrates take away the
indifferency, and require a Conformity and Observance under sin: They conclude,
and limit our choice, and it is sin in us, not to obey them, when they are
indifferent. Nay, if what they enjoin be doubtful, their Command should weigh
down our private Opinion, till we are clearly convinced of the Sinfulness of
what they impose, and then, and not before, must we disobey them. Damnum dat
qui jubet dare, ejus vero nulla culpa est, cui parere necesse est. The Laws of
the Romans, and other Nations, excused the Person who obeyed the Magistrate,
from all punishment or trouble of Law; and so St. Austin states it in the case
of the Soldier, L. 22. c. 74. Con. Faus.
who is not certain, whether what he is ordered to do, be against the Law of
God or no. Fortasse reum faciat Regem iniquitas imperandi, innocentem vero
militem ostendat Ordo serviendi. The Magistrate may offend in commanding, but
not he who obeys; the Principium actionis is in him, and he must answer for it.
Thus should we behave our selves, when what is commanded, is only doubtful, or
indifferent, we should have meekness of Judgment, complying and condescending
Spirits; we should distrust and reject our private humors, and fancies, for
the general quiet of the Kingdom; and by our Conformity to the Rules imposed,
show our Honor to the King, and never resist them, unless they be clearly
against the revealed Law of God.

In such case only have we liberty to deny, but even then, we must refuse it
with all humility, and meekness, patiently undergo Imprisonment or Death, but
never use any open resistance; and thus have all Nations understood the Power,
and Prerogative of Princes; for were there Decrees to be opposed with Force and
Violence, no Order or Government could be in the World: And therefore the very
Heathens advise Subjects to dye, Tacit:
rather than lift up a hand against their King, though he were Tyrannical, and
did exact unlawful things. The Gods have given Princes Power to govern, and
nothing is left to the Subject, but the Glory of Obedience; let them be what
they will, we must obey without resistance. Many are the Laws, and most severe
were the Punishments, which they ordained, to defend the Majesty and Grandeur
of their Kings, their Prefects, and Officers; if the Soldier broke the Stick,
with which the Centurion struck him, he was put to death.

This Nature taught them, and there is natural Allegiance due from every
Subject, to the Prince of the Country where he is born, though that Prince did
not make him swear; he transgresses the Law of Nature, if he denies Fealty to
him; and whether ever he is sworn or no, he is bound to be true to his native
Prince; for the Fidelity of Subjects, proceeds originally from the Law of
Nature, which is eternal, and unalterable, and not from the obligation of
Oaths; and he violates this Law, who does not pay all Honor and Subjection to
that Prince, in whose Country he his born and resides, though he never took
Oath of Allegiance or Supremacy.

But if my King require an Oath from me, to assure him of my Fidelity, I must
take it; and I am guilty of Perjury, as well as Disloyalty, if I ever swerve
the least tittle from it. He is the Head of the Society, or Community, of which
I am a member: to him, before my Oath, I owed homage by nature; and no Power
under Heaven can discharge me from that natural Allegiance, which I owe him,
nor absolve me from the Oath I have taken, without his consent.

Beside all which, the Law of God has in many places enjoined Obedience to
Kings; and there are not more positive and plainer Commands for any Duty, than
for Honor, Maintenance, and Obedience to Princes; and we find no persons
exempted from it, but both Clergy and Laity are subject to it, as I shall fully
prove by Scripture, and Antiquity: and all who derogate from the Honor of
their native Prince, who lessen his Authority, and deny his Supremacy, act
quite contrary to this Text, and in so doing, are neither good Christians, nor
good Subjects: But they who walk exactly according to this Rule, who honor the
King, and no way entrench upon his Prerogative; but support it in its just
height and exaltation, they are the best Christians, and the truest Subjects,
and consequently ought to receive all Countenance, Encouragement, and
Protection from Princes; and so I have to the next thing.

2. Who are the great Violaters of this Text, and their unjust Pretenses.

They who chiefly oppose the true Protestant Doctrine of Obedience to Secular
Princes, are the Papists, and the Separatists; in this they agree, and their
Principles are very destructive to Government, quite contrary to the Practice
of the Primitive Christians, and the indispensable Rules of Scripture; for the
Law of God requires all persons to obey their Kings; if St. Peter's words can
have any influence on the Papists, I need but name my Text, which has no
limitation in it, but is directed to all men, not imagining his Successors
would have pretended the contrary; but if they will not be concluded by him in
this, and other Texts, let them hear what St. Paul says, To. 13.1. Let every
soul be subject unto the higher Powers; if every soul must be subject, the Pope
and the Clergy are included, and all are there commanded to obey, under the
dreadful penalty of Damnation.

But the Popes have since, through Ambition and Avarice, usurped a Power over
Princes; and the Jesuits, the great Pillars of the Papal Throne, have wrote
much in defense of it; though they cannot but know, that the Popes themselves
observed this Rule for many hundreds of years, and all the Bishops, both of the
East and West, did exactly conform unto it; L. 5. Orat. in Aux.
Repugnare non novi, dolere potero; potero flere, potero gemere, lachrymae meae
arma sunt, etc. says St. Amb. They claimed no Authority over them, and made no
resistance, but with their Prayers, and Tears. Cum nefanda perpetimur, ne verbo
quidem reluctamur, sed Deo remittimus ultionem. Lact. l. 5.
And Athanasius says, Obedience to Magistrates was the universal Doctrine of
the Church; the ancient Councils, and Synods, were called by the Emperors; the
Titles of their Acts are, Sacra Synodus juxta religiosissimorum
Christianissimor umque Imperatorum nostrorum Praescriptum coacta. Sacra Synodus
juxta piissimorum nostrorum Imperatorum Decretum per Dei gratia m congregata.
Sometimes the Acts run, Ex Jussu, Ex Evocatione, Ex Ordinatione, Regum
nostrorum, etc. They met by the Emperors Order, Appointment, and Writs; 2
Cone. Constable.
as they acknowledge in their Letters to them; (...); and their Acts were made
Authentic by their Confirmation.

The Bishops humble Addresses to the Emperors for Establishing their Canons,
and Decres; and their Ratifications and Orders for Obedience to them, are
frequently recorded; and all the Clergy of Rome, as well as other places,
observed their Edicts; and no news then of the Popes Supremacy, as is confessed
by the Bishops, who met at Bononia, to settle the Church in the time of Julius
the Third; which Power did all along, both under the Law, and the Gospel,
belong unto Princes. If you look in the Old Testament, you will find, they had
power over the Clergy, from the first settlement of Government amongst Gods own
People; Aaron obeyed Moses, who was King in Jesurum; and in the 2 Chr. 23.21.
You see both Clergy and Laity entering into a Covenant of Allegiance to young
King Joash; and then did Kings punish spiritual persons, as well as others,
Abiathar was removed from the high Priesthood by King Solomon; and Josiah,
Jehoshophat, and other Kings, did reform Religion, and banish Idolatry: and in
the New Testament, Christ and his Apostles were all obedient to the Heathen
Emperors, paid them Tribute, and owned their Authority, in appealing to them
from inferior Jurisdictions. And long after them, The Bishops of Rome were so
far from having Supremacy over Kings, that other Bishops would not yield to
their Usurpation; for Ann. 325, when Constantine called the Council of Nice,
the four Patriarkships were settled by the Suffrage of 318 Bishops, and then it
was decreed, that the Bishop of Alexandria should have as much Authority in his
Patriarkship, as the Bishop of Rome had in his; only the first Place was
allowed him in General Councils, he being Bishop of the Imperial City. The
Council of Constantinople (in which were 150 Bishops, and which was called by
the Emperor Theodosius) granted only a Primacy of Order to the Bishop of Rome,
and no more; and Ann. 434, the Council of Ephesus (which was summoned by the
Emperors Order, as the Acts do often show) which was honored with the
presence of 200 Prelates, ordered, no Bishop should usurp any Authority, but
what was always his: And about eighteen years after, when 430 Mitred Heads did
adorn the great Council of Chalcedon, they declared, that though the Roman
Bishop had the Precedence of Place, yet was the Bishop of Constantinople equal
to him in all things.

St. Peter's Charter was not then urged, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I
will build my Church, and I will give unto thee the Keys of Heaven; they knew,
no more was meant by the words, than that, as Peter's Name signified a Rock,
such should he be, strong and solid, in the building of the Church; and that
nothing should prevail against the Faith he then had publicly professed, so
Chrysos. Hill. and Cypr. understood it, and so did St. Bernard long enough after
them; for he loudly inveighs against the Tyranny of the Roman Bishop, and says
to Eugenius, who was Pope about 1145, Quid vos alienos fines invaditis? disce,
tibi sarculo opus esse, non Sceptro; he denies St. Peter's Charter, and says,
Esto ut quacunque alia ratione hoc tibi vindices, non tamen Apostolico jure,
nec illud dare tibi Petrus potuit, quod non habuit. He thought a Sheephook did
better become that great Shepherds hand, than a Scepter; and that Peter could
not consign that power to others, which was never granted to him: and as to the
power of the Keys, Christ gave it equally to all the Apostles, Joh. 20.21. He
did not then give it, but according to his promise (I will) he afterward
imparted it unto them; so that it is clear, Peter had no personal Authority from
Christ over the rest of his Brethren, neither did he arrogate the Name of
Universal Bishop, as Pope Gregory himself declares, l. 4. Epis. 76; and much
less should his Successors claim that Title. His Age and Gravity might give
him a Primacy of Order, but more we do not find, And therefore the Priority of
place, was all that the first General Councils would allow to the following
Bishops of that See, and that only, because Rome was the Seat of the Empire;
and when the Emperor removed to Constantinoplo or Ravenna, the Bishops of
those Places did contend with him for superiority; Neither would the Bishops of
Carthage, Alexandria, Millain, and other Places, yield any thing more to Rome,
but said they were equal in their several Precincts. The Greek and Roman
Patriarcks, and Archbishops, governed their own Provinces, without Usurping
upon each other; according to the Division of the Roman Empire, they were
quietly settled in the Principle City of each Province; where the Roman
President lived, there did the Christian Metropolitan dwell; the Bishops were
Placed in their several Diocesses, and were subordinate to their own
Metropolitan, and no other.

This was the true State of the Church then, the Bishop of Rome had no
Supremacy over Foreign Bishops, much less over Kings, but gave both that
honor which was due unto them. And thus did it continue till about 606; when
Boniface the Third, and sixty sixth Bishop of that See (according to the best
Chronologers) usurped the Title of chief of the Bishops, by the help of the
cruel Phocas; for Sabianus his Predecessor had it not, and Gregory, who was
just before him, did sharply exclaim against the Bishop of Constantinople, who
then began to assume it; he called it Nomen Blasphemiae, L. 4. Epis: 76.
and in his 83 Epis. In isto scelesto Vocabulo, nihil est aliud quam fidem
perdere.

But the judgment of that good Pope weighed little with his successors, they
Triumphed in that swelling Title; But tho they dealt thus injuriously with
their Brethren the Bishops, (to which some near them were soon drawn to
consent, but others in Africa and Cappadocia would not hear of it, but severely
rebuked them for their Pride) they themselves did meekly Submit to the
Authority of the Emperors, De. Council. L. 3. C. 6.
who did then and long after convocate and Dissolve Synods, And as Cardinal
Cusanus himself confesses, did in Person, or by their Deputies, preside in
Eight General Councills, which they could not have done, had the Pope been then
Head of the Church.

They disposed of spiritual preferments, and judged and made Laws in
Ecclesiastical affairs, one was made by Honorius, about the very Election of
the Pope, Gratian Did. 63. C. 23.
and what Edicts they decreed, Damasus and other Popes made be read in all the
Churches of Rome; see the decree for the Consecration of Leo the 8. and the
Council, which gave Jus et potestatem eligendi pontificem, to Charles the
Great, when he had secured and settled the western Empire; which power his
successors held, till the Reign of Henry the fourth, who confirmed the
Election of Gregory the 7. C. 16.17.
but was afterward excommunicated by him; There also will you find that the
Pope durst not Consecrate Colonus without the Emperors license; There was no
opposing them in any thing then, the very time and place for holding Councils
were ascertained by them. You find Pope Leo with weeping Eyes begging
Theodosius to have a Council in Italy, which he refused, Epis. 24.
and kept at Chalcedon, and Commanded him to attend it; and in all Places, the
Bishops then obeyed the Princes they lived under, and did not pretend the Popes
supremacy to defend them; they thought it a sin (as the sixth Council of Toledo
declares it) to question his Power, to whom God has given Authority over all,
but did every where patiently submit to what they inflicted upon them, How
silently did Eusebius Bishop of Samosatena, go into banishment at the Emperors
command? and did not St. Cyprian do the like at the Injunction of the Proconsul
of Afric? was not St. Cyril imprisoned by Theodosius junior, and St.
Chrysostom banished by Arcadius? and many more by other Emperors? what need I
insist longer on this? the greatests Bishops and Fathers of the Church, did
throughout the world, submit to their Kings, and gave them all imaginable
Honor and Reverence.

This they did till Boniface the Eight about 1295 advanced the Papal Grandeur,
and claimed Authority over Princes, and by degrees, and with difficulty, he and
his successors obtained it Generally beyond Seas. In which yon may observe the
policy of the Popes; first they did exact Superiority over the Bishops, and
then over Kings; To ascend the Throne they pull down the Mitre; In which method
they were lately followed by the aspiring Separatists of these nations; but
neither abroad nor here, could Princes be brought under, till the Bishops were
first cast down: whence by foreign and domestic Experience, we may conclude,
that Aphorism of King James will be eternally true; No Bishop, No King. They
who rob the Bishops of their honor will next fly at the Kings; If they once
get the Rich Stones out of Aarons Ephod, the Jewels of the Crown will be
thought too Splendid; If they get the Crozier in one hand, they will be
impatient, till they hold the Scepter in the other.

Thus did the Pope, Thus did the Kirk; But though the Pope did exalt himself
above many foreign Princes, our Kings would not submit to such Usurpation;
most of them before and since the Conquest opposed it, and his Nuncio's and
Legates, have been often rejected, and his Bulls and Breves vilified and
contemned; his Supremacy denied, the Clergy consenting thereunto, and Appeals
to Rome most strictly Prohibited and forbdiden, of which our ancient and modern
Historians, give many instances, too tedious now to mention. Do but consult the
Acts of Parliament made in the Reigns of Edw: the 1st. Rich: the 2d. and Edw:
the 3d. and Henry the fifth, and you will find, they unanimously declared, that
the King of England ought not to answer before any Judge Ecclesiastical or
Secular, and that the Crown of England was subject to none but to God, and
ought not to be submitted to the Pope, and that he was to exercise no
Jurisdiction in England.

And Anno 601 Dionothus, Abbot of Bangor, proved by many Arguments, that the
Church of England owed no subjection to the Pope of Rome; and as Bede assures
you, Neque precibus, L. 2. C. 2. Ecles. Hist.
neque hortamentis, neque increpationibus Augustini, etc. They would by no
means recede from their own ancient Customs, and traditions, they would not at
all submit to what he desired, nor own him for their Archbishop, tho he came
from the Pope; the Abbot owned they had love and service for the Pope; and for
every true and pious Christian, but he knew no other obedience to be due unto
him, whom they called the Pope; Neither was he Father of Fathers, and moreover
they were under the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Caerleon.

The Britains and Saxons would not in those early times own the Pope for an
Infallible judge, tho he sent Preachers among them; they consulted him as a
Patriarch, but no more, and did not follow the Rites of the Roman Church, till
the Reign of Henry the first; They were subject to their own King, and he only
subject to the King of Heaven; and memorable are the words of William the
Conqueror to Greg. the 7th; I neither have nor will own Fealty to you, neither
do I find that my predecessors did ever do it to yours, which is fully made
out by the Sages of our Law.

The Kings of Scotland, have anciently done the like, as is Evident from their
Historians; and by the advice of their Bishops and Clergy, they prohibited
Legates from Rome to enter the Kingdom. And in this Country, Fealty was sworn by
the Clergy and Laity at Lismore to Henry the 2d. He convened a Synod at Cashel;
and there, and at another General meeting of the Clergy at Ardmagh, was the
Kings Sovereignty acknowledged, and the conformity of this Church with that of
England, in all divine offices, agreed on; and in Henry the Eights time, they
did not only unanimously by act of Parliament, but particularly under their
hands, to the then Lord Deputy, renounce the Papal jurisdiction; and then did
all the Bishops, of England but one, take the Oath of the Kings Supremacy; The
Convocation, which is a National Council, consented to it; and they gave under
their hands, that the Pope had no Jurisdiction in England; Nay Q. Mary her self
commanded the Popes Nuncio not to come into England. Thus did these three
Kingdoms, both of old and of late, disown the Popes power, tho they were all
then of the Romish Religion.

Notwithstanding all which, the Scripture, Councils, and Fathers say, the Pope
has no authority over Princes, yet has he usurped it, and their Subjects, who
would not submit unto him have been absolved from their Allegiance, and
instigated by his Emissaries to Rebel; and Kings have been Excommunicated,
deposed, and Murdered, and none has violated this Canon of St. Peter's, more
then his pretended successors. I need not instance in P. Zachary, who deposed
Childerick, and Ordered Pipin, the Kings high Steward, to Govern France. In the
Histories of Greg. the 7th. and Urban the 2d. you will find the Emperors Son
urged to Rebel against his Father; the Bishop of Liege excommunicated, and he
and his Clergy commanded to be put to death, for not renouncing their fidelity,
but giving that honor which this Text injoyns to their Native Sovereign. You
know Pius Quintus urged the English to Rebel against our own Queen E. And the
Divines of Salamanca and Valadolid encouraged the Irish to rise up against her;
and Gauran their Primate was killed in the head of the Rebels, tho I now find
him enrolled, with many other such Subjects, among the Martyrs of this Nation,
in the Tripartite Epitome of their Modern Saints; who had many contrivances to
destroy that good Queen. The like practices they had in the Reign of K. J. and
how much they contributed to the Ruin of the late King; and how zealously they
have of late attempted the destruction of this, is obvious to all: their Clergy
being the Chief Incendiaries to all these Villainies.

And that which is most lamentable is, John Gavan alias Gawen lately Executed.
all these Mischiefs proceed from the Principles of their Religion, for these
Actions have been Justified by many of their best writers, and greatest
Jesuits; On which allow me to enlarge a little, seeing one, who was lately
executed for the Plot, did (out of zeal to his order, and knowing how apt the
words of dying men are to melt and Influence the too Credulous vulgar) openly
and solemnly deny it; it is strange he could remember but one of his Brethren,
who allowed of that Doctrine, when many of their books run that way. Becanus
will not suffer us to question the Lawfulness of Killing refractory and
disobedient Princes, Angl. Cont. 1.15. p.
if the Pope so Order it; And Lessius thought it surely, the doctrine of the
Church, when he says it is heretical not to believe the Popes power of deposing.
Indeed Emmanuel Sa wont have the King killed, Voce, Tyran.
till he be Excommunicated, but then (lata sententia) any one may be his
Executioner; And Suares says, It Is lawful to Resist and kill your own King, L.
6. c. 3 6.
if you cant defend your selves otherwise from his violence; and in another
place, he says, such insurrections are no Treason, but a Just war; which
Doctrine was defended by Dr. Petit, upon the Murder of the Duke of Orleance.
Simanca says an heretical Prince must not only lose his Kingdom, but his
Children shall be debarred from the succession; L. Dict. Philop. sec. 2. p. 1.9.
And Creswel affirms, That if any King desert the Roman Religion, all Divines
and Canonists agree, that by the Law of God and Man, he immediately looses all
power and dignity, before the Pope give Sentence against him; his subjects are
free from all Oaths of Allegiance which they have taken, and they may, and
ought, if they have strength, to depose him as an Apostat Heretic; And says
he, This is the most certain, Definit, and undoubted opinion of the most
learned men. L. 6. de Reg. p. 59.
Mariana says, The King must be admonished to own the Popes Supremacy, but if
he wont, they may kill him, how highly does he (and so does the Jesuit
Ribadeneira also) defend and extol that inhuman Monk, who murdered H. 3d. and
calls that horrid wickedness, C. 6.
an admirable greatness of spirit, and an Act not to be forgotten, by which he
had raised to himself a great and mighty name; There does he Justify the
Killing of Kings, for the alteration of Religion, and in the next chapter,
directs the manner, how he would have them poisoned; which very Book was
approved of, by their General the Visitor, and other Grave and Learned men of
the Jesuitical order. It were endless to name all who maintain this Opinion;
read Amphitheatrum Bonarsii, and the Book De Abdicatione H. 3, and you will find
the assassinating of Kings, largly justified; and in Franciscus Veronas Apology
for the wicked Chastel, Pars. 2. c. 2.
you will see the Killing of Kings Vindicated with this Circumstance, Non obstante
decreto supradicti Concilij Constantiensis, Privatis, et Singulis licitum sit,
Reges et Principes Haereseos, and Tyrannidis condemnatos occidere; Tho the
Council of Constance decreed the Contrary, yet may any Private man kill Kings
and Princes condemned for Heresy and Tyranny. Gretzer, Burgoin, Andreas
Eudemons Apology for Father Garnet, and many more, too tedious now to mention,
are full of such discourses; De. Pontif. Romans
; Their great oracle Bellarmine cries out, Papa potest mutare Regna and uni
auferre, atque alteri confer, etc. The Pope, as he is supreme spiritual
Prince, may take a Kingdom from one, and give it to another; and in another
place he says, C. 7
, if the King be Tyrannical or Heretical, all agree, that he may, and ought to
be deposed, and pretends the Primitive Christians would have served them so,
but that they wanted strength; though he well knew they abhorred such
Doctrines, when they were equal to their Adversaries, as is fully evident from
St. Cypr. Tert. St. Aug. and others; which great Truth is confessed by Barclay
and Tollanus and other of their writers; They own, it was not for want of
strength, the Christians did not Rebel, but out of obedience to the Principles
of their Religion.

But that Cardinals judgment prevayled more than all the Primitive Fathers, he
affirms, all agree in it; and who will contradict him, seeing one Pope says,
Non eos Homicidas arbitramur, Urb. 2: Rescrip. de Occis. Excom. etc.
quos adversus Excommunicatos zelo Catholicae Matris ardentes, eorum quoslibet
trucidasse Contigerit; That good Pope counted them no Murderers, who out of
zeal to the Catholic Church, would kill those whom she Excomunicated. Who will
doubt this to be the Doctrine of the Roman Church, when the infallible head
thereof (as they call him) gives such great encouragement to slay all who are
under that sentence, or sees another Pope grant a Jubilee to all Christendom for
the Massacre of Paris, or reads the Oration, which his Holiness made upon the
Murder of H. 3d, which is attested by Father Warmington, Sixth. Quint.
who writ and distributed the copies among the Cardinals, to second which,
Guinard made a Book in praise of the Monk who did it; and in it advised the
like to be done to his successor, which Ravaillac performed, and was also
justified in their Public writings; and the Doctrine of Deposing Princes is
fully asserted in many other books dedicaed to the Pope, and the greatest
Cardinals, and the Superiors of their Orders, carrying their Approbation and
License in the Front; and not only particular persons, Conc. Lat. 4. Can. 3.
Tom. 28.
but above a thousand of their Clergy at once, invested the Pope with the Power
of Excommunicating and Deposing such Princes, as at any time should refuse to
extirpate Heretics. And did not another Council ratify the Deposing of
Frederick the Second, Conc. Lugd. T. 28.
by Innocent the Fourth? and their Doctors tell us plainly, what may be done
with them, when the Pope has deprived them, for which I might quote Creswell
and Windeck, and others, who say, that Subjects are bound in Conscience, and by
the Command of God, to expel their Heretical Princes, and that they hazard
their Souls if they don't do it; and that all Heretics should be put to death;
they should be burnt or cut in pieces.

By which you see, it is not the opinion of one, but of many, and the Practice
of their greatest Churchmen has been agreeable to this Doctrine; I could name
several of their Bishops, who, in this Kingdom, turned their Mitres into
Helmets, and their Croziers into Swords, and embrued their hands in the blood
of the Kings good Subjects; and who can tell when they will be of a better
mind, and more merciful disposition? for their Jesuit Campian says, He would
have all know, In Concer. Eccl. anno 1583.
that their Society, which is spread over all the world, has made a League, a
holy and solemn Oath, that while any one of them is alive, they will go on in
using all ways, to extirpate and root out Protestants; and that they will
pursue the Ruin of our Princes Person, Religion, and Kingdom; and we have
found his words true hitherto. Becan. l. 5. c. 16. Comp. Contr.
And another of his Brethren says, A Catholic Prince ought not to suffer a
Heretic to live in his Dominions, unless they be too numerous and strong for
him; or unless he fears some Heretical Prince will invade him for it. And in
the preceding Chapter, he says, Heretics do more disturb the Christian Peace,
than Murderers or Thieves; but they may justly be put to death, much more may
Heretics: In order to which, these Kingdoms were formerly given to Charles the
fifth, by the Pope, and the Grant afterward ratified to his Son Philip; and
the Natives of this Country were told in Bulls, and Breves, that the English
ought to be as much opposed, as the Turks; they were promised Victory, and the
same Rewards, which they should have had, in a Holy War, against Saracens: And
was not a Plenary Indulgence and Pardon of Sins granted by Urban the Eighth to
all, who would join in the late Rebellion? I could name other Jesuits, and
Popes, who are of these bloody Principles; but I fear, I am already irregular
in this long Collection, which is extorted from me by the late Jesuit's
forgetfulness at his death; who, out of politic Charity to others, yet
untryed, and to prevent Scandal, could think of none that held this Opinion but
Mariana. And now do you judge what sort of Religion this is, which allows and
enjoins such open violations of the Laws of God and Nature, which reconciles
Treason to the fith, and Murder to the sixth Commandment, which saints Men for
Rebellion, and damns them for Allegiance; such Tenets are surely scandalous to
Christianity, most dangerous and destructive to Princes, and highly against
this Text; and have and will much hinder the Propagation of the Gospel, in
Infidel and Pagan Countries, where the Light of Nature, the Practice and
Tradition of their Forefathers, and the moral Instructions of their Priests,
teach men to be more Humane, and Loyal, than are many Votaries of the Roman
Church.

And would to God, I could accuse no others for the Violation of my Text; but
alas! O grief and shame to speak it! Is not this Doctrine countenanced by many
Bigots of Geneva, and our neighboring Kirk, who would manacle our freeborn
Princes, invade their Prerogative, and strip them of those Honors, which their
Royal Ancestors have always enjoyed? who would reduce these three Kingdoms into
a Seigniory, and make our Imperial Crown as narrow as the Duke of Venice his
Cap: They would allow the King a kind of Regal, but dependant, Authority; He
should have the Robes of the British Monarch, but nothing of his ancient Power:
and in short, if their Instructions were followed, he should be only a Noble
Servant to the People, whom they might call to an account, and punish when they
please: For, does not Buchanan say, the People may give the Crown to whom they
will? that if Princes do not excel in virtue, De Jure, Reg.
they are not to be deemed Kings, but should want the benefit of all humane
Society; and if they wont walk according to the Laws made by the People, they
are Enemies to God and Man, and should be reckoned among Wolves, and other
destructive Beasts; he would have the People carry them into some remote parts,
or drown them in the Sea, as the Romans did their Monsters; he says, Major pars
Populi de Magistratu judicare, and judices ei forre queat, aut si Trib. plebis
Romani, and Ephori Lacedemonii ad leviendam vim imperii quesiti sunt, etc.
which surely he took from Calvin, Instit, l. 4. c. 20. s. 31.
who says, If there be popular Magisirates, to moderate the unruliness of
Kings, such as the Ephori were to the Lacedemonian Kings, the Tribunes to the
Roman Consuls, or the Demarchi to the Athenian Senate, (which Power, it may be,
the three Estates have in every Kingdom) they are perfidious if they connive at
them; which very words Bradshaw used, when he condemned our late gracious
Sovereign; or from Beza, who affirms, 24 Epsi.
that Inferior Magistrates are bound to protect the People from domestic
Tyrants; or from Bucanus de Magistratu, who speaks much to the same purpose;
but he far exceeds them all, in most subtle and bitter instigations, to rebel
against the King; and tells them, how some have been perpetually imprisoned,
and others banished, and the Actors not censured for it, and instanceth in
James the Third, whose Death (says he) was not revenged: but here he forgot,
what horror of Conscience seized on his Son, whom they forced with them into
the Field, that he lamented it all his life after, and wore an Iron Chain about
him, in token of his great, grief and sorrow of heart: And how remarkably God
punished him, his Nobles, and Commons, at the Battle of Flowden, where many of
those Parricides, or their Children, were signally vanquished, and destroyed,
as their-own Books witness.

He runs on in that rebellious strain, and commends Thebe for killing her
Husband; Timolean his Brother, and Cassius his Son; and Fulvius and Brutus for
murdering their Sons and near Kinsmen, for consulting how to restore the
Emperor; and says, Honors and Rewards were given by many of the Grecian
Cities, to the Killers of Tyranical Princes; and blames Domitius Corbulo, for
not deposing Nero, when he might, etc. His whole Book is full of such
traitorous Incentives, and is indeed the Quiver, whence showrs of barbed and
empoysoned Arrows have been shot at Monarchs, by all the Pamphleteers in the
late times, which makes me quote him so largely.

Thus did he honor the King, in broaching such rebellious Principles among his
Subjects, in which Knox, Cartwright, and Goodman, three of their great Writers,
do exactly agree with him in them; and many more are the Jesuits Principles
asserted; If Bell: says the Ecclesiastical Estate is higher than the Civil, L.
de Cler. 28. See Rogers 's Preface to the 39 Articles. See Cartwrights Reply to
the same purpose.
Mr. Travers will say of the Presbyterian Discipline, Omnes orbis Menarchas,
etc. all the Monarchs of the earth ought to submit their Scepters to it; I
might show you the like agreement between the Jesuit Parsons and Buchanan,
between Emmanuel Sa, Mr. Melvil, and Mr. Gibson, and many others: but I offend
your Ears in naming so many; like Herod and Pilate, they go hand in hand, to
destroy the Lords Anointed, though they differ in other points, and they
jointly violate my Text.

The most learned of them declined the Judgment and Authority of K. James, and
affirmed, that what was spoken in the pulpit, ought first to be tried by the
Presbytery; and that neither he, nor his Council might meddle with it, in prima
instantia, though the Words were treasonable: they have called him Persecuter
in their Sermons, said, he was possessed with a Devil, Spotswoods Hist.
and made the people rise up against him; neither the Holiness of the Place,
nor the Sacredness of his Person, could protect him from their rebellious
Invectives: But least some think, these were private and particular persons,
and what they did, ought not to reflect on the whole Kirk; pray observe, that
their general Assemblies, and Synods, have denied the Regal Power: And
although, in France, in Holland, in Geneva it self, Councils and Synods are
still called by the Permission and License of the chief Magistrate, yet would
the Kirk convene Assemblies, and make Acts of the highest Consequence, contrary
to the Kings express Commands. And when he would have dissolved them, they have
proclaimed openly, that their Assembly was the Supreme Judicatory, in all
Causes Ecclesiastical, and that it was their ancient Grievance, that his
Majesty took upon him spiritual Authority; and therefore they instigated the
Commons to rebel: for, to give him power in Spirituals, was to erect a Popedom
in his Person. Nay, in the year 1582, when K. James did, Ass. at St. And.
by his Royal Letter, by express Messengers, by his Master of Requests, and
Herald at Arms, prohibit their Assembly, they slighted all, and did proceed;
then, and afterward, they would allow of no Appeals to the King, but punished
those who did so, Print. 47. Decret Syn.
though Paul was permitted to appeal unto Caesar. In their Theorems, they say,
no Power on earth can challenge Command or Dominion upon the Church; but that
all Estates within that Realm, 1 Book Disc. 7. Head.
as well Rulers as others, must be subject to the Discipline.

So that you see; the most learned of their Writers, their most admired
Preachers, their General Assemblies, which are the Representative Body of the
Kirk, rob the King of the honor and authority which belong to him, diminish
his Power, and with the Pope raise themselves above all that is called God,
which the Apostle makes a Mark of Antichrist, and they justly urge it so
against him; but what will they say, if he retort it upon the Kirk, 2. Bork.
Disc. C. 12.
seeing they say, their jurisdiction is independent, and that all men as well
Magistrates as others are subject to their Judgment? What dos the Pope say
more? They both have deposed Princes for not owning this Doctrine and by these
fiery Principles, have set the world in a flame. How miserable then are those
Monarchs, whose Crown and life depend on the pleasure of such men? What
Protestant King and Country can be long quiet where they are? All our late
Troubles sprung from these sanguinary Doctrines; they ruined both Church and
State, and made these three Kingdoms one great Akeldama; and while there is the
same cause, may we not fear the same effects? What has either party Printed, in
detestation of these ungodly Tenets and Practices, which may awaken the
Government, to fixed their Eyes upon both? for tho their Heads look several
ways, like those of a Spread Eagle, yet are they united in heart, and with
their sharp Claws are still grasping, to pull down the most Apostolical Church
under Heaven. Let them for shame renounce these Rebellious opinions, and be no
longer the great violators of this Apostalical Canon; let them become good
Christians and good Subjects, and unite themselves to the true old Protestants,
who are free from the blood of Kings, who have ever been the best observers of
this Text; and consequently the best Subjects; which is the last thing to be
discoursed on. 3dly
And very justly may I call them the best Subjects, it being against the
Doctrine of our Church, any way to dishonor the King; she enjoins obedience to
him, in spiritual, as well as temporal things, and gives him the same authority
which Godly Kings had among the Jews, and Christian Emperors in the primitive
Church; her Liturgy, her Homilies, her Canons, her Articles do all own his
Supremacy, while both Papists and Fanatics deny it, pretend a Superiority over
him, and that by Divine right.

Where, by the way, I may note the great Partiality and Injustice of our
Separatists; who, when they exalted their new Discipline above all other Forms
of Church Government, call it the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom, and exact
obedience from all Monarchs to it; enter into a rebellious Covenant to defend
it, and murder thousands who opposed it; even then did they cry out against
Episcopacy, as intolerable, intrenching on the Kings Prerogative, and taking
away his Power; because some had learnedly defended the Order to be Apostolical
and Divine. How great was this Injustice, to abolish Episcopacy, which had
flourished in all ages, and all places of the world, even in Aethiopia and
India (where the Popes Supremacy is disowned) from the very Apostles days; for
pretending to stand by the same Authority, which their upstart Model had,
against Scripture, and Antiquity, most illegally usurped? How highly did these
men sin against this Text, abuse and dishonor the King, in urging him, with
Force and Arms, to pull down that holy Order, which he and his Ancestors were,
at their Coronation, most solemnly sworn to preserve; and which, with all the
Privileges and Liberties of the Church, more than thirty Parliaments had
wisely and maturely confirmed?

And have they not again attempted, by the Sword, (their only powerful
Argument) to compel our present Sovereign, contrary to all Rules of Justice and
Providence, to alter that Government, which has ever been obedient to him, for
that which always rebelled against him, and turn out a Clergy, who would
vindicate his Prerogative, and seal their Allegiance with their blood, and
place those in their Seats, who were ever disloyal, and yet claim Authority
over him? to whom (as his martyred Father said of them) nothing will give
content, but the alteration of the whole frame of the Government, and the total
overthrow of Royal Authority: Decl. after the Pacif. at Ber.
or, as his Royal Grandfather wrote of them, who will judge and give Law to
their King, but be controlled by none; whom no deserts can oblige, neither
Oaths nor Promises bind: breathing nothing but Sedition and Calumnies, Bas. Dor.
and aspiring without measure, etc. This (and much more) was the Character,
that wise King, who had a long and sad experience of them, left to his Son: and
their many Rebellions ever since, show it; not only true of them, who vexed his
righteous Soul, but a Prediction of others, who would afterward strictly adhere
to their Principles; and in bloody Letters have they, in most places since,
recorded themselves, the great violaters of this Text.

But, blessed be God, the true Episcopal Protestants, have always observed it,
and most conscientiously honored their King; they have adhered to him in the
worst of times, and have been the greatest presidents of Fidelity in the world;
they have cheerfully suffered plundering and sequestration, imprisonment and
exile; some were Martyrs at Home, and others were Confessors abroad; neither
Chains, nor Gibbets, could terrify them from their Allegiance; their Religion
and Loyalty were grounded on the same Foundation, and they could not be Sons of
the Church, and Traitors to the King; they must lay down old Protestancy, when
they lift up a hand against the Lords Anointed.

For their Principles are the same with those of the Primitive Christians, and
they will, on no pretense whatsoever, rebel against their Prince; though he
were a Presbyterian, both in Opinion, and Government, they durst not dishonor,
or disobey him, but would, with those of old, flere and mori, weep and dye, and
never draw a Sword against him. They would imitate the Thebean Legion under
Maximianus, submit to a second Decimation, and be cut in pieces, before they
would strike at their lawful Sovereign. This was, and is still, the Doctrine of
our Church, in which she may justly triumph over all the World, which we
should, at this juncture of time, frequently preach, and defend, with all true
Protestant Courage and Resolution.

Let us, with the brave Mauricius, and Exuperius, who commanded that Loyal
Army, call to our Parishioners, Mori magis quam vincere, rather to dye, and
fall innocently, than live victorious Rebels; let us often show them the
eternal Rewards of Fidelity, and the dreadful Punishments of Disobedience; 3.
Ser. against Rebel.
let us convince them, as it is in our Homilies (which also shows the Doctrine
of our Church) that as Heaven is the place of good obedient Subjects, so is
Hell the Prison and Dungeon of Rebels against God and their Prince, etc. By
which allowed President, let us with Loyal and Religious Zeal, cry aloud
against the Breakers of this Text; let us assert the Supremacy of Princes in
their own Territories, against all the Delusions and Impostures of Rome, and
Geneva; let us privately discourse them, and publicly preach them, into a
devout Reverence, and Loyal Admiration of the present Government; which, for
the security of Religion and Property, is most certainly the best under Heaven;
it is easy and gentle, not Arbitrary and Tyrannical, and gives the Subject all
the Privileges, he can rationally desire: no Sequestrators or Committy-men are
seen among us, the Cry of Widows and Orphans is not heard in our streets; the
Peasant does not groan under Taxes, but every man enjoys his own, and is
protected by the Laws, from the Oppressions and Injuries of others; for which,
and all other Blessings we here enjoy, persuade we our Auditors, to be truly
thankful to God and the King, and to express it in all Godliness and Honesty,
in all Loyalty and Affection, in unity and uniformity; and let us in all
respects, be burning and shining Lights unto them: In a word, let us in our
Lives and Actions contribute all we can, to the Honor of our King, who is a
most tender, indulgent and nursing Father to our Church; Let us show it in our
exact Conformity to the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, in our great Honor and
Obedience to those whom he has set over us, in Church and State, and
especially to him, who for his vast abilities, his great Sufferings, and
untainted Loyalty, is now most deservedly set in the ancient Throne of this
Diocese; let his Comfort in his Clergy increase with his Honor, and let us, by
the Holiness of our Lives, our Constancy in Preaching, and other Ministerial
Duties (on which I have formerly on the like occasion discoursed) show our
Obedience to our Metropolitan, our Fear to God, and Honor to the King.

FINIS.

