SOME Prison Meditations In the 7th Month, 1657.

BEING A Free-Gift SERMON Mainly touching the Religious Robbers, or Spiritual
Murderers, the Sermon and Prayer-sellers of the former, later and present
times; Even to the whole company of Mystery. Babylons Merchants and Members a
Warning.

Hos. 6 Chap. Verse. the 8. and 9. it is written, Gilead is a City of them that
work iniquity, and is polluted with blood: And as Troops of Robbers wait for a
man, so the company of Priests murder in the way by consent, for they commit
leudness.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle near the West end
of Paul's, 1657.

SOME Prison-Meditations.
NOW all you people and Priests of the Earth, amongst all your observings and
gatherings of Doctrine, observe with me, and take diligent notice of these few,
short, plain Doctrines, or Lessons from hence, and tremble, and repent; to wit,
1. That workers of iniquity are a filthy and bloody people. 2. That lewd
Priests or Teachers are murderers, and layers in wait for blood 3. Where the
Priests or Teachers are naught, such as follow them are not good; and so like
Priest, like people, as here. 4. Lewd Priests, and murtherous-minded men,
(false Teachers) have in all ages been many a mighty band, fitted to devour.


But Hosea! how did thou escape this bloody people, and these murtherous
Priests, these lewd workers of iniquity? Did they not murder or imprison thee,
or sue thee at their Courts for a disturber of their peace, or for a slander?
How did thou, poor Lamb, escape these Wolves, these boody murtherous Priests
and people. Thy brother Amos, the Prophet, was accused by one of these
murtherous Priests for a conspirer against the King in the midst of the House
of Israol, and that the Land was not able to bear his words, Amos 7. 10, etc.
And thy brother Jeremiah was cast into a dirty Dungeon, almost unto death,
besides the other beatings, and stockings, and imprisonings that he suffered
from one of these lewd Priests Jer. 20. 1, etc.
and the sinful Princes, for his witness sake in that generation, as it is to
be seen in Jer. 38. and other places of that Book: And thy brother Zacharias,
son of Barachias was slain by this bloody generation between the Temple and the
Altar for his witness sake, Matthew. 23: 35: And all the Sea Mat. 23. 34, etc.
Lu. 13. 33, etc. and chapter 22. and 23.
rest of thy brethren were evil entreated of this bloody murtherous generation
of Priests and people for their testimonies sake: And the Heir himself Christ
Jesus the Head, when he appeared, was cruelly murdered by these bloody
Priests, and such as followed them, and consented with them; and that for
witnessing forth truth against the wickedness and lewdness of the bloody City
and venomous Priests, their Teachers, as is all over in the Scripture of truth
to be read, and is now also in these present days found true in experience by
all thy suffering Brethren and Sisters, Oh Prophet! who are reproached and
persecuted of this present evil-generation of the Priests (the Teachers) and
the people under them, under the Nickname of Quakers. And therefore we having
such a Cloud of Witnesses and fellow sufferers for the truths sake going before
us, we may be comforted and encouraged in all our tribulations knowing that we
are hereunto called, not only to believe, but also to suffer for Christ his
Name sake, that so we may fill up the measure of the afflictions of Christ in
our flesh for his bodies sake, which is his Church.

Further, oh all people! you may hence observe and take diligent notice for
your good, that it has been an old custom of the worlds Teachers, such as are
called of men Master, Matthew. 23. and who preach for hire, Mic. 3. and seek
their gain from their quarter, Isa. 56. I say, that it has been an old custom
of such Wolves to murder souls and people of God; for in some Scriptures is
mention made of the spiritual, and in others of the bodily murder that they
had and would be guilty of. And further take notice, that these banding Priests
are a lewd generation, which in other expressions is all one as to say,
Thieves, Whores, and Harlots; and so indeed are they also in Scripture usually
said to be, and therefore typed and set forth under the name of painted whorish
Jezzabel, and the wel-favoured Harlot, and here under the similitude of Troops
of Robbers waiting for a man; and Paul calls them Ministers of Satan, having a
form of godliness, denying and resisting the power and truth of godliness: And
therefore (oh all people!) you are exhorted by the spirit of truth to turn away
from them, yea, and commanded to come out from amongst them upon pain of
eternal death, Jer 23. throughout. Rev 14. 8, 9, 10, 11. Rev. 18. throughout. 2
Cor. 11. 13, 12, 15. 2 Timothy 3. 5, etc. Rev. 2. 20, etc.

Read Scripture, and see if these things be not so, and fear the living God,
and bow to truth, and be exhorted and persuaded all people now at length to
learn wisdom, and to understand whom you follow; for you see the Scripture
tells of murtherous lewd Priests that stood over the people for Teachers in
former days; and in Christ's time there was Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites,
who were taken by the blind people to be sufficient guides and Teachers, whom
Christ called blind guides, children of the Joh. 8 25. Matthew. 23.
devil, painted Sepulchers, whited Walls, yea Vipers and Serpents. And so you
people that gather together to the Steeple-House, which you call your Church,
when you hear your Teachers, who now-a-daies go under the name of Ministers
with you, take a Scripture, and out of it choose a verse (or so) of a chapter,
according to their wills, for filthy lucre, and calls it their Text, and from
it draws Doctrines, and Reasons, and Uses, as they call them, ask them whether
there be any such company of false Teachers now-a-daies in England to be found,
as this Scripture speaks of, who as troops of Robbers wait for a man, so wait
to murder in the way by consent; and who they are, and what, and who they
murder; and with what they murder; and how these murderers may be known;
what be their fruits, for by their fruits ye shall know them, says Christ.
And ask them further, Whether these false Teachers which the Prophet Hosea
here calls lewd murderers be not the same in nature with those which Isaiah
in the 56. chap. and 10. v. of his Prophecy, calls greedy dumb dogs, that
sought their gain from their quarter, and could never have enough: and the same
that Jeremiah spoke of in chapter 5. ver. 1, 2. and 23. chapter of his Prophecy,
throughout, That stole the word from their neighbor, and used their tongues,
and said, he says, when the Lord never sent them, and so could not profit the
people at all. And whether they be not the same that Micah the Prophet (Mic.
chapter 3. 5, etc.) speaks of, who preached for hire, and divined for money, and
spoke peace to the wicked for the gift sake, but if any put not into their
mouths, they prepared war against them, and yet like all hypocrites would lean
upon the Lord in words, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? no evil shall
come unto us. And whether these murtherous Priests were not one with those
that Christ Jesus cried vvo against in Matthew. 23. who were sayers, and not
doers; who loved to be called of men Master, and bound heavy burdens upon the
people, and touched them not with one of their own fingers, but shut up the
kingdom of heaven against men, and would neither enter in themselves, nor
suffer others. And finally, ask them whether such men now as stand over the
people for Teachers, though under another Name, and making another profession
in words, yet if they be found in the foresaid steps, doing the foresaid deeds
of those forementioned false Teachers, are not to receive the same judgment,
and to be cried against and denied, and forsaken by all the children of light
now, as formerly, yea or nay.

And now Hosea, thou holy Prophet of God, thou have said and laid down these
two Doctrines or high Charges against the people in general, and against the
Priests in particular: The first, That the people in general are polluted with
blood. The second, That as Troops of Robbers wait for a man, so the company of
Priests murder in the way by consent: How do thou prove and make these good,
for the Gileadites are deeply concerned in it; and they will have thee to make
it good, or suffer for default? Yea, by the spirit I make it good, thus: Gilead
is a (ity polluted with blood, because they are such as work iniquity; and the
Priests murder in the way by consent, because they commit Iewdnesse: And this
is witnessed not only by the Scriptures, but also by the same spirit of truth
that gave it forth in all the children of light to be so. But Hosea, thou must
not be tried per pares, that is, them of like condition or quality with thee,
to wit, the holy Prophets and children of God, who are Witnesses with thee
against the abominations of their times, and sins that rules in Priests and
people, for that will not satisfy nor serve the Gileadites turn, for so the
great men of all sorts in City and Country would be found faulty: But these
Priests and people think it fit (according to their Nation-Law) to have a
Judge, and Justices fit upon the Bench, and to have a Jury of Inquest summoned
and to have a Bill of Indictment found against thee, and then if thou plead thy
innocence, and say thou art not guilty of doing them any wrong, but only thou
spoke as thou was moved by the spirit of God; then thou must have, as they
pretend, a fair trial, (for thou must know that the Gileadites cannot believe
thy Witness, nor any for thee from that spirit only) but this fair trial must
not be by spiritual men, who only are able to judge of spiritual things, for
the Gileadites know not their voice no more then thine, Oh Prophet! but it must
be further, by another company of these men whom thou have said are workers of
iniquity, and polluted with blood, and so are parties; and these must judge of
thee; and these (says the world) are a Grand Jury, a company of substantial
men of the Country, sworn men (Mark, out of the Doctrine of Christ, for his yea
is yea, and his nay is nay, without an oath.) And these men (the Grand Jury)
must bring in their Verdict (as they call it) against thee, for they have found
thee guilty, (for thou have nothing on thy side but plain truth, without man's
testimony, or an oath) and the Judge of the Court (one of the chief men among
the Gileadites that is versed in Law matters) thinks it fit thou should be
fined to pay a sum of money for thy offense, (oh Prophet! thou man of God!) and
be kept in prison (Summer and Winter, that matters not) until thou pay it: But
what (oh Prophet!) if thou have neither liberty in thy spirit, nor outward
ability to pay thy Fine, What course must be taken with thee? Well, for that (O
Prophet!) Gilead matters not, but imprisoned thou must remain, for so Gilead
will be quiet of thee, and thou cannot come into their Synagogues, Markets, nor
other Assemblies, to cry against their sins, and disturb them, for the people
and Priests would live quietly in their sins, and they would not be disturbed
neither in the time of their service, nor otherwise. And Hosea, that thou
may have no occasion to find fault with the Jury or the Judge, one of these
Priests whom thou have by the spirit declared to be murderers and lewd men,
have taken an oath in open Court against thee; and do thou think that though
(...) ded for a witness against this generation of cruel hearted men, whom the
beast and false prophet has raised in his defense, and against the Kingdom of
Christ Jesus and them that follow him, how full have the most part of the
prisons in all this land been with guiltless sufferers under cruel bondage,
with unjust dealings and false judgments, have gone forth from some of your
mouths, you that have been set to judge over the people, who should have been
a terror to the wicked, but have rather strengthened the hands of evil doers,
and been a terror to righteousuesse, so much as is possible, the great whore
which sits upon the beast, has made your Rulers drunk and stagger with envy
and hatred and persecution, and works of wickedness against the upright; Woe is
me for you, what have you brought forth? even iniquity by Decrees, and
injustice by Ordinances, and false judgment by Laws; alas, alas, your
destruction comes as an armed man upon you. Was ever the like heard, or any
president in any generation before you, for imprisoning just men, for declaring
against sin and the abominations of the times, as you have done many, and for
imprisoning men because they cannot put off their hat to you and respect your
persons, and so transgress the law of God, and because they cannot swear, and
so break Christ's command? For this you have imprisoned many, and caused them to
suffer because of this, may not you fear and tremble before the Lord God, and
your faces gather blackness at this, when you consider it? Did ever any that
were set to judge in the earth among men so abuse their power, and subvert it
so, quite to another end than wherefore it was committed to them? May not shame
cover you all, to commit men to prison for the exercise of pure conscience
toward God, because they cannot swear, or respect men's persons, or maintain
Idol-shepherds, and Idol-temples and worships, which is abomination to the
Lord; and for taking peaceable men out of peaceable meetings, and out of their
travel on the Highways, and first whipping them, and sending them to prison,
the example of this which you have done, never went before in any age, and
therefore have you exceeded in oppression, in injustice, in cruelty and false
judgment; all your forefathers the Pope nor Bishops, hardly ever brought forth
such things; but the Lord will reckon with you, and plead the cause of the
oppressed against all you oppressors; yea, and will give unto you a recompense
of reward according to your works; ye that have exalted your selves against the
innocent, shall be brought down to the dust of misery, and the Saints shall
reign and rejoice over you, when the Kingdom of Christ Jesus the Lamb shall be
set up over you all, and your beastly power dashed to pieces as a Potters
vessel, when he whom you have persecuted and his followers shall rule with a
rod of iron, and break you asunder; and this shall shurely come to pass,
therefore consider it, ye that thus deal in your anger against the Lord and his
chosen, for the Lamb shall get the victory over the Beast, and over you all
that seek to defend him, and that strive under his power; for they that are
with the Lamb are Called, and Faithful, and Chosen: O! therefore be awakened,
be awakened, ye heads, and Judges, and Rulers of the people, remember and
repent, the Lords hand is stretched forth against all oppression and
oppressors, and his wrath is kindled against the wicked ones, and his power to
overthrow his dominon which long has reigned in the Nations, and now though he
seeks to defend himself against the Lamb and his followers by injust dealing,
yet the outstretched arm of the Lord shall bring deliverance to his chosen,
who has been made havoc upon, in their liberties and in their estates; some
cruelly suffering in prison, and others by spoiling of their goods, and none of
these for evil doing, but upon false suspicions, and envious jelousies, and
secret surmisings, without any ground of occasion given; but by wickedness
have many of you sought occasion to make offenders, by laying snares for the
feet of the harmless and innocent; you have made men offenders for a word, and
perverted innocent words and actions, that you might make to your self a ground
to persecute, and have sought a cloak to cover your cruelty in the sight of
men, but naked and bare are your hearts made manifest in the sight of the lord,
who has looked down from heaven, and considered these things, and has
regarded the unjust sufferings of his people whose liberties, and estates, and
good names have been spoiled through injustice, by grievous burdens laid upon
some, because they could not pay Tithes (that heinous oppression) to satisfy
the unmercifullnesse of cruel men, and many suffers at this day, unjustly in
the sight of God, and illegally also in the sight of men; and some suffer the
spoiling of their goods, rather by way of robery and theft, than by just
execution of judgment in proceeding of just law; this can largely be witnessed,
and this is brought forth by subservant Officers to you that are set to judge,
and you to them are evil examples, and strengtheners of their malicious hands,
some of them are not ashamed to take six times the value of what is unjustly
claimed for the use of a false teacher and deceitful hireling who rides upon
the beast, and make you their servants to oppress the poor, to uphold them and
maintain them in their pride and vanities, but the Lord has considered these
things, and he has numbered the oppressions against you, wherewith the just
have been grieved and oppressed under you, he has counted this cruelty and
recorded all your unjust dealing, which you have (or suffered to be) brought
forth, yea the day of account hastens and the term draws near upon you,
wherein the just and righteous Judge of heaven and earth will call you to
account who will plead the cause of the poor, and of the unjust sufferer, and
oppressed, against you all, who are oppressors the innocent prosecute against
you, and the begging of the poor is heard, which calls for vengeance upon you.
In the Record of justice, what account will you give to the Highest-power, who
rules over heaven and earth, for imprisoning just men for crying against sin,
and declaring against the wickedness of this age; this shall be proved against
you in the day of the Lord; Is your answer ready, or will not your mouths be
stopped and you speechless, when righteousness it self pleads against you?
And what can you plead for fining men, and imprisoning them, for not respecting
your persons, and bowing with hat and knee, and because they could not swear;
this has some of you done; will you have any thing to say in the cause of
these things, when Christ Jesus comes to reign and his Saints with him, unto
whom the government and the authority, and rule shall be given: though now they
are persecuted, and as the refuse of men accounted by you, unto whom they are
become a prey, to act your oppression and cruelty upon; and because they render
not evil for evil, therefore is the impudency of some men the more increased,
and their hardness of heart enlarged; and because judgment is not speedily
executed, therefore are the hearts of some men set in them to do evil. O! what
a sad reckoning in that day, and what large indictments and verdicts for your
oppression, will be read against you, and proved to be just in the sight of God
and men; a sad thing will it be upon you, when laid to your charge by the Lord,
for causing men to suffer because they could not swear, nor respect persons,
nor uphold the deceits of false worships and teachers, nor cease to cry against
sin, in your Towns and Steeple Houses. O! be stirred up out of your security,
you Heads, and Rulers, and Judges, and Officers, even all you be awakened who
have turned your sword against the peaceable, and been a terror to
righteousness as much as you could, which you ought not to have been, and so
your power you have abused, and subverted it to another end than wherefore it
was committed to you: instead of defending the upright you have offended him,
and instead of being a terror to the wicked, his hand has been strengthened
through your wicked presidents; this is the truth, as the light in all your
consciences shall witness in the day of the Lord; O! how has justice and true
judgment been neglected, and oppression and cruelty abounded, the like in
generations past has not been known, but the Lord is now arisen, and has
said, I will ease me of my enemies, and take vengeance upon my adversaries, who
have done wickedly against him and his people, till the patience of the Lord is
near an end, and his long suffering finished, and his judgments will he make
known upon his enemies in this generation, that ages to come forever may be
warned not to oppress the innocent, as these have done by false accusations,
and unjust judgment, and wicked proceedings, and because of it, the wrath of
the Lord is kindled, and his viols of indignation shall be poured upon the
beast, and upon the false Prophet, and all their power shall be smitten in one
day.

And O what wickedness has abounded in the people also, to help up the
measure of the Rulers sins, that may receive the recompense together; how have
the people of all sorts abused the innocent lambs of Christ, whom he has
called? What beatings, and stonings, and bruisings, and other abuses, in
Towns, and Highways, and Steeple Houses, its hard to be expressed and large
to be declared: some have been wounded nigh unto death, others bruised till
blood have gushed out, and others cast down in the dirt and punched with feet
and trodden upon, and many have been in danger of their lives, some have been
knocked down with staves and their clothes rent, and their hair torn off their
heads, and some have been pursued after with throwing stones and dirt at them,
and many halled, and tumulted, and lugged, and hurried up and down in cruel
manner, to the danger of life and oppression of the creature, and others have
been whipped, and lashed, and put into cruel torment of their bodies, by engines
framed of purpose to torment the bodies of the harmless, as Chester and
Carlisle may witness, and others have been halled before rulers, and falsely
slandered to the taking away of life if the Lord had not prevented, more than
mercy of men, and having been unmercifully and unjustly sent to prison, there
have they suffered cruelties from the Goalers or their servants, by beatings,
or punnishings, or threatenings, or cruel words, and casting into dungeons, and
great abuses shamefully acted upon them, and other prisoners have made a prey
upon them, by t^king away their clothes and meat, and beating of them, and
abusing them diverse ways, and murderers have had more privilege of freedom
in prisons and in trials, than these who are innocent, and these things thus
acted contrary to their own law, has passed without reproof from many in
Authority, though it have been brought to their door, and in this manner have
the children of God, the Lamb and his followers been persecuted without cause,
or any evil works brought forth by them, and legally proved against them; but
for well doing and not for evil, has the wicked vented their malice against
them, that the more the Beast and his power has fullfilled wickedness, the
sooner may be his destruction.

And O what scorning, and reviling, and lying, and slandering, and evil
speeches, with mockings, and cruel words of envy, and terms of cruelty against
the innocent, has this generation brought forth in this day, wherein the
dragon with his Angels has joined battle against the Prince of
righteousness, and they that follow him, and whole Gog and Magog is gathered
together, to compass the Camp of the Saints about, and to fight against the
beloved City, the Judges and Rulers, with their train of subservant officers,
as Bailiffs, Clarks, Goalers, Constables, with all that to those belonged, have
with a high hand persecuted and laid oppressions by hard-heartednesse, upon the
backs of the poor and distressed, and the scorners, and liers, and profane
wretches have bent their tongue against the just, in uttering lies, slanders,
reproaches, backbiting, nick-namings, and false-accusing, and all manner of
evil speehes, and false reproaches, and the just have been burdened by all
this; and thus they that have been departed from iniquity have been a prey to
Rulers to act their injustice upon, and to the people to utter their slanders,
and to do cruelty against; and the teeth of evil doers have been set on edge,
to bite and devour, and to satisfy their maliciousness upon the sufferings
of the upright people, and from the Judge upon his throne, to the beggar upon
the highway; all have had their hand dipped in this cause of cruel and unjust
persecution, and the Lord has considered and harkened from his holy
habitation, and numbered up the sum of all your iniquities that he may repay
and recompense upon your heads, woe unto you unjust Judges, and corrupt men, who
have abused your power. And woe unto all that do oppress by hard dealing, who
have offended the just, and defended the unjust: Woe unto all you scorners,
liers, back biters, and reproachful tongues; the Lord is coming to take an
account. Your sins cry for vengeance against you, and though your hands and
tongues have been strengthened to speak and act ungodliness, by the evil
example of your rulers, yet your own iniquity shall you bear in the day of the
Lord, and though your rulers and judges have been strengthened in their
unjustnesse and mercilessenesse, by the false lying teachers and diviners of
false visions, which have seen vanity, yet their own iniquity shall they bear,
and every man shall die for his own sin; Woe unto your teachers, they have eaten
up the sin of rulers and people, and covered iniquity and transgression, by
flattering and lying words; they have daubed with untempered mortar, and healed
up the wound deceitfully, and cried peace, peace, to the wicked, that have
walked in the imaginations of their own hearts, when unto such the Lord never
spoke peace.

And now whereas the Rulers and people have stretched forth their hands to vex
the Lords people, and have through unjust judgment, and grievous oppressions,
and unmercifull dealings, trodden the innocent under foot, and made them a prey
to their mouth, and diverse ways have persecuted in cruel manner the followers
of the Lamb; yet also have the wise men of this world, even the Priests and
Teachers, who have led the people, and have caused them to err, and have set
themselves as in battle array against the Lord and his way and people; How have
you hardened your hearts and made your forehead as brass, against the Word of
the Lord, and you have been as the fountain of all this wickedness acted
against the just, and strengtheners of the hands of ungodly men; the Heads and
Ruler, you have strengthened in their cruelty, of false judgments by your
arguments of strife; in subtiltly you have been as nursers of all this
persecution and wickedness, and have interceded for oppression, to cause the
just to groan, whom the Lord has raised to testify against you; the judges
they have given regard unto you, and the people they have taken you for
examples, who have been cursed presidents to the Rulers and people, who have
followed your cruel steps of malice and envy; and from the head to the tail,
they have drunk in your poisonus doctrines; and made themselves drunk
therewith, and out of reason, in their furious zeal of madness, and all have
taken council together to slay the harmless from off the face of the earth;
some by false judgment and oppression, and others by cruel abusings, as
beatings, and stonings, unheard of, or unequalized in generations of late. O ye
Priests, and Teachers, and wise men, and Scribes! how many of you in this
Nation joined hand in hand to betray the innocent, by your false doctrines and
lying divinations, and have filled (and sought to do so) the mind of the people
with slanders and false reproaches, and lying imaginations, and many
conceptions and jealousies against the people of God; many of you have made it
your study work, to bring forth evil by cunning arguments, to suggest into the
hearts of people, that they might not enter the kingdom, and even so have you
been shutters of the kingdom of heaven against men, and would not enter your
selves, nor suffer others that would.

Woe unto you, you have taken away the key of knowledge and lost it, and
multitudes of false aspersions, and lying assertions have you brought forth
without fear, by wicked consequence and lying productions, that you might take
away the key of knowledge thereby, and hide it from men, and lay stumbling
blocks of iniquity before the people, to stop the way of the upright, and you
have traveled to seek occasions of evil against the just, and watched for the
halting of the innocent, that you might glory and rejoice in their fall, and
without any occasion by words or actions, you have (...) ded] five Marks, and
imprisonment until I should pay it; And so because I cannot give them money for
their unjust proceedings against me, and unchristian dealings with me, I am
kept here accordingly in the common Goal a prisoner, yet free, and in that
everlasting Truth of God which cannot be bound, but tramples upon the neck and
head of all deceit more then a Conqueror. But from hence all that have eyes may
see what little liberty truth can yet get in the earth, after so much war and
words protested for it: And therefore whoever thou art that reads these things,
know, that in England also now if thou vvilt live godly in Christ Jesus, thou
must suffer persecution; for the Scripture cannot be broken. And this
persecution now in England arises mainly from the blind zeal that many have
for keeping up their Ministers as they call them, from being spoken unto in the
Assembly, either in, after, or before the time of their preaching, especially
on the first day of the week, by them called the Lords day, and Sabbath day,
and this the people are prompted unto by the wicked spirit in their Teachers,
which cannot endure the light that God has raised up in his people in these
Islands in these days: and so this is the condemnation of all such children of
darkness, whether Priest or People, that light shines, and they love darkness
more then light because their deeds are evil. And so all may see whether the
teachers and people that act in such darkness are going; for in the days of
Mary the persecutor, the Law reached only to a punishing of such as spoke to
her Priests in the time of their service; but now the zeal of some for them is
so increased, that neither in the time of their speaking, nor in their coming
nor going from their Steeplehouse, especially on the day aforesaid, must their
Teachers be spoken unto, but they will impute it to the party for an ofence,
without examining whether there be cause for it yea or nay; but the Teacher
though he be never so false in Doctrine, or vicious in life, yet if he be a
Parish-Teacher, and receive the worlds hire, as Tithes, Glebe-lands, and
Augmentations, with the State-allowance, or upon other Accounts be allowed for
a Puklike Teacher by the Nation-Law, he is like to be defended; and he or she
that speaks to them, though such a one be never so deer to God, and speaks
truth in that particular never so clearly, is like to be punished as an evil
doer: And if this be not a provoking of the wrath and hot displeasure of God
against thee, Oh England! then let him that has understanding declare what
more can be: and therefore thou art now in time warned of these things, that
thou may by repentance be saved from those things that shall assuredly come
upon the wicked. But for the present, all poor people every where, who are in
the dark mind, unacquainted with the teachings of God in the spirit and light
of the holy Annoynting, but are following the blind guides that endeavor to get
their wickedness established by a Law, your misery is great and much to be
lamented, and the case of such of you as have any true breathings after God is
to be pitied; and who shall deliver you out of your bondage, but he that
delivered Israel out of Egypt, and has in all Ages been a present help unto
them in the needful time of trouble, and will still deliver them that fear him
out of all adversity: So wait upon him, and the work is done, and be encouraged
all that wait upon him, for there is no end of his goodness to us, for his
mercy indureth for ever; and before him goes a devouring fire to consume the
Adversaries of his glorious Truth round about; and the day is dawned that will
leave them neither root nor branch. And in this rest I am your deer brother, oh
all ye free people of God! and in the patience and sufferings of Christ your
fellow servants for the imbondaged seeds sake,

Thomas Tailor.

To the Judges, Justices, Juries, Teachers and people of the Nation who profess
themselves to be Christians, and the Scripture to be their rule, and yet
account themselves disturbed if any speak unto them and cry against them in
their Assemblies or Streets in the name and word of the Lord (without any
authority from man) a few Quaeries.
1 Quae.
WHether was that a disturbance in Christ Jesus when he went into the Temple at
Jerusalem (a figure of his body) and made a whip of small cords, and with it
(without any authority from man) whipped out the buyers and sellers, and
overthrew the Tables of the Money Changers, and commanded the Merchandise to be
taken thence, Yea or nay, Mat. 21. 12. etc.

2 Query.
Whether was it a disturbance in the young prophet of God that was sent to cry
against the Altar at Bethel whereon the King Jeroboam sacrificed even in the
time of his worship, or the disturbance was not on the Kings own part, who put
out his hand against Gods servant in Gods work; and whether the withering of
that hand was not an evident sign on whose part the disturbance was, 1 Kings
13. 1. etc. Yea, or Nay.

3 Query.
Whether did Jeremiah the Prophet disturb the people of Israel, when he spoke
unto them, and cried against them terribly in the Word of the Lord ordinarily
in their Assemblies and gates of their Cities, yea, or nay. Or did not they
disturb him in putting him in stocks and prison for so doing? Consider well of
it, and give judgment accordingly, Jer. 20. and Chap. 26. and chap. 37. and 38.

4 Query.
And whether was it wicked Ahab, King of Israel, and his house that had sinned
against God, or Elijah the prophet of God who cried against their sins, that
disturbed Isreal's peace, yea or nay. And whether the wicked Kings Judgment, or
the holy Prophets Judgment will you be of in this matter. See 1 Kings 18. 17.
etc.

5 Query.
And whether Amos who prophesied even in the Kings court and chapel, the sword
upon the Kings house, and desolations upon all their sanctuaries, was a
disturber in so doing, or so accounted then (that we read of) save only by one
wicked Priest, as you may read, Amos 7. 7. etc. And whether Jonah preaching
repentance in the open streets of Niniveh for a whole day together was a
disturber or a friend to their city, yea or nay, see Ion. 3. 4. etc.

6 Query.
And whether the King and people of Nineveh who instead of persecuting him the
Lords Prophet, did repent at his preaching, shall not rise up in judgment with
this present generation, and condemn it, yea or nay.

7 Query.
Whether did Paul the Apostle disturb the Jews and Gentiles in their
synagogues and markets, when he reasoned of the things of Gods kingdom, and
disputed as it were daily with them there, as you may read in the Acts of the
Apostles: And whether you who account your selves disturbed with the like
things, doing in these days, do not allow of the Jews persecuting of him for
his works sake then, Yea or Nay.

8 Query.
And whether the same Paul in the Corinthians when he said, In the true church
all that have any thing revealed unto them from God, may speak one by one: and
when he that is speaking hears such an inspired one begin to speak, he (to
wit, the first) is to hold his peace, that all things may be he ard, and all
edified; I say whether Paul in preaching such doctrine preached disturbing
doctrine, yea or nay.

And lastly, it is required of those that judge others for disturbers in such
cases as these, that they do set down what is the true and infallible rule of
trying doctrines and spirits by in these days; or for ever hereafter that they
let the thing alone.

These from the Lords Prisoner, Thomas Tailor.

THE END.

