That the Right both of Choosing Sheriffs, and of Admitting them to, or
Precluding them from, the relieving themselves by FINE, is solely in the
Common Hall, briefly Opened and Defended.
IT IS as surprising, as it is unaccountable, that while we are vindicating our
Laws, Rights, and Liberties from the invasions made upon them by our late
Kings, there should be found so great an inclination in inferior Magistrates,
Courts, and Officers, to maintain their own usurpations over the Franchises and
Privileges of their fellow Subjects and Citizens. Nor does it only fill men
peaceably disposed with amazement, but it greatly alarms them to find, that
those who a few Months ago, would have been thankful to have stood indemnified
from their illegal and arbitrary Actings, are become of late so emboldened, as
to justify their former Lawless Courses, by adhearing unto, and pursuing the
same methods. But surely the Freemen and Citizens of London, must be
degenerated into a strange fondness of slavery, if when through the Grace and
Generosity of Their present Majesty's, they are not only redeemed from the
Tyranny exercised over them and the Nation by Kings, but secure against it in
future Reigns as well as their own; they should sacrifice their Rights to the
Court of Aldermen and the Common Council, who, as they are indebted for the
station they are in to the choice of the Freemen, so they are not only sworn
to preserve and defend the Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises granted to the
City by so many Charters; but are accountable to the Community represented in
the Common Hall, in case through violating their Oaths they either invade or
betray them. And as the behavior, at this juncture, of some Men, shows how
little they are influenced by the example of His Majesty, both in making the
known Laws the alone Rule of his Government, and in expressing the utmost
temperance of mind, condescension, patience and goodness, toward unthankful,
murmuring, and undutiful, as well as toward grateful and loyal Subjects; so
the present carriage of some of the Court of Aldermen, in the matter under
debate between them and the Common Hall, seems to be calculated in order to
frustrate and defeat one of the great ends of His Majesty's glorious
undertaking in his coming into England, which was to vindicate, recover, and
restore to Cities and Corporations, all the Privileges and Rights whereunto
they had a legal claim by Laws, Prescriptions, Grants or Charters, and which
had been either lost and departed from by length and corruption of time, or
wrested from them by the fraud and violence of any Rank or Set of Men.

Whatsoever Right some of our late Mayors, Aldermen, and Common Council men
challenged in and over the Privileges and Franchises of the City, as if the
Charters containing the Customs, Liberties, Powers and Authorities, vouchsafed,
and conveyed to the said City, had been originally made and granted solely to
them; yet it is a matter too evident to be controlled, That they are not so
much as named or mentioned in any of the said Charters, every thing therein
specified and comprehended, being made over, granted, and confirmed to the
Citizens and Commonalty of London: So that all the Interest they can with
Justice or Reason pretend unto, by virtue of any Charter, in reference to the
Rights and Franch^ses of the City, is merely as they are Citizens, a^ in
conjunction with the Commonalty. See ^ Charters granted to the City of London
by Hen. K. John. Hen. 3. Edw. 1. Edw. 2. Edw. 3. Ric. 2. etc.

And as the Power of choosing Sheriffs, is one of the principal Rights and
Privileges conveyed and confirmed in the said Charters; so both the Sheriffwick
it self, with all the Customs thereunto belonging, and the Privilege and
Authority, as well of making as amoving Sheriffs, is made over and granted to
the Citizens and Commonalty of the said City. This will fully appear to all
such as will allow themselves to consult the forementioned Charters. Nor is is
it consistent either with the Honor or Peace of the City, That the Right of
Electing Sheriffs should be lodged in one Body of Men, and the Power of
Approving and Disallowing should be vested in another. Neither is it agreeable
with the measures either of Wisdom or Justice, That any should loose' but they
who have power to bind. Accordingly when Mr. John Richmond, who in 33 Hen. 8.
had been chosen by the Common Hall for one Sheriff, refused to serve upon a
certain pretense mentioned in the Records of the City, Lib. Q. fol. 35. a. The
Commons in the Common Hall Assembled took cognizance of it, and judging the
Excuse and Plea upon which he grounded his refusal, to be insufficient, they
committed him to Prison for disobedience and obstinacy: And then he submitted
to a Fine, and the Common Hall met again the 12th of August, to consent to his
discharge.

But whereas the Court of Aldermen insist upon, and allege the Authority of an
Act of Common Council, made An. 7. Car. 1. whereby they pretend to be
authorized and empowered to admit such to Fine whom they shall think meet,
without the concurrence of the Commons; and that notwithstanding the Commons
having both chosen such Person or Persons to the Office of Sheriff, and their
continuing to adhere to the Election which they have made: we shall take
liberty to unravel that Act, and show, not only the illegality of it, but what
fatal mischiefs it is shapen and adapted to produce. Nor is it a derogation
from the Wisdom of a Common Council, when I say that One of the Acts of that
Body may be illegal; seeing I am justified in the use of the expression by the
Commons of England in Parliament assembled, An. 1628. who being applied unto by
way of Petition and Complaint by one Legatt, did judge and declare a certain
Act of the Common Council to be null in it self, and that all the Proceedings
upon it had been unjust and arbitrary.

Nor is it much for the Reputation of the Court (...) ^ldermen, that the Act
which they seek to ju^^^fie themselves by, is the same that Sir John More bore
himself upon, when he overthrew all the Rights of the City relating to the
Choice of Officers, and thereby laid us open to a Deluge of Misery and Blood.
But I see some Men do as little understand their Interest as their Duty; for by
reviving the Authority of that Act of Common Council, they prevent the
forgiving as well as the forgetting their Crimes. There must be in the Court of
Aldermen Gentlemen either ^f very weak Memories, so as to forget the
Re^lections made upon this Act in the Committee ^t the House of Commons but a
few weeks ago; ^ else they have neither that Reverence for the ^thority, nor
that Apprehension of the Justice ^ that Part of the Legislative Body, as well
as Grand Inquest of the Kingdom, which not only their Duty, but their
Circumstances should oblige them unto.

To which I do farther add, That whatsoever the Power of a Common Council is,
yet it remains still subordinate and subject unto, and may have its Acts both
questioned and superseded by a Common Hall: For the former being a Creature of
the latter, and only instituted and erected by it, for the ease and convenience
of the Great Body of the Commonalty; it is not to be supposed but that the
Freemen reserved a Jurisdiction unto themselves in their General Meetings,
both of controuling and annulling such Acts as should be found to the prejudice
of the Corporation and Society. Accordingly, we not only find the Commons of
London, in the 20 Ed. 3. and the 43 Ed. 3. giving Rise and Being unto a
Common Council, and both prescribing the Ends for which it was Instituted and
Ordained, and adjusting the number of the Members that were to constitute it,
together with the manner how they should be chosen and elected: But we further
find, That the said Commons
in Common Hall assembled, An. 7. Ric. 2. do both redress those Inconveniences
that had crept into the Management of Common-Councils, and prescribe such new
Regulations as might render their Debates calm and sedate, and themselves more
useful in time to come.

But then, if we will observe, That the Act insisted upon by the Court of
Aldermen for their admitting Persons, after their being elected to Offices by
the Commons, to discharge and free themselves from the said Offices by Fine,
without the leave and consent of the Commons, is inconsistent with the Charter,
we may not only affirm it to be in it self null, but that they who strive to
assert and uphold the Authority of it, are not so regardful of their Credit, as
men of Wisdom and Honesty ought to be. All the Power and Authority that either
the Court of Aldermen, or the Common Council can pretend unto, is vested in
them for the preservation of the Franchises granted to the Citizens, and not
for the subversion of them. To this they are sworn upon their admission into
their respective Offices; and by every known and wilful invasion upon the
Privileges settled by the Charter on the Freemen, they are guilty of the
violation of their Oaths, and become perjured. Nor is their passing and
enacting of such Laws as are inconsistent with the Charter, merely an invasion
upon the Rights of the Commonalty; but it is a Crime against the King, both in
robbing his people of the Grace which the Crown has vouchsafed unto them, and
in annulling all the Statute Laws by which the Charter is rati^ied and
confirmed. And therefore, as it has been lately acknowledged by the Town Clerk
before the Committee of the House of Commons, that this Act of Common Council
is disagreeable unto, and inconsistent with the Charter; so I do not know, but
that they who have the boldness to support and justify it, are liable to be
impeached of cancelling the Laws of the Kingdom, and of claiming a power unto
themselves, both of subverting his Majesty's Royal Authority and Prerogative,
and of committing a breach upon his Bounty, Favor, and Grace.

And as it is not to be thought that the present Lord Mayor, who besides his
approved Integrity in the most difficult times, is a person of that Wisdom as
not to act inconsistently with himself, will after he has so lately departed
from one Branch of this Act of Common Council as unjust, illegal, and
oppressive, insist upon any other Clause or part of it, as valid and binding;
so it is to be hoped, that the very Court of Aldermen will as readily in favor
of the Commonalty of London, abandon the unjust and arbitrary pretense and
claim, which they fan^y ^^^ ^oresaid Act does empower them to challenge, about
admitting persons to Fine, whom the Common Hall has chosen for Sheriffs,
without the concurrence and approbation of the Majority of the Electors, as
they calmly deserted and forsook their invasion upon the Rights of the City,
about the Lord Mayor's constituting a Sheriff by the Honorable Method of
Drinking to One, and who by the late Act of Common Council in the Mayoralty of
Sir Will. Pritchard, was to be so held and esteemed, if but Two Persons of the
whole Commonalty, should hold up their hands in Confirmation of the Person
designed and chosen by the Glass and Rummer.

Nor will it be unworthy of the consideration of the Court of Aldermen, That
the Act of Common Council upon which they insist in justification of their
present procedure, has been judged to be of no Force, Validity, or Obligation,
by the highest Court of Judicatory of the Kingdom, namely by the Lords in
Parliament assembled, 17 Car. 1. For the Commons having refused to confirm one
for Sheriff, whom Sir Edward Wright, the then Lord Mayor, had by the Cup or
Glass chalked out for that Office, and a disappointment being thereby
occasioned of the Election of Sheriffs on Midsummer day, the Case was thereupon
brought judicially before that High and Honorable Court, which after a full
he^^ing of both Parties, ordered the Commonalty to proceed to the Nomination
and Election of both Sheriffs for the Year ensuing.

To which may be added, That the forementioned Act in the 7 Car. 1. and all
other Acts of Common Council preceding the 15 Car. 2. that are either
derogatory from, inconsistent with, or invasions upon the Rights of the
Charter, are all cancelled, repealed, or made void by the Inspeximus of the
said 15 Car. 2. For whereas that revives and confirms all the Original Grants
made to the City, reinvesting the Freemen in all the Rights and Privileges
conveyed to them in Former Charters, it necessarily follows, That all such
Bylaws as detract from, diminish, or subvert their Franchises, are thereby
supe^s^ded, abrogated and annulled. And for any now to plead the validity of
the often forementioned Act of Common Council, is not only to dispute the
Authority, and renounce the grace and benefit of the said Inspeximus, but to
provoke the Commonalty to seek redress in Parliament, against this unjust and
abrogated Law.

Yea, should this Act of the Common Council be acknowledged of force and
binding, and be made the Rule according to which the Court of Aldermen are to
govern themselves in reference to the choice of Sheriffs, they would not only
be clothed with a power of oppressing and harrassing the Citizens by often and
unnecessary attendance in Common Halls, but they would so far deprive the City
of all Authority over its Memb^rs, That it would neither be in the power of the
Commonalty, nor in the Court of Aldermen, to oblige any man to take upon him,
and to hold the Office of Sheriff. For whereas by that Law, any man that will,
may, notwithstanding his being chosen by the majority of the Freemen for
Sheriff, challenge a right of discharging himself from serving, upon the paying
of a certain and specified Fine; it plainly follows, that it must be from
Choice, and not from Obligation, if any Person submit to hold.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1689.


