A THAKNS-GIVING For the Recovery of PHILIP, EARL OF PEMBROKE and Montgomery.

Who being lately admitted into the Supreme Authority of the Nation* a Knight
for Berkshire; was unfortunately jeared into a Pestilent-Feaver, which after
turned to the Foul Disease, but by the skill of a State-Emperick and Mrs. May
his Nurse, is happily Recovered:

And desires a Thanksgiving for the same, from the Supreme Authority,and all
other Well-affected to the Nation.

Taken verbatim from his own mouth,

BY MICHAEL OLDSWORTH.

May 29 Printed in the happy year of the Lords Liberty. 1649.

A THANKSGIVING For the Recovery of PHILIP, EARL OF PEMBROKE and Montgomery.
THey tax me with swearing; Damme, it is a scurvy trick that I learnt in King
Iameses time, 'zbloud I cannot leave it if I should be hanged; If I have not
strived as much to leave this sin as any Member in the House, I am a Traitor;
Refuse me I have not only sworn, but forsworn my self over and over again, and
yet they say I am a coustant swearer, confound me if I love Oaths, or to keep
Oaths, let them keep them that make Conscience of them: A pox of Conscience for
me, I know not what it is, large Conscience, and little Conscience is all one
to me; 'zbloud my Lord Capel used Conscience, and the late King suffered for
His Conscience: No, no, it is just they should suffer that are so Malignant as
to keep any scruple of it: i will have a care of that i will warrant you: though I
am a Fool, I am not a Conscientious fool, if I am let me suffer: 'bloud I think
I have suffered as much as any man living for my time: I have suffered
switching, Caining, jearing, and now sickness, and yet am thought by the people
to be never a whitt the better for my sufferings; Damme I may be the better in
time, for worser I think I cannot be, and therefore I desire all people to pray
for me; yet I thank God I am amended over I was: these rogues are able to jear
a horse to death, and you know a horse has a bigger head, and is a bigger
beast every way then I am, and has more brains and strength to bear it: Damme
if I suffer them any longer, let them briddle me, and saddle me, and ride me
for a fool: I have had too much patience, and I think that caused sickness, for
I was damnable impatient in my sickness, and so I purpose to be unto my dying
day: can any man be patient to suffer himself to be so abused, and cannot tell
how to help himself? If the State will suffer it, let them, the wrong is theirs
as well as mine; I am the ancientest Earl in the Parliament, and should be
their Head: and if they will suffer every fool to make a Football of their
Head, it is pity but they should be a Body without a Head: Damme it is a
monsterous thing to be without a head, or a headpiece either; a headpiece
will keep off a blow, I am sure I found the miss of it; a pox take the Scot, he
bruised my head and my bones too: and said moreover, he would crown it with a
Piss-pot; but his head does not ache for that now.

They say he that is called the Prince of WALES is providing head-pieces in
Holland, and if they suffer me to be still jeared and derided, I know nothing
to the contrary, but they may be knocked of the head themselves before next year
yet: I am an Old man, and it is time for me to give over fighting: Dam me, I
never drew a sword in anger in my life, and should be loath to begin now in my
Old days: but if they will fight let them; I never knew any good come by
fighting, I am sure it has done hurt on either side, and yet we love it so
well with a pox, that we must fight against our own Party too; 'z blood, are we
mad to kill our selves? it is Murder by the Law; and in my judgment he that
kills himself deserves to be hanged, and not shot to death as they are: Dam me,
I know Death is terrible, but yet not so terrible as to fright us into WAR that
brings Death; and War one with another too, like two Dogs to fight for a Bone,
till a third comes and runs away with it: I am bound in Conscience to speak my
mind, and yet it had been better for me to have been born dumb, then ever to
have spoke at all: for let me speak but two words, presently it begets a
SPEECH, and then there is laughing work for the whole City for a month: Nay, my
own Tenants get my Speeches by rote, and report them on their Ale-benches, and
swear with as great a grace as my self.

My Lord Mulgrave, you are a man that I dare open my self too: Dam me, would I
could open as loud as Thunder -- My Lord the Parliament is become Common, and
that makes it Common, and every thing they do is made Common; and all their
Speeches, Acts, Declarations, and Protestations, are but as so many Lasts for
the Cavaliers to make Shoes on: we must have Diurnals, Scouts, Occurrences,
and the Devil and all, for them to make jears on; 'zbloud I am not such a fool,
but I can tell from whence all this proceeds -- A Member cannot let a Fart in
the House, but presently he finds it wrapped up in two sheets of a Diurnal: I
pity other men as well as my self; My Lord, here is the Worshipful Alderman
Atkins is sensible my Lord, and has formerly made Complaint to me in the Lords
House, but (Lord help us) to little purpose: for an unmannerly fellow cannot so
much as let a Fart, but presently he cries Atkins.

My Lord Mulgrave, it is a stinking shame that our Members should be thus
abused; I hope my Lord you will move the House for a speedy Redress in this --
Had I died my Lord, sink me, I am Mortal, flesh and blood, gra^s and hay, as
another man is, and so subject to dye; A pox take 'um, they made my Will and
Testament, and my Epitaph too, thinking I had been Mortus est (as my Chaplain
says) and then I had had a sweet Fame, had I not? for ever and ever to be sung
up and down in Ballads, to the tune of the Great Boobee: My Lord, it is all your
cases as well as mine -- But (blessed be God) I am alive, and may live to see
them all hanged that are the occasioners of this -- Dam me, I never gave them
occasion to be thus abused: but I am such a fool, as I can forget an injury
presently; nay, and forgive too; but I can neither forget nor forgive this: My
Lord, we must look after the occasioners of this, for take away the occasions,
and the effects will cease of themselves: if the Diurnals had occasioned my
death, 'zbloud I have reason to kill them if I can: and yet I was never much
guilty of shedding Blood in my life; I had rather swear blood a thousand times
then shed blood once my Lord: innocent blood would trouble a Parliament man's
Conscience, if he had any; but this is no time for a Parliament man to have
Conscience: 'zbloud I swore away mine above 40 years ago, and I hope there is
not a Member in the House but has sworn away his too, or else he is forsworn:
Besides, we being the Supreme Authority in the Nation, and invested with Power
and Authority from the peoeple, to be questioned upon Cas^s of Consci^nce, or
rules of Reason for what we do? My Lord, the State needs not to render a
reason to any one, either to Li^burne or any body else; and if they will not be
ruled without reason, the State must rule them by force; D^mme (my Lord) force
is above reason, for does not our power lie in our force^: had it not been for
our forces, would reason have saved us from hanging think ye? This Nation must
be ruled by force, and not reason, Damme, reason has brought the Land to that
pass that it is, for can a mischief happen without there be some reason for
it? Damme, I know no difference between reason and treason; if the State please
to make any thing treason, then Sink me it is treason, and let him dispute
against it that dares; No, reason is one of the Levellers Principles, and not
to be allowed of in a free State, if the rest were of my mind, we would Vote
any man a Traitor that could but render half a reason; for I take it to be a
contempt of a high nature against out Authority, and so a crime unpardonable:
Damme, I bannish'd it out of the University of Oxford, and my Lord General
has since taken Degrees there, with the Lieftenant General, and diverse other
Gentlemen that understand as little reason as my self: Damme, it reviveth my
drooping sick soul to hear that they are become Members of All-soules, and be
God, for ought I know, it may prove a means of saving their souls: Damme, I am
their Chancellor, and would have Visited them there, but that (a Pox on it) I
was Visited my self; Judge me, they have honored me, and (i^ I had been well) I
would have honored them again with my presence; but I hope Mr. Button did it
for me, he is the better Orator of the two, or else he is not worth a Button:
Had I not been ill, all the men in the world could not have kept me from a
Banquet, I loved sweetmeats from a child, and now I am almost become a Child
again, for old men be twice children, and Chi^dren are loving, and love sweet
things; and be God I think it is a sweet thing for Brethren to agree, and
Banquet together in unity.

The University I hope gave them good content, and Mr. Mandit and Mr. Wil^ison
made them two good Sermons to save their souls; they were soldiers, and
soldiers have souls to save as well as others, and if they will loose their
souls they may; and yet it is their own fault if they do, because they are
members of All Souls, can fight for souls, and preach to save souls too; and
now (being University-men,) they may do it lawfully too, without the mocks and
flouts of the Reprobate Cavees, who profanely term them Tub-men, Anabaptists,
Jesuits, etc. Damme I was never much Book-learn'd, because I took Hunting to
be a more Noble exercize then learning; is it not better music to hear a Pack
of Dogs mouth it, then a company of Scholars gabling the language of the
Beast in an unknown tongue; No, I am no Scholar, but a Statesman; and good
Statesmen cannot make good Scholars, you my see by Canterbery and Strafford,
both good Scholars, but ill Statesemen, and you may see what their learning
brought them too? Refuse me, it is a dangerous thing to be a Scholar, Philip
had rather be a Scullar, and get his living backwards, as he gets his Honor,
then take out such lessons; my head would look scurvily on London Bridge
without a Perriwigge, and therefore God send me Ignorance: A Pox a learning for
me, it is the worst enemy the State has, for there is no mischief committed, but
it is first learnt; therefore is not learning the cause of it? Does not
Lilburne learn the Levellers, and the Levellers learn the People, and the
Devil learn them all to disobey their Superiors, and set us together by the
ears; 'Zblood, could I get but a lusty hunts-man, or a Falconer, that could man
my wife, the Rogue Ouldisworth should not stay a day in my House; for I am
sure I have learnt no goodness on him, his learning is the cause of my
sickness; for had not he learnt me to make Speeches, to speak witty Sentences
and the like, I had not been so jeered, that I am ashamed to take my Coach, the
very children pointing, and making horns at me, saying, There goes my l^a^ned
Lord of Pembroke, and my wise Lord of Pembroke; but I thank God I have so much
wisedom^, as to bid my Coachman drive away; Damme I hate revenge, it is base in
a Nob^eman to seek revenge: No, I had rather fall sick again, then seek
r^venge, because it is dangerous: But J am now recovered of my si^knesse, and
therefore I hope all men will rejoice, and give thanks; and J shall desire the
Supreme Authority to set apart a day of Thanksgiving, and Order the same;
Damme they shall loose nothing by it, for J will bestow a Thanksgiving Dinner on
them, for it is a sign of health that J begin to be hungry, and hunger had need
of a good dinner; No man has given more Thanks for the Parliaments Victories
then my self, Mistress May can witness it, Judgeme (in my judgment) one
thanksgiving deserves another; the Levellers are now levelled, and destroyed,
and as God shall judge me, J had like to have been levelled into my grave, and
then J had been destroyed too; and therefore one Thanksgiving may serve both;
And so J take my leave of you for the present, not noubting but you will
remember me in your Prayers,

Yours till death, Philip Herbert, Knight for Berkshire; AND Earl of Pembroke
and Montgomery.

FINIS.
Die Martis 29 May, 1649.
ORdered that the next Innocents. Day shall be a general Thanksgiving
throughout England and Wales for the happy recovery of the Earl of Pembroke.

Hen. Scobell. Cler. Parl.


