For all in Authority upon the Earth, and in Special, those now in ENGLAND, to
Read and Ponder.
AGes, Times, Generations have passed over the world since the first
Publication of the Gospel of Truth by the Holy Apostles of Jesus Christ; and in
these times the destroying Antichrist foretold by the Spirit (2 These. 2. and
throughout the Revelations) to come, has had his Reign. And in this Dark and
Miserable Time, the Glory of the Gospel, and the true knowledge of the
Everliving God and Savior, has been lost from amongst men, and consequently
the Spirit of Love, Meekness, Long-Suffering, Equity and Amity: Whereby it has
come to pass, that instead of a sweet smell, all Worships and Offerings have
been of an evil Savor in the Nostrills of a pure God; and instead of a
Blessing, the Wrath and Indignation of the Almighty has come upon men, by
reason of the dishonor done unto his Name, in the same Cloudy, Dismal, and
Dark Day. But now is the Lord God, the true and faithful holy One (according to
the words also spoken, and written by the said Servants of God from the
beginning) arisen and made manifest by the Spirit of his Mouth to Consume, and
by the Brightness of his Coming, to destroy the same destroying Antichrist,
that Mystery of Iniquity out of the Earth, 2 These. 2. 8. That the Creation of
God may be cleansed from its Corruption, and restored into its Primitive
Liberty and Freedom to Worship God in Purity, Spirit and Truth, as in the
beginning; that so the offerings of all people may be holy to the Lord, and the
Unity of the Spirit be kept in the Bond of Truth and Peace, by all that call
upon his Name.

And though the Seed of God has been as a Captive and Stranger in a strange
Land, bowed under by reason of the said Enemy: Yet now is the Lord arisen in
his glorious Majesty, to bring his Seed back again from the Land of its
Captivity, into the promised Land, the Land of Righteousness and Holiness, the
true Land of Israel, and the glory of all Lands, in which is the Beautiful and
well-Fenced City, the Holy and New Jerusalem (with her holy Worshippers
therein) seen, and into which no unclean thing can enter.

So Awake, and Arise all people into the holy Understanding, to know what God
is doing this day in earth, that your Souls may live, and not die: For the
Darkness is passing away, and the true Light now again shines forth, even the
true Light that lights every man that comes into the world. Yea, be wise now
therefore O ye Kings, and be Learned, and truly understanding all ye that Rule,
Judge, and give Laws in the Earth, and know what the Lord God requires of
you. Take not Counsel one at another, leaning to your own Understanding, to do
your own wills, but all take Counsel at his good Spirit, studying how to do his
Will, for they only that do Gods Will, endure for ever. Many people and strong
Nations have been seen to have had great power for a time, and flourishing for
a little moment, but they could not always endure, because they took not
Counsel at God, neither were doers of his Will, but their own.

So, be wise now therefore, all ye that are up in Power and Authority in the
Earth this day, and be Warned, and with the Wisdom which is from above be
Armed, and let the fear of God, which is the beginning thereof, enter into your
hearts, and take place there, and dwell there for ever; for that only is able
to direct you into the way of the good Understanding in all things; for a good
understanding have all they that do thereafter: Strive not to set up your
selves in the Earth; seek not your own revenges, but seek how you may be
serviceable to God, his dear Children, yea, and to all that walk Innocentlie
toward one another in the Earth: Seek not the honor which comes from men of
this world, but seek that Honor which comes from God only; and such as Honor
him by doing his Will, them will God honor and none else. So, consider well,
for what end Power and Authority is in your hands; Is it not to try you? and
is it not for the punishment of them that do Evil? to wit, such as walk
contrary to the manifest Truth, the Light of God, his Righteous Law in all
Consciences, and for the praise of them that do well; to wit, such as walk
according to that Righteous Law of God, the manifest Truth, the Light in all
Consciences, which says, As ye would that men should do unto you, even so do
ye unto them; And teaches all that obey it, to do accordingly, and so to
fulfill the Royal Law of Love, which says, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self. And these being doers of the Law of the Just God, may of Right, expect
the benefit and good of your Laws; for, for this cause do we pay Tribute, even
that we may live peaceably, in all Honesty and Godliness under the Powers that
are.

You are not to hearken to men of corrupt minds, who are in the strife about
Words, and wranglings about Opinions, who serve not Christ the Prince of Peace,
but their own Bellies, affecting worldly Titles of Honor, and would put you on
to lay your Law upon all, and Persecute all that will not bow to their Image,
and feed their insatiable avarice: For these are they that have stirred up
Nations and People one against another, ever since the woeful and miserable
Apostasy before mentioned; to the imbruing of whole Countries in Blood, under a
pretense of Religion, (for their own evil ends) even to the destruction of all
pure Religion, Amity, and Concord from amongst men. But now is the Lord
discovering the skirts of that great Whore, that neither Kings, Princes, nor
Rulers, may love her any more, nor ever help her to carry on or accomplish her
evil designs in the earth; but that all people may know God alone to be their
Teacher, as in the beginning when the morning Stars Sung for Joy, and all the
Sons of God rejoiced together as Members of one Body, not envying or hurting
one another, nor serving themselves one of another; but all serving one another
in love, and so fulfilling the Royal and everlasting Law of Christ, to the
Glory of God, and Father over all, blessed for ever.

And in particular, let not the good Cause of Liberty for Tender Consciences
(declared for by the King) now fall in England; but let the Parliament, and all
in Authority under Him, study and strive how to assist Him in it, and to
Promote so good a Cause; for is it not fitting, O all people, that men of truly
tender and pure Conscience, and peaceably Principled and Living, should have
Liberty to exercise their pure Consciences in goodness toward God and men; and
that the Law should be laid only upon the Lawless, who are not tender, but
manifestly depraved in Conscience, and hard, and careless of heart what they
do, both respecting God and man? For, for the restraint and punishment of such,
was God's Righteous Law given, and not at all against the Righteous man. And
let not the Bishops say, That Liberty to tender Consciences, will be any
disparagement to Religion, or disadvantage to the Nation; but let them judge
according as the Truth is, that Liberty to tender Consciences, is the only
thing, that will be good for all things: And as the King has rightly declared
an only Way to stop the mouths (if not overcome the hearts) of all that
(either only seem, or indeed do) hate Him: For such love will break the hearts
of many. And what can stand before it? And O that the Powers now in England,
might be an example this day, in so good a work to all the Earth, that Pope,
Turk, and all others might be provoked thereby to do the like; that so the dear
Seed of God, that groans in many Lands under the sore Oppression of forcing of
Conscience, might be set at liberty, to run the ways of Holiness and
Righteousness to the ends of time (to the glory of God) without fear.

And seeing that Protestant Religion engages you to take Scripture for your
Rule, does it not say, Romans 14. That in matters of Gods Worship, every man
ought to be fully persuaded in his own mind of the goodness of what he does,
because whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin? But now, if Liberty for the Tender
and good Conscience be not granted, but a compulsory power be exercised toward
all, for bringing them into the form of some men's apprehensions, then the
possibility of every man's being fully persuaded by Gods Spirit, in his own mind
in what he does, is taken away, and the Ancient Liberty that was amongst the
first Christians, lost; as in that said 14. chapter of the Apostle to the
Romans, at large appears, where it is evident, that the glory of the true
Church, stands not in the oneness of outward Form or Observation, but in this,
to wit, That every man do what he does in the holy Fear, Faith, and power of
Christ's Spirit; for the Apostle well knew, that the Kingdom of God stood not in
Meats, Drinks, Days, or the like; but in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost; and he that serves God in these things, says he, is acceptable to
God, and approved of men. And thus ought it also now to be amongst such as
profess Christ throughout the Earth, until all be grown up to a perfect man in
Christ. And O that yours, and all peoples eyes, were fully open, to see and
understand the necessity of such things as these, that so much concern both the
Temporal and Eternal good of all.

From a Servant of the God of Heaven, whose tender Soul is often bowed down
under the sense of the great misery, that as yet lies upon the Creation of God
throughout the Earth, by reason of Corruption; and as a sensible member of the
same Creation prays for its Deliverance; and in order thereto, desiring that
all in Authority every where, might weigh and ponder these few lines in the
like uprightness of heart, as from which they were given. T. TAILOR.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, 1663.


