THE Thankful Acknowledgment and Congratulation OF Diverse well-affected
Apprentices within the Ward of Cripple-gate without, UNTO The ever to be
honored Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, Mr William Walwyn, Mr Thomas Prince,
and Mr Richard Overton, now Prisoners in the Tower of London, for their
faithful Services, Love and Affections to this poor distressed and miserably
wasted NATION.
HONORED GENTLEMEN,
HAving seen your late Manifestation and Agreement of the People, with others
of your Books, tendered to the People of this Nation, of which we (though
Apprentices) are a part. And thereby perceiving your ultimate aim* ends and
intentions, to be only and merely for common Freedom and Liberty, such as
best suits with the due ordering of this distressed Commonwealth; We conceive
our selves bound in Canscience to return you most real and hearty Thanks for
your so unwearied, unparaleld and cordial affections, appearing in so gallant
and honorable a Cause, desiring you, Honorable Worthies, that your hands may
not fail, nor your hearts faint in so great an employment, but that
courageously you would be pleased to go on and persevere as you have begun,
until it shall please God to give us the enjoyment of those just Rights and
Privileges therein contained; you appearing unto us as if it were another
Moses and Aaron to lead us, poor Israelites, out of our sad Bondage and Slavery
of Egypt into a Canaan of Liberty, Freedom, Peace and Plenty. And herein Worthy
Gentlemen, and Gallant Hearts, we do declare to adhere to stand by and owned
you to the utmost of our powers in this so good a work, so long as our hearts,
tongues, hands or lives remains; Resting confident thousands more of faithful
Apprentices in the City will do the like.

This was subscribed, dated and presented upon the sixth day of May 1649 which
we now publish to all our loving Friends, courageous and faithful Fellow
Apprentices, inhabiting within their several Wards, and Precincts of the City
of London, etc. Whom we desire would speedily choose out from among your selves
in your several and respective Wards four or six, or as many as you see good,
of cordial and active young men to be Agitators for you. And that you forthwith
appoint Meetings in your several Wards for better carrying on of this work, as
we have done in ours, that we and you may have more convenient and orderly
Meetings, and Correspondency.


