A TERABLE FIGHT Between the Gardners and Seamen; Being an ACCOUNT Of a most
Barbarous and Bloody MURDER
Committed on Friday last by Eight Seamen on the Road between Debtford and
London; on the Body of Henry Spicer of Peckham with an Account how the Seamen
going from the Naggs-head near Kent-street without paying their Reckoning, the
Gardeners, Endeavoring to stop them, a isarp Engagment happened between them
where several were wounded on both sides, and Henry Spicer killed out right. As
also how 8 of the 9 Seamen were Apprehended, and Committed to the Marshals by
the worshipful Justice Rich, with other remarkable accidents.
ON Friday Morning last being the 17th. of this Instant November 1699. Nine
Lusty Seamen (who, as we are informed) belong to an East India Merchant Man
called the Fame, now Lying at Anchor near the Red House, came to the Sign of
the Naggs-head in the Road between Kent-street and Deptford where they called
for several Bottles of Liquor called Stout, till their Reckoning amounted to
Nine Shillings at which time, the Landlady of the said House asking for her
Money, but instead of paying it they gave her very abusive Language, and not
only so but forced their way out of the House from her in a most rude and
uncivil manner, insomuch that being affrighted by reason she lived in a lone
House, and being a poor Woman and loath to loose Nine Shillings she called out
to her Husband who was at work in Gardening not far* from thence, whereupon by
making a certain Noise (which it seems ^ll the Gardners thereabouts understands
upon any disturbance) so that in an instant as it were near a Hundred Gardners
incomass'd the Seamen on every side* but being flushed with strong Liquor and
being furnished with great Oken Clubes, they laid on all they me^^ without
fear or wit, which the Gardners observing, took them for no less than Highway
Men, so that Number of Gardners and other Country Men still increasing several
end^vovred to make their Escape by striving to Leap the Ditches, were taken by
their falling therein, and others by the Gardners great Dogs who bitt and hurt
some of them.

However four or five being swifter of Foot than the other, got almost as far
as the sign of the Black Jack without opposition, at which place meting with
one Henry Spicer of Peckham, who was brining a Load of Clay to the Brewers in
London (according to hi^ Daily Custom) and seeing that they were persued
attempted to stop them; which proved Fatal to him for^ with their Clubs,
repeating their heavy Strokes so often on his Head* that immeadiatly he fell
down, where they left him wallowlng in his Blood, and leaped the Ditches to
make away, but the Gardners having better knowledge of those parts than they,
fetched a Compass about and met them contrary to their Expectations, where
being over powered with numbers, they were at last forced to submit, after
having given and received several Wounds, and 8 of them were Seized and taken,
but the 9th made his Escape where upon the were Carried before the Worshipful
Justice Rich, who commit^ed them to the Marshals; during which time, Henry
Spicer whom they had VVounded* was carried to Dr. Harwoods at the Lock in
Kent-street, where his VVounds was Dressed but all in vain, for his very Brains
was beaten out, besides other Cruel Bruses on severa^^ parts of his Body, so
that, Notwithstanding all the Endeavor that could be used, he Dyed the same
Evening of the said VVounds about 5 of the Clock.

His Death is much Lamented by his Neighbour^ at Peckham, not only because he
was a very Honest and Peaceable Man, but the more in regard he has left a Wife
with Four or Five small Children.

London, Printed for John Alkin in the Borrough. 1699.


