A terrible and BLOODY FIGHT AT Sea between the English and the Dutch, on
Thursday last: With the manner how the Hollanders advanced with threescore and
ten stout Men of War, against General Blake, with their bloody flags of
defiance, streamers and Pendants; the particulars of this great and desperate
Engagement; the boarding of the Dutch by the English Redcoats and Seamen; the
blowing up of the Decks by the Enemy; the playing of Grenades, 700 prisoners
surprised, and 50 gallant ships sunk, burnt, taken, and dispersed.

English Dutch. woodcut of two ships in battle

Imprinted at London for Jacob Fielding, 1652.

Another bloody fight at Sea between the English and the Dutch, on Tuesday
last: With the true particulars thereof; and the manner of General Blakes
engagement with seventy Men of War upon the North coast, sent from Vantrump.
SIR,
HIis Excellency General Blake having received Advertisements of a great Fleet
of ships, under sail Northwards, supposed them to be Hans, designed for the
relief and safety of the Flemish Busses: whereupon, Major Bourn was commanded
forth with seven Scouts, to make a discovery thereof; and coming within a
League of them, found them to be men of War, having their streamers, Jacks, and
bloody Flags all forth; Admiral Hantz being Commander in chief, selected forth
Ten chief ships, to give Us a revengeful salute; which Major Bourn perceiving,
prepared to receive them, sending the Saphir back to the General, to hasten up
the rest: the Dutchmen being exceedingly enraged, with great fury bore up to
us, with their Pendants flying, and Thunder-like their broad sides they let
fly; we answered them again, putting forth our bloody flags in defiance; and
in the midst of our dispute, each man acting with a most heroic mind, our
General made up to us with 37 sail; which the Dutch Admiral seeing, bore up
with 40 stout ships to them; and entering battle, saluted Us with many great
vollies; we rung them the like peals again; and after two ho: dispute,
maintained with great resolution on both sides, we came to grapling, in which
action the Land-souldiers performed singular service, but was several times
blown up and repelled from the Enemies decks; til at last the nimble Saphir
bore up to the head of their Admiral; fired both sails and tackling, shot her
in the Keel; and immediately upon the next broad side sunk her; at which
instant, most of our ships being engaged, the General resolved to bear up, and
to play the Grenades; the which, was with such dexterity of spirit attempted,
that in a moment 5 of their ships was fired, which could by no means be
extinguished; 17 we took; sunk 9, dispersed, rent, and torn many of them, but
not without loss; and had not the sable Curtains of the night prevented, we had
made the victory far more glorious; but we are in pursuit, and have sent 700
prisoners to Dunbar, with some ships.

Aboard the Reformation July 17, 1652.
The Lord Admiral Vantrump is come into the Downs; where the Dutch maintained a
very sharp dispute for many hours together; and great was the loss on both
sides: Many gallant ships being sunk and fired; But by reason of the great
might and power of the Enemy; their number far exceeding ours; it was thought
most requisite to decline, and tack about for Dover Cliff; which we did, with
very little loss: So that now we are secure, and under the protection of the
Castle; but expect every hour another engagement; which is a thing generally
desired both by the Seamen and soldiers; only it is waved for the present,
by reason that Vice Admiral Pen is every minute expected with a Squadron of
ships for our assistance, which will then complete us 30 Sail, gallantly manned,
and well resolved.

Vantrump lies three leagues distance; and is resolved forthwith to engage Us;
as captain Vand-Erst informs Us, who has deserted them, and declared for the
Parliament.

He likewise brings intelligence, That the States have given Orders for the
re-inforcing their Maritine Towns and Castles; and have declared to the People,
That our Admiral intends to land some soldiers about the Brill, and Flushing,
with a Resolution to cut down the Dammes, or Sea-walls, and so drown the
Country. The allarum whereof has so exasperated the spirits of many, that
they are exceedingly enraged, and vows revenge.

We hear that there is a general Rising from 16 to 60; and those that do refuse
to to engage, are to die without mercy. They are setting forth another great
Fleet of 200 sail, and the Zealanders have chosen a new Admiral. In our last
engagement, our loss is esteemed killed and wounded about 300. The Enemies far
greater.

There is daily Action between our Scouts, and Trumps; and this morning captain
Peacock, with the Tiger, going to relieve the Guard, was set upon by three
Dutchmen, who maintained a gallant dispute, for the space of half an hour;
which our Admiral hearing of, dispatched captain Watson and captain Tailor to
his assistance, who bearing up close to them, saluted them with several broad
sides, insomuch that one immediately sunk by their sides; the other two got off,
but much battered and torn, as well as ours; some having their legs and arms
shot off; others lamentably shot and mangled. We hear that General Blake has a
design to block up the Zound, which will greatly frustrate and eclipse their
liberty, etc.

Aboard the Rubey in the Downs, July 17. 1652.
Most of the Parliaments forces are advancing toward the sea coast, in Kent
and Essex; the greatest part of the foot are to be boarded as occasion shall
serve; the Militia of the Country come in with great alacrity: The ships that
lay in the Hope are joined with Sir George Ayscue in the downs, which makes him
complete about 32 sail: All which are as well manned, both with heroic spirits,
and sons of Mars, as Europe can afford. Great preparations are making for
another engagement; and sudden Action is expected.

FINIS.

