Good News from Sea, BEING A True Relation OF The late Sea Fight, between
Captain William Thomas, Captain of the 8th Whelp, now employed for the service
of the King and Parliament, against Captain Polhill, Captain of the ship
called the May flower Admiral of Falmouth, with the taking of the said ship.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Relation be printed
and published.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON, Printed for Lawrence Blaiklock, and are to be sold at his shop next to
Temple-barre, June 26. 1643.

THE RELATION Of Captain WILLIAM THOMAS, Captain of the eighth Whelp.
Touching his fight with Captain Polhill, Admiral of Falmouth, near unto
Breast, on the Coast of Britain on the fourth of June. 1643.

BEing commanded by your Lordship, the tenth of May last, to convoy certain
Vessels from Hampton, Torbay and Lynne, to Morleaux; I arrived at the Isle of
Basse, the third of June, and staying there about twenty four hours, to get
some Intelligence from the English Merchants at Morleaux, they sent me word,
that Captain Polhill, Captain Jones, and a prize Ship that they had lately
taken belonging to Yarmouth, which they had manned and fitted with ten pieces of
Ordnance, were about that Coast near Breast; and withal the said Merchants sent
me three Masters of Ships, who had been taken by them, pillaged of all their
Goods, and imprisoned till they gained an opportunity to slip away; upon some
conference with these Masters, I found there was no more strength of English
Shipping in those Parts, but these three men of War; and they told me their
accustomed manner was to set out their Scouts in several places, to give them
notice when they should discry any English Colors coming in the Trade, which
they could do six or seven Leagues off, presently to Ship their Cables, go out,
and by craft, and deceit, seize on them.

I set sail from the Isle of Basse to the Trade, and when I came there, I took
down my Foretop-Gallant-Mast, and put English Vanes, in all my top Masts Heads,
and took in all other Colors, with a resolution to meet with him, and surprise
him, with the Charity, a small Friggate with me, whereof Daux was Commander,
having only six small Pieces; and on Sunday the fourth of June, went in like a
Merchant man, having covered my painting with old Canvas, took in all my
Ordnance, kept close my men. He had his Spies there, which discerned my coming
in, Commander Daux coming three hours after me, with a Flag in the main Top: On
Monday morning, they sent their Boat full of men, with Muskets, Pikes, etc. to
take us, but passed by me, with an intent to Board the Friggat, and viewed us
narrowly, and returned, Boarding neither of us; I being more desirous of the
Ship then the Boat, let them pass, and never shot at them; Afterward Polhills
Lieutenant came in a small French Boat, and in French habit, and came a Board
the Charity Friggat, demanding whence she was, he answered, (as we had
concluded before) his Ship was of London, and mine of Bristoll, both come from
Bilboe, laden with Wool and Iron, and being pursued by Turks men of War, were
fled thither for shelter, and desired to know what English Merchants were there
on shore, that were bound for London, enquiring of him further, what English
Ships were there of strength, that might accompany us to London, for we were
afraid.

The Lieutenant presently repaired ashore, and acquainted Polhill, who made
great haste to come out with his Ship, having in her two and twenty Pieces of
Ordnance, and six Murderers, and appears to us about eleven or twelve of the
clock, with an intent to have boorded us; But we were provided, with our Sails
furred with Rope-Yarns, and the Ax at the Bitts, ready to cut the Cable, and to
receive them as soon as they came near us; and presently I cut the Cable in the
Hause; and in two or three Boords got to winde-ward of him; and when I was
drawn near unto him, out went all my Guns, my Colors, and my Wastclothes, and
shot at him, and followed him till they run the Ship on ground; and I Anchored
within less then a Musket shot of him when he was aground, with my broad side
to his, and then I discharged within one hour and a half, an hundred and twenty
Pieces of Ordnance upon him, and he plied his Ordnance all that time very hot
at me: I finding some of his Shot very dangerous, was forced again to cut my
Cable in the Hause, hoping to do better execution under Sail; and standing off
one board, I made in again to him, and gave him a broad side, which took place
every Piece; which did so daunt and discourage him, that within one broad side
or two after, we perceived the men to forsake the Ship. Polhill and the Master
escaped out at the Gun-room Port on shore, half an hour before the Fight was
ended. Then they struck down their Flag, and held out a white Cloth; but we
being doubtful of their treachery, and having but small Boats, I could not
send men enough on board; but I manned the Fregat with my men, and commanded him
to run as near as he could, and to burn and destroy her, if otherwise they
could not preserve her: But God be thanked, though she was mightily torn (with
great difficulty, and much pains taking) we stopped her leaks, and preserved her,
and have safely arrived with her at Stokes Bay.

During the continuance of this Fight, I discharged an hundred fifty nine
Pieces of Ordnance, and came off with the loss of one man, my self and another
a little hurt. And two of his were slain outright, if not more, and above
twenty hurt.

There came from Polhils and Jones his Ship near forty of their men, and
desired that I would entertain them, which I did, wanting men to manage my own
Ship and the Prize, who are likewise all safely arrived with me; for which I
heartily acknowledge the goodness and mercy of God.

This is the truth of our proceedings, which I humbly submit to your Lordship.

From aboard the eighth Whelp, the 20 of June, 1643. William Thomas.

FINIS.

