Hell broke loose: OR AN HISTORY OF THE QUAKERS Both Old and New. Setting forth
many of Their Opinions and Practices. Published to antidote Christians against
Formality in Religion and Apostasy.

By Thomas Underhill Citizen of London.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

TO THE HONORABLE THE Officers of the Armies OF England, Scotland and Ireland.
SIRS,
SVpposing that possibly your heads have been so taken up for a long time with
these Questions, How shall we keep the Power in our own hands? And, What is the
end of Government? (For you answer that last Question very well in your late
Plea) that you have not seriously viewed the complexions and spirits of people
in the glass of such Books as are daily dispersed all the Lands over. And
therefore since you are uppermost, and under God may do much good or harm, as
his grnce shall incline you, or leave you. I thought good to dedicate this
small Piece to you, that you may see what Spirit they are of that are the
enemies of the Ministry, and our Christian Religion, and Assemblies, who if you
nurse, encourage and protect in their ungodliness and blasphemy, it will be
under the notion of Godliness, reckoning them Godly, and so you will be like them
in calling evil good. And will not you thereby in Gods just account be reckoned
among them, and judged with them? And how can you possibly please Gods enemies,
and not dsplease both God, and his servants? Gentlemen, be serious, God will
not be mocked: If you are not as bad as Infidels, who are resolved to play with
Religion, you will bear with me, if I tell you, That though you seem to be much
doubting, what sort of people are good Christians, [and therefore you include
all that do but say they are such, to the apparent ruin of all true Religion
and piety, if God prevent it not, by you or some other way:] Yet you do know,
That the Scripture is Gods written Word, and a holy perfect Rule of faith and
practice That this Scripture holds forth an Infinite God in three Persons, A
Mediator, who is true God, and true man, that gave his blood as a price for
man's Redemption, who was buried, Rose again, Ascended, and now is in his humane
glorified body in Heaven: That there is an everlasting state of misery and
happiness. A Gospel Ministry to be continued by a mediate Call to the end of
the world. That the Ministers of Christ must be entertained honorably, as his
Ambassadors. And you know, that he that believes in Christ shall be saved, and
that he who obeys not his commands shall be damned. That the objects of Saving
Faith and Obedience are without us, though the capacitated faculties by which
we act Faith and Obedience are within us, and a part of us. That Faith,
Repentance, New-Obedience are the free-gifts and Graces of God, which he works
in those whom he will save by his holy Spirit, and that the Spirit works and
increases them in a man by the Ordinances of the Gospel. That it is most
equitable and well-pleasing to God, that one day in seven should be set apart
for Rational Souls to mind the things of eternity, and have more intimate
communion with God, by hearing his Word, and calling upon his Name. That
Uniformity and Unity in what is good, is well-pleasing to God, and beautiful,
and profitable unto men. That it is well done in any Governor of a Family to
ordain Uniformity in his Family, as to what is good: both in reference to
Duties, and the time of performing them, and therefore no less well done in
the Magistrate effectually to appoint the same to his Subjects, I mean in
things absolutely necessary to the salvation of souls, and the well-being of
the public. That it is the duty of Parents both Natural and Political to cause
all their children and Subjects to learn the will of God. I say most certain it
is that we may presume that you that make such a great profession of Religion
do know and believe these things. If you do not, you are no Christians, and we
shall have cause to mourn that ever we had such Rulers, were it not for our
hopes, that God will sanctify unto us the worst that you can do unto us. If
you do so know and believe, as no doubt but you will say you do, then let it
appear by your practice, by your love to, and care of Gods truths, Ministers
and Ordinances; otherwise there are many thousands of the Children of the most
high God, who are the excellent upon the Earth, that will not believe you, and
you will prove that your Knowledge and Faith are but Historical at the best;
And how then can you escape the wrath to come? Unfeignedly I dare foretell, that
if God will make you instrumental, for the settling of us upon a holy and
righteous foundation, he will incline your hearts to be nursing Fathers unto
his Church, and enemies to the enemies thereof, especially Blasphemy and
Blasphemers: And the more good you do, the more you shall be loved and
honored, and the more God shall be praised for you by all his people, and in
particular by him that desires your everlasting happiness, and is

Your fellow-souldier Tho. Underhill.

Postscript.
IF any enemies of the Christian Ministry and Ordinances shall take offense at
my seeking to the Civil or Military Power to support Religion, contrary to the
Great Church-door, which is erected for the letting out of the Reformed
Religion, and the letting in of Popery, I mean this Assertion, That the
Magistrate, qua Magistrate, is not to meddle with matters of Religion. My
Defense is this, That the contrary is my belief, and my address is the
exercising the Liberty of my Conscience; And why may not I that so believe more
acceptably move the Higher Powers for Religion, then they against it, who
therein cross their own professed opinion, as they have very much done of late
years, by the multitude of motions, in Councels, Books, Papers, Letters, which
they have sent or delivered unto every pretended Authority for these many years
for the pulling down the Ministry and the Steeple Houses, and the obtaining
leave to disturb all the Ministers and Assemblies, contrary unto their way.
Their very importuning the Magistrate to pull down the public Ministry and
worship, is a yielding the cause, and an owning his Authority in the matters in
question, though thereby they contradict themselves, while they say, he has no
such Authority, which if they did believe to be a truth, they would move him,
in stead of pulling them down, to let them alone, as matters beyond the sphere
of his calling. And undoubtedly if the Magistrate, as such, ought not to meddle
with the things of Religion, then it is a sin for him to pull down, as well
as build. Oh the worth of a truly tender conscience, how rare is it!

TO THE REVEREND AND Wellbeloved in the Lord, the Pastors and People of the
Church of Scotland.
Christian Friends,
WHen I lately heard a good Christian of your Nation say, That the sad
disagreement among you had not proceeded (at least in his observation) unto any
actual Separation of the members from the respective settled Congregations unto
which they belonged, nor from communicating together in the Ordinances of
Christ, it much rejoiced my heart; because we of England do know by woeful
experience, That Separation from a true Reformed or Reforming Church, is the
VAN of such a company of Abominations, as have allowed Blasphemies for their
RERE, as may be seen in this short History, which I have published partly for
your sakes, that so you may see what poisonous weeds they are with which the
Garden of the Church in England is overrun by its lying common without an hedge
(to the apparent danger of Religion) and may be provoked both to pity and pray
for us, and to look to your own Church, by striving every one of you in your
places, to strengthen and tie fast the bond of heart-unity among your selves,
in reference both to affection and practice. The Reverence I owe unto so
eminent a part of the Spouse of my Savior, as the Church of Scotland is,
forbids me to multiply words; I heartily beg of all her members, that they will
faithfully endeavor to purge out any old leaven that may at any time be found
among them, but abhor Schism and Separation. That Jesus Christ would preserve
and sanctify the Church of Scotland more and more, and purge the Church of
England from her dross, is the hearty prayer of

A poor member of Christ's Catholic Church Tho. Underhill.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
IN collecting the Opinions of our Quakers, though I much affected to
transcribe their own words, which I have done for the most part, yet sometimes
(though seldom) I have contracted, where I found my Authors prolix, yet without
wronging them in the least. For it was the Spirit of those people, and the
Substance of their writings; and not only the letter (as they phrase it
concerning the Scriptures) which I sought after, which course James Nailer
himself says he took in his Answer to Moor, page 34. Where they in stead of
Scripture say the letter, I render it Scripture, because thereby they mean the
Scripture, as themselves acknowledge, ( Farnworth against Hagger, page 20, 26.
Buroughs against Firmin, page 8.) as every Reader may discern by the matter
treated on; And that every of the meanest Readers may the better understand
their meaning. I know very well that there are many things in the Catalogues
that will astonish thee, but I do freely and sincerely affirm, that I have not
knowingly wronged them in the least, and do engage my self to make good every
thing I charge them with to any sober and peaceable person, that shall require
so much of me. I do expect many thundering Accusations and Comminations from
the Quakers, but would not have either them or thee to expect, that I shall
take any public notice thereof, for these two Reasons, 1. Because they do
disclaim both Scripture and Argumentation as Judge, to try any things in debate
between them and their Adversaries. their own fancy and will (which they
miscall the infallible Spirit of God) shall determine all, and so it is a vain
thing to strive to convince them of any thing contrary thereunto. 2. Because
when they do pretend to Answer, they do so equivocate and prevaricate that such
Answers are little better than their more plainer ones, to wit, Thou lie;
even just as one answered Bellarmine with a word. I could in my collections
have been much more large, but supposing here is more than enough, I forbear,
with a promise of more, if it be thought needful, and what is done find
acceptance.

Tho. Underhill.

An History of the Quakers.
CHAP. I. Of the Name Quaker: And the Substance of their Opinions.
ALthough they agree with the great Opposites to verity, in many great points,
as with Simon Magus, Menander, Saturnius, Basilides, Carpocrates, the
Nicolaitans, Arrians, and Mehomitans of old, and with the Papists, Socinians,
and Enthusiastical Anabaptists of Germany of late, as may evidently be seen in
the comparing of their Opinions; yet with us they are not commonly called by
the name of any of those, with whom they do so agree; but have their
denomination from their sits of the Quaking of their bodies, when they are
either really or pretendedly acted by another Spirit than their own. And though
now adays it is rarely seen that they Quake; yet it is well known to thousands,
that the quakings and bodily tremblings of single persons, and the greatest
part of their Assemblies was very ordinary. And no doubt but in those strange
fits they are sometimes passive, when acted by Spirits, as was Gilpin of
Kendall; See his own Relation: And sometimes active, as when they do it of
their own accord. Suitable to this is the Story that I had from one that I am
sure tells the truth: That coming once into a great Assembly of them at
Glasiers-Hall London (their then meeting place) he found some trembling, others
howling, others crying out, and violently moving their bodies just like mad
folks, who were (to his appearance) forceably held by the more sober, just as
mad folks are, and all this for many minutes together, the like carriage he
affirms, he had thought had been no where on this side Hell: But when he dealt
with their Speaker, endeavoring to prove him a Seducer, they were so vexed,
that they left their Bedlam carriage, and like the pictures of the Witches in
the Fortune-Book, fell upon him with dreadful denunciations and impudent
censures, until he charged them with hypocrisy and voluntariness, and called
upon them to howl again, and to let him alone with that Fellow their Speaker;
and then they did fall to their howling again, but not so loud as to hinder the
debate which he had with him.

And for the chief Opinions of the Quakers: That our Ministers are not of God:
Nor the Scripture his Word: That they are not our Rule: That the
Gospel Ordinances cease: That themselves are immediately taught, and are
infallible: Denying the Trinity, Christ's Humanity, Merit and Ascension. Of only
such as these I shall treat in this ensuing History.

CHAP. II. Of their Antiquity.
FOr the Antiquity of the Quakers, take the very words of Mr Henry Stubbs of
Christ Church in Oxon, in his Rebuke to Mr Richard Baxter, p. 36.

As to the Generality of their Opinions and Deportment, I DO AVOW it out of as
sure and good Records as any can be produced, that they can plead more for
themselves from the first two hundred seventy years, then Mr Baxter for the
present Orthodox Religion laid down in the Saints Everlasting Rest, or the
Confession OF THE ASSEMBLY. I fully agree with this Learned man, that they are
very Ancient; but yet I do not agree with him in one point of Circumstance, and
in another of Substance, as to the Subject of the Quakers. As to the
Circumstance of time, he fetches their Original but from the year two hundred
and seventy; but I find them above two hundred years sooner, even in St. Paul's
time, as may be seen in my next Chapter. This Difference is not very great: But
for the other point, That the Quakers can plead more for themselves from the
first two hundred seventy years, then Mr. Baxter for the present Orthodox
Religion laid down in the Saints Rest, or the Confession of the Assembly, I do
heartily profess I differ from him as much in my opinion, as he does that loves
to speak truth, from him that will say otherwise for advantage, and as a
Protestant different from a Papist: And in this Difference I have all Learned
Protestants of my side; the Papists and Quakers I think are for him.

CHAP. III. The Quakers chief Predecessors in the several Ages of the World
since Christ.
AS to the main design of the Spirit of Heretics, viz. The disgracing and
opposing of Christ and his Gospel (both the Scripture, Ministry and Ordinances)
The Quakers are the chiefest Instruments upon the earth (as will appear by
their Opinions and Practices) And these were the chief of their Predecessors in
the several Ages of the World, since Christ was upon the earth.

1. The false Apostles that did so oppose the true ones, and teach
Justification by the works of the Law, that they occasioned Saint Paul to
write the Epistles to the Romans and Galatians against them, and charge them
with setting up a new Gospel, which infection proceeded so far, that those who
before would have plucked out their eyes for him, did now take him for their
enemy.

2. Simon Magus, a Leader of a deluded Society, and an opposer of the Apostles
and the Gospel of Christ, pretended himself to be God and Christ, that seemed
to die at Jerusalem, denied that Christ was really come, or did suffer, also
the Resurrection of he body, and brought in the promiscuous use of Women,
Jacks. Chron. 186.

3. Menander his Disciple. And

4. Saturnius his Disciple, who said that Marriage and Generation were of
Satan, many of whose followers would not eat of my living sensitive creature.

5. Basilides taught that it was not Jesus, but Simon of Cyrene in his shape
that was crucified. And that saving Faith did not terminate in him that was
crucified, but in Jesus that came in the shape of a man, and was thought to
have been crucified.

6. Carpocrates and the Nicolaitans; some of them made themselves to be equal
with Christ, and some the same with him; they used multitudes of amazing words,
Enchantments; and were familiar with Devils.

The Cerinthians, Cordonites, Ebionites, Valentinians and Marcionites, who had
all the general name of Gnostics, from their own proud pretenses of the
Knowledge of such mysteries, as the Catholic Church was ignorant of, but were
called by the names of their respective succeeding Leaders, because every one
added to, or altered somewhat from the Doctrine of the former, yet holding the
same in the main. These were as Irenaeus shows, Lib. 1. cap. 30. all the
Disciples of Simon Magus the Witch, and continued the substance of his
Doctrine, with some additions though some of them would not own his name. All
the fore, going were against the Christian Doctrine Ministry and Ordinences.

The Arrians, who denied the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and that he was the only
begotten Sin of God, Coequall and Coeternall with the Father and the holy
Spirit; and consequently his Merit and Satisfaction, and Justification by the
imputation thereof, and his Ministers.

The Katharoi, who affirmed, that they being justified, were perfect and free
of all sin, as the glorified in Heaven, Anno 1118.

Adamites devised a Church, to be as a hot house to keep them from cold: The
Service time they were all naked men and women; the Virgins preached unto the
rest; their Church they called Paradise, and themselves Adam and Eve, Epiphan.
haeres. 52.

Priscilianus a Gnostick said, the Soul was of one Substance with God; man's
actions were governed by the Stars; condemned the eating of flesh; parted
married Couples? ascribed Creation of the flesh to wicked Angels, Aug. lib. de
Haeres.

Pelagius a Monk of Bangor, he held that man without the grace of God was able
to fulfill all the commands of God; that the Just have no sin in this life;
that Children have no original sin, Aug. de Haeres. See Baxters sin against the
Holy Ghost.

All these Heretics with their Heresies and Blasphemies, were in the Church
many hundred years ago; and condemned by Councils and Fathers; and many of them
witnessed against from Heaven by dreadful judgments.

For the truth of my Collections, I appeal to all that have read the ancient
Histories of the Church, which are of as clear evidence, as the Chronicles that
give us the Names and Reigns of William the Conqueror, Henry the Eight, and
Queen Mary. So that it is not lawful for any man to say these Stories are
lies, until after diligent search he find them to be so; or until upon his
enquiry of honest learned men they say so, which will never be.

Mahomet growing famous for Wealth and Magic, by the advice of Sergius a Monk,
called himself the great Prophet of God; denied the Sufficiency, Perfection,
and Authority of the holy Scriptures; (but stole abundance of the words, names
and things therein contained, to make up his Speeches and his Alchoran) also
the Trinity. He held Community of Women; was an Enthusiast, pretending to
Revelations and Infallibility.

CHAP. IV. Of the Quakers of Germany in Luther and Calvin's time, that opposed
Christ, at his then coming to reform the Church.
COme we now to the Quakers of Germany, though not so called. These were some
of the principal of them: Nicholas Stork, Tho. Muntcer, Dr. Belthazer, Hubmore
Melchior Rink, John Hut, Jo. Deuter, Lodovick Hetzer, Phifer John Becold,
Rotman, Harman Staxrede, Henry Rolls, Knipperdoling, Cipperbroke Creching,
John Mathews, David George Conradus, Jo. Trajer, Seekler David George, Gasper
Swenckfield. Baxters Sin against the Holy Ghost.
When Satan perceived that he could no longer keep up the Tyranny and Errors
undisturbed, but that Christ would send out such a light, as should disgrace
and dispell his darkness; he renewed his old attempts again, and sets upon
Christ in his own Kingdom, and falls upon the Reformation in its own quarters,
to disgrace it by the diversity of evil Doctrines and practices of those, who
pretended to be Reformers. They began in a seeming simplicity of harmlesness,
as if the Reformers had not reformed enough, but they must carry on the work
where we left it, and cast out children from the Church, as we cast out
Superstition and Errors. But when the spirit within them had once vent, and
field-room for agitation, it soon discovered it self to be of the great
Deceiver, as will abundantly appear by the ensuing Epitomy of the Stories of
some of them. Muntzer and his company at Mulhuze, chose a new Senate of their
Party, to seize upon the Ministers and their Estates; drew the multitude to
side with them; forty thousand of them desist from their labors, take up
Arms, and in Swabe and Francony, slew the greatest part of the Nobility, and
burnt and sacked their astles, but were beaten in many encounters; fifteen
hundred of them were slain at once by Count Mantsfield; and three hundred at
the taking of Francuse, where Muntzer being taken and reproved by the Duke of
Saxony, for being the cause of the ruin of so many people, he laughed, and
said, the people would have it so; but he publicly confessed his fault and
error, and was beheaded.

His Party that escaped fled to Munster the chief City of Westphalia, where
they made a great Party with the Citizens for the pulling down of Popery; and
afterward being headed by John Becold of Leyden, were very seditious; refused
to depart the City, when commanded, pulled Mr. Wirtem a Minister out of the
Pulpit, run up and down the City crying, Repent and be rebaptized, or, the
wrath of God will fall upon you; whereupon many coming in to them for fear,
they gat the upper hand of the rest, turned the Dissenters out of the City,
seized upon their Estates, Arms and Ammunition, commanded all that were
unrebaptized to be put to death, crying, quickly depart ye wicked, if ye will
not die; and so being in Arms, drove out all that were not of their Sect,
without having respect to Age or Sex, commiting such outrages, that there is
no act so fellonious, horrible, cruel, and wicked, that ever was done, which
they did not commit. In the beginning they talked of nothing but the spirit and
holiness, said it was not lawful for a Christian to be a Magistrate, or to
bear Arms; but after they had brought all under their power, then it was
lawful to take the public Arms with the Townhouse, and to choose a
Magistrate to their mind, with the rejection of him that was ordained of God,
making themselves Consuls and Senators. At first if they saw any Matron wear
silk, or any man of fashion to wear a gold Ring, they cried them down with open
mouth; but now their glorious King Tailor omitteth nothing, that may set forth
his State and pomp, as the rest of this Narrative will show They caused all
persons goods to be brought to a common Treasury: Burnt all Books but the
Bible, executed who they pleased. Knipperdolin prophesied, that all lofty
things must be laid low, and the poor, and the mean, and the low things must be
exalted: and immediately commanded all the Churches to be demolished, which was
put in execution; he assuring them with great gravity, that this command came
from God. They fallied forth and killed four thousand. John of Leyden dreamed
three days together, and making signs for paper, he writ the names of twelve
men to govern Munster, as the heavenly Jerusalem; taught as from God the
lawfullness of plurality of Wives; he married three Wives, and after that
twelve Wives to himself. John Twiscoscar prophesied, that John of Leyden should
by the will of the heavenly Father, be Emperor of all the earth; he accepts of
the office; cashiers the twelve Commanders; invests himself with princely
Robes, and takes to him a pompous train and attendance; upon his Girdle was
writ, The power of God is my strength; his Title was the King of the New
Jerusalem, King of Righteousness throughout all the world. By revelation he
sent forth twenty eight Teachers, to convert the world to his obedience: Their
Answer to all Objections against all this was, That now the time was come, that
the meek should possess the Earth. Hilvers prophesies that Amsterdam, Wesell,
and Daventer, should flow unto them with all their Riches; and thereupon
Emissaries were sent to seduce those places to Quakerisme, whose success at
last caused many to be put to death for Anabaptisme, and their design to be
frustrated, though not without a stout bussle in Frise, and another in
Amsterdam. At last Munster is brought into great straits by Famine, which
occasioned one of King John's Queens out of pity to say, that she thought it was
not the will of God, that so many people should thus famish by Famine; for
which the King killed her in the market place before all his other Queens, who
thereupon sung Glory to God in the highest. The Famine was so great, that
Dogs, Cats, Rats, Mice, Horses, yea dead Carkases were their food; yet this
Fellow cheated them into patience, telling them that God tried them, but
certainly the Father would deliver them in a short time, which proved a lie:
For on the 21. of June, 1536. one of his own Disciples, and fellow-Prophets,
Langke-stroote by name (some days before pretending to fetch in relief) sold
the City for Money to the besiegers, who upon that day entered the City by his
treachery; but when they were in, there was a bloody Battle fought, wherein the
King of the whole World, and many of his Confederates were taken, and sometime
after he with two of his Companions were put to death, and their bodies (being
put into iron Cages) were hung upon an high Tower for a perpetual memorial.

The Doctriens which these Enthusiasts taught, were some of them these.

They preached Dreams for divine Oracles, and said, they spoke familiarly with
God.

And because there should come a new world, wherein should dwell Righteousness,
therefore they ought to exterminate all the wicked.

They called all Unbelievers, that were not of their Sect.

Defamed and detracted from the Ministry and Magistracy.

Made Rebaptizing of absolute necessity, to their favor and salvation.

Disclaimed all interpretation of Scripture.

Muntzer taught, that whoever would be saved, must firstly fly all manifest
vices, Murders, Blasphemies against the name of God, chastize and masserate his
body by fastings and mean apparel, hold forth an austere visage, and speak
little.

He taught community and equallity in dignity.

That the Protestant Ministers and Teachers were not sent of God.

That the Scripture was not the Word of God, but a Testimony or Declaration
thereof.

And that we must search for the Word in the internal part.

That faith comes not by the Scriptures and Preaching.

One of them said, That the earth never bore a more abominable Idol, then that
called the Bible.

At the same time another said, he had learned more by seeing a Hen or Capon
killed, then ever by all the Sermons and Lectures that ever he heard.

Muntzer said, he had seen Angels, and talked with them: Printed that the
Ministers were liars, for saying, Jesus Christ has satisfied for us; and that
we are justified by faith alone without works. That the Marriage of Pagans,
Ignorants, and unbelievers, was fornication and whoredom, upon which the Wives
of their Sect left their Husbands. One sort of them called spiritual, would
have nothing common with Gentiles. These set a rule how plain their Garments
must be, of what stuff, how long; forbad the use of costly Garments, Mirth,
Laughter, Music, Banquets at Weddings.

For proof of these things, I refer the Reader to all bookish men, that have
read the Histories of those years, wherein these things are said to fall out;
and they will tell us, that these things are asserted by so many credible
Authors, at that time living, agreeing in the same, as takes away all doubt of
forgery and slander. Or the Reader may find them in Bullinger adv. Anabaptist.
Sleiden hist. Heresbachius hist. Anabaptistica. Lambertus, Hortensius, of the
same. Spanhem. Diatr. hist. de Anabap. Joannis Clopenburgius, gangrena
Anabaptist. And also Mr. Robert Baily, Mr. Rutterfords Survey: And a Piece
lately transsated by a Minister of New England, and published by Mr. Hook of
the Savoy; entitled, Johannis Becoldus Redivivus, will further satisfy the
Reader.

Anno, 1528. Ludovicus Helster, Joannis Trajer Seekler, and other Enthusiasts
were in the matter of Oaths, Magistracy, etc. confuted by Hollerus, and Kolvius
at Bern, and driven to say, The Spirit taught them otherwise, then the letter
of the Scripture spoke, Rutterfords Surv. p 7.

David George born in Delph, austere as any Capuchin Friar, that did often fast
three days together; by trade a Painter, in 1540. did vend these Heresies
among others.

That he was the Son of God, the true and spiritual David, born of the Spirit;
whereas Jesus Christ was born of the flesh.

That the Doctrine of Moses, the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, was
imperfect, carnal, litteral.

That his Ministry was the time of perfection, when all Ordinances shall be
useles.

That it was the sin against the Holy Ghost, to refuse the Spirit in David
George his Ministry, and to go back to the Prophets and Apostles.

These seeds he sowed in Germany and Transylvania. Rutterfords Survey.

Gasper Swenck field, in Luthers time, a great opposer of the Reformation,
taught,

That the Doctrine contained in the Scripture, is not properly the Word of God;
but improperly by a Metonimy, where the sign is put for the thing signified.

That Faith and Conversion come not immediately by the Word preached, but
immediately from heaven by inspiration.

That the preachers of his time, Luther, Bucer, Calvin, Peter Martyr, Beza,
Musculus, Grynaeus, Tossanus, Melancthon, etc. were not sent of God; and that
no man was converted, or the better for their preaching.

That no Doctrine in the Scripture CONDUCES TO SALVATION.

That God is to be sought in his naked Majesty, in dreams, inspirations, and
revelations of the Spirit.

That our Righteousness and Justification is not in the imputed obedience and
righteousness of Christ, but in a conformity with Christ in glory, by the
in-dwelling Spirit of Christ. Rutterfords Survey, out of the Germne Authors.

CHAP. V. Of the Quakers of England, since the Reformation.
HEnry Nicholls, the head of the Sect, called the Family of Love, here in
England, wrote an Epistle to two Daughters of the Earl of Warwick, in King
Edward the sixth's days, dissuading them from Regeneration by the Word of God,
read or preached; he denied Christ to be God. This Epistle was answered by
Henry Ainsworth; he ascribed his blasphemies and heresies to the holy God, as
the Author of them; saying of himself, That he was anointed with the holy
Ghost, in the old age of the holy understanding of Jesus Christ, Goded with God
in the Spirit of his love, illuminated in the Spirit with the heavenly truth,
the true light of perfect being: That Christ was not God nor man, but the state
of perfection in believers, or anointing, or Sabbath, or the holy disposition,
or Godliness: That all Ordinances, Hearing, Preaching, Scripture,
Scripture-learning, Baptism, the Lords Supper, all confession of Christ before
men, all externals in Religion, are things of no worth, indifferent, free,
trivial, laid on us by no Law of God: That our second Birth, is our Savior
Christ. Rutterford. That he could no more err in what he said, then could the
Prophets of God, or Apostles of Christ. His Prophet. of the Spirit, Cl, 13.
See. 8. quoted by Rutterfords Surv. p. 169.

Of this Tribe were Hacket, Coppinger, and Arthington, and that great number
called Grundletenians, from a Village in Yorkshire, where they met in Queen
Elizabeth's and King James his days; concerning whom Mr. Richard Baxter
affirms, in his Treatise of the sin against the holy Ghost, p. 149. I had an
old godly Friend that lived near them, and went once among them, and they
breathed on him, as to give him the holy Ghost, and his Family for three days
after, perceived him as a man of another spirit, as half in an ecstasy; but
coming to himself, he came near them no more. The hanging of Hacket in
Cheapside, 1591. who died blaspheming, did much mar their matters; and
Arthingtons Recantation, in a Book called His seduction, did stay many.

CHAP. VI. Of the Quakers of New England.
BEcause some Enthusiastis agreeing in many heretical and blasphemous Opinions
with the Quakers, did sail to New England, in the Reign of King Charles, among
those godly Ministers and people that went thither to free themselves from
Prelatical Monarchy; let us follow them, and take a view of them.

Mrs. Hutcheson and her Disciples taught,

That Love in the Saints is the very holy Ghost.

As Christ was God manifested in the flesh; so is he incarnate, and made flesh
in every Saint.

The new creature, or new man, love, or the Armor of God, Ephesians. 6. is not meant
of grace, but of Christ himself.

The Faith that justifies, has not any actual being out of Christ, it is
Christ believing in us.

The search and knowledge of the Scriptures, is not a safe way of searching and
finding Christ.

A Christian is not bound to the Law, as a rule of his Christian walking.

In the Saints there is no inherent grace, but Christ is all.

Frequency and length of holy duties, argues the Party to be under a Covenant
of works.

All Doctrines, Revelations, and Spirits, must be tried by Christ, rather then
by the Word.

The soul need not go out to Christ for fresh supply, but is acted by the
inhabiting Spirit.

In the Saints, Christ loves, prays, believes, praises formally in them, and
they are wholly Christed and Godded.

A Christian is not bound to pray, nor to any spiritual acts, but when the
Spirit exciteth and moves him thereunto.

He that has the Seal of the Spirit, can infallibly judge of another, whether
he be elected or not.

No Minister can convey to another, more then he has experience of in his own
soul.

The Law is no rule of life to a Christian.

Mrs. Hutcheson said, Her own Revelations about future events, are as
infallible as Scripture; the holy Ghost is Author of both: That she is obliged
with certainty of Faith, to believe the one as well as the other. Rutterfords
Surv. out of Welds Narrative.

Almost every one of these Errors and Blasphemies, are the same for Substance,
with what the present Quakers hold, as may be seen by comparing.

The Errors and Blasphemies of the Gortinians, from Sam. Gorten, banished out
of New England, about the year, 1646.
That the Ministers and Churches of New England, that are not of their way, are
Antichrists, Idolizers, false Teachers, Ungodly, etc.

That the rising of their Sect, is the Messenger of the Covenant, Christ coming
to his Temple.

That whatever it is the Saints utter in point of Religion, must be the voice
of the Son of God.

That Christ's death and suffering, is nothing else but the dying and suffering
of the Saints.

He denied there being three Persons in one God.

That Christ was a single man, true man, and died for us.

The Resurrection. And affirmed,

That Christ reveals his will by no voice, but the voice of the Spirit in the
Saints.

That swearing at all, though before a Judge, is unlawful.

That those that study for their Sermons, are Idol Shepherds of Rome.
Simplicityes defense against seven headed policy, quoted by Rutterfords Surv.

I my self did hear this Gorten affirm, about the year, 1647. in a Sermon in
Coleman-street; that whatever shall have an end, was a carnal Ordinance, and
from the Devil; for he made them convertible terms, and instanced in Baptism,
Lords, Chaplains, Ruling Elders, etc.

The Reader may see what plain Quakerisme these things are, by comparing them
with the following Catalogue.

PART. II.
THus having brought the Reader down to these times, wherein we live; I shall
now show,

1. How the Quakers of these days, came so suddenly to multiply.

2. What their Opinions and Practices are. And

3. What the design of Satan is, in stirring up such kind of people.

And so conclude, with a Prayer to God to reduce them; and in the mean time, to
preserve me and all others from their infection and rage.

CHAP. I. Of the Quakers of these days: Showing how they came so quickly to
increase, as they have done: And the Diversity of them.
1. THe old Church Government being quite taken away, and no new one set up in
its stead, all Laws that enjoined people to heat Gods Word repealed, and the
ways of proceeding against Heretics, dying with the Government, factions and
animosities breaking out into an unhappy War, in which the reins of men being
more loose, and Soldiers having both provocations to stir up their pride,
passion, and dissent from their enemies to the height, and also opportunity to
vent their opinions, and to propagate them with less contradiction, as being
removed further from the inspection of able Ministers. A few Anabaptists,
Antinomians, Familists, that were the spawn of the forementioned Family of
Love, Henry Nicholls, and the Grundletonians, but shrouding themselves at first
under the name of Independents and Seperatists, upon pretense only of some
corruptions in the Church, did grow in two or three years time to a multitude,
spreading themselves and their conceits, through the several Cities, and
Countries, and Armies; until at last through the just hand of God, their
combining for Tolleration, the great industry of disguised Jesuits, and their
many flagitious abominable practices, they arrived to that height and The
number of Quakers, of all sorts, that deny Christ, his Scripture, Ministry, and
Ordinances, is no doubt 150000. in England.
number, and to those advantages, for the propagation of their ways, which our
eyes have seen, and the faithful do lament. Oh what a great lump has a little
Leaven leavened! And for brevity sake, take the words of a great observer of
the times. A man would scarce have believed that saw the first spring of
Separation and Anabaptistry among us, that it would have produced those
fearful effects, which we have since beheld. The Devil has now got such an
Ths was written five years ago: How greatly are they increased since then?
Army of Heretics, to spit their venom daily in the face of Christ, that we
may hear daily from their voices, whether Satan be for Christ, or against him.
From Separation, and Anabaptisme, and Antinomianisme, they are proceeded to
such madness and abominable conceits, and to so great variety of them, as I
scarce read of in any time of the Church, except in the days of the Simonions,
Nicolaitans, and the rest of the Gnostics, in and near the days of the
Apostles, and in the time of David George, and some others at the Reformation.

When many both Rulers and People desired, endeavored, and expected such a
Reformation, as to have seen a plenty of faithful Teachers, and Discipline
faithfully exercised, and God purely and seriously worshipped; we could not
foresee, What grievous Wolves should enter, not sparing the flock; and that of
our own selves, should men arise speaking perverse things, to draw away
Disciples after them, Acts 20.29, 30. So that I think, we may almost compare
with the first Heretics, for vileness and variety.

Some we have that turn Socinians, some turn Libertines, and some Familists,
some Seekers, and some downright Infidels.

Besides these, we have had, and yet have, a horrible Sect of men called
Ranters; who make it their very Religion, to swear out the most foul-mouthed
Oaths by multitudes, and openly blaspheme the God of Heaven, and so meet, and
dance, and roar together, and commit whoredoms and filthiness without shame, so
that they seem to match the Simonians and Nicolaitans. They fall into frensies,
and there lie with their bodies swelled, and strangely acted; and then fall
into their raptures and blasphemings. Act of O. C. against Blaspheming, which
proves the truth of these things.
When the Law began to restrain these for their wicked practices, the same
deceivng Spirit raises up another Sect in their stead called Quakers, who hold
many of their Doctrines, and take their course in many other respects: Only
instead of ranting open wickedness, they pretend to as great mortification of
the flesh, as the ancient Eremites, and more: They fall into trances, swell,
quake, and tremble, and yell, and roar, and after the fit is over, fall a
threatening Judgments, sometimes against common sins; but the life and venom
of all their speeches and endeavors, is against the Ministry, Baxters sin
against the Holy Ghost. p. 151.
to make them odious in the eyes of the people. The said Author goes on, and
names a more soberer sort, possessed with the fancies of Jacob Bemon the German
paracelsian Prophet, and the Rosiecrusians, that set themselves mainly to a
mortification of bodily desires and delights, and advancing the intellective
part above the sensitive (which is well;) but the Doctrine of Christ crucified,
and Justification by him, is little minded by them. They do as the Quakers,
maintain the Popish Doctrine of Perfection. That they can live without sin, or
that some of them can. They aspire after visible Communion with Angels, and
many of them pretend to have attained it, and frequently to see them: The rest
have that immediate intuition of verities by the Spirit within them, or by
revelation, that it is above mere rational apprehension; and therefore they
will not dispute, nor be moved by any Arguments or Scriptures that you bring,
affirming, that Rationation cannot prevail against their intuition. The sum
of their Doctrines is,

That we must be perfect.

And for subjecting the flesh to the intellect, we must live in contemplation,
lay by all Offices in the Commonwealth, and own no fleshly Relations as they
call them; not the Relation of Brother, or Sister, not the Relation of a
Magistrate, or of a Master, not the Relation of a Father, or Mother, Son, or
Daughter, nor love any because of such a Relation; but only as Justice binds us
to requital, for what they have done for us. That none should own the Relation
of Husband, or Wife, nor love each other, as so related.

That we should endeavor to be perfect; and therefore to forbear all carnal
acts of Generation, as being of sin, and of the Devil; and therefore Husband
and Wife should part asunder, or abstain.

That all things should be common, and none should own propriety; with
abundance more, which are Jounded on certain vain unproved fancies of Behmens.

That God at first created man a spiritual body, in one sex only, that
containing both sexes vertually, having an Angelical power of spiritual
Generation; and that this gross corporeity, and diversity of Sex, Marriage, and
Generation, are all the fruits of sin, and Satan; with abundance more such
audacious vanities, not worth the reciting.

"Now I shall come more closely to treat of the people among us, that are
commonly called Quakers. The chief Ringleaders are named in the Quotations
following.

CHAP. II. Containing some of the Blasphemies and Errors of the Quakers, which
they have Published in their Printed Books, which I have not taken upon trust,
but have seen them every one, and reduced them to the following Heads.
Of the Authority of their Words and Writings.
1. THat what Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles spoke, and what is spoken or
written by the Quakers are all given forth by one Spirit according to measure,
and that a man may as well slight the one as the other. Mr. Camelford Minister
of Stasly Chapel in Lancheshire, having told Tho. Atkinson (in answer to his
Queries,) that his Queries were condemned to the fire to be burned: Geo. Fox
replies, You might as well have condemned the Scriptures to the fire. Truths
defense against resined subtilties: By Geo Fox, and Rich. Hubberthorn, p. 2.
and justified by James Nailor in his Answer to Jer. Ives, p. 15.

2. That they have as full a measure of the Spirit, as the Penners of the
Scriptures had, Geo. Fox, and Rich. Hubberthorn Truths defense, p. 43.

3. That the same gift that works miracles is among them, as was among the
Apostles, Geo. Fox, and Rich. Hubberthorn, Truths desence, p. 44.

Of Antichrist.
4. That that denying of Christ to be come in the flesh, which is the mark or
Character of Antichrist, or the Man of sin; is the denying of Christ to be come
in the flesh of his Saints. Masons Answer to Johnson.

Of Atonement.
5. That there is that in the spiritual Man, which being turned into, and
followed, can redeem and make Atonement, and that in him the Atonement is
made. IN Answer to Higgenson, p. 3.

6. That the light which is in every man, shows the true Atonement, and no
other thing can show it to every particular Person, ibid. p. 38.

Of civil Titles and Gestures of respect unto Men.
7. That bowing the body, and putting off the Hat unto one another, is an
Heathenish Custom, and Idolatry. James Parnell's Goliahs head cut off, p. 39,
40.

8. Mr. Raynor of Lincoln, is called Babilonian, for directing his Epistle to
the Right Worshipful the Major of Lincoln. Masons Answer to Raynor. p. 4.

Of Christ.
9. George Fox being asked whether Christ have a body in Heaven, and be a
particular man or person, encompassed with a body to live for ever, ye or no?
Affirms, that Christ has but one Body, and that is the Church. Truths defense
against refined subtilty: by Geo. Fox, and Hubberthorn, p. 78, 79. Edw.
Burrough's Answer to Bunion, p. 28.

10. Christ has but one body, and that is his Church, James Nailor against
Ives, p. 23. Edw. Buroughs against Bunion, p. 30. The destinction of Christ's
personal presence in Heaven, and spiritual presence in his people is denied.
James Nailor's second Answer to Tho. Moore, p. 13.

11. That the Election, Ordination, and Adoption so often spoken of in the
Scriptures is Christ, and the drawing is the Spirit of the Father, which is
administered in the light, which draws to Christ the Election. James Nailor
against Jo. Beacon, p. 40.

12. That Christ was the Gospel which the Apostles Preached. Ja. Parnell's
Goliahs head cut off, p. 17.

13. Christ's coming in the flesh gave Adam his created estate and recovery.
Hubberthorn against Tho. Winterton, p. 8.

14. Christ's coming in person to Judgment is denied. Hubberthorns innocence of
the righteous seed, p. 7, 8. he is no where to be looked for, but within. Mason
against Johnson.

15. It is no deceit to own Christ no otherwise then as he was before the world
began. Edw. Buroughs against Bunion, p. 13.

Of the Church.
16. Christ's Church is in God, and God has not a visible or temporal Church
in the world, nor is the Order, or Rule, or Government in the Church visible,
but spiritual and eternal. Farnworth against Hagger, p. 17, 23.

17. That since the Apostles days has been a great Apostasy, and not a true
Church of Christ could be found; and ever since has the same Generation (as
now) of false Prophets stood under several forms and appearances, deceiving
the Nations, but now the pure light of Christ shines. etc. Answer to Griffith.

Of Religious Education.
18. That for Masters and Mistresses to make their Servants read Scriptures,
and to bring them to the public Ordinances, argues a persecuting Bonner like
spirit; and is a seeking to dethrone Christ, and is treason against the King of
Saints and his tender Lambs. Masons Answer to Mr. Rayners Precepts, p. 37.

Of free will, and of the power of nature.
19. The light of Christ within, or the light that is in every Man's Conscience,
if walked in, and hearkened unto, will be strength to lead a Man to life. Edw.
Buroughs Truth defended, p. 12. many of their assertions concerning the light
imply the same thing.

Of internal light, and what it can do.
20. That the light which is in every one that comes into the world shows a man
sin and evil, and the deceipts of his own heart. Geo. Fox Exhort. to the
People, in Answer to Westminster. Ministers. Pet.

21. And loving this light it will bring you off all the worlds ways and
worships to worship God, ibid. And lead you into the light of life. Farnworth
against Hagger, p. 51. Hubberthorn against Tho. Winterton, p. 2. From impurity
unto holiness. Masons Epistle to his Answer to Mr. Rayners Precepts.

22. It is spiritaall.

23. And the light of Christ, wherewith he enlightens every one that comes into
the world.

24. It is pure, and whosoever beleives and follows it, shall not abide in
darkness, but shall have eternal life; and whosoever believes it not, is
damned. James Nailors Answer to Fr. Harris, p. 11.

25. By the power of it, is the Creature brought into the world. James Nailors
Answer to Winterton, p. 7.

26. It reveals, without the Scripture, the lives and actions of Christ and
his Apostles, and of the Resurrection to judgment. Farnworth against Hagger and
Pollard, p. 55, 58.

27. That nothing else can reveal Christ. Edw. Buroughs Answer to Bunion, p.
18.

28. By this light all the holy men of God were taught, that gave forth the
Scriptures. Edw. Buroughs Truth defended, p. 17.

What it is.
29. Christ is this light. Fox his Exhortation in James Nailors Answer to
Higgenson, p. 5. James Nailors Answer to Pendarvis, p. 6.

30. Its the light and Spirit of Christ. James Nailors wickedness weighed, p.
22.

31. It is the light, Spirit and power of God unto salvation, which is the
Gospel of Christ. Farnworth against Hagger, p. 57.

32. It is the perfect Law of liberty. Ja. Nailors Answer to Higgenson, p. 5.

33. The Lord God and the Lamb is the light within men. Farnworth against
Higgenson, p. 54.

34. It is the light of the Covenant of grace. James Nailors Answer to Fr.
Harris, p. 15.

35. This light in all men is God, and when Paul committed them to God, it was
to the light within them. Farnworth against Hagger, p. 48.

36. Its the word of faith which the Apostles Preached. Edw. Buroughs against
Firmin, p. 18.

37. It is reason and understanding that is in every Man. Edw. Buroughs
against Firmin, p. 19.

38. It is a perfect rule in every man's Conscience, where man is guided by it,
ibid. p. 18.

39. That in a man which is just, equal, and righteous, telling him he ought
not to do wrong. Answer to Berks Letter, p. 6.

40. And that reproves him in secret of his secret iniquities. Answer to
Griffith, p. 33.

41. Its the light, life, and power of God, the just and living truth, from
which the Scriptures were spoken forth. Answer to Berks Let. p. 7.

42. Its that of God in a man's Conscience. Answer to Berk, p. 20. Humph. Smith
reply to Edm. Skip, p. 17.

43. It is the light of Israel. Hubherthorns Answer to T. Winterton, p. 3.

44. This light with which Christ enlightneth every one that comes into the
world, is the same thing with the life and light of Adam in Paradise; but when
he went into the selfish knowledge, he became brutish, and this a witness
against him. Hubberthorn against Tho. Winterton, p. 8.

45. This light is the grace of God that teaches to deny all ungodliness, etc.
and this grace is Christ himself. Masons Answer to Rayners Precepts, p. 20.

46. This light in every man's Conscience is the right heir, give him the
kingdom of your hearts; this is the Son of God in whom he is well pleased.
Mason against Rayners Precepts, p. 49.

47. It is no other thing than the light of the Gospel. Edw. Buroughs Answer
to Bunnion, p. 18.

48. It is the same light with the anointing, both in believers and
unbelievers. Truths defense against refined subtilty by Geo. Fox. and R.
Hubberthorn, p. 67.

Of judgeing and discerning men's hearts and persons.
49. That the Saints by the Spirit that is in them, can judge of men's hearts,
(not by outward appearance) and that such judging is Christ's judging of men.
And that Christ shall judge no where else but in his Saints. James Nailors
Answer to Jo. Pendarvis, p. 7.

Of Justification.
50. That that is a blind Doctrine which Preaches that righteousness which
justifies is not in them. James Nailor against Higgenson, p. 6. Buroughs
against Firmin, p. 21.

51. He that has a covering for his sins no nearer then above the Stars, will
one day be found naked. James Nailors Answer to Higgenson, p. 8.

52. The obedience of Christ and of the Creatures, is not two obediences but
one. James Nailors Answer to Higgenson, p. 22.

53. Christ Jesus made manifest and revealed in us, is our righteousness for
justification. Ed. Buroughs Truth defended, p. 12.

54. The faith of God justifies alone without imputation; thy imputation to
thy dead works without thee, we do deny. Truths defense against refined
subtilty. p. 93.

55. That Christ bought us not with the price of his blood that was shed upon
the Cross at Jerusalem.

56. That the blood of Christ is but one as ever 'twas, by which we are
redeemed from our vain conversation. That this blood is our witness and seal,
by which we are redeemed, but not at Jerusalem only, but made manifest in us.
Truths defense against refined subtilty, p. 95.

Of faith and its Object.
57. God has given his Son, who is not only that light (which inlightneth
every one that comes into the world) but to all that believe therein and follow
it, he leads them out of darkness thereby, and gives them the light of life.
James Nailors Answer to Higgenson, p. 17.

58. Without faith in the light of Christ (within a man) a man cannot know the
things of God, nor have his duties accepted. James Nailors Answer to Beacon, p.
9.

59. He that believes in the light and follows Christ who is the light, shall
have the light of life. Hubberthorns Answer to Winterton, p. 2. The light
within also is asserted to be the Object of Faith. By James Nailors Answer to
Fr. Harris, p. 26. id. against Jo. Beacon, p. 39. id. Answer to Tho. Winterton,
p. 7. Mason against Jhonson, p. 3.

We must believe in the light. James Nailors Answer to Harris, p. 26.

Of the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.
60. Mr. Breck of New England asks, How came you to know there was ever such a
man in the world as Jesus Christ? They answer, not by the Prophets, nor by the
witness of his holy Apostles and Evangelists left in their holy Record of the
New Testament, but by the eternal infallible Spirit. Answer to Edw. Breck, p.
16. l. 34. compared with his Letter prefixed, p. 9. Quest. 2.

61. That it is dangerous for the ignorant and unlearned to read the Scripture.
1. Because they are made use of against the Saints. 2. The Ministers of it are
the Ministers of death. 3. They make a trade with it, yet the holy Brethren may
read them. Truths defense against refined subtilty. By Hubberthorn, p. 101.

62. But if any raise from the Scripture points, trials, motives, uses, he adds
to the Scripture, and to him are added the curses and plagues, Rev. 22.18.
Truths defense against refined subtilty, p. 101. Whithead against Clapham, p.
11.

63. That the Scriptures are for the perfecting the Man of God, and not for the
instruction of others, for that is for destruction.

64. It is the man of sin that talks and prates of the Scriptures who is
exalted above all that is called God in thee. Truths defense against refined
subtilty. By Hubberthorn, p. 102.

65. That the Scripture is not the Word of God, nor a standing Rule. James
Nailors Answer to Baxters Q. Cat. p. 26.

66. It is not a perfect Rule of faith and conversation to walk By Farnworth
against Hagger and Pollard, p. 22, 43. Answer to Io. Griffeth, p. 19, 32.

67. That to limit a man to the Scriptures, to Preach nothing but what he can
prove from the vissible Rule of the Scriptures, is to debar and limit God.
Rich. Farnworth against Hagger and Pollard, p. 3.

68. That faith comes not by hearing the Scriptures Preached.

69. That the Scripture is not the Gospel.

70. That men may be saved without it, and comforted, though disowning the
Scriptures. Farnworth against Hagger and Pollard, p. 21, 22.

71. That he that has no light to walk or speak by, but the Scriptures is not
like to speak truth. Answer to Mr. Breck of N. Eng. Letter, p. 7.

72. He is dead in sin that has no other light, nor way to salvation, but what
he has out of the Scripture. Answer to Mr. Brecks Letter, p. 17.

73. Jeremiah Ives Quoting Lev. 19.32. to prove some honor dne unto men; which
James Nailor Answers in scorn thus. What a standing rule is this word of yours
(the Scriptures) that the deceit can thus turn quite into another thing than it
speaks? The Devil likes such a word as he can turn every way to plead for his
Kingdom. James Nailors Answer to Ives, p. 22.

74. That it is the Devil in men that contends for the Scripture to be the Word
of God. James Nailors Answer to Ives, p. 22.

75. That the Bible is not the written Word of God, but a declaration of Christ
the Word. Answer to Io. Beacon, p. 9.

76. The Scripture is not the Gospel, that is Christ Jesus that cannot be
contained in Paper and Ink. Parnels Goliahs head cut off, p. 17. Farnworth
against Hagger, p. 35.

77. That the light which is in all the Indians, Americans, and other Pagans on
earth, is sufficient without Scriptures. James Nailors Answer to Baxter, p. 48.

Concerning the Ordinances of Jesus Christ.
78. Psalms. That David's Psalms are not to be sung in Meeter. Truths defense
against refined subtilty. By Geo. Fox and Rich. Hubberthorn, p. 18, 20.

79. Preaching. That such a Minister (that ownes not the Quakers way) as takes
a Text of Scripture and makes a Sermon upon it, is a Conjurer, and what he
raises must needs be Conjuration. James Nailor against Ives, p. 13.

80. That he is a false Prophet and a Deceiver which has not the word
(immediately) from the mouth of the Lord, but takes that which the Lord spoke
to another, and the Prophets, Christ's, and the Apostles words, and calls it
Gods word, and says, the Lord says it. Edw. Buroughs Truth defended, p. 4.

81. That to raise Points, Trials, Motives, and Uses, is adding to the
Scriptures. Truths defense against refined subtilty. By Fox and Hubberthorn, p.
40. James Nailors Answer to Io. Beacon, p. 40.

82. Water-baptisme is denied, and affirmed to be no Ordinance of Christ. James
Parnell and James Nailors Answer to Ives, p. 14, 29. Geo. Whithead against
Clapham of singing Psalms, p. 11.

83. That it is a beasticall, carnal, earthly Tradition never commanded.
Truths defense against refined subtilty: By Geo. Fox and Rich. Hubberthorn, p.
98.

84. Lords Supper. Mr. Kellet in Laxcheshiere Queries. Whether did not Christ
institute his last Supper with Bread and Wine? Richard Hubberthorn Answers him,
That Christ spoke not of Bread and Wine, but the Bread which Christ called his
Body is to be understood of the Church, that are many Members but one Body.

85. But the Cup which thou drinkest we do deny, for thy Cup is the Cup of
Devils, and thy Table is the Table of Devils, which is an Idol and imitation,
and thy Sacrifice is to Devils and not to God. And this Answer to Mr. Kellets
Q. he says is, by the Spirit of the Lord. Defense against refined subtilty, p.
99. And not only this, but (says he) Our giveng forth Papers and Printed Books
is from the immediate eternal Spirit of God, p. 104.

Of all the Ordinances together.
86. The Sacraments and Ordinances are beggarly Rudiments, Commandments and
Doctrines of Men; and not the Ordinance of God. Answer to Edw. Brecks Letter,
p. 10.

87. Although they are commanded by Christ, yet to continue but for a time, a
figure of a substance, which being (...) the Saints, the figure cease. Answer
to Griffith, p. 16. Edw. Buroughs Truth defended, p. 11.

88. They are unholy Duties and Ordinances. Masons Answer to Rayner, p. 17.

89. There is not any profit in sprinkling Infants, or your Bread and Wine; and
those that partake in those Ordinances, were never yet washed from their sins
and pollutions. James Parnels Goliahs head cut off, p. 73. Whithead against
Clapham, p. 11. Edw. Buroughs Truths defense, p. 11.

90. Preaching the Word, Praying, Singing, are no appointments of Christ, but
the inventions of men. Truth defended against refined subtilty: By Geo. Fox and
R. Hubberthorne.

91. The Priests taking Tithes in the time of the Law, was evil, and proved
them to be false Prophets and Deceivers. Buroughs Truth defended, p. 5.

92. That the light of God and of Christ (which is affirmed to be in every man's
Conscience that comes into the world) commanded circumsion, and the seanenth
day to be kept a Sabbath, and the worship in the Temple, etc. And it was the
same light that led the Disciples from these things to deny them, and yet no
offense to God, nor contradiction in the light of Christ. Buroughs Answer to
Firmin, p. 20.

Of the Sabbath.
93. No Sabbath to be kept. Answer to Edw. Brecks Letter, p. 9.

Of Ordination or Call to the Ministry.
94. The Ministers of God never were sent forth from God by a mediate sending,
but were immediately sent. Rich. Farnworths Answer to the Westmorland Ministers
Petition, p. 5.

Of Oaths.
95. That it is not lawful to take an Oath before a Magistrate, no not to end
a Controversy, and that he who affirms it, is thereby found in the
condemnation of the Devil. James Parnels Goliahs head cut off, p. 70, 71.

Of Perfection.
96. That those that have received Christ and God, are come to perfection,
because God and Christ are perfection. James Nailors Answer to Ives, p. 13.

97. That all such as are in Christ are without sin. Farnworth against Hagger
and Pollard, p. 7.

Of Sin.
98. That the Doctrine of Original Corruption, whereby we are deprived of the
Image of God, etc. is a soul destroying, God blaspheming Doctrine. Masons
Answer to Rayner, p. 13.

Of Union with God.
99. That the substance of the Diety is communicable unto man, so as to
confound the natures, and change man into the devine substance and essence.
Masons Answer to Rayners precepts, p. 23. compared with Mr. Rayners denial of
such a Union in his Precepts.

Of the Sufferings of the Quakers.
100. That it is for no other cause but for bearing witness for the living God
and his truth, as it is made manifest in us by the same spirit and life and
power as all the holy men of God were sent Prophets and Apostles. Answer to
Brecks Letter, p. 4, 5.

Of the Trial of Spirits and Doctrines.
101. That the infallible Spirit in the Saints is the sole tryer of all spirits
and Doctrines, and they are not to be tried by the Scriptures. James Nailors
Answer to Fr. Harris, p. 9. Geo. Whithead against Clapham, p. 13.

102. That the Spirits are to be tried whether they be of God, or be the Spirit
of error, delusion and darkness, not by the Scriptures, but by truth, which is
eternal and infallable, by the same eternal infallable Spirit, as spoke forth
the Scriptures, and was before Scripture was written, and this Spirit gives
judgment upon thee Edw. Breck, and knows thee and tryes thee and thy light
which is the Scripture, and judges thy Spirit to be a fallible lying Spirit.
And this Spirit and judgment do we (Q) witness, and this shall be Answered by
that of God in all Consciences. Answer to Mr. Edw. Breck of New England. his
Letter, p. 8.

103. That a man's being charged with lies, error, falsehood, by the Quakers, is
an infallable proof of his guilt. Answer to Mr. Breck, p. 16. Farnworths Answer
to Hagger and Pollard, p. 14.

104. Thou (says Edw. Buroughs) indeavourest to prove thy accusation by vain
consequences and false conclusions; but our assertion is proved by the Spirit
of God, or the light that every one is enlightened with. Buroughs against
Firmin, p. 14. which Spirit or light is to be exalted above all things, as the
searcher and tryer of all things and Spirits, and is not to be judged or tried
by the Scriptures. Buroughs against Firmin, p. 15, 16.

Of the Popery of the Quakers.
By this we may clearly see, that they are in many of their opinions very
Popish, agreeing with the Papists in all these things. 1. That the Ministers of
the Reformed Churches are not true Ministers. 2. Nor the Ordinances Administered
by them, the Ordinances of Christ. 3. That a man is justified by the merit of
good works, by inherent righteousness. 4. That the Scriptures should not be
read by the ignorant and unlearned. 5. That the Church has an infallable,
unerring Spirit, to try and judge of Scripture it self, is to be judged by none,
whose dictates and determinations are of as great Authority as the Scripture.
6. And as the Papists by their Doctrine of the Real Corporeal presence of
Christ, in many thousand places at once, overthrow, as much as in them lies,
the Articles of Christ's Humanity, viz. of his being a real Man; of his
suffering death; rising, ascending, and sitting at the right hand of God. So
the Quakers destroy the Humanity of Christ, by denying his being corporcally in
Heaven, and affirming that he has but one Body, which is his Church, and that
God manifest in flesh is to be understood in the Saints. Also their opinion,
That the Magistrate is not to meddle with matters of Religion, unless to pull
down the Reformed Religion, is a plain Point of Popery. And for the truth of
these, I appeal to all men in the world that know what Popery is (and they are
many Millons) that shall also read the Opinions of the Quakers in this
Catalogue.

CHAP. III. Of the Actions and Manners of the Quakers.
THey will not put off their Hatts, nor bow their bodies, to the greatest
Persons. The Parliament 1659 appointed a Committee of purpose to hear their
Complaints; before which the Quakers stood covered, and thou would and thee'd the
Chairmen and Members thereof, to the greatest dishonor of the Authority of
England, as ever was admitted.

They will not petition to men, no not the highest Powers, but Council and
Command: Witness all their Addresses to the Protectors and Parliaments, in
Print many of them to be seen.

They will not take an Oath, before a Magistrate, or otherwise, saying, it is
unlawful. And yet this Summer, 1659. to revenge themselves of some Country
men, about Sawbridgworth in Hartfordshire, for affronting them, they could
freely swear against them, in order to the binding them over to the Sessions,
and rail against St. T. H. a Justice of the Peace, accusing him in Print, for
not taking the Parliaments new Engagement.

They say, the Magistrate has nothing to do, to meddle in matters concerning
Religion; and yet do continually importune him to pull down Religion, as is
well known to all the late Authorityes, and thousands more, by Edward Burrow's
Letters to the Protectors, and other Papers Printed.

They cry up Liberty of Conscience, but are not willing to give it to others.
How many thousand times have some Ministers or other in all parts of the Laud,
been most impudently disturbed by them, in their public religious exercises,
is so well known, that none but John Impudence will deny it.

They are notorious Liars; for all their Blasphemies and Errors are so many
lies: Not because I say they are lies (that is their common disproof) but
because they are contrary to the Law and the Testimony, the Scriptures, as all
do know, and can witness, that have savingly learned those Statutes, and so are
taught of God. If St. Paul himself had told the Bereans, that for Masters and
Mistresses to make their Servants read the Scripture, is Treason against the
King of Saints and his tender Lambs, as Mason against Mr. Rayner does (See
Catal. Educa.) would not they who tried his Doctrine by the Scriptures (and
therefore are called noble) Acts 17.11. have told him he lied.

2. Every one of the Quakers says, he is taught and guided by an infallible
Spirit, and is without sin: And that they are all so, and that is a lie with a
latchet, as I Will prove presently by another way, then by comparing what they
say with the Scripture, though that is the best way; even by their notorious
contradicting one another. Many instances might be given; I Will only name one or
two.

Hubberthorn, in his Truths defense against Refined Subtilties, p. 101. does
affirm, That the wicked are not to read the Scriptures but the godly; and gives
his wise Reasons for it. But Buroughs against Firmin, p. 16. allows only the
wicked and ungodly: Such as the Scribes and Pharisees were, to search and read
the Scriptures, and not the godly. Here Is a plain opposition and contradiction,
from which I infer, that both of them did not write truth, they were not both
guided and directed by an unerring infallible Spirit; and consequently, that to
say all the Quakers have the guidance of such a Spirit, ey and that in all
their speeches and writings, as they say they have, is such a lie as I called
it: And there is that in all men, that will not offer violence to their
Reasons, that will witness to the truth hereof. Take but one more instance.

James Natlor, in his Answer to Francis Harris, uses the name SCRIPTURE, and
the WORDOF THE LORD, indifferently as convertible terms, as being fullfilled
by men's coming from far, and sitting down in the Kingdom, etc. thereby
contradicting his well known elsewhere Assertion, That the Scripture is not
Gods Word, p. 3.

They are the most immodest, obscene, people in the world, next to the late
Ranters. If all the Stories of their women's stripping themselves to the very
skin, in the presence of men, and of men's so doing in the presence of women of
late years, should be here et down, they would be enough to make a large
Volume. I will set down but those few, which I am sure I can prove to be true,
and that are by many hundreds known to be true.

1. A Female Quaker about four or five years ago, came into White Hall Chapel
stark naked, while a great Congregation was at the public worship of God, the
Lord Protector O.C. being present.

2. Since then, a Relation of mine had a Maidservant that became a Quaker, and
one day at Putny where his house was, and when he had many friends at dinner
with him, she came into his Parlour stark naked while they were at dinner, to
the astonishment of their modesty. And another day, she did Stark naked go from
her Masters house through Wandser, and to Lambeth, or near it, where some
Watermen by force stopped and covered her, and carried her back. It was said,
that she intended to have entered London over the Bridge, and to have gone in
that posture through London Streets unto West minster.

3. This last Summer 1659. in Colchester a Man-Quaker went stark naked all
through the Market: And another day, which was the Lords day, in the same
posture entered into the greatest Assembly that was in that Town, walking unto
the further end of the lower cross He through many people, and then returned
without saying a word. And from thence he went to a great company of the
Quakers, assembled together in that Town, where he did for a long time act the
part of a Speaker; which considered, as also that when he did go naked, he had
a Brother waiting upon him, carrying his Clothes under his Arms, it was the
more apparent, that it was an act well-pleasing to, and approved of by the
Quakers.

4. This last Summer 1659. A Man-Quaker went naked through the City of London
down Cheapside, as hundreds can witness.

5. In Colchester this last Summet, 1659. many of them, as also the
Anabaptists, have opened their Shops, and followed their handicraft Callings
every Lords day for many weeks together, notwithstanding the Legal oppositions
that have been made against them; and it is likely they continue so to do, they
did until very lately. The like (as is known to thousands) has been done
several Lords days by some of them of late in London, and Southwarke.

6. In Colchester this last Summer 1659. a Woman-Quaker brought her needlework
into a Church, and fell to work, and singing, while the Minister was
officiating.

7. In Aldermanbury-Church in London, this last Summer 1659. a Man-Quaker after
one frustrated attempt, did (while the Psalm was singing, and before the
Minister ascended) get up into the Pulpit, and there sat upon the Cushion,
with his foot upon the Stool, or Seat, and with a Needle and Thread sewed a
Pocket, until he was pulled down; since which, the same Person has in Print
published the reason of his so doing, to be only this: That the Burden of the
Lord was upon him: That he was so pressed in his spirit to do it, that he could
have no rest until he had done it, but declares no end for which he did it:
Surely the Devil that moved him, did not exercise his wit; or else had a very
fool to work upon, that would move to no end.

They do exceedingly covet that, which impudently they say they have, but have
not, namely the gift of working Miracles; concerning which, take these
following Stories, wherein may be seen their pride, and how the lying Spirit
has befooled them.
WIlliam Pool (a professed Quaker) servant to George Knight Clothier, of the
City of Worcester, and a Quaker also, seemed for some short time to be much
troubled in mind and dejected, which his Master and some others tooknotice of:
But not finding satisfaction from the Quakers, with whom he did converse, upon
the 19. of February 1657. being Friday, he was more then ordinarily troubled,
(but the manner and grounds of it are variously reported) and at eveningwent
suddenly out of his Masters house, and could not be found or heard of that
night, nor the next day; but on the Lords day, early in the morning, was found
within half a Mile of the City, dead, and naked, with his face downward in a
little puddle of water, all his Clothes lying by him. Upon the view of which
and hearing the matter, the Coroners Inquest found him guilty of self-murder:
His Mother and Friends on Monday morning, the 22. of February, caused him to be
buried in Claynes Churchyard, two Miles from the Ciry: And the same day in the
afternoon, after he had lain buried six or seven hours, a strong persuasion of
pride and confidence, seized upon one Susnnah Peirson (one of the most violent,
heady, and high-minded Quakers in the City) that she could raise William Pool
from the dead; whereupon she took three or four more of her way, and went to
the Churchyard, caused his body to be dug out of the earth, and laid upon
the ground, and opened his shroud, touching him, and calling him by his name,
saying, Arise and walk, with sundry other expressions, many being present: But
she and her companions returned with shame, yet persists still in her Opinion
without any change. The Lord show her her sins, and give her repentance to the
acknowledging of the Truth, that she may recover her self out of the snare of
the Devil, who is taken captive by him at his will.

They compass Sea and Land to make Proselites, and have too much succeeded both
in Virginia and Amsterdam: But I hope where ever this Book shall arrive before
them, the people will so well know them, as to abhor any further acquaintance
with them.

They are a very cruel, bloody people, if we may judge of the Lion by his paw,
or what is abundantly in their hearts, by such speakings of their mouths as
these, to our Captains in Christ's Army: That they are of the Synagogue of
Satan, and know nothing of God, but are enemies of God, being guided by the
spirit of error, without, among dogs, whose humility is fained: That their
Sermons are fleshly fancies and Conjurations, dirty miry Doctrine, a stinking
puddle: That their hearts are filthy deceitful, seeking praise from men: That
they are scandalous, following the ways of Balaam and Cain: worse then Simon
Magus, knowing nothing of the life of the Gospel, That they are Heathens,
wallowing in the mire and filth of the flesh, on whom all the Plagues of God
are to be powered, blind guides, proud, Baals Priests, Liars, Blasphemers,
Enemies to Christ Jesus, Murderers, Sorcerers, Whoremongers, Children of
disobedience, greedy dumbrdogs, Witches, Antichrists, Antichrists Merchants,
Robbers, Deceivers, Ministers of the world, Conjurers, Devils of a Serpentine
nature, a Brazen-fac't Beast, Covetous, Idolatrous Priests, Tleeves, Devilish
Priests, Priests of the world, Foxes, Ministers of Antichrist, Proud Pharisees,
Envious, malicious Priests, Egyptians, Sodomites, Gog and Magog, a Seed of evil
doers, children of the devil, Blind Watchmen, Back-biters, Raylers, Seducers,
Taskmasters of Egypt, Devouring Lions, Firebrands of hell, Sons of Belial.
What would not these men that use such language, do, if they had power to their
will.

Many of the Quakers are no doubt enchanted and bewitched, and possessed by the
Devil. I could instance in Glipin of Kendell, and Tolderby, as may appear by
their several Narratives published by themselves. And of a Physician in
Lincoln, who with his consent was made a Quaker for twenty four hours, by a
Quaker who he privately convicted to be a man in Popish Orders beyond Sea. The
Agreement was, That at the end of so many hours he should cease to be a
Quaker; which so fell out; but he affirmed, that for that time he could not
choose but Preach and Pray at the Quakers rate; but at the end of the said time
he found himself exceeding weary, and as indisposed to such work as ever.

In Colchester Gole, within this last two years, Parnell the Quaker would needs
fast forty days and nights as Christ did, who after he had fasted eight or
nine days suffered some food to be applied to him, but his body by fasting
having lost its power of reception and concoction, he dyed. And after he was
laid in his Grave, a man Quaker (how many more then one I cannot say) waited by
his Grave until the end of three days, expecting his Resurrection, but James
not rising the poor man ranmad upon it, and so continued many weekss, but at
last got loose both from his madness and Quaking, through Gods mercy to him.

These Stories following are Published by Mr. Ford, and Mr. Fowler Ministers of
Reading, in their Answer to Speed, p. 75. 1656.
A Quaker acted that most abominable, unnameable sin with a Mare.

Another poor wretch hanged himself: these two you may find at large added to
the relation of Gilpin of Kendall, and confessed by the Prime of that way to be
true; what may be your thoughts of those?

Some Quakers killed their Mother. They were taught to hearken to, and follow
after the Light within them; this Light taught them they ought to destroy the
Original of Sin, and by the said Light they apprehend their Mother to be the
Original, and from thence still by the said Light they most wickedly embrued
their hands in the blood of their Mother, this you may read in Mr. William Keys
Minister of Stokesly his Answer to eighteen Quaeries, who was with them in
Prison.

Nicholas Kate of Harwell in this County of Berks? about ten months since came
into Newberry between eight and nine in the morning on the Lords day, stark
naked in a most immodest manner, even beyond the Pagans, and so walked through
a long Street, only with an enchanted belt about him (which belt we have ground
to call enchanted,) this man did not converse or live as a Husband with his
wife for many months before this: we will tell you what his Doctrines were.

1. That Marriage was made by Man.

2. That Christians were worse than Beasts.

3. That any woman was as free to him as his Wife.

4. That his Wife was no Wife of his, she was a limb of the Devil.

5. That he was holy, and all things that he touched were holy, as his very
Hatchet, his pot, his Knife.

6. That when the fullness of time was come, he should work miracles.

This man has left his own Family, his Land and Stock of a very considerable
value, entered upon by Persons whom the Country esteems Ranters, his Wife a
weak diseased Woman, who brought him a valuable portion, left to the mercies of
these Persons, which are cruel enough to her: the Farmer Kate himself since
his departure was never heard of by his wife or any of her friends, if any
Person can tell where he is, or what is become of him, they may do a charitable
Christian Office to inform his much distressed Wife.

One of Bristoll, who lately even the twenty ninth of April last, at
Marleborough in the County of Wilts in a discourse with a Godly, discreet, and
Learned Friend, held out this Light.

1. He knew no such things as the Resurrection of the body.

2. That the Body of Christ was not in Heaven, neither should be come thence
with a body.

3. He defended those that went naked, but as yet he had no command to do so.

4. That of late he went to bed with a woman, who was not his wife, and that he
did it without Sin.

5. That that very Christ crucified at Jerusalem, was in-dwelling in him.

6. That he was confident of his perfect holiness, and on that account went to
bed with the woman, and yet afterward excused himself saying, there was a
necessity for it, there was no other spare bed in the house.

CHAP. IV. Some Observations upon the whole History
1. THat men may talk much of God, Christ, the Spirit, and all the things of
Religion and all in vain, and worse then in vain, even to the blaspheming of
God, and Christ, and the holy Ghost, and the infecting the minds of people. And
to my certain knowledge, there are very many that sometimes use to express
themselves about matters divine, after an extraordinary rate, as to sublimity
and experience; in show, who at other times among their Comrades, like Devils
incarnate, will most jocularly blaspheme and jeer at the greatest things in
Divinity.

2. The necessity of divine knowledge of the Principles of Religion. A firm
knowledge and assent to Principles held forth and proved in many Catechismes, or
Systeme among us, would arm and fortific the soul against all contrary
Doctrine, and against all such foolish glosses upon Scripture, as overthrow the
said Principles and Analogy of Faith. Oh that people were convinced of the good
of Catechizing. Its the best part of good education, even for the greatest
persons.

3. The great danger that we are in of having the whole Nation overrun with
these poisonous Weeds, to the everlasting undoing of so many of our selves,
Wives, Children, Relations, as shall take down the venom thereof. As the
coming in of darkness puts out light; and sickness, health; so does the coming
in of error and misbelief, thrust out truth, faith, piety, and happiness. The
Land is sick, and the disease increases, threatening death. And if it once come
to be predominant, England is undone. And then may it be said to be so when
error and ungodliness come to wield the Sword and the Scepter.

4. The great danger of Hipocrasie and Formality in Religion, of men's having
the form of goldiness, but denying the power thereof; of living under the
tenders of the truth without receiving the love of it. For which cause God
threatens to send them strong delusions that they should believe a lie. That
they all might be damned who believe not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. 2 These. 2.10, 11.

5. The impudence of sin, that with a Brazen Whoorish forehead, dare hold forth
its abominable Doctrines of Devils and rebellious practices, for precious
truths and holy works, as may be seen in this History.

6. The patience of God, that a Nation of the greatest provocations is not
utterly destroyed. That London the source of these Abominations, has not been
yet made more miserable than blasphemous Cracovia.

7. The nature and consequence of scisme and causeless separation from the
Church and Churches of Christ. Where as many as will may turn Masters, and
orderless; no marvel, if confusion and every evil work follow; besides one
sin many times causes God to give a man up to another, and so on.

8. What great need all that think they stand have to take heed least they
fall. Oh let us watch and pray; be jealous of our selves, and trust in the Lord
in the use of all the means that he has appointed; A great reason of falling
from the truth, is peoples pride, and selfe-confidence, and want of that
tenderness of Conscience, and fear of sinning, that puts a man upon care,
pains, and diligent inquiry, in the matters of says and life, to prevent our
miscarrying.

9. How wicked a thing it is, and how highly displeasing unto God, to call all
persons whatsoever that pretend to godliness, (and though free from common,
notorious, and unmasked wickedness) a godly party, or godly persons; whenas
many such pretenders hold forth such opinions as deny the Lord that bought us,
and maintain the works of the flesh, and damnable Heresies. And woe be to him
that calls good evil and evil good, which respects persons as well as things

10. How much it concerns all the Servants of the most high God, the Disciples
of Jesus Christ, both Magistrates, Ministers and People from this Alarm to Arm
themselves as the faithful Soldiers of Jesus Christ, and by all holy ways
and means, to set themselves against this flood of Blasphemy and Error, and
the Captain thereof, who strives to be sole Prince of England. This, this with
all his Armies -- is the common enemy, he has many Armies, great Revenues, he
has great experience, craft and policy, which never appeared so much as it
would, if he could persuade the Christians of these Nations, that error is
truth, and wickedness godliness, and the encouraging of them a good old Cause.

11. What cause we have to fear, that while persons of such corrupt minds and
heads increase, our Judicatures even from the highest to the lowest, will be in
danger of being corrupted, because they are made up of the distributed people,
unless it were made a fundamental Order of those Courts, that none who are
either by Apostasy or Education, enemies to Christ and the known avowed
Christian Religion shall be members thereof.

12. That the Quakers have no reason in the world to cry out of perfection, nor
to boast of their sufferings as they do; for its as plain as the Sun, that they
have suffered as evil doers, for being uncivil to Magistrates, disturbing
Gods People in their Assemblies, for being busy bodies, or some other known
wickedness; and if so, all their charging the Courts, Justices, Constables, and
those that assisted or abetted them with persecution, falls flat to the ground.

13. What a great mercy of God it is, that (though there are so many thousands
of them) their number is not greater, they being such an unruly people, and so
full of deadly hatred against Jesus Christ, his Ministers, People, and
Ordinances. If they had power to their will, they that now frequently affront
and disturb a Minister and Congregation, would pull the Minister out of the
Pulpit, and instead of being turned out of the Church, would turn out the
Congregation, and then our blood might be mingled with our Sacrifice. And
moreover would not they that scorn to petition a Parliament, or be uncovered
before the greatest Throne of a Nation, pull them out by the ears if they were
able? unless all Civil power were in their hands; and then what Persecutors
they would be, may be easily concluded from the sight of their teeth before
hand.

14. That it is high time for all the Redeemed ones, the Sanctified ones, the
Children of the great God, the Favorites of Heaven, honest, godly, sincere
Christians; Children that will not lie, to improve their interest in God,
through Jesus Christ, for this poor sinful divided Nation, that God would not
impute unto the Nation the Abominations of many, and so depart from us, and
suffer us to relaps into Popery or Paganism. But that he would arise for the
recovery of the interest of true Religion, that is brought very low in England,
as indeed it is abroad in other Nations. Its time for God to arise, for men
have made void his Law. That God would either deliver us from unreasonable men,
and give us such Magistrates, as shall be nursing Fathers to his Church; Or
prepare us so for sufferings, that we may be ready to dye for the Name of the
Lord Jesus, his Person, Natures, Word, Offices, Ministry, Ordinances, thereby
demonstrating as much as in us lies the power of godliness, the transcendent
exceilency of true Religion, above the honors, pleasures, profits of this
world, and life it self: that so through God blessing our very sufferings may
indeere our Religion unto surviving Generations. When they shall consider not
only what it cost their Ancestors by way of testimony to the Truth, but what it
wrought their hearts unto, as the Instrument of the Spirit of God, making them
to forgo all for God their portion, and Jesus Christ their Redeemer.

CHAP. V.
AS to Satan's design in stirring up such kinds of people, I had a purpose to
have done it more fully than now I shall, for having taken up more Paper
already than agrees with the small price I intended this Book to be sold for
[that so it might come into the more hands of such as I Writ it for. viz. those
that do not know so much as myself,] I shall at this time say but thus much;
Satan's design is, That he may solely rule in, and over every Man and Woman in
these Nations, to their everlasting damnation, that not one of our Children and
Posterity may be saved. To which end he would reduce us unto Popery or
Infidelity, as abundantly appears by the foresaid Doctrines, which according to
his will, are propagated all the Land over, by all the ranks and orders of his
Kingdom.

These Opinions following are affirmed to be the Opinions of the Quakers, by
Toldervey, who was a Quaker, which he affirms in his Retractation Entitled,
The foot out of the snare.
THat the Word of God is [not the Scripture, but] the life or the substance
whence the Scriptures are spoken.

That the substance the Word of life, is the measure of God manifested in man,
the gift of the holy Spirit manifest in flesh, made known in all.

That this substance is the same holy Ghost by which the Apostles were endued,
and the Christ of God the Redeemer from sin.

That the Garden of Eden is the world, that the Trees thereof are all living
beings. That Paradise is in man. That man fell by harkning to the wicked, which
was the fleshly mind, and that not the Woman properly, but the silliest and
weakest part was the Woman that tempted him. That Adam was the earthly nature
in Man.

That the Redeemer of Man is not that person the Son of God that dyed at
Jerusalem, but the light which is in every particular Man, by which he is given
to see sin, and enabled by it if obedient to be redeemed from sin. That
searching the Scriptures is not the way to find out the knowledge of Christ, but
the turning the mind within, there to be taught the measure of God, the Law
written in the heart.

That Scripture ought not to be interpreted.

This Collection following of the Opinions of the Quakers, was made by two very
Reverend and most credible men, Mr. Christopher Fowler, and Mr. Simon Ford
Ministers of the Gospel in Reading, in their Book Entitled, A sober Answer to
an Angry Epistle of Tho. Speeds a Quaker in Bristol.
[The Quakers Doctrines.]
1. Sect. 54. Perfect Pharisee, p. 3. See also the Relation of the itreligious
Northern Quakers.
THat they are equal with God, as holy, just, and good, as God himself.
Affirmed by G. Fox, and J Nailor, before Witnesses who attest it, in a Book
called the perfect Pharisee, published by five Ministers of Newcastle.

2. Sultable hereunto was the Blasphemy of one of your she-Quakers lately in
hold in this Town, who being convented before the Major of this Corporation,
and asked what she was, and what was her name, roundly answered (and stood to
it again the next day) I AM THAT I AM, which will be attested upon Oath by the
Major and one of the Constables.

3. Suitable to this was the Blasphemy of another of your Brethren, who meeting
with a godly Londiner, occasionally being in this Town on a Lords day lately,
and asking him the way, as he met him, to one of our Churches, answered him in
these words, The Church is in God, and the Church is God.

4. That the being of God is not distinct from them that are begotten by him.
[Sword of the Lord by James Atkinson Quaker.]

5. That the Nature and Glory of the Elect, differ not from the Nature and
Glory of the Creator. For the Elect are one with the Creator in his Nature,
enjoying his glory. That the Elect is not distinct from the Creator. [ Howgill
and Buroughs two Quakers in an answer to Reeve.]

6 And that God is not distinct from living Creatures; for in him living
Creatures lives, moves, etc.

7. That God is three Persons, or subsistences (they say) is a lie. That there
is no distinctions of Persons in the Godhead. [Sword of the Lord by J.
Atkinson, G. Fox Errand to Damascus.

8. That the soul is a part of the Divine Essence. [See perfect Pharisee, p. 6.]

9. That Jesus Christ is God and Man in one person (they say) is a lie.

10. They deny and detest this Doctrine, That Christ being the only God and Man
in one person, remains for ever a distinct person from all Saints and Angels,
notwithstanding their Union and communion with him. [Sword of the Lord by James
Atkinson.]

11. That the person that Son of God which died at Jerusalem, is not the
Redeemer of Man from sin; but the Redeemer is in every man, that light by which
he is given to see him, etc.] The discourse of a Quaker with J. Toldervy. Foot
out of the Snare, p. 7.

12. That Christ is in every man, even Heathen, Indians, and in the Reprobates
he is hold under corruption.

13. That Christ was a man, had his failings, for he distrusted God upon the
Cross -- [ J. Nailor. See perfect Pharisee, p. 7. Rob. Collison. See Gilpins
Book. p. 2.]

14. That we are not justified by that righteousness of Christ, which he in his
own person did fulfill without us. And that whosoever expects to be saved by
him that died at Jerusalem, shall be deceived: For Christ in the flesh was in
all, that he died and suffered a Figure, and nothing but an example.

15. That we are (therefore) to be saved not by the righteousness of Christ
imputed to us, but by the righteousness of Christ inherent in us. [See both
these in the perfect Pharisee, with their Testimonies. p. 9, 10, 11. And
Howgill and Buroughs Answer to Bennet, Q. 9.

And another to the same purpose says, That the faith and justification which
stands in the comprehension of Christ without, will stand us in no stead. [ Fr.
Gawler to Mr. Miller of Cardiff.]

16. That God and man cannot be perfectly reconciled till he be brought into
the state of the first Adam, and able in his own power to stand perfect. And
that holy works and lives of Saints are not excluded from justification. [
Howgill, etc. Answer to Bennets 11, 12, Quaeries.]

17. That no man that is not perfectly holy, or commits sin, can ever enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, except there be a Purgatory. And there is no Saint
but he that is so perfectly holy in this life without sin.

18. That to Preach the impossibility of such a freedom here on earth, is to
Preach up sin while the world stands, and to bring men into Covenant with the
Devil for term of life. Nailor perfect Pharisee, p. 11, 12, 13. See also J.
Parnell Shield of faith, p. 29. to both these Nailor in his answer to Mr
Baxter, p. 28.]

19. That Christ took not humane flesh upon him at any time, otherwise then he
daily does; and that Christ is now conversant on earth among men since his
ascension, as he was in the Apostles times. It is the sum of Howgills and
Buroughs answer to two Quaeries of Mr Bennet. [See Howgill, etc. in their
answer to Bennets 18, and 19, Qu.]

20. That the Scriptures are not the Word of God. This is their constant
judgment, though they dare not profess it for fear of the Law, as one of the
most eminent in these parts, confessed before the Magistrates here, in the
hearing of one of us; asking, Whether if the Bible were burnt, the Word of God
were burnt? or words sully to this purpose. See the proof, perfect Pharisee, p.
23. T.C. Parnells book, p. 10. says, He that says, the Letter is the Word, is
a Deceiver.]

21. That they had a light in them sufficient to lead them to salvation, if
they had never seen or heard of the Bible. The substance of this was affirmed
before some Magistrates of this Town, and one of us by the same party. And this
light extended to Heathen Indians, by him Suitable to the assertions of James
Nailor in a discourse of his in the Book quoted here. And he that says, the
Letter is the Rule and guide of the people of God, is without, feeding upon the
Husk, etc. p. 11. See way to the Kingdom, p. 8. See perfect Pharisee, p. 17,
18.]

22. That the Scriptures are not the Saints Rule of knowing God, and living
unto him, but that which was before the Scriptures were written. This is also
your own, concerning which, anon, more at large. [ Atkinson ubisupra. p. 1.
Parnell, p. 11.

23. That there is no need of outward teachings by reading or hearing of the
Scriptures opened and applied. [See perfect Pharisee, p. 20.]

24. That no men's interpretations of the Scripture, or Arguments from them are
to be received, except those that give them are infallible. [See Quakers Cat.
published by Mr Baxter, where the Quaerists require Infallibility in a
Minister. And perfect Pharisee. p 23.]

This is generally their strain. We renounce and deny all your meanings,
interpretations, arguments, calling them adding to the Scriptures. And
concerning it we must have a brush or two with you anon.

25. That the light in them is the Gospel, and the more sure word of Prophecy;
so sure, that some of them say, That it is a like for to take a sentence out of
their Letters, and Preach from it, as to take a sentence out of Paul's Epistles.
[Discovery of mystical Antichrist displaying Christ's Banners, p. 15, and 33.]

26. That there is no call to the Ministry but an immediate Call, which is
generally proclaimed by them. [See perfect Pharisee, p. 29. J. Parnell, p. 16.]

27. There is no Baptism of Christ, but with the holy Ghost and fire. And no
Supper of the Lord, but in the spiritual part: for as for the visible part,
The Bread which the world breaks is carnal and natural. See perfect
Pharisee, p. 28. and J. Parnell, p 12, 13.]

28. That singing David's Psalms in English Meeter, is to sing the Ballads of
Hopkins and Sternhold, King James his Fiddlers. And to sing them is to turn the
Scriptures into lies and blasphemies. [One of them in a Letter here at Reading.
Henry Clarke in his description of the Prophets, p. 9.]

29. That God made not man to be Lord over Man, but over Creatures; and
therefore amongst them there are no Superiors after the flesh. But are there
any Superiors over them (then) that are not among them? see in the next
Article. [ J. Parnell, p. 22, 23.

30. That Christ comes to fulfill and end all outward Laws and Government of
man. Ja. Parnell, p. 18, 19.
The righteous are from under the outward Law, for they are a Law to
themselves. Especially if Magistrates be wicked (that is, not of them) the
Author quoted in the Margin denies them utterly.

31. Ja. Parnell, p. 37.
That there is no Sabbath now, but an everlasting Sabbath, and that our Sabbath
is but a shadow of which they have the substance, and that the first day in the
week is no Sabbath.

32. That we may not pray before and after Sermons, or at set times, days, and
hours, because these things were in the Generation which were enemies to
Christ. [Quaeries sent to the Congregation at Stopport, printed in a Book of Mr
Eaton.]

33. That the Ratters themselves had a pure convincement which did convince
them. And what their convincements were, most men know. To wit, that there is
no Heaven, Hell, Resurrection, Judgment to come; that there is no sin, but what
a Man thinks to be so; that all that they did was done by the Eternity in them,
etc. [ Geo. Fox, and J. Nailor in a book called A word from the Lord, p. 13.]

34. That that word, 1 John 1.8. If we say we have no sin we deceive our
selves, was spoken by the carnal man. [ Fr. Gawler. See Antichrist in man by
Mr Miller of Cardiff, p. 7. Idem. ibid.]

35. That if a man has sin in him he has none of Christ.

36. They will not acknowledge that Christ ascended with his body into Heaven.
[Idem. ibid.]

Since my Catalogue of the Errors and Blasphemies of the Quakers, was Printed
off, I thought good to make this Addition following.
Of the Trinity.
WE deny the term of three distinct Persons, which you call God the Father, God
the Son, and God the holy Ghost; Whitehead and Geo. Fox against Mr. Smith the
Library keeper of Cambridg, p. 2. Printed 1659.

Of the Authority of the speeches and writings of the Quakers.
Quest. Do you esteem of your speakings to be of as great Authothority as any
Chapters in the Bible.

Answ. That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great
Authority as the Scriptures or Chapters are, and greater; as Christ's words were
of greater Authority when he spoke, then the Pharisees reading the Letter. This
was Writ and Published by Geo. Whitchead, and Geo. Fox the younger, in their
Truth defended against Mr. Tho. Smith. of Cambridge 1659.

And themselves say it was written from the Spirit of Truth, in Geo. Whitehead,
and Geo. Fox the younger, see the Title Page of Truth defending the Quakers,
and p. 7. here it is plainly, though most grossly and blasphemously affirmed,
that the Quakers speakings are of greater Authority than the Scriptures.

Of the Moral Law or Ten Commandments.
No Rule to the Christians life Whitehead and Geo. Fox against Mr. Smith, p.
18. In which Book also these Doctrines are owned. That Christ's coming in the
flesh was but a Figure, p. 20. That its no sin to mend an old Doublet on the
Communion Table on the Lords Day in Sermon time, though forbidden by the
Parrishioners. p. 20, 21.

Of Justification.
Good works are the meritorious cause of our Justification. Fisher the Quaker
in the Dispute with Mr. Tho. Danson at Sandwitch, Printed 1659.

These following Stories I had from my very good Friend Mr. W. Allen of London,
who will if occasion be, satisfy any concerning the truth of them: By which as
well as by some of the former may be seen, that the Devil does extraordinarily
act in and by many of the Quakers.
A Maid in London being met by a Quaker, who addressed himself to her with
suits of Love, was persuaded to drink with him. The Quaker took something out
of a Paper and put into the drink, and in discourse told her, she should come
after him, and that he need not come after her. The Maid after this found
pressing inclinations within her self to go to the Quakers Meeting, and was
brought into strange Raptures, and found her mind exceedingly turned against
the Bible. And some Christian Friends of hers having observed her to have been
under sore distempers as well of body as mind for a certaintime, at last kept a
day of fasting and Prayer for her, having her then in their company, though not
without much relactancy on her part. Whilst they were thus seeking God for her,
she found her self greatly tormented, and her body sweld so much, that they
were fain to unloose her Clothes to give her ease. But before they had
finished that days work, she found her self delivered, and since acknowledged
to me the great mercy of God to her, in recovering her from that strong
Delusion, and the sad concommitants of it. This Relation for substance, I and
my Wife had from this Maids own mouth.

A Woman so low in parts, as rendered her esteemed not much better then a
Natural Fool, being on a day at a Quakers Meeting in the County of Bucks, not
far from Ailsbury, where Fox the Quaker was, was on a sudden so transported,
that with much liberty of speech and confidence, she spoke in the Quakers Tone
of matters far above her capacity, though she never pretended to Quakerisme
before. And continued in those strange Raptures for about two days or more.
But afterward changed her Note, and fell into a grievous Rage, cursing,
swearing, and blaspheaming; and crying out, a Fox a Devil, a Fox a Devil: in
which she continued till she died, which was about a day or two after that
raging Frenzy fit took her. And though of her self she was almost as weak as
a Child, yet in this fit could scarcely be held in bed by two or three Men.
This I had from one living near the place, the truth of whose Relation in this
behalf I have no reason to question, he being a person of credit, and one whom
this poor Woman sent to speak with, the evening of that day, in which she was
taken with her Rapture.

The same Friend likewise told me of a Gentlewoman, whose Husband being
inclined to the Quakers, (though she was not) on a certain time brought Fox the
Quaker up into her Chamber, where she was sitting by the fire. The said Fox,
not using many words, comes to her, and laid his hand on her forehead: after
which she became a Quaker for a certain time, till God graciously recovered
her. This Relation my Friend had from the Gentlewomans own month, that was thus
used.

A Man in Kent, sober, of good report, and religiously disposed, but somewhat
of the Seekers strain, going to the Quakers Meeting one day, was so wrought
upon whilst there, that he fell to Dancing; and afterward went home under
great alteration of mind. The violent impression of which exercise soon ended
his life, having before he died and whilst in his violent fits, (which were sad
to behold) complained grievously of Fox, his holding him in Chains. This I
have by credible information; and being objected to an eminent Quaker in Kent,
he put it off with saying it was the just judgment of God upon him for opposing
the Quakers.

A Prayer added only for their help that need it.
O Most great and most holy Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who have been so
justly provoked by the People of this Land for their setting light of Christ
the only Mediator between God and Man; after such clear plain affectionate and
long continued tenders of HIM, and of salvation by HIM from sin and punishment,
that thou have in thy wrath and sore displeasure, given up thousands of them to
their own hearts lust, to the casting off subjection to thy Laws, and the
pursuing the imaginations of their own hearts. Yea to professed enmity against
God the Father, Son and holy Ghost. Oh Lord, how do they cry down thy holy
Word, Ministry, Ordinances, Sabbaths, and the Blood of Jesus Christ as unholy
things: inso much that we may truly say; This day O Lord is a day of trouble,
and of rebuke and blasphemy; Lord how down thine ears and hear, open thine eyes
and see the words that they speak from the Devil and the Pope, who have sent
these Papists, Quakers, Ranters, Socinians, to reproach the living God. Oh that
thou would give Repentance and pardon to profane people, to formal outside
professers, to those that are enemies of reformation, that have provoked thee
to threaten (by the sad posture we are in) the exterpation of thy true and holy
Religion; to those also that having no more knowledge of the true Head, and
Members of thy Church, or zeal to thy glory, do under pretense of charity, call
thy Blasphemous Enemies Godly people, and of the godly party. Oh that my Lord
would give Repentance and pardon to his own peculiar ones, for all their
miscarriages whereby they have provoked thy Majesty to threaten the setting of
the Sun of Righteousness in our days, and bringing a night of Ignorance, Err
or, and Idolatry upon our Children and Posterity. Oh my God, do this I pray
thee for the Lords sake. Good Father stay thine anger, let thy spiritual
plagues proceed no further; undeceive simple well meaning souls, that seeing
not the worst of Seducers think well of them, and so are in danger of being
eternally undone by them. Convert so many of thine Enemies as are not given up
to final impenitency and from implacable ones, Good Lord deliver me and this
Nation, and all thy Churches and Ministers, both from their infection and rage:
Stir up the Spirit of these Nations to oppose the spreading of Blasphemy, of
Popery, and persecution of true Protestants; suffer none of thine Enemies to
continue uppermost; give us such Magistrates as shall be Nursing-Fathers to the
Church. Curse and blast all Councels and undertakings that are against the
Kingdom of Christ. Stir up all thy People to pray earnestly unto thee for our
selves and Posterity, that thou would continue the Gospel with us, in power,
plenty, and purity; and however thou in thy Fatherly wisdom shall deal with
us, that we may be kept faithful unto the death, to the glory of that power,
grace, and holiness of thine, which the Word of Truth that we profess holds
forth. All these things I beg, for the sake of Jesus Christ my dear Savior.
Amen.

FINIS.

