EKSKYALAYPON: OR, The Discovery of A most exquisite JEWEL, more precious then
Diamonds inchased in Gold, the like whereof was never seen in any age; found in
the kennel of Worcester-streets, the day after the Fight, and six before the
Autumnal Aequinox, anno 1651.

Serving in this place, To frontal a VINDICATION of the honor of SCOTLAND,
from that Infamy, whereinto the Rigid Presbyterian party of that Nation, out of
their Covetousness and ambition, most dissembledly has involved it.

Distichon ad Librum sequitur, quo tres ter adaequant Musarum numerum, casus,
and articuli. O voc. you are a nom. Book in 1 abl. truth with 2 abl. love to
dat. many,
Done by 3 abl. and for 4 abl. acc. the free'st-spoke Scot of genesis any.
Efficiens and finis sunt sibi invicem causae. LONDON, Printed by Ja: Cottrel;
and are to be sold by Rich. Baddely, at the Middle-Temple-gate. 1652.

The Epistle Liminary.
THE scope of this Treatise is (for the weal of the public, in the propagation
of learning and virtue throughout the whole Isle of great Britain) in all
humility to entreat the honorable Parliament of this Commonwealth, with consent
of the Council of State thereof, to grant to Sir Thomas Vrquhart of Cromarty
his former liberty, and the enjoyment of his own inheritance, with all the
immunities and privileges thereto belonging. The reasons of this demand in an
unusual (though compositive) way, are so methodically deduced, that their
recapitulation here (how curt soever I could make it) would afford but little
more compendiousness to the Reader; unless all were to be summed up in this,
that seeing the obtaining of his desires would be conducible to the whole Land,
and prejudicial to no good member in it, he should therefore be favored with
the benefit of the grant thereof, and refusal of nothing appertaining to it.

By reason of his being a Scottish man, a great deal therein is spoken in favor
of that country, and many pregnant arguments inferred for the incorporating of
both nations into one, with an indissolubility of union for the future, in an
identity of privileges, laws and customs. As by the praising of many the
coetaneans and compatriots of his no-less-deserving predecessors, Scotland is
much honored: so, to vindicate the reputation thereof from any late scandal, it
is fitly represented how the miscariage of a few should not occasion an
universal imputation. The unjust usurpation of the Clergy, the Judaical
practices of some Merchants, and abused simplicity of the gentry, have in the
minds of forraigners engraven a discredible opinion of that Nation, which will
never be wiped off under a Presbyterial government: for where ever it bears
sway, etc. here I must stop; for should I give way to my pen to decipher the
enormities of that rule, I would, by outbulking the book with this Epistle,
make the porch greater then the lodging; enter into a digression longer then
the purpose, and outstrip the period with the parenthesis. Therefore out of
that inclination which prompts me to conceal the faults of those, in whom there
may be any hope of a cordial penitency for having committed them; I will not at
this time lanch forth into the prodigious depth of Presbyterian plots, nor rip
up the sores of their Ecclesiastical tyranny, till their implacable
obduredness, and unreclaimability of nature, give open testimonies of their
standing to their first erroneous principles, and not acknowledging a
subordination to a secular authority.

For the present then, it shall suffice, that I bestow upon them a gentle
admonition, to refrain from that ambitious design of spiritual sovereignty; or
(to use the phrase of their patron Knox) that I warn them with the first sound
of the trumpet, to give the civil Magistrate his due: but if after this
Diansounding, they (instead of apparelling their consciences with the garment
of righteousness) come forth to the field of public affairs, with their rusty
armor of iniquity; then let them not blame me, if for the love of my country,
whose honor they have defaced, and the best inhabitants whereof they have born
down with oppression, I refuse not the employment of taking up banner against
them, and giving them a home charge with clareens, under the conduct of reason
and common sense, their old and inveterate enemies. Now seeing that in this
introitory discourse (to avoid the excursive pomp of a too large ranging at
random) I am limited to some few pages, should I employ them all to attend the
Presbyters greatness, it would argue in me great inconsideracy, in preferring
him to his betters; therefore till I have the leisure to bestow a whole sheet
by it self upon honest Sir John (who in that kind of liberality toward the
fornicator and malignant, was the Non-pareil of the world) that therein (as in
a habit of repentance, he may be exposed to the public view of the honest men
of Scotland, whom he has so much injured: I must confine my self now to so
much bounds (without more) as barely may suffice to excuse the superficial
errata's both of pen and press.

This Treatise (like the words of mass, dinner, supper, and such like, which
besides the things by them signified, do connotate the times of morning, noon,
night, or any other tide or season) importing beyond what is primarly expressed
in it, a certain space of time, within which unto the world should be made
obvious its final promulgation; and that being but a fornight (lest a longer
delay, by not giving timely information to the State, might prove very
prejudicial (if not totally destructive) to the aforesaid Sir Thomas Vrquhart,
in whose house (as he is informed by letters from thence) there is at this
present an English garrison; and whose lands are so overrun and exhausted by
these public pressures, that since he has been a prisoner of war, which is
now half a year, he has not received the value of one farthing of his own
means) and having designed for the Press at first, but 5 sheets, viz. the three
first, and some two about the latter end, I deemed the aforesaid time of two
weeks, of extent sufficient for encompassing a work of so short a breath. But
by chance two Diurnals having been brought to me, in one whereof was contained
the relation of the irrational prooceedings of the Presbytery of Aberdeen,
against Sir Alexander Iruin of Drum, together with his just appeal from their
tyrannical jurisdiction to Colonel Overton, the then only competent judge that
was there; and in the other a petition or grievance of the commons of Scotland,
against the merciless and cruel taskmasters that the Presbyterian zeal had set
above them these many years past; wherein (whether that petition was
supposititious, or no) there was not any thing, the truth whereof might not be
testified by thousands of honest people in Scotland, and ten times more of
their roguery, then in it is specified: and besides all that, there being
nothing in the mouths almost of all this country more common then the words of
the perfidious Scot, the treacherous Scot, the false brother, the covetous
Scot, and knot of knaves, and other suchlike indignities fixed upon the whole
Nation for the baseness of some: I resolved on a sudden (for the undeceiving of
honest men, and the imbuing of their minds with a better opinion of Scottish
spirits) to insert the martial and literatory endowments of some natives of
that soil, though much eclipsed by their coclimatary wasps of a Presbyterian
crew.

Thus my task increasing, and not being able to enlarge my time, for the cause
aforesaid, I was necessitated to husband it the better, to over-triple my
diligence, and do the work (by proportion of above three days in the space of
one: wherefore, laying aside al other businesses, and cooping my self up daily
for some hours together, betwixt the case and the printing press; I usually
afforded the setter Copy at the rate of above a whole printed sheet in the day;
which, although by reason of the smallness of a Pica letter, and close couching
thereof, it did amount to three full sheets of my writing; the aforesaid setter
nevertheless (so nimble a workman he was) would in the space of 24 hours make
dispatch of the whole, and be ready for another sheet. He and I striving thus
who should compose fastest, he with his hand, and I with my brain; and his
uncasing of the letters, and placing them in the composing instrument, standing
for my conception; and his plenishing of the gally, and imposing of the form,
encountering with the supposed equivalue of my writing; we would almost every
foot so jump together in this joint expedition, and so nearly overtake other in
our intended course, that I was oftentimes (to keep him doing) glad to tear off
parcels of ten or twelve lines a piece, and give him them, till more were
ready; unto which he would so suddenly put an order, that almost still, before
the ink of the written letters was dry, their representatives were (out of their
respective boxes) ranked in the Composing-stick; by means of which great haste,
I writing but upon the loose sheets of cording-quires, which (as I minced and
tore them) looking like pieces of waste paper, troublesome to get rallyed,
after such dispersive scattredness, I had not the leisure to read what I had
written, till it came to a proof, and sometimes to a full revise: so that by
virtue of this unanimous contest, and joint emulation betwixt the theoretick
and practical part, which of us should overhye other in celerity, we in the
space of fourteen working-daies, completed this whole book (such as it is)
from the first notion of the brain, till the last motion of the press; And that
without any other help on my side, either of quick or dead (for books I had
none, nor possibly would I have made use of any, although I could have
commanded them) then what (by the favor of God) my own judgment and fancy did
suggest unto me; save so much as, by way of information, a servant of mine
would now and then bring to me, from some reduced Officer of the primitive
Parliament, touching the proper names of some Scottish warriors abroad, which I
was very apt to forget.

I speak not this to excuse gross faults (if there be any) nor yet to praise my
own acuteness (though there were none) but to show that extemporaneanness, in
some kind of subjects, may very probably be more successeful, then
premeditation: and that a too punctually digested method, and over-nicely
selected phrase, savouring of affectation, diminish oftentimes very much of the
grace that otherwise would attend a natural ingenuity. If the State of England
be pleased with this book, I care neither for Zoil nor Momus; but if
otherways, then shall it displease me, whose resolution from its first
contrivance was, willingly to submit it to their judicious censure.

It is entitled (...), because of those few sheets of Sir Thomas Vrquharts
papers, which were found in the kennel of Worecester-streets; they being the
Cream, the Marrow, and most especial part of the book; and albeit they extend
not in bulk to above two sheets and a quarter, of that small letter as it lies
in an Octavo size; yet that Synecdochically the whole should be designed by it,
lacks not its precedent: for Logic sometimes is called Dialectica, although
it be but a part of Logic: and that Discipline which treats of the dimensions
of continuate quantity, named geometry, albeit how to measure the earth be
fully instructed by Geodesie, one of the smallest parts of that Divine Science.
That which is properly France, is not the hundredth part of the Kingdom of that
name. Moscovy, Fez, and Morocco, though Empires, have their denominations from
Cities of the same name: so have the Kingdoms of Leon, Toledo, Murcia, Granada,
Valencia, and Naples, with the Isles of Mayorca, Minorca, Sardinia, Malta, and
Rhodes, and so forth through other territories.

It mentions Sir Thomas Vrquhart in the third person, which seldom is done by
any Author in a Treatise of his own penning; although Virgil said, Ille ego qui
quondam; and Scaliger the younger, Ego sum magnus ille Josephus: nevertheless,
to satsfie the Readers curiosity, and all honest men of the Isle of Britain,
rather then to write Anonymos, I will subscribe my self,

Christianus Presbyteromastix.

The names of the chiefs of the name of Vrquhart, and of their primitive
fathers; as by Authentic Records and Tradition, they were from time to time,
through the various generations of that Family, successively conveyed, till the
present year 1652.
1 A Dam. 2 Seth. 3 Enos. 4 Cainan. 5 Mahalaleel. 6 Jared. 7 Enoch. 8
Methusalah. 9 Lamech. 10 Noah. 11 Japhet 12 Javan. 13 Penuel. 14 Tycheros. 15
Pasiteles. 16 ESORMON. 17 Cratynter. 18 Thrasymedes. 19 Evippos. 20 Cleotinus.
21 Litoboros. 22 Apodemos. 23 Bathybulos. 24 Phrenedon. 25 Zameles. 26
Choronomos. 27 Leptologon. 28 Aglaestos. 29 Megalonus. 30 Evemeros. 31
Callophron. 32 Arthmios. 33 Hypsegoras. 34 Autarces. 35 Evages. 36 Atarbes. 37
Pamprosodos. 38 Gethon. 39 Holocleros. 40 Molin. 41 Epitimon. 42 Hypotyphos. 43
Melobolon. 44 Propetes. 45 Euplocamos. 46 Philophon. 47 Syngenes. 48
Polyphrades. 49 Cainotomos. 50 Rodrigo. 51 Dicarches. 52 Exagastos. 53 Denapon.
54 Artistes. 55 Thymoleon. 56 Eustochos. 57 Bianor. 58 Thryllumenos. 59
Melleffen. 60 Alypos. 61 Anochlos. 62 Homognios. 63 Epsephicos. 64 Eutropos. 65
Coryphaeus. 66 Etoimos. 67 Spudaeos. 68 Eumestor. 69 Griphon. 70 Emmenes. 71
Pathomachon. 72 Anepsios. 73 Auloprepes. 74 Corosylos. 75 Daetalon. 76
Beltistos. 77 Horaeos. 78 Orthophron. 79 Apsicoros. 80 Philaplus. 81 Megaletor.
82 Nomostor. 83 Astioremon. 84 Phronematias. 85 Lutork. 86 Machemos. 87
Stichopaeo. 88 Epalomenos. 89 Tycheros. 90 Apechon. 91 Enacmes. 92 Javan. 93
Lematias. 94 Profenes. 95 Sosomenos. 96 Philalethes. 97 Thaleros. 98 Polyaenos.
99 Cratesimachos. 100 Eunaemon. 101 Diasemos. 102 Saphenus. 103 Bramoso. 104
Celanas. 105 Vistoso. 106 Po^^^o. 107 Lustroso. 108 Chrestander. 109 Specta
bundo. 110 Philodulos. 111 Paladino. 112 Comicello. 113 Regisato. 114 Arguto.
115 Nicarchos. 116 Marsidalio. 117 Hedumenos. 118 Agenor. 119 Diaprepon. 120
Stragayo. 121 Zeron. 122 Polyteles. 123 Vocompos. 124 Carolo. 125 Endymion. 126
Sebastian. 127 Lawrence. 128 Olipher. 129 Quintin. 130 Goodwin. 131 Frederick.
132 Sir Jaspar. 133 Sir Adam. 134 Edward. 135 Richard. 136 Sir Philip. 137
Robert. 138 George. 139 James. 140 David. 141 Francis. 142 William. 143 Adam.
144 John. 145 Sir William. 146 William. 147 Alexander, 148 Thomas. 149
Alexander. 150 Walter. 151 Henry. 152 Sir Thomas. 153 Sir Thomas.
The names of the mothers of the chief of the name of Vrquhart, as also of the
mothers of their primitive fathers. The Authority for the truth thereof being
derived from the same Authentic Records and Tradition on which is grounded the
above-written Genealogy of their male collaterals.
1 EVa 2 Shif ka 3 Mahla 4 Bilha 5 Timnah 6 Aholima 7 Zilpa 8 Noema 9 Ada 10
Titea 11 Debora 12 Neginothi 13 Hottir 14 Orpah 15 Axa 16 Narfesia 17 Goshenni
18 Briageta 19 Andronia 20 Pusena 21 Emphaneola 22 Bonaria 23 Peninah 24
Asymbleta 25 Carissa 26 Calaglais 27 Theoglena 28 Pammerissa 29 Floridula 30
Chrysocomis 31 Arrenopas 32 Tharsalia 33 Maia 34 Roma 35 Termuth 36 Vegeta 37
Callimeris 38 Panthea 39 Gonima 40 Ganymena 41 Thespesia 42 Hypermnestra 43
Horatia 44 Philumena 45 Neopis 46 Thymelica 47 Ephamilla 48 Porrima 49 Lampedo
50 Teleclyta 51 Clarabella 52 Eromena 53 Zocallis 54 Lepida 55 Nicolla 56
Proteusa 57 Gozosa 58 Venusta 59 Prosectica 60 Delotera 61 Tracara 62 Pothina
63 Cordata 64 Aretias 65 Musurga 66 Romalia 67 Orthoiusa 68 Recatada 69
Chariestera 70 Rexenora 71 Philerga 72 Thomyris 73 Varonilla 74 Stranella 75
Aequanima 76 Barosa 77 Epimona 78 Diosa 79 Bonita 80 Aretusa 81 Bendita 82
Regalletta 83 Isumena 84 Antaxia 85 Bergola 86 Viracia 87 Dynastis 88 Dalga 89
Eutocusa 90 Corriba 91 Praecelsa 92 Plausidica 93 Donosa 94 Solicaelia 95 Bonta
dosa 96 Calliparia 97 Creleuca 98 Pancala 99 Dominella 100 Mundula 101 Pamphais
102 Philtrusa 103 Meliglena 104 Philetium 105 Tersa 106 Dulcicora 107 Gethosyna
108 Collabella 109 Eucnema 110 Tortolina 111 Ripulita 112 Urbana 113 Lampusa
114 Vistosa 115 Hermosma 116 Bramata 117 Zaglopis 118 Androlema 119 Trastevole
120 Suaviloqua 121 Francoline 122 Matilda 123 Allegra 124 Winnifred 125 Dorothy
126 Lawretta 127 Genivieve 128 Marjory 129 Jane 130 Anne 131 Magdalen 132
Girsel 133 Mary 134 Sophia 135 Eleonore 136 Rosalind 137 Lillias 138 Brigid 139
Agnes 140 Susanna 141 Catherine 142 Helen 143 Beatrice 144 Elizabeth 145
Elizabeth 146 Christian


Let such as would know more hereof, be pleased to have recourse to the book
treating of the Genealogy of that Family, entitled (...) which together with
this, is to sold by one and the same Stationer.

I Must beg this favor of the ingenious Reader, that with his pen (before he
fall to the perusal of the book) he be pleased to correct these ensuing
errata's; which though not all to be found in any one of the copies, yet each
of them being in the whole impression, I chused rather to insert more, then
that an industrious spirit should be debarred the convenience of amending any.

PAge 12. Line 11. for fashion the hebrew ShinRead fashion of the hebrew Shin.
p. 34. l. 11. r. you words of ^he. p. 38. l. 19. r. parts. p. 42. l. 17. r.
negation.p. 55. lines 5, 6, 8. for ready r. already. for conderable r.
considerable. for eixibilty. r. enixibility p. 74. l. 2. r. kill. p. 77. l. 17*
dele so. p. 28. 19. r. vigor and freshness. p. 82. l. 25. r. this. p. 91. l.
2. r execute. p. 91. l. 3. dele for. p. 97. l. 4.r. was. p. 103. l. 11. r.
worlds. p. 104. l. 18. r. of verses of his composing p. 105. l. 16. r. sight l.
24. r. the intermediate. p. 146. l. 3. r. autochthony. p. 154. l. 7. r. the. p.
158. l. 15. r. furthered.p. 167. l. 15. r. Logerheadistick. p. 186. l. 23. r.
astricted.p. 188. l. 15. r. Periscians. p. 208. l. 6. r. he. p. 215. l. 2. r.
subtilis.p. 218. l. 8. r. sint. p. 239. l. 28. r. zeal-legerdemaim.p. 240. l.
20. r. to be achieved. p. 248. l. 20. r. examined.

He should obtain all his desires,
Who offers more then he requires.

NO sooner had the total Rout of the Regal party at Worcester, given way to the
taking of that City, and surrendering up of all the prisoners to the custody of
the Marshal-general and his Deputies; but the liberty customary at such
occasions to be connived at, in favors of a victorious Army, imboldened some
of the new-levied Forces of the adjacent Counties, to confirm their Conquest by
the spoil of the Captives. For the better achievement of which design, not
reckoning those great many others that in all the other corners of the Town
were ferreting every room for plunder, a string or two of exquisite snaps, and
clean shavers (if ever there were any) rushing into Master Spilsbury's house,
(who is a very honest man, and has an exceeding good woman to his wife) broke
into an upper chamber, where finding (besides Scarlet Cloaks, Buff Suits, Arms
of all sorts, and other such rich chaffer, at such an exigent escheatable to
the prevalent Soldier) seven large Portmantles full of precious commodity; in
three whereof, after a most exact search for gold, silver, apparel, linen, or
any whatever adornments of the body, or pocket-implements, as was seized upon
in the other four, not hitting on any thing but Manuscripts in folio, to the
quantity of sixscore and eight quires and a half. divided into Six hundred
forty and two Quinternions and upwards, the Quinternion consisting of five
sheets, and the Quire of five and twenty; besides some Writings of Suits in
Law, and Bonds, in both worth above three thousand pounds English, they in a
trice carried all whatever else was in the room away, save those Papers, which
they then threw down on the floor, as unfit for their use: yet immediately
thereafter, when upon Carts the aforesaid baggage was put to be transported to
the Country, and that by the example of many hundreds of both horse and foot,
whom they had loaded with spoil, they were assaulted with the temptation of a
new booty, they apprehending how useful the paper might be unto them, went back
for it, and bore it straight away: which done, to every one of those their
Camarads whom they met with in the streets, they gave as much thereof, for
packeting up of Raisins, Figs, Dates, Almonds, Caraway, and other suchlike dry
Confections and other ware, as was requisite: who doing the same themselves,
did, together with others, kindle pipes of Tobacco with a great part thereof,
and threw out all the remainder upon the streets, save so much as they deemed
necessary for inferior employments, and posteriour uses.

Of those dispersedly-rejected bundles of paper, some were gathered up by
Grocers, Druggists, Chandlers, Pie-makers, or such as stood in need of any
cartapaciatory utensil, and put in present service, to the utter undoing of all
the writing thereof, both in its matter and order. One Quinternion
nevertheless, two days after the fight on the Friday-morning, together with two
other loose sheets more, by virtue of a drizelling rain, which had made it
stick fast to the ground, where there was a heap of seven and twenty dead men,
lying upon one another, was by the command of one Master Braughton taken up by
a servant of his; who, after he had (in the best manner he could) cleansed it
from the mire and mud of the kennel, did forthwith prefent it to the perusal of
his Master; in whose hands it no sooner came, but instantly perceiving by the
periodical couching of the discourse, marginal figures, and breaks here and
there, according to the variety of the Subject, that the whole purpose was
destinated for the Press, and by the Author put into a garb befitting either
the Stationer or Printer's acceptance; Yet because it seemed imperfect, and to
have relation to subsequent Tractates, he made all the enquiry he could, for
trial, whether there were any more such Quinternions or no: by means whereof,
he got full information, that above three thousand sheets of the like Paper,
written after that fashion, and with the same hand, were utterly lost and
imbezzeled after the manner aforesaid; and was so fully assured of the
misfortune, that, to gather up spilt water, comprehend the winds within his
fist, and recover those Papers again, he thought would be a work of one and the
same labor and facility. Therefore, because he despaired of attaining to any
more, he the more carefully endeavored to preserve what he had made purchase
of: and this he did very heedfully, in the Country for three months together,
and afterward in the City of London; where at last I getting notice thereof,
thought good, in regard of the great moan made for the loss of Sir Thomas
Vrquhart's Manuscripts, to try at the said Sir Thomas, whether these seven
sheets were any of his Papers or no. Whereupon, after communication with him,
it was found that they were but a parcel of the Preface he intended to premise
before the Grammar and Lexicon of an Universal Language; the whole Preface
consisting of two quires of paper, the Grammar of three, and the Lexicon of
seven: the other fivescore and sixteen quires and a half treating of
Metaphysical, Mathematical, Moral, Mythological, Epigrammatical, Dialectical,
and Chronological matters, in a way never hitherto trod upon by any; being
brought by the said Sir Thomas into England for two reasons: First, lest they
should have been altogether lost at Sterlin; and next, to have them printed at
London, with the best conveniencie that might stand with the indemnity of the
Author; whom when I had asked if his fancy could serve him to make up these
Papers again, especially in so far as concerned the New Language; His answer
was, that, if he wanted not encouragement, with the favor of a littie time, he
could do much therein: but unless he were sure to possess his own with freedom,
it would be impossible for him to accomplish a task of so great moment and
laboriousness. This modest reply, grounded upon so much reason, has emboldened
me to subjoyn hereto what was couched in those papers which were found by
Master Braughton; to the end the Reader may perceive, whether the performance
of so great a Work as is mentioned there, be not worth the enjoyment of his
Predecessors inheritance, although he had not had a lawful title thereunto by
his birthright and lineal succession, which he has.

The Title of those found Papers was thus.
An Introduction to the Universal Language; wherein, whatever is uttred in
other Languages, has signification in it, whilst it affords expressions,
both for copiousness, variety, and conciseness in all manner of subjects, which
no Language else is able to reach unto: most fit for such as would with ease
attain to a most expedite facility of expressing themselves in all the Learned
Sciences, Faculties, Arts, Disciplines, mechanic Trades, and all other
discourses whatsoever, whether serious or recreative.

The matter of the Preface begun after this manner, as it was divided into
several Articles.
1. WOrds are the signs of Things; it being to signify that they were
instituted at first: nor can they be, as such, directed to any other end,
whether they be articulate or inarticulate.

2. All things are either real or rational: and the real, either natural or
artificial.

3. There ought to be a proportion betwixt the sign and thing signified;
therefore should all things, whether real or rational, have their proper words
assigned unto them.

4. Man is called a Microcosme, because he may by his conceptions and words
contain within him the representatives of what in the whole world is
comprehended.

5. Seeing there is in nature such affinity 'twixt words and things, as there
ought to be in whatever is ordained for one another; that Language is to be
accounted most conform to Nature, which with greatest variety expresses all
manner of things.

6. As all things of a single complete being, by Aristotle into ten Classes
were divided; so may the words whereby those things are to be signified, be set
apart in their several storehouses.

7. Arts, Sciences, Mechanic Trades, notional Faculties, and whatever is
excogitable by man, have their own method; by virtue whereof, the Learned of
these latter times have orderly digested them: Yet has none hitherto
considered of a mark, whereby words of the same Faculty, Art, Trade, or Science
should be dignosced from those of another by the very sound of the word at the
first hearing.

8. A Tree will be known by its leaves, a Stone by its grit, a Flower by the
smell, Meats by the taste, Music by the ear, Colors by the eye, the several
Natures of things, with their properties and essential qualities, by the
Intellect: and accordingly as the things are in themselves diversified, the
Judicious and Learned man, after he has conceived them aright, sequestreth
them in the several cells of his Undeastanding, each in their definite and
respective places.

9. But in matter of the words whereby those things are expressed, no Language
ever hitherto framed, has observed any order relating to the thing signified
by them: for if the words be ranked in their Alphabetical series, the things
represented by them will fall to be in several predicaments; and if the things
themselves be categorically classed, the word whereby they are made known will
not be tied to any Alphabetical rule.

10. This is an imperfection incident to all the Languages that ever yet have
been known: by reason whereof, Foraign Tongues are said to be hard to learn;
and, when obtained, easily forgot.

11. The effigies of Jupiter in the likeness of a Bull, should be liker to that
of Io metamorphosed into a Cow, then to the statue of Bucephalus, which was a
horse: and the picture of Alcibiades ought to have more resemblance with that
of Coriolanus, being both handsome men, then with the image of Thersites, who
was of a deformed feature: just so should things semblable in Nature be
represented by words of a like composure: and as the true intelligible speices
do present unto our minds the similitude of things as they are in the object;
even so ought the word expressive of our conceptions so to agree or vary in
their contexture, as the things themselves which are conceived by them do in
their natures.

12. Besides this imperfection in all Languages there is yet another, That no
Language upon the face of the earth has a perfect Alphabet; one lacking those
letters which another has, none having all, and all of them in cumulo lacking
some. But that which makes the defect so much the greater, is, that these same
few consonants and vowels commonly made use of, are never by two Nations
pronounced after the same fashion; the French A with the English, being the
Greek (...); and the Italian B with the Spanish, the Hebrew Vau.

13. This is that which makes those of one dominion so unskilful in the idiome
of another; and after many years abode in a strange land, despair from
attaining at any time to the perfect accent of the language thereof, because,
as the waters of that stream cannot be wholesome, whose source is corrupted;
nor the superstructure sure, whereof the groundwork is ruinous: so does the
various manner of pronouncing one and the same Alphabet in several Nations,
produce this great and most lamentable obstruction in the Discipline of
Languages.

14. The G of the Latin word legit, is after four several manners pronounced by
the English, French, Spanish, and Dutch: the Ch likewise is differently
pronounced by diverse Nations; some uttering it after the fashion the Hebrew
Shin, as the French do in the word chasteau, chascun, chastier, chatel; or like
the Greek Kappa, as in the Italian words, chiedere, chiazzare, chinatura; or as
in Italy are sounded the words ciascheduno, ciarlatano; for so do the Spanish
and English pronounce it, as in the words achaque, leche; chamber, chance:
other Nations of a guttural flexibility, pronounce it after the fashion of the
Greek (...). Nor need we to labor for examples in other letters; for there is
scarce any hitherto received, either consonant or vowel, which in some one and
other taking in all Nations, is not pronounced after three or four several
fashions.

15. As the Alphabets are imperfect, some having but 19 letters, others 22. and
some 24. few exceeding that number: so do the words composed of those letters
in the several Languages, come far short of the number of things, which to have
the reputation of a perfect tongue, ought to be expressed by them.

16. For supply of this deficiencie, each Language borrows from another; nor is
the perfectest amongst them, without being beholden to another, in all things
enuncible, bastant to afford instruction: many Astronomical and Medicinal terms
have the Greeks borrowed from the Arabians, for which they by exchange have
from the Grecians received payment of many words naturalized in their Physical,
Logical, and Metaphysical Treatises. As for the Latin, it owes all its
Scientifick dictions to the Greek and Arabic: yet did the Roman Conquest give
adoption to many Latin words, in both these languages, especially in matters of
military discipline, and prudential Law.

17. And as for all other Languages as yet spoke, though to some of them be
ascribed the title of original Tongues, I may safely avouch there is none of
them which of it self alone is able to afford the smattring of an elocution fit
for indoctrinating of us in the precepts and maxims of moral and intellectual
virtues.

18. But, which is more, and that which most of all evinceth the sterility of
all the Languages that since the Deluge have been spoke, though all of them
were quintescenced in one capable of the perfections of each, yet that one so
befitted and accommodated for compendiousness and variety of phrase, should not
be able, amidst so great wealth, to afford, without circumlocution, the proper
and convenient representation of a thing, yea of many thousands of things,
whereof each should be expressed with one single word alone.

19. Some Languages have copiousness of discourse, which are barren in
composition: such is the Latin. Others are compendious in expression, which
hardly have any flection at all: of this kind are the Dutch, the English, and
Irish.

20. Greek has the agglutinative faculty of incorporating words; yet runs
not so glib in Poesy as does the Latin, though far more abundant. The Hebrew
likewise, with its auxiliary Dialects of Arabic, Caldean, Syriack, Ethiopian,
and Samaritan, compoundeth prettily, and has some store of words; yet falls
short by many stages of the Greek.

21. The French, Spanish, and Italians, are but Dialects of the Latin, as the
English is of the Saxon Tongue; though with this difference, that the mixture
of Latin with the Gaulish, Moresco, and Gotish Tongues, make up the three
first Languages; but the mere qualification of the Saxon with the old British,
frames not the English to the full, for that, by its promiscuous and
ubiquitary borrowing, it consists almost of all Languages: which I speak not
in dispraise thereof, although I may with confidence aver, that were all the
four aforesaid Languages stripped of what is not originally their own, we should
not be able with them all, in any part of the world, to purchase so much as our
breakfast in a Market.

22. Now to return from these to the learned Languages; we must acknowledge it
to be very strange, why, after thousands of years continual practice in the
polishing of them by men of approved faculties, there is neither in them, nor
any other Tongue hitherto found out, one single word expressive of the vice
opposite either to Temperance or Chastity in the defect; though many rigid
Monks, even now adays, be guilty of the one, as Diogenes of old was of the
other.

23. But that which makes this disease the more incurable, is, that when an
exuberant spirit would to any high researched conceit adapt a peculiar word of
his own coining, he is branded with Incivility, if he apologize not for his
boldness, with a Quod ita dixerim parcant Ciceronianae manes, Ignoscat
Demosthenis genius, and other such phrases acknowledging his fault of making
use of words never uttered by others, or at least by such as were most renowned
for eloquence.

24. Though Learning sustain great prejudice by this restraint of liberty to
endenizon new Citizens in the Commonwealth of Languages, yet do I conceive the
reason thereof to proceed from this, That it is thought a less incongruity to
express a thing by circumlocution, then by appropriating a single word thereto,
to transgress the bounds of the Language; as in Architecture it is esteemed an
error of less consequence to make a circuitory passage from one room to
another, then by the extravagancie of an irregular sallie, to frame projectures
disproportionable to the found of the house.

25. Thus is it, that as according to the largeness of the plat of a building,
and compactedness of its walls, the Work-master contriveth his roofs,
platforms, outjettings, and other such like parts and portions of the whole:
just so, conform to the extent and reach which a Language in its flexions and
compositions has obtained at first, have the sprucest Linguists hitherto bin
pleased to make use of the words thereto belonging.

26. The Bonification and virtuification of Lully, Scotus's Hexeity, and
Albedineity of Suarez are words exploded by those that affect the purity of the
Latin diction; yet if such were demanded, what other no less concise
expression would comport with the neatness of that language, their answer would
be altum silentium: so easy a matter it is for many to find fault with what
they are not able to amend.

27. Nevertheless, why for representing to our understandings the essence of
accidents, the fluency of the form, as it is in fieri; the faculty of the
Agent, and habit that facilitates it, with many thousands of other such
expressions, the terms are not so genuine, as of the members of a man's body,
or utensils of his house; the reason is, because the first inventers of
Languages, who contrived them for necessity, were not so profoundly versed in
Philosophical quiddities, as those that succeeded after them; whose literature
increasing, procured their excursion beyond the representatives of the common
objects imagined by their forefathers.

28. I have known some to have built houses for necessity, having no other aim
before their eyes, but barely to dwell in them; who nevertheless in a very
short space were so enriched, that after they had taken pleasure to polish and
adorn, what formerly they had but rudely squared, their movables so multiplied
upon them, that they would have wished they had made them of a larger extent.

29. Even so though these Languages may be refined by some quaint derivatives
and witty compositions; like the striking forth of new lights and doors,
outjetting of kernels, erecting of prickets, barbicans, and such like various
structures upon one and the same foundation; yet being limited to a certain
basis^ beyond which the versed in them must not pass, they cannot roam at such
random as otherwise they might, had their Language been of a larger scope at
first.

30. Thus albeit Latin be far better polished now, then it was in the days of
Enntus and Livius Andronicus, Yet had the Latinists at first been such
Philosophers as afterward they were, it would have attained to a great deal of
more perfection then it is at for the present.

31. What I have delivered in freedom of the learned Languages, I would not
have wrested to a sinister sense, as if I meant any thing to their
disparagement; for truly I think the time well bestowed, which boys in their
tender years employ toward the learning of them, in a subordination to the
excellent things that in them are couched.

32. But ingenuously I must acknowledge my averseness of opinion from those who
are so superstitiously addicted to these Languages that they account it
learning enough to speak them, although they knew nothing else; which is an
error worthy rebuke, seeing Philosophia sunt res, non verba; and that whatever
the signs be, the things by them signified ought still to be of greater worth.

33. For it boots not so much, by what kind of tokens any matter be brought
into our mind, as that the things made known unto us, by such representatives,
be of some considerable value: not much unlike the Innes-a-court-gentlemen at
London, who usually repairing to their commons at the blowing of a horn, are
better pleased with such a sign (so the fare be good) then if they were warned
to courser cates, by the sound of a Bell or Trumpet.

34. Another reason prompteth me thereto, which is this, That in this frozen
Climate of ours, there is hardly any that is not possessed with the opinion,
that not only the three forenamed Languages, but a great many other, whom they
call Originals (whereof they reckon ten or eleven in Europe, and some fifty
eight more, or thereabouts, in other Nations) were at the confusion of Babel,
immediately from God* by a miracle, infused into men: being induced to believe
this, not so much for that they had not perused the interpretation of the
Rabbis on that text, declaring the misunderstanding whereunto the builders
were involved by diversity of speech, to have proceeded from nothing else, but
their various and diserepant pronunciation of one and the same Language, as
that they deemed Languages to be of an invention so sublime, that naturally the
wit of man was not able to reach their composure.

35. Some believe this so pertinaciously, that they esteem all men infidels
that are of another faith; whilst in the mean while, I may confidently assever,
that the assertors of such a tenet, do thereby extremely dishonor God, who
doing whatever is done, by nature, as the actions of an Ambassador (as an
Ambassador) are reputed to be those of the Sovereign that sent him, would not
have the power he has given to nature to be disclaimed by any, or any thing
said by us in derogation thereof.

36. Should we deny our obedience to the just decree of an inferior Judge,
because he from whom his Authority is derived, did not pronounce the sentence?
Subordinate Magistrates have their power, even in great matters; which to
decline, by saying, they have no authority, should make the averrer fall within
the compass of a breach of the Statute called scandalum magnatum.

37. There are of those with us, that wear gowns and beards longer then ever
did Aristotle and Aesculapius; who when they see an Eclipse of the Sun or Moon,
or a Comet in the air, straight would delude the commons with an opinion that
those things are immediately from God, for the sins of the people; as if no
natural cause could be produced for such like apparitions.

Here is the number of twelve Articles wanting.

50. For which cause, they are much to blame, that think it impossible for any
man naturally to frame a Language of greater perfection then Greek, Hebrew, or
Latin.

51. For who, in stead of affording the true cause of a thing, unnecessarily
runs to miracles, tacitly acknowledges that God naturally cannot do it:
wherein he commits blasphemy; as that Soldier may be accounted guilty of
contumacie and disobedience, who rejecting the Orders wherewith an inferior
Officer is authorized to command him, absolutely refuses compearance, unless
the General himself come in person to require it of him.

52. As there is a possibility such a Language may be, so do I think it very
requisite such a Language were, both for affording of conciseness, and
abundance of expression.

53. Such as extol those Languages most, are enforced sometimes to say, that
Laborant penuria verborum; and thereunto immediately subjoyn this reason, Quia
plures sunt res quam verba.

54. That is soon said; and, ad pauca respicientes facile enuntiant. But here I
ask them, how they come to know that there are more Things then Words, taking
Things (as in this sense they ought to be taken) for things universal; because
there is no word spoken, which to the conceit of man is not able to represent
more individuals then one, be it Sun, Moon, Phoenix, or what you will, even
amongst Verbs, and Syncategorematical signs, which do ^^ely suppone for the
modalities of things (...) ^^ore is each word the sign of an universal thing;
Peter signifying either this Pet^^ or that Peter; and any whatever name,
surname, or title, being communicable to one and many.

55. Thus though both words and thoughts, as they are (...) universal; yet do I
believe that those w^^^ld attribute less universality to words then things,
knew not definitely the full number of words, taking words for any articulate
pronunciation.

56 Nay, I will go further: There is no Alphabet in the world, be the
Calculator never so well skilled in Arithmetic, by virtue whereof the exact
number of words may be known; because that number must comprehend all the
combinations that Letters can have with one another: and this cannot be done,
if any letter be wanting; and consequently, by no Alphabet as yet framed,
wherein (as I have already said in the twelfth Article) there is a dificiencie
of many letters.

57. The Universal Alphabet therefore must be first conceived, before the
exactness of that computation can be attained unto.

58. Then is it, when having couched an Alphabet materiative of all the words
the mouth of man, with its whole implements, is able to pronounce, and bringing
all these words within the systeme of a Language, which, by reason of its
logopandocie, may deservedly be entitled The Universal Tongue, that nothing
will better merit the labor of a Grammatical Arithmetician, then, after due
enumeration, hinc inde, to appariate the words of the Universal Language with
the things of the Universe.

59. The analogy therein 'twixt the sign and thing signified holding the more
exactly, that as, according to Aristotle, there can be no more worlds but one,
because all the matter whereof worlds can be composed, is in this: so can there
be no Universal Language, but this I am about to divulge unto the world,
because all the words enuncible are in it contained.

60. If any officious Critic will run to the omnipotency of God for framing
more worlds, (according to the common saying, Nothing is impossible to God,
that implies not a contradiction) so he must have recourse to the same
omnipotent power for furnishing of man with other speech-tools then his tongue,
throat, roof of the mouth, lips, and teeth, before the contexture of another
Universal Language can be warped.

61. That I should hit upon the invention of that, for the furtherance of
Philosophy, and other Disciplines and Arts, which never hitherto has been so
much as thought upon by any; and that in a matter of so great extent, as the
expressing of all the things in the world, both in themselves, actions, ways of
doing, situation, pendicles, relations, connexions, pathetick interpositions,
and all other appurtenances to a perfect elocution, without being beholding to
any Language in the world; insomuch as one word will hardly be believed by our
fidimplicitary Gown-men, who, satisfied with their predecessors contrivances,
and taking all things literally, without examination, blate rate, to the
nauseating even of vulgar ears, those exotic Proverbs, There is no new thing
under the sun, Nihil dictum quod non dictum prius, and Beware of Philosophers;
authoridating this on Paul, the first on Solomon, and the other on Terence.

62. But, poor souls, they understand not that in the passage of Solomon is
meant, that there is no innovation in the essence of natural things; all
transmutations on the same matter, being into forms, which, as they differ
from some, so have an essential uniformity with others preexistent in the same
kind.

63. And when it was said by Paul, Beware of Philosophers, he meant such
Sophisters as themselves, who under the vizzard of I know not what, corrupt the
channels of the truth, and pervert all Philosophy and Learning.

64. As for the sayings of Terence, whether Scipio couched them, or himself,
they ought to be inferred rather as testimonies of neat Latin, then for
asserting of infallible verities.

65. If there has been no new thing under the Sun, according to the adulterate
sense of those Pristinary Lobcocks, How comes the invention of Syllogisms to be
attributed to Aristotle, that of the Sphere to Archimedes, and Logarithms to
Neper? It was not Swart, then, and Gertudenburg, that found out Gunpowder and
the Art of Printing; for these two men lived after the decease of Solomon.

66. Had there been Canon in Solomon's days, Rehoboam (by all appearance) would
have made use of them for the recovery of his inheritance; nor had some mention
of Artillery been omitted in the Books of the Mac^habees.

67. Pancorola's Treatise de novis adimpertis (although Polydor Virgil were
totally forgot) would be had there been no new thing since Solomon penned
Ecclesiastes, but as a discourse of Platonic reminiscences, and calling to
mind some formerly-lost fancies.

68. Truly, I am so far from being of the opinion of those Archaeomanetick
Coxcombs, that I really think, there will always be new inventions, where
there are excellent spirits.

69. For as I ascribe unto my self the invention of the Trissote^rail
Trigonometry, for facility of calculation by representatives of letters and
syllables; the proving of the equipollencie and opposition both of plain and
modal enunciations by rules of Geometry, the unfolding of the chiefest part of
Philosophy by a continuated Geographical allegory; and above a hundred other
several books on different subjects, the conceit of so much as one whereof
never entered into the brains of any before my self (although many of them
have been lost at Worcester-fight:) so am I confident, that others after me,
may fall upon some strain of another kind, never, before that, dreamed upon by
those of foregoing ages.

70. Now to the end the reader may be more enamored of the Language, wherein I
am to publish a Grammar and Lexicon, I will here set down some few qualities
and advantages peculiar to it self, and which no Language else (although all
other concurred with it) is able to reach unto.

71. First, There is not a word utterable by the mouth of man, which in this
language has not a peculiar signification by it self; so that the allegation
of Bliteri by the Summulists, will be of small validity.

72. Secondly, Such as will harken to my instructions, if some strange word be
proposed to them, whereof there are many thousands of millions, deviseable by
the wit of man, which never hitherto by any breathing have been uttered, shall
be able, although he know not the ultimate signification thereof, to declare
what part of speech it is; or if a noune, unto what predicament or class it is
to be reduced; whether it be the sign of a real or notional thing, or somewhat
concerning mechanic Trades in their Tools, or terms; or if real, whether
natural or artificial, complete, or incomplete; for words here do suppone for
the things which they signify; as when we see my Lord Generals picture, we
say, there is my Lord General,

73. Thirdly, This world of words has but two hundred and fifty prime radices,
upon which all the rest are branched: for better understanding whereof, with
all its dependant boughs, sprigs, and ramelets; I have before my Lexicon set
down the division thereof (making use of another allegory) into so many Cities,
which are subdivided into streets, they again into lanes, those into houses,
these into stories; whereof each room stands for a word; and all these so
methodically, that who observes my precepts thereanent, shall at the first
hearing of a word, know to what City it belongs, and consequently not be
ignorant of some general signification thereof, till after a most exact prying
into all its letters, finding the street, lane, house, story, and room thereby
denotated, he punctually hit upon the very proper thing it represents in its
most specifical signification.

74. Fourthly, By virtue of adjectitious syllabicals annexible to Nouns and
Verbs, there will arise of several words, what compound, what derivative,
belonging in this Language to one Noune or to one Verb alone, a greater number
then does pertain to all the parts of speech, in the most copious Language in
the world besides.

75. Fifthly, So great energy to every meanest constitutive part of a word in
this Language is appropriated, that one word thereof, though but of seven
syllables at most shall comprehend that which no Language else in the world is
able to express in fewer then fourscore and fifteen several words; and that not
only a word here and there for masteries sake, but several millions of such;
which, to any initiated in the rudiments of my Grammar, shall be easy to frame.

76. Sixthly, In the cases of all the declinable parts of speech, it surpasses
all other Languages whatsoever: for whilst others have but five or six at most,
it has ten, besides the nominative.

77. Seventhly, There is none of the learned Languages, but has store of Nouns
defective of some case or other; but in this Language there is no Heteroclite
in any declinable word, nor redundancie or deficiency of cases.

78. Eighthly, Every word capable of number, is better provided therewith in
this Language, then by any other: for in stead of two or three numbers which
others have, this afafordeth you four; to wit, the singular, dual, plural, and
redual.

79. Ninthly, It is not in this as other Languages, wherein some words lack one
number, and some another: for here each casitive or personal part of speech is
endued with all the numbers.

80. Tenthly, In this Tongue there are eleven genders; wherein likewise it
exceeds all other Languages.

81. Eleventhly, Verbs, Mongrels, Participles, and Hybrids, have all of them
ten Tenses, besides the present; which number, no Language else is able to
attain to.

82. Twelfthly, Though there be many conjugable words in other Languages
defective of Tenses, yet does this Tongue allow of no such anomaly, but
grants all to each.

83. Thirteenthly, In lieu of six Moods which other Languages have at most,
this one injoyeth seven in its conjugable words.

84. Fourteenthly, Verbs here, or other conjugable parts of speech, admit of no
want of Moodes, as do other Languages.

85. Fifteenthly, in this Language, the Verbs and Participles have four voices,
although it was never heard that ever any other Language had above three.

86. Sixteenthly, No other Tongue has above eight or nine parts of speech; but
this has twelve.

87. Seventeenthly, For variety of diction in each part of speech, it
surmounteth all the Languages in the world.

88. Eighteenthly, Each Noun thereof, or Verb, may begin or end with a Vowel or
Consonant, as to the peruser shall seem most expedient.

89. Nineteenthly, Every word of this Language declinable or indeclinable has
at least ten several synomyma's.

90. Twentiethly, each of these synomyma's, in some circumstance of the
signification, differs from the rest.

91. One and twentiethly, Every faculty, science, art, trade, or discipline,
requiring many words for expression of the knowledge thereof, has each its
respective root from whence all the words thereto belonging are derived.

92. Two and twentiethly, In this Language the opposite members of a division
have usually the same letters in the words which signify them; the initial and
final letter being all one* with a transmutation only in the middle ones.

93. Three and twentiethly, every word in this Language signifies as well
backward as forward; and how ever you invert the letters, still shall you fall
upon significant words: whereby a wonderful facility is obtained in making of
Anagrams.

94. Four and twentiethly, there is no Language in the world, but for every
word thereof, it will afford you another of the same signification, of equal
syllables with it, and beginning or ending, or both, with vowels or consonants
as it does.

95. Five and twentiethly, by virtue hereof, there is no Hexameter, Elegiack,
Saphick, Asclepiad, Iambick, or any other kind of Latin or Greek verse, but I
will afford you another in this Language of the same sort, without a syllable
more or less in the one then the other, Spondae answering to Spondae, dactil to
dactil, caesure to caesure, and each foot to other, with all uniformity
imaginable.

96. Six and twentiethly, as it trotteth easily with metrical feet, so at the
end of the career of each line, has it the dexterity, after the manner of our
English and other vernaculary Tongues, to stop with the closure of a rhyme; in
the framing whereof, the well-versed in that Language shall have so little
labor, that for every word therein he shall be able to furnish at least five
hundred several monosyllables of the same termination with it.

97. Seven and twentiethly, in translating verses of any vernaculary Tongue,
such as Italian, French, Spanish, Slavonian, Dutch, Irish, English, or whatever
it be, it affords you of the same signification, syllable for syllable, and in
the closure of each line a ryme, as in the original.

98. Eight and twentiethly, by this Language, and the letters thereof, we may
do such admirable feats in numbers, that no cyfering can reach its
compendiousness: for whereas the ordinary way of numbering by thousands of
thousands of thousands of thousands, does but confuse the hearers
understanding; to remedy which, I devised; even by cyfering it self, a far more
exact manner of numeration, as in the Treatise of Arithmetic which I have ready
for the press, is evidently apparent; This Language affords so concise words
for numbering, that the number for setting down, whereof would, require in
vulgar Arithmetic, more figures in a row then there might be grains of sand
containable from the center of the earth, to the highest heavens, is in it
expressed by two letters.

99. Nine and twentiethly, what rational Logarithms do by writing, this
Language does by heart; and, by adding of letters, shall multiply numbers;
which is a most exquisite secret.

100. Thirtiethly, the digits are expressed by vowels, and the consonants stand
for all the results of the Cephalisme, from ten to eighty one, inclusively;
whereby many pretty Arithmetical tricks are performed.

101. One and thirtiethly, in the denomination of the fixed Stars, it affords
the most significant way imaginary: for by the single word alone which
represents the Star, you shall know the magnitude, together with the longitude
and latitude, both in degrees and minutes of the Star that is expressed by it.

102. Two and thirtiethly by one word in this Language, we shall understand
what degree, or what minute of the degree of a sign in the Zodiake, the Sun or
Moon, or any other planet is in.

103. Three and thirtiethly, as for the year of God, the month of that year,
week of the month, day of that week, partition of the day, hour of that
partition, quarter and half quarter of the hour, a word of one syllable in this
Language will express it all to the full.

104. Four and thirtiethly, In this Language, also, words expressive of herbs,
represent unto us with what degree of cold, moisture, heat, or dryness they are
qualified; together with some other property distinguishing them from other
herbs.

105. Five and thirtiethly, In matter of Colors, we shall learn by words in
this Language the proportion of light, shadow, or darkness commixed in them.

106. Six and thirtiethly, In the composition of syllables by vowels and
consonants, it affords the aptest words that can be imagined, for expressing
how many vowels and consonants any syllable is compounded of, and how placed in
priority and situation to one another. Which secret in this Language, is
exceeding necessary, for understanding the vigor of derivatives in their
variety of signification.

107. Seven and thirtiethly, for attaining to that dexterity which Mithridates
King of Pontus was said to have, in calling all his soldiers of an Army of
threescore thousand men, by their names and surnames, this Language will be so
convenient, that if a General, according to the Rules thereof, will give new
names to his soldiers, whether Horse, Foot, or Dragoons, as the French use to
do to their Infantry by their noms de guerre; he shall be able, at the first
hearing of the word that represents the name of a soldier, to know of what
Brigade, Regiment, Troop, Company, Squadron or Division he is; and whether he
be of the Cavalry, or of the Foot; a single Soldier, or an Officer, or
belonging to the Artill^^y or Baggage: Which device, in my opinion, is not
unuseful for those great Captains that would endear themselves in the favor of
the Soldiery.

108. Eight and thirtiethly, in the contexture of nouns, pronouns, and
preposital articles united together, it administreth many wonderful varieties
of Laconick expressions; as in the Grammar thereof shall more at large be made
known unto you.

109. Nine and thirtiethly, every word in this Language is significative of a
number; because, as words may be increased by addition of letters and
syllables; so of numbers is there a progress in infinitum.

110. Fourtiethly, In this Language every number, how great soever, may be
expressed by one single word.

111. One and fourtiethly, As every number essentially differs from another,
so shall the words expressive of several numbers, be from one another
distinguished.

112. Two and fourtiethly. No Language but this has in its words the whole
number of letters, that is, ten vowels, and five and twenty consonants; by
which means there is no word escapes the latitude thereof.

113. Three and fourtiethly, As its interjections are more numerous, so are
they m^^ emphatical in their respective expression of passions, then that part
of speech is in any other Language whatsoever.

114. Four and fourtiethly, The more syllables there be in any one word of this
Language, the manyer several significations it has: with which propriety no
other Language is endowed.

115. Five and fourtiethly, All the several genders in this Language, are as
well competent to verbs as nouns: by virtue whereof, at the first uttering of a
verb in the active voice, you shall know whether it be a god, a goddess, a man,
a woman, a beast, or any thing inanimate, (and so through the other five
genders) that does the action: which excellency is altogether peculiar unto
this Language.

116. Six and fourtiethly, In this Language there is an art, out of every word,
of what kind of speech soever it be, to frame a verb; whereby, for expressing
all manner of actions, a great facility is attained unto.

117. Seven and fourtiethly, To all manner of verbs, and many
syncategorematical words, is allowed in this Language a flexion by Cases,
unknown to other Tongues, thereby to represent unto our understandings more
compendious expressions then is possible to afford by any other means.

118. Eight and fortiethly, Of all Languages, this is the most compendious in
complement, and consequently, fittest for Courtiers and Ladies.

119. Nine and fourtiethly, For writing of Missives, Letters of State, and all
other manner of Epistles, whether serious or otherways, it affords the
compactest style of any Language in the world; and therefore, of all other, the
most requisite to be learned by Statesmen and Merchants.

120. Fiftiethly, No Language in matter of Prayer and Ejaculations to Almighty
God, is able, for conciseness of expression, to compare with it; and therefore,
of all other, the most fit for the use of Churchmen, and spirits inclined to
devotion.

121. One and fiftiethly, This Language has a modification of the tense,
whether present, preterite, or future, of so curious invention for couching
much matter in few words, that no other Language ever had the like.

122. Two and fiftiethly, There is not a proper name in any Country of the
world, for which this Language affords not a peculiar word, without being
beholding to any other.

123. Three and fiftiethly, In many thousands of words belonging to this
Language, there is not a Letter which has not a peculiar signification by it
self.

124. Four and fiftiethly, The polysyllables of this Language do all of them
signify by their monosyllables; which no word in any other Language does, ex
instituto, but the compound ones: for though the syllabical parts of exlex
separately signify as in the compound; yet those of homo do it not, nor yet
those of dote, or domus, as in the whole: and so it is in all other Languages
except the same: for there are in the Italian and Latin Tongues words of ten,
eleven, or twelve syllables, whereof not one syllable by it self does signify
any thing at all in that Language, of what it does in the whole; as adole
scenturiatissimamente, honorificic abilitudini tatibus, etc.

125. Five and fiftiethly, all the Languages in the world will be beholding to
this, and this to none.

126. Six and fiftiethly, there is yet another wonder in this Language, which
although a little touched by the by in the fifty eighth article of this
preface, I will mention yet once more; and it is this, That though this
language have advantage of all other, it is impossible any other in time coming
surpass it, because, as I have already said, it comprehends, first, all words
expressible; and then, in matter of the obliquity of cases and tenses, the
contrivance of indeclinable parts, and right disposure of vowels and
consonants, for distinguishing of various significations within the latitude of
letters, cannot be afforded a way so expedient.

127. Seven and fiftiethly, the greatest wonder of all, is, that of all the
Languages in the world, it is the easiest to learn; a boy of ten years old,
being able to attain to the knowledge thereof, in three months space; because
there are in it many facilitations for the memory, which no other Language has
but it self.

128. Eight and fiftiethly, sooner shall one reach the understanding of things
to be signified by the words of this Language, then by those of any other, for
that as Logarithms in comparison of absolute numbers, so do the words thereof
in their initials respectively vary according to the nature of the things which
they signify.

129. Nine and fiftiethly, for pithiness of proverbs, oracles, and sentences,
no Language can parallel with it.

130. Sixtiethly, in Axioms, Maxims, and Aphorisms, it is excellent above all
other Languages.

131. One and Sixtiethly, for definitions, divisions, and distinctions, no
Language is so apt.

132. Two and sixtiethly, for the affirmation, negotation, and infinitation of
propositions, it has proprieties unknown to any other Language, most necessary
for knowledge.

133. Three and sixtiethly, in matter of Enthymems, Syllogisms, and all manner
of Illative ratiocination, it is the most compendious in the world.

134. Besides these sixty and three advantages above all other Languages, I
might have couched thrice as many more, of no less consideration then the
aforesaid, but that these same will suffice to sharpen the longing of the
generous reader, after the intrinsecal and most researched secrets of the new
Grammar and Lexicon which I am to evulge.

TO contrive a Language of this perfection, will be thought by the primest wits
of this age, a work of a great undertaking; and that the promover of so
excellent an invention, should not lack for any encouragement, tending to the
accomplishment of a task of such maine concernment. If any say there are too
many Languages already, and that by their multiplicity and confusion, the
knowledge of things having been much retarded, this fabric of a new one may be
well forborne, because it would but entangle the mind with more impestrements,
where there was too much difficulty before: I answer, that this makes not one
more, but in a manner comprehends all in it; whereby it facilitates, and does
not obstruct: for by making Greek, Latin, and all the other learned Languages
the more expressive, it furthers the progress of all Arts and Sciences, to the
attaining whereof, the uttering of our conceptions in due and significant
terms, has, by some of the most literate men in former ages, been esteemed so
exceeding requisite, that for attributing a kind of necessity thereunto, they
are till this hour called by the name of Nominal Philosophers; it being thus
very apparent to any well affected to literature, that the performance of such
a design would be of a great expediency for scholars: equity it self seems
to plead, that unto him by whom a benefit redounds to many, is competent by
many a proportionable retribution: yet seeing nothing ought to be charged on
the public, but upon considerations of great weight; I will premise some few
infallible principles, that upon them the world may see, how demonstratively
are grounded the Authors most reasonable demands.

1. EAch good thing is desirable, because goodness is the object of the will.

2. Every thing that ought to be desired, is really good; because a
well-directed will is not deceived with appearances.

3. The better a thing be, the more it is to be desired; because there is a
proportion betwixt the object and the faculty.

4. The mind is better then the body; because by it we are the image of God.

5. The goods of the mind are better then those of the body; because they give
embellishment to the nobler part.

6. The goods of either mind or body are better then wealth; because wealth is
but subservient to either, and the end is more noble then the means which are
ordained for it.

7. Learning is the good of the mind; because it beautiefith it.

8. This new Language is an invention full of learning; because the knowledge
of all Arts and Disciplines is much advanced by it.

9. A discovery is the revealment of some good thing, which formerly was either
concealed, or not at all known; for in a discovery two things are requisite;
first, that it be good; secondly, that it be revealed.

10. Who discovers a secret of money, should have the fifth or third part
thereof; because there is an Act of Parliament for it.

11. If there be any discovery in learning, the Act ought to extend to it;
because the State is endowed with a soul as well as a body.

12. This new-found-out invention is a discovery of learning; because the two
requisita's of a discovery, together with the description of learning, are
competent thereto.

13. Who discovers most of the best good, deserves the best recompense;
because merit and reward are Analogical in a proportion of the greater reward
to the greater merit.

14. Though money be not proportionable to learning, yet seeing the learned man
may have need of money, he should not lack it; if not as a full recompense, at
least as a donative or largess, should it be given unto him, in testimony of
his worth, and the respect of others toward him, and withal to encourage him
the more to eminent undertakings: for were it otherwise, the more deserving a
man were, the worse he would be used; there being nothing so unreasonable, as
to refuse a little to any that stands in need thereof, because a great deal
more is due unto him: as if in time of famine, there being no more but one
peny-loaf to give unto a Prince, he should be made starve for the want of it,
because of his deserving better fare: For, that which comprehends the more,
comprehends the less.

15. In matter of recompense for good things proceeding from the mind, which
in in the midst of flames cannot be conquered, and by virtue whereof a gallant
man is always free, and invincible in his better part, we ought altogether to
prescind and abstract from the conditions of the native country, and person of
the deserver, whether that be fertile, or barren; or this, at liberty or
indurance; for these being things quae non fecimus ipsi, we ought to say, Vix
ea nostra voco: and therefore seeing punishment and reward should attend the
performance of nothing else, but what did lie in our power to do, or not to do;
and that the specifying of good or bad actions, depends upon the
qualification of the intention; no man should be either punished, or rewarded,
for being either a Scottish man, or a prisoner, or both, if no other reason
concur therewith; because the country of our birth, and state of our person, as
being oftentimes the effects of a good or bad fortune, are not always in our
power to command.

16. If by means of the aforesaid discovery, may be effectuated the saving of
great charges to the subjects of the land, a pecunial or praedial recompense
will (in so far) be very answerable to the nature of that service: because in
matter of merit, and the reward proportionable thereunto, money is with money,
and things vendible, no less homogeneal, then honor with virtue.

17. The State no doubt will deal proportionably with their prisoners of war,
without prosopolepsie, or any respect to one more then another; and that by a
geometrical equity, because it is just.

18. The State assuredly will grant the same freedom to one prisoner (caeteris
paribus) which they do to another, and upon the same terms, those of a like
condition not being unequally faulty; because they will not be unjust.

19. If any one prisoner of a like condition and quality, at the least (in
caeteris) with another that has obtained his liberty, represent to the public
somewhat conducible thereunto, which the other is not versed in, common equity
requires, that he have a compensation suitable to that additional endowment;
for, si ab inaequalibus aequalia demas, quae restant sunt aequalia; and the Act
for discoveries maintains the truth thereof.

20. Though it be commonly maintained amongst the Protestants, that we cannot
supererogate toward Almighty God, (albeit those of the Romish faith be of
another opinion) for that God cannot be unjust, how severely soever he inflict
his afflictions; and that all the favors he conferreth on mankind are of his
mere grace, not our deserving: yet that a subject may be capable of
supererogation toward any sublunary State or sovereignty, is not only
agreeable with all the religions of the world; but also a maine principle of
humane society, and ground unalterable of politic Government; for who
transgress not the limits of those good subjects, whose actions, thoughts, and
words, show at all times faithfulness, loyalty, and obedience to the sovereign
power under which they live, are universally esteemed (by so doing, to
discharge their duty so to the full, that in reason no more can be required of
them. If therefore it happen, besides this general bond of fidelity whereunto
all the natives and inhabitants of a country are by their birth and protection
inviolably engaged, that any one more obliging then others, perform some
singular good office, unto which he was not formerly tied by the strictness of
his allegiance, there is no doubt, but that the public (whom nature exempteth
not from thankfulness, more then private persons) should and will acknowledge
such an action, exceeding the reach of his fellow-patriots and co-habitants, to
be meritorious, and therefore worthy of recompense; upon which consideration,
according to the peoples diversity of carriage, in the well or ill demeaning of
themselves, are built the two maine pillars of reward and punishment, without
which the strongest Commonwealth on earth on earth is not able to subsist long
from falling to pieces. That it is so, I appeal to Scipio, who (with the
approbation of all that lived since his days) exclaimed against Rome, in these
words, O ingratam patriam! as likewise to those many great Statesmen and
Philosophers, who from age to age twitted the Athenians with ingratitude for
the ostracizing of Aristides; for if humane frailties were not incident to
Princes, States, and Incorporations, as well as unto individuals in their
single and private callings, and particular deportments; there would never be
any need of protestations, declarations, or defensive war against the Tyranny,
usurpations, and oppressions of misrule. Hence do I think that in a well
pollished State, reward will not be wanting to him that merits it for his good
service; because punishment, by the Law, attends the offender; and contrariorum
eadem est ratio.

21. It is acknowledged by the laws and customs of this Island, that the
subjects thereof have a right of propriety to their goods, notwithstanding the
titles of dominion and supremacy remaining in the persons of others above them;
and that if for erecting a Castle, Fort, Church, Hospital, College, Hall,
Magazine, or any other kind of edifice tending to public use, the State should
be pleased to incroach upon the land of any private person, who doubts but
that such a man (of how mean soever a condition he be) will in justice be heard
to give up, and require the full value of his land, that a compensation
suitable to the worth thereof, may be allowed to him? founding the equity of so
just a retribution upon Ahabs case in Naboths vineyard. Now the soul and body
of man being more a man's own (they being the constitutive parts whereof
Physically he is composed) then are the goods of fortune, which totally are
accidental to him, it follows clearly that a man has a full right of propriety
to the goods of his own mind, and consequently such goods being better (as has
been evidenced by the sixth Axiom) then any external means, what can be more
manifest, than that he who is endowed with them (so careful a course being
taken for the satisfaction of any in matter of outward wealth) may at the best
rate he can, capitulate for their disposal, with what persons he thinks most
concerned in the benefits and utility by them accrescing; because it is an
argument a minore ad majus, and therefore a fortiori.

22. If such a one nevertheless voluntarily accept of a lesser recompense, then
by his deserving he may claim right unto, he is not unjustly dealt with; quia
volenti non fit injuria, and pactum hominis tollit conditione^ legis.

These specious Axioms, Definitions, and uncontrollable Maxims thus premised,
I must make bold, in behalf of the Author, to deduce from thence the equity of
his desires, in demanding that the same Inheritance, which for these several
hundreds of years, through a great many Progenitors, has by his ancestors,
without the interruption of any other, been possessed, be now fully devolved on
him, with the same Privileges and Immunities, in all things, as they enjoyed
it. But, the better to make appear his ingenuity in this his suit, and modesty
in requiring no more, it is expedient to declare what it is he offers unto
the State, for obliging them to vouchsafe him the grant of no less. May the
Reader therefore be pleased to understand, that it is the discovery of a secret
in Learning, which, besides the great contentment it cannot choose but yield to
ingenious spirits, will afford a huge benefit to Students of all sorts, by the
abridgement of their studies, in making them learn more in three years, with
the help thereof, then, without it, in the space of five. This saving of two
years charges to Scholars in such a vast Dominion as this is, although I speak
nothing of the sparing of so much time, (which, to a methodical wit of any
pregnancie, is a menage of an inestimable value) cannot be appreciated, how
parsimonious soever they be in their diet and apparel,) at less then ten
thousand pounds English a year.

That this is a secret, it is clear by this, That never any, since the laying
of the foundations of the earth, did so much as divulge a syllable thereof;
which undoubtedly they would have done, had they had any knowledge therein. And
that none now living (be it spoken without disparagement of any) either knows
it, or knows how to go about it, save the aforesaid Author alone, who is
willing to forfeit all he demands (although by birthright it be his own
already, and worth near upon a thousands pounds sterlin a year) if, without his
help, any breathing (notwithstanding the instructions may possibly be had by
his lost Papers, and by what in the preceding Articles has been in this little
Tractate promulgated) shall, within half a year after the date hereof, give any
apparent testimony to the world, that he has any insight in this invention.

Which, that it is good and desirable, is evident by the first and second
Axioms: and that it is a Discovery, and a discovery of Learning, by the ninth
and twelfth: that the discovery of a matter of less moment then it, deserves
great sums of money, is manifest by the tenth and thirteenth: and that a
retribution of great value should attend the disclosure of so prime a secret,
by the eleventh and fourteenth: that the knowledge of this Invention is of more
worth then either Strength or Wealth, is proved by the fifth and sixth: and
that it is more to be desired then any thing that is at the disposure of
Fortune, by the third and fourth: that it does promove Reason, illuminate the
Judgment, further and improve Literature, by polishing and imbellishing the
inward abilities of man, and faculties of his mind, is clear by the seventh
and eighth.

Thus much of the Invention, or thing invented; which (as the fruit is to be
accounted of less worth then the tree, which yearly produces the like;
cistern-water, that daily diminishes, then that of a fountain, which is
inexhaustible; and a hay-mow, then the meaiudow on which it grew) being (as in
reason It ought) to be estimated at a rate much inferioasir to the Inventer,
from whose brains have, ^^ready issued offsprings every whit as con^^derable,
with parturiencie for greater births if a malevolent time disobstetricate not
their e^ixibility, it follows of necessity that he should reap the benefit
that is due for the Invention, with hopes of a higher remuneration for what of
the like nature remains as yet unsatisfied. And although his being a Scot,
and a prisoner of War, may perhaps (in the opinion of some) eclipse the
splendour of so great an expectation; yet that it should not, is most
perspicuously evinced by the fifteenth Axiom.

That he is a Scot, he denies not; but that he thereby meriteth to be either
praised or dispraised, is utterly to be disavowed, because it lay not in his
power to appoint localities for his mothers residence at the time of his
nativity, or to enact any thing before he had a being himself.

True it is, that nothing is more usual in speech, then to blame all, for the
fault of the greater part; and to twit a whole Country with that vice, to which
most of its inhabitants are inclined. Hence have we these sayings: The
Spaniards are proud, The French inconstant, The Italians lecherous, The
Cretians liars, The Sicilians false, The Asiaticks effeminate, The Crovats
cruel, The Dutch temuleucious, The Polonians quarrelsome, The Saxons mutinous;
and so forth through other Territories, nurseries of enormities of another
kind: although nothing be more certain, then that there are some Spaniards as
humble, French as constant, Italians chaste, Cretians true, Sicilians
ingenuous, Asiaticks warlike, Crovates merciful, Dutch sober, Polonians
peaceable, and some Saxons as loyal, as any in the world besides. By which
account, all foreigners (for such are all the inhabitants on the earth, in
relation to those that are not their compatriots) yielding to the most and some
of each stranger-Land, in its respective vice and virtue; it may safely be
avouched, that there is under the sun no National fault, nor National
deserving, whereby all merit to be punished, or all rewarded; because the
badness of most in each, destroys the universality of virtue; and the good
inclination of some in all, cuts off the generality of vice.

But to come nearer home: seeing Scotland was never loaded with so much
disreputation, for Covetousness and Hypocrisy, as it is at this present; and
that the Knight for whom this Treatise is intended, has, as a Patriot, some
interest in the good name thereof; it is not amiss, that, for the love of him
and all honest Scots, I glance a little at the occasion (if not the cause) of
so heavy an imputation; especially that Country having been aspersed
therewith, long before it had sustained the loss of any Battle, wherein the
several miscarriages looked rather like the effect of what formerly had
procured the said reproach, then any way as the causes thereof: for where
Covetousness is predominant, Fidelity, Fortitude, and Vigilancie, must needs
discamp, if Mammona give the word: the concomitancie of Vices (seeing
contrariorum eadem est ratio) being a sequel from that infallible tenet in the
Morals, the concatenation of virtues.

How this Covetousness, under the mask of Religion, took such deep root in that
Land, was one way occasioned by some Ministers, who, to augment their stipends,
and cram their bags full of money, thought fit to possess the minds of the
people with a strong opinion of their sanctity, and implicit obedience to
their Injunctions: to which effect, most rigidly Israelitizing it in their
Synagogical Sanhedrius, and officiously bragging in their Pulpits (even when
Scotland, by diverse notorious calamities of both Sword, Plague, and Famine, was
brought very low) that no Nation (for being likest to the Jews of any other)
was so glorious as it; they, with a Pharisaical superciliosity, would always
rebuke the non-Covenanters and Sectaries as Publicans and sinners, unfit for
the purity of their conversation, unless, by the malignancie or over-mastering
power of a cross wind, they should be forced to cale the hypocritical bunt,
let fall the top-gallant of their counterfeit devotion, and tackling about, to
sail a quite contrary course, (as many of them have already done) the better at
last to cast anchor in the harbor of Profit, which is the Butt they aimed at,
and sole period of all their dissimulations.

For I have known some, even of the most rigid zealots, who, rather then to
forgo their present emoluments, by continual receiving, and never erogating; by
never sowing, and always reaping; and by making the sterility of all men prove
fruitful to them, and their fertility barren to all* Would wish Presbytery were
of as empty a sound, as its homaeoteleft, Blitery; and the Covenant, which
asserts it no less exploded from all Ecclesiastical Societies, then Plautus
exolet phrases have been from the eloquent orations of Ciceron.

But this affecting only a part of the Tribe of Levi, how the remainder of new
Palestine (as the kirkomanetick Philarchaists would have it called) comes to be
upbraided with the same opprobry of covetousness, is that which I am so
heartily sorry for, that to wipe of its obloquy, I would undertake a pilgrimage
to old Judea, visit the ruins of Jerusalem, and trace the footsteps of
Zodekiahs fellow-captives to the gates of Rabylon.

Yet did this so great an inconvenience proceed merely from an incogitancy, in
not taking heed to what is prescribed by Prudence the directress of all
virtues,) and consequently of that which moderates the actions of giving and
receiving; (although it be nobilius dare quam accipere; the non-vitiosity
whereof, by her injunctions, depends on the judicious observing of all the
circumstances mentioned in this Mnemoneutick Hexameter Quis, quid, ubi, quibus
auxiliis, cur, quomodo' quando, whose last particle, by the untimely taking of
a just debt, and unseasonable receiving of what at another time might have been
lawfully required, being too carelessly regarded by the State and Milice of that
country, gave occasion to this contumely; the stain whereof remains still,
notwithstanding the loss in money (besides other prejudices) sustained since,
of ten times more then they got.

I heard once a Maronite Jew to vindicate the reputation of the family and
village of the Iscariots, in which he pretended to have some interest, very
seriously relate, that according to the opinion of Rabbi Ezra, the thirty
pieces of silver delivered to Judas, was but the same sum which, long before
that, when Christ went up from Galilee to celebrate the feast of tabernacles at
Jerusalem, Malchus the servant of Caiaphas had borrowed from him (whilst he had
the charge of his Masters bag) with assurance punctually to repay it him again,
at the subsequent term of the passover, as the fashion was then amongst the
inhabitants of Judea: but although it were so (which we are not bound to give
ear to, because it is plainly set down in the fifth verse of the two and
twentieth Chapter of the Evangile according to Saint Luke, that the high
priests made a Covenant with Judas) yet should he not have received the money in
the very nick of the time that his master was to be apprehended.

This I the rather believe, for that I likewise heard a Minister say, that he
offends God who stretches forth his hand to take in the payment of any debt
(how just soever it be) upon a Sunday; and that though a purse full of gold
were offered unto himself, whilst he is a preaching in the Pulpit, he would
refuse it.

These collateral instances I introduce, not for application, but illustration
sake; not for comparison, but explication of the congruent adapting of
necessary puntilio's for the framing of a virtuous action.

Another thing there is that fixes a grievous scandal upon that Nation, in
matter of philargyrie, or love of money; and it is this: There has been in
London, and repairing to it, for these many years together, a knot of Scottish
bankers, collybists, or coinecoursers, of trasfickers in Merchandise to and
again, and of men of other professions, who by hook and crook, fas and nefas,
slight and might (all being as fish their net could catch) having feathered
their nests to some purpose, look so idolatrously upon their Dagon of wealth,
and so closely (like the earths dull center) hug all unto themselves; that, for
no respect of virtue, honor, kindred, patriotism, or whatever else (be it never
so recommendable, will they depart from so much as one single penny, whose
emission does not, without any hazard of loss, in a very short time
superlucrate beyond all conscience an additionall increase, to the heap of that
stock which they so much adore: which churlish and tenacious humor, has made
many, that were not acquainted with any else of that country, to imagine all
their compatriots infected with the same leprosy of a wretched peevishness;
whereof those quomodocunquizing clusterfists and rapacious varlets have given
of late such cannibal-like proofs, by their inhumanity and obdurate carriage
toward some (whose shoos-strings they are not worthy to unty) that were it not
that a more able pen then mine, will assuredly not fail to jerk them on all
sides, in case, by their better demeanor for the future, they endeavor not to
wipe off the blot, wherewith their native country by their sordid avarice, and
miserable baseness has been so foully stained; I would at this very instant
blaze them out in their names and surnames, notwithstanding the vizard of
Presbyterian zeal wherewith they mask themselves; that like so many Wolves
Foxes, or Athenian Tim^ns, they might in all times coming, be debarred the
benefit of any honest conversation.

Thus is it perceptible how usual it is, from the irregularity of a few, to
conclude an universal defection; and that the whole is faulty, because a part
is not right; there being in it a fallacy of induction, as if because this,
that and the other are both greedy and dissembling, that therefore all other
their countrymen are such: which will no ways follow, if any one of these
others be free from those vices; for that one particular negative (by the rules
of contradictory opposites) will destroy an universal affirmative; and of such
there are many thousands in that Nation, who are neither greedy nor dissemblers.

And so would all the rest, if a joint and unanimous course were taken to have
their noblemen free from baseness, their Churchmen from avarice, their
Merchants from deceit, their gentlemen from pusillanimity, their Lawyers from
prevarication, their Tradesmen from idleness, their Farmers from lying, their
young men from pride, their old men from morosity, their rich from hard
heartednes their poor from theeving, their great ones from faction, their
meaner sort from implicit Sectatorship, the Magistrates from injustice, the
Clients from litigiousness, and all of them from dishonesty, and disrespect of
learning; which, though but negatives of virtue, and (at best) but the ultimum
non esse of vice, would nevertheless go near to restore the good fame of that
country to its pristine integrity; the report whereof was raised to so high a
pitch of old, that in a book in the last edition of a pretty bulk, written in
the Latin Tongue by one Dempster, there is mention made, what for arms and
arts, of at least five thousand Illustrious men of Scotland, the last liver
whereof dyed above fifty years ago.

Nor did their succession so far degenerate from the race of so worthy
progenitors, but that even of late (although before the intestine garboyles of
this Island) several of them have for their fidelity, valor, and gallantry,
been exceedingly renowned over all France, Spain, the Venetian terriotries,
Pole, Moscovy, the Low-countryes, Swedland, Hungary, Germany, Denmark, and
other States and Kingdoms; as may appear by General Ruddurford, my Lord General
Sir James Spence of Wormiston, afterward by the Swedish King created Earl of
Orcholm; Sir Patrick Ruven Governor of Vlme, General of an Army of
High-Germans, and afterward Earl of Forth and Branford; Sir Alexander Leslie
governor of the Cities along the Baltic coast, Field-marshal over the Army in
Westphalia, and afterward entitled Scoticani faederis supremus dux; General
James King, afterward made Lord Ythen; Colonel David Leslie Commander of a
Regiment of Horse over the Dutch; and afterward in these our Domestic wars
advanced to be Lieutenant General of both Horse and Foot; Major General Thomas
Kar, Sir David Drumond General Major, and Governor of Statin in Pomer; Sir
George Douglas Colonel, and afterward employed in Embassies betwixt the
Sovereigns of Britain and Swedland; Colonel George Lindsay, Earl of Craford;
Colonel Lord Forbas, Colonel Lord Sancomb, Colonel Lodowick Leslie, and in the
late troubles at home, governor of Berwick, and Tinmouth-sheels; Colonel Sir
James Ramsey governor of Hanaw; Colonel Alexander Ramsey governor of
Crafzenach, and Quartermaster-General to the Duke of Wymar, Colonel William
Bailif, afterward in these our in testin broyls promoved to the charge of
Lieutenant General: another Colonel Ramsey, besides any of the former two,
whose name I cannot hit upon; Sir James Lumsden, Colonel in Germany, and
afterward governor of Newcastle, and General Major in the Scottish wars; Sir
George Cunningham, Sir John Ruven, Sir John Hamilton, Sir John Meldrum, Sir
Arthur Forbas, Sir Frederick Hamilton, Sir James Hamilton, Sir Francis Ruven,
Sir John Junes, Sir William Balantine; and several other Knights, all Colonels
of Horse or Foot in the Swedish wars.

As likewise by Colonel Alexander Hamilton, agnamed dear Sandy, who afterward
in Scotland was made General of the Artillery, for that in some measure he had
exerced the same charge in Dutchland, under the command of Marquis James
Hamilton, whose Generalship over six thousand English in the Swedish service, I
had almost forgot, by Colonel Robert Cunningham, Colonel Robert Monro of Fowls,
Colonel Obstol Monro, Colonel Hector Monro, Colonel Robert Monro, lately
General Major in Ireland, who wrote a book in folio, entitled Monroes
Expedition; Colonel Assen Monro, Colonel James Seaton, and Colonel James
Seaton, Colonel John K^nindmond, Colonel John Vrquhart, who is a valiant
soldier, expert Commander, and learned Scholar; Colonel James Spence, Colonel
Hugh Hamilton, Colonel Francis Sinclair, Colonel John Leslie of Wards, Colonel
John Leslie agnamed the Omnipotent, afterward made Major General; Colonel
Robert Lumsden, Colonel Robert Leslie, Colonel William Gun, who afterward in
the year 1639. was knighted by King CHARLES, for his service done at the Bridge
of Dee near Aberdeen, against the Earl of Montross, by whom he was beaten;
Colonel George Colen, Colonel Crichtoun, Colonel Liddel, Colonel Armestrong,
Colonel John Gordon, Colonel James Cochburne, Colonel Thomas Thomson, Colonel
Thomas Kinindmond, Colonel James Johnston, Colonel Edward Iohnston, Colonel
William Kinindmond, Colonel George Leslie, Colonel Robert Stuart, Colonel
Alexander Forbas, agnamed the Bauld; Colonel William Cunningham; another
Colonel Alexander Forbas, Colonel Alexander Leslie, Colonel Alexander
Cunningham, Colonel Finess Forbas, Colonel David Edintoun, Colonel Sandilands,
Colonel Walter Leckie, and diverse other Scottish Colonels, what of Horse and
Foot (many whereof within a short space thereafter, attained to be general
persons) under the command of Gustavus the Caesaromastix; who confided so much
in the valor, loyalty, and discretion of the Scottish Nation, and they
reciprocally in the gallantry, affection, and magnanimity of him, that
immediately after the battle at Leipsich, in one place, and at one time, he had
six and thirty Scottish Colonels about him; whereof some did command a whole
Brigad of Horse, some a Brigad composed of two Regiments, half Horse, half
Foot; and others a Brigade made up of Foot only, without Horse: some again had
the command of a Regiment of Horse only, without Foot: some of a Regiment of
Horse alone, without more; and others of a Regiment of Dragoons: the half of
the names of which Colonels are not here inserted, though they were men of
notable prowess, and in Martial achievements of most exquisite dextetity;
whose Regiments were commonly distinguished by the diversity of Nations, of
which they were severally composed; many Regiments of English, Scots, Danes,
Sweds, Fins, Liflanders, Laplanders, High- Dutch, and other Nations serving in
that confederate war of Germany under the command of Scottish Colonels.

And besides these abovementioned Colonels (when any of the foresaid number
either dyed of himself, was killed in the fields, required a pass for other
countries, or otherwise disposing of himself, did voluntarily demit his charge
(another usually of the same Nation succeeding in his place) other as many more
Scottish Colonels (for any thing I know) as I have here set down, did serve in
the same Swedish wars, under the conduct of the Duke of Wymar, Gustavus Horn,
Baneer, and Torsisson, without reckoning amongst them, or any of the
above-recited Officers, the number of more then threescore of the Scottish
Nation, that were Governors of Cities, Towns, Citadels, Forts, and Castles in
the respective conquered Provinces of the Dutch Empire.

Denmark (in my opinion) cannot goodly forget the magnanimous exploits of Sir
Donald Mackie Lord Reay, first, Colonel there and afterward commander of a
Brigade under the Swedish Standard; nor yet of the Colonels of the name of
Monro, and Henderson, in the service of that King; as likewise of the Colonel
Lord Spynay, and others; besides ten Governors at least, all Scots, entrusted
with the charge of the most especial strengths and holds of importance, that
were within the confines of the Danish authority; although no mention were made
of exempt Mouat living in Birren, in whose judgment and fidelity, such trust is
reposed, that he is as it were Vice-King of Norway: what obligation the State
of France does owe to the old Lord Colvil, Colonel of Horse; the two Colonel
Hepburnes, Sir John Hepburn by name, and Colonel Heburn of Wachton, and Colonel
Lord James Douglas (the last three whereof were Mareschaux de camp, and (had
they survived the respective day wherein they successively dyed in the bed of
honor) would undoubtedly very shortly after have been all of them made
Mareschals of France, one of the highest preferments belonging to the Milice of
that Nation) is not unknown to those that are acquainted with the French
affairs: and truly as for Sir John Heburn (albeit no mention was made of him
in the List of Scots Officers in the Swedish service) he had under Gustavus,
the charge of a Brigad of Foot; and so gallantly behaved himself at the battle
of Leipsich, that unto him (in so far as praise is due to man) was attributed
the honor of the day.

Sir Andrew Gray, Sir John Seatoun, Sir John Fulerton the Earl of Irwin, Sir
Patrick Morray, Colonel Erskin, Colonel Andrew Linsay, Colonel Mouat, Colonel
Morison, Colonel Thomas Hume, Colonel John Forbas, Colonel Liviston, Colonel
John Leslie, (besides a great many other Scots of their charge, condition, and
quality) were all Colonels under the pay of Lewis the thirteenth of France.
Some of those also, though not listed in the former Roll, had, before they
engaged themselves in the French employment, standing Regiments under the
command of the Swedish King.

The interest of France, Swedland, and Denmark, not being able to bound the
valor of the Scottish nation within the limits of their Territories; the
several Expeditions into Hungary, Dalmatia, and Croatia, against the Turks;
into Transylvania against Bethleem Gabor, to Italy against the Venetians, and
in Germany against Count Mansfield and the confederate Princes, can testify
the many Martial exploits of Colonel Sir John Henderson, Colonel William
Johnston, (who shortly thereafter did excellent service to this King of
Portugal, and is a man of an upright mind, and a most undaunted courage)
Colonel Lithco, Colonel Wedderburne, Colonel Bruce, and of many other Colonels
of that Country, whose names I know not; but above all, the two eminent ones,
Colonel Leslie, and Colonel Gordon; the first whereof is made an hereditary
Marquess of the Empire, and Colonel-General of the whole Infantry of all the
Imperial Forces; and the other gratified with the privilege of the Golden Key,
as a cognizance of his being raised to the dignity of High Chamberlain of the
Emperors Court: which splendid and illustrious places of so sublime honor and
preeminence, were deservedly conferred on them, for such extraordinary great
services done by them for the weal and grandeur of the Caesarean Majesty, as
did by far surpass the performance of any, to the Austrian family, now living
in this Age.

But lest the Emperor should brag too much of the gallantry of those Scots,
above others of that Nation; his cousin the King of Spain, is able to outvie
him, in the person of the ever-renowned Earl of Bodwel; whose unparalled
valor, so frequently tried in Scotland, France, Germany, the Low Countries,
Spain, Italy, and other parts, in a very short time began to be so redoubtable,
that at last he became a terror to all the most desperate Duellists and
Bravo's of Europe, and a queller of the fury of the proudest Champions of his
Age: for, all the innumerable Combats which he fought against both Turks and
Christians, hoth on horse and foot, closed always with the death or subjection
of the adversary (of what degree or condition soever he might be) that was so
bold as to cope with and encounter him in that kind of Hostility: the
Gasconads of France, Rodomontads of Spain, Fanfaronads of Italy, and
Bragadochio brags of all other Countries, could no more astonish his invincible
heart, then would the cheeping of a Mouse a Bear robbed of her whelps. That
warlike and strong Mohammedan, who dared (like another Goliath) and appealled the
stoutest and most valiant of the Christian faith, to enter the Lists with him,
and fight in the defense of their Religion, was (after many hundreds of
galliant Christians had been foiled by him) thrown dead to the ground by the
vigor and dexterity of his hand. He would very often, (in the presence of
Ladies, whose intimate favorite he was) to give some proof of the undantedness
of his courage, by the mere activity of his body, with the help of a single
sword, set upon a Lion in his greatest fierceness, and killed him dead upon the
place. For running, vaulting, jumping, throwing of the bar, and other
suchlike feats of nimbleness, strength, and agility, he was the only paragon
of the world, and unmatched by any.

Whilst, in Madrid, Genua, Milan, Venice, Florence, Naples, Paris, Bruxelles,
Vienna, and other great and magnificent Cities, for the defense of the honor
and reputation of the Ladies whom he affected, he had in such measure incurred
the hatred and indignation of some great and potent Princes, that, to affront
him, they had sent numbers of Spadassins, and Acuchilladores, to surprise him
at their best advantage; he would often times, all alone, buckle with ten or
twelve of them, and lay such load, and so thick and threesold upon them, that
he would quickly make them for their safeties betake themselves to their heels,
with a vengeance at their back; by which means he gave such evidence of his
greatness of resolution, strenuitie of person, excellency in conduct, and
incomparable magnanity of spirt, that being comfortable to his friends,
formidable to his foes, and admirable to all; such as formerly had been his
cruellest enemies, and most deeply had plotted and projected his ruin, were at
last content, out of a remorse of conscience, to acknowledge the ascendent of
his worth above theirs, and to sue, in all humility, to be reconciled to him.
To this demand of theirs (out of his wonted generosity, which was never
wanting, when either goodness or mercy required the making use thereof) having
fully condescended, he past the whole remainder of his days in great security,
and with all ease desirable, in the City of Naples; where, in a vigorous old
age, environed with his friends and enjoying the benefit of all his senses till
the last hour, he dyed in full peace and quietness: and there I leave him For,
should I undertake condignly to set down all the Martial achievements and acts
of prowess performed by him, in Tournaments, Duels, Battles, Skirmishes, and
fortuite encounters, against Scots, French, Dutch, Polonians, Hungarians,
Spaniards, Italians, and others (were it not that there are above ten thousand
as yet living, who, as eyewitnesses, can verify the truth of what I have
related of him) the History thereof to succeeding ages would seem so
incredible, that they would but look upon it (at best) but as on a Romance,
stuffed with deeds of Chivalrie; like those of Amades de Gaul, Esplandian, and
Don Sylves de la Selve.

Next to the renowned Count Bodwel, in the service of that great Don Philippe
tetrarch of the world, upon whose subjects the sun never sets, are to be
recorded (besides a great many other Colonels of Scotland) those valorous and
worthy Scots, Colonel William Sempil, Colonel Boyd, and Colonel Lodowick
Lindsay Earl of Crawford; there is yet another Scottish Colonel that served this
King of Spain, whose name is upon my tongues end, and yet I cannot hit upon it:
he was not a Soldier bred, yet, for many years together, bore charge in
Flanders under the command of Spinola. In his youth-hood, he was so strong and
stiff a Presbyterian, that he was the only man in Scotland made choice of, and
relied upon for the establishment and upholding of that Government, as the
arch-prop and main pillar thereof: but as his judgment increased, and that he
ripened in knowledge, declining from that Neoterick faith; and waining in his
love to Presbytery, as he waxed in experience of the world, of a strict Puritan
that he was at first, he became afterward the most obstinate and rigid Papist,
that ever was upon the earth. It is strange my memory should so fail me, that
I cannot remember his title: he was a Lord I know, nay more, he was an Earl, I
that he was, and one of the first of them: Ho now! pescods on it, Crauford Lodi
Lindsay puts me in mind of him; it was the old Earl of Argile, this Marquis of
Argile's father: that was he, that was the man, etc.

Now as Steel is best resisted and overcome by Steel; and that the Scots (like
Ismael, whose hand was against every man, and every man's hand against him) have
been of late so engaged in all the wars of Christendom, espousing, in a
manner, the interest of all the Princes thereof; that, what battle soever, at
any time these forty years past has been struck within the continent of
Europe, all the Scots that fought in that field, were never so overthrown, and
totally routed; for if some of them were captives and taken prisoners, others
of that Nation were victorious, and givers of quarter; valor and mercy on the
one side, with misfortune and subjection upon the otherside, meeting one
another in the persons of compatriots on both sides: so, the gold and treasure
of the India's, not being able to purchase all the affections of Scotland to
the furtherance of Castilian designs, there have been of late several Scottish
Colonels under the command of the Prince of Orange, in opposition of the
Spagniard; viz. Colonel Edmond, who took the valiant Count de Buccoy twice
prisoner in the field; Sir Henry Balfour, Sir David Balfour, Colonel Brog, who
took a Spanish General in the field upon the head of his Army, Sir Francis
Henderson; Colonel Scot Earl of Bacliugh, Colonel Sir James Livistoun, now Earl
of Calander, and lately in these our tourmoyles at home Lieutenant General of
both Horse and Foot, besides a great many other worthy Colonels, amongst which
I will only commemorate one, named Colonel Douglas, who to the States of
Holland was often times serviceable, in discharging the office and duty of
General Engineer; whereof they are now so sensible, that, to have him alive
again, and of that vigor freshness in both body and spirit, wherewith he was
endowed in the day he was killed on, they would give thrice his weight in gold;
and well they might: for some few weeks before the fight wherein he was slain,
he presented to them twelve Articles and heads of such wonderful feats for the
use of the wars both by Sea and Land, to be performed by him, flowing from the
remotest springs of Mathematical secrets, and those of natural Philosophy, that
none of this age saw, nor any of our forefathers ever heard the like, save
what out of Cicero, Livy, Plutarch, and other old Greek and Latin writers we
have couched, of the admirable inventions made use of by Archimedes in defense
of the City of Syracusa, against the continual assaults of the Roman Forces
both by Sea and Land, under the conduct of Marcellus. To speak really, I think
there has not been any in this age of the Scottish Nation, save Neper, and
Crichtoun, who, for abilities of the mind in matter of practical inventions
useful for men of industry, merit to be compared with him: and yet of these two
(notwithstanding their precellency in learning) I would be altogether silent
(because I made account to mention no other Scottish men here, but such as have
been famous for soldiery, and brought up at the school of Mars) were it not,
that, besides their profoundness in literature, they were enriched with
Military qualifications beyond expression, As for Neper, (otherwise designed
Lord Marchiston) he is for his Logarithmical device so completely praised in
that Preface of the Authors, which ushers a trigonometrical book of his,
entitled the Trissotetras, that to add any more thereunto, would but obscure
with an empty sound, the clearness of what is already said: therefore I will
allow him no share in this discourse, but in so sar as concerns an almost
incomprehensible device, which being in the mouths of the most of Scotland, and
yet unknown to any that ever was in the world but himself, deserves very well
to be taken notice of in this place; and it is this: he had the skill (as is
commonly reported) to frame an Engine (for invention not much unlike that of
Architas Dove) which, by virtue of some secret springs, inward resorts, with
other implements and materials fit for the purpose, enclosed within the bowels
thereof, had the power (if proportionable in bulk to the action required of it
(for he could have made it of all sizes) to clear a field of four miles
circumference, of all the living creatures exceeding a foot of hight, that
should be found thereon, how near soever they might be to one another; by which
means he made it appear, that he was able, with the help of this machine alone,
to kill thirty thousand Turks, without the hazard of one Christian. Of this it
is said, that (upon a wager) he gave proof upon a large plain in Scotland, to
the destruction of a great many herds of cattle, and flocks of sheep, whereof
some were distant from other half a mile on all sides, and some a whole mile.
To continue the thread of the story, as I have it, I must not forget, that, when
he was most earnestly desired by an old acquaintance, and professed friend of
his, even about the time of his contracting that disease whereof he dyed, he
would be pleased, for the hunour of his family, and his own everlasting memory
to posterity, to reveal unto him the manner of the contrivance of so ingenious
a mystery; subjoining thereto, for the better persuading of him, that it were a
thousand pities, that so excellent an invention should be buried with him in
the grave, and that after his decease nothing should be known thereof; His
answer was, That for the ruin and overthrow of man, there were too many
devices already framed, which if he could make to be fewer, he would with all
his might endeavor to do; and that therefore seeing the malice and rancor
rooted in the heart of mankind will not suffer them to diminish, by any new
conceit of his, the number of them should never be increased. Divinely spoken,
truly.

To speak a little now of his compatriot Crichtoun, I hope will not offend the
ingenuous Reader; who may know, by what is already displayed, that it cannot be
heterogeneal from the proposed purpose, to make report of that magnanimous act
achieved by him at the Duke of Mantua's Court, to the honor not only of his
own, but to the eternal renown also of the whole Isle of Britain; the manner
whereof was thus.

A certain Italian gentleman, of a mighty, able, strong, nimble, and vigorous
body, by nature fierce, cruel, warlike, and audacious, and in the gladiatory
art so superlatively expert and dextrous, that all the most skilful teachers of
Escrime, and Fencing-masters of Italy (which, in matter of choice professors in
that faculty needed never as yet to yield to any Nation in the world) were by
him beaten to their good behavior, and, by blows and thrusts given in, which
they could not avoid, enforced to acknowledge him their over commer: bethinking
himself, how, after so great a conquest of reputation, he might by such means
be very suddenly enriched, he projected a course of exchanging the blunt to
sharp, and the foiles into tucks; and in his resolution providing a purse full
of gold, worth near upon four hundred pounds English money, traveled along
the most especial and considetable parts of Spain, France, the Low-countryes,
Germany, Pole, Hungary, Greece, Italy, and other places where ever there was
greatest probability of encountering with the eagerest and most atrocious
duellists; and immediately after his arrival to any City or Town that gave
apparent likelihood of some one or other champion that would enter the lists
and cope with him, he boldly challenged them with sound of Trumpet, in the
chief marketplace, to adventure an equal sum of money against that of his, to
be disputed at the swords point, who should have both. There failed not several
brave men, almost of all Nations, who accepting of his cartels, were not afraid
to hazard both their person and coin against him: but (till he midled with
this Crichtoun) so maine was the Ascendent he had above all his Antagonists,
and so unlucky the fate of such as offered to scuffle with him, that all his
opposing combatants (of what State or Dominion soever they were) who had not
lost both their life and gold, were glad, for the preservation of their person
(though sometimes with a great expense of blood) to leave both their reputation
and money behind them. At last returning homewards to his own country, loaded
with honor and wealth, or rather the spoil of the reputation of those
forraginers, whom the Italians call Tramontani, he, by the way, after his
accustomed manner of abording other places, repaired to the City of Mantua,
where the Duke (according to the courtesy usually bestowed on him by other
Princes, vouchsafed him a protection, and savegard for his person: he (as
formerly he was wont to do by beat of Drum, sound of Trumpet, and several
printed papers, disclosing his design, battered on all the chief gates, posts,
and pillars of the Town) gave all men to understand, that his purpose was, to
challenge at the single Rapier, any whosoever of that City or country, that
durst be so bold as to fight with him, provided he would deposite a a bag of
five hundred Spanish Pistols, overagainst another of the same value, which
himself should lay down, upon this condition, that the enjoyment of both should
be the conquerors due. His challenge was not long unanswered: for it happened
at the same time, that three of the most notable cutters in the world, (and so
highly cried up for valor, that all the Bravo's of the Land were content to
give way to their domineering (how insolent soever they should prove) because
of their former constantly-obtained victories in the field) were all three
together at the court of Mantua; who hearing of such a harvest of five hundred
Pistols, to be reaped (as they expected) very soon, and with ease, had almost
contested amongst themselves for the priority of the first encounterer, but
that one of my Lord Dukes Courtiers moved them to cast lots for who should be
first, second, and third, in case none of the former two should prove
victorious. Without more ado, he whose chance it was to answer the cattle with
the first defiance, presented himself within the barriers, or place appointed
for the fight, where his adversary attending him, as soon as the Trumpet
sounded a charge, they jointly fell to work: and (because I am not now to
amplify the particulars of a combat) although the dispute was very hot for a
while, yet, whose fortune it was to he the first of the three in the field, had
the disaster to be the first of the three that was foiled: for at last with a
thrust in the throat he was killed dead upon the ground. This nevertheless not
a whit dismayed the other two; for the nixt day he that was second in the roll,
gave his appearance after the same manner as the first had done, but with no
better success; for he likewise was laid flat dead upon the place, by means of
a thrust he received in the heart. The last of the three finding that he was as
sure of being engaged in the fight, as if he had been the first in order,
plucked up his heart, knit his spirits together, and, on the day after the death
of the second, most courageously entering the Lists, demeaned himself for a
while with great activity and skill; but at last, his luck being the same with
those that preceded him, by a thrust in the belly, he within four and twenty
hours after gave up the ghost. These (you may imagine) were lamentable
spectacles to the Duke and City of Mantua, who casting down their faces for
shame, knew not what course to take for reparation of their honor. The
conquering Duellist, proud of a victory so highly tending to both his honor
and profit, for the space of a whole fortnight, or two weeks together, marched
daily along the streets of Mantua, (without any opposition or controulment)
like another Romulus, or Marcellus in triumph: which the
never-too-much-to-be-admired Crichtoun perceiving, to wipe off the imputation
of cowardice lying upon the Court of Mantua, to which he had but even then
arrived, (although formerly he had been a domestic thereof) he could neither
eat nor drink till he had first sent a Challenge to the conqueror, appelling
him to repair with his best sword in his hand, by nine of the clock in the
morning of the next day, in presence of the whole Court, and in the same place
where he had killed the other three, to fight with him upon this quarrel, that,
in the Court of Mantua there were as valiant men as he; and, for his better
encouragement to the desired undertaking, he assured him, that, to the
aforesaid five hundred pistols, he would adjoyn a thousand more; wishing him to
do the like, that the Victor, upon the point of his sword, might carry away the
richer booty. The Challenge, with all its conditions, is no sooner accepted of,
the time and place mutually condescended upon kept accordingly, and the fifteen
hundred pistols hinc inde deposited, but of the two Rapiers of equal weight,
length, and goodness, each taking one, in presence of the Duke, Duchess, with
all the Noblemen, Ladies, Magnifico's, and all the choicest of both men,
women, and maids of that city, as soon as the signal for the Duel was given,
by the shot of a great Piece of Ordnance of threescore and four pound ball; the
two combatants, with a lionlike animosity, made their approach to one another;
and being within distance, the valiant Crichtoun, to make his adversary spend
his fury the sooner, betook himself to the defensive part; wherein, for a long
time, he showed such excellent dexterity, in warding the others blows,
slighting his falsifyings, in breaking measure, and often, by the agility of
his hody, avoiding his thrusts, that he seemed but to play, whilst the other
was in earnest. The sweetness of Crichtoun's countenance, in the hotest of the
assault, like a glance of lightning on the hearts of the spectators, brought
all the Italian Ladies on a sudden to be enamoured of him; whilst the sternness
of the other's aspect, he looking like an enraged Bear, would have struck
terror into Wolves, and affrighted an English Mastiff. Though they were both
in their linens, (to wit, shirts and drawers, without any other apparel) and in
all outward conveniences equally adjusted; the Italian, with redoubling his
strokes, foamed at the mouth with a choleric heart, and fetched a pantling
breath: the Scot, in sustaining his charge, kept himself in a pleasant temper,
without passion, and made void his designs: he alters his wards from Tierce to
Quart; he primes and seconds it, now high, now low, and casts his body (like
another Prothee) into all the shapes he can, to spy an open on his adversary,
and lay hold of an ndvantage; but all in vain: for the invincible Crichtoun,
whom no cunning was able to surprise, contrepostures his respective wards, and,
with an incredible nimbleness of both hand and foot, evades his intent, and
frustrates the invasion. Now is it, that the never-beforeconquered Italian,
finding himself a little faint, enters into a consideration, that he may be
over-matched; whereupon, a sad apprehension of danger seizing upon all his
spirits, he would gladly have his life bestowed on him as a gift, but that,
having never been accustomed to yield, he knows not how to beg it. Matchless
Crichtoun, seeing it now high time to put a gallant catastrophe to that
so-long-dubious combat, animated with a divinely-inspired fervencie, to fulfill
the expectation of the Ladies, and crown the Dukes illustrious hopes, changes
his garb, fails to act another part, and, from defender, turns assailant: never
did Art so grace Nature, nor Nature second the precepts of Art with so much
liveliness, and such observancie of time, as when, after he had struck fire out
of the steel of his enemies sword, and gained the feeble thereof, with the fort
of his own, by angles of the strongest position, he did, by Geometrical
flourishes of straight and oblique lines, so practically executed the
speculative part, that, as if there had been Remora's and secret charms in the
variety of his motion, the fierceness of his foe was in a trice transqualified
into the numness of a pageant. Then was it that, to vindicate the reputation of
the Duke's family, and expiate the blood of the three vanquished Gentlemen, he
alonged a stoccade de pied ferme; then recoyling, he advanced another thrust,
and lodged it home; after which, retiring again, his rig^t foot did beat the
cadence of the blow that pierced the belly of this Italian; whose heart and
throat being hit with the two former strokes, these three franch bouts given in
upon the back of other: besides that, if lines were imagined drawn from the
hand that livered them, to the places which were marked by them, they would
represent a perfect Isosceles Triangle, with a perpendicular from the
top-angle, cutting the basis in the middle; they likewise give us to
understand, that by them he was to be made a sacrifice of atonement for the
slaughter of the three aforesaid Gentlemen, who were wounded in the very same
parts of their bodies by other such three Venees as these, each whereof being
mortal: and his vital spirits exhaling as his blood gushed out, all he spoke
was this, That seeing he could not live his comfort in dying was, for that he
could not dye by the hand of a braver man: after the uttering of which words he
expiring, with the shril clareens of Trumpets, bouncing thunder of Artillery,
bethwacked beating of Drums, universal clapping of hands, and loud acclamations
of joy for so glorious a victory, the air above them was so rarefied, by the
extremity of the noise and vehement sound, dispelling the thickest and most
condensed parts thereof, That (as Plutrach speaks of the Grecians, when they
raised their shouts of allegress up to the very heavens, at the hearing of the
gracious Proclamations of Paulus Aemilius in favor of their liberty) the very
Sparrows and other flying Fowls were said to fall to the ground for want of
air enough to uphold them in their flight.

When this sudden rapture was over, and all hushed into its former tranquillity,
the noble gallantry and generosity, beyond expression, of the inimitable
Crichtoun, did transport them all again into a new ecstasy of ravishment, when
they saw him like an Angel in the shape of a man, or as another Mars, with the
conquered enemies sword in one hand, and the fifteen hundred Pistols he had
gained, in the other, present the sword to the Duke as his due, and the gold to
his high treasurer, to be disponed equally to the three widows of the three
unfortunte gentlemen lately slain, reserving only to himself the inward
satisfaction he conceived, for having so opportunely discharged his duty to the
house of Mantua.

The Reader prehaps will think this wonderful; and so would I too, were it not
that I know (as Sir Philip Sidney says) that a wonder is no wonder in a
wonderful subject, and consequently not in him, who for is learning, judgment,
valor, eloquence, beauty, and good-followship, was the perfectest result of
the joint labor of the perfect number of those six deities, Pallas, Apollo,
Mars, Mercury, Venus, and Bacchus, that has been seen since the days of
Alcibiades: for he was reported to have been enriched with a memory so
prodigious, that any Sermon, Speech, Harangue, or other manner of discourse of
an hours continuance, he was able to recite, without hesitation after the same
manner of gesture and pronuntiation, in all points, wherewith it was delivered
at first: and of so stupendous a judgment and conception, that almost
naturally he understood quiddities of Philosophy: and as for the abstrusest and
most researched mysteries of other Disciplines, Arts, and Faculties, the
intentional Species of them were as readily obvious to the interior view and
perspicacity of his mind, as those of the common visible colors, to the
external sight of him that will open his eyes to look upon them: of which
accomplishment and Encyclopedia of knowledge, he gave on a time so marvelous a
testimony at Paris, that the words of admirabilis Scotus, the wonderful Scot,
in all the several Tongues, and Idiomes of Europ, were (for a great while
together) by the most of the Eccho's, resounded to the peircing of the very
clouds. To so great a hight and vast extent of praise, did the never too much
to be extolled reputation of the Seraphick wit of that eximious man attain,
for his commanding to be affixed programs, on all the gates of the Schools,
Halls, and Colleges of that famous University, as also on all the chief
pillars and posts standing before the houses of the most renowned men for
literature, resident within the precinct of the walls and suburbs of that most
populous and magnificient City, inviting them all (or any whoever else versed
in any kind of Scholastic faculty) to repair* at nine of the clock in the
morning of such a day, month, and year, as by computation came to be just six
weeks after the date of the affixes, to the common School of the College of
Navarre, where (at the prefixed time) he should (God willing) be ready to
answer; to what should be propounded to him cencerning any Science, Liberal
Art, Discipline, or Faculty Practical or Theoretick, not excluding the
Theological nor jurisprudential habits, though grounded but upon the
Testimonies of God and man, and that in any of these twelve Languages, Hebrew,
Syriack, Arabic, Greek, Latin, Spanish, French, Italian, English, Dutch,
Flemish, and Sclavonian, in either verse or prose, at the discretion of the
disputant: which high enterprise and hardy undertaking, by way of challenge to
the learned men in the world, damped the wits of many able Scholars to
consider, whether it was the attempt of a fanatic spirit, or lofty design of
a well-poised judgment; yet after a few days enquiry concerning him, when
information was got of his incomparable endowments, all the choicest and most
profound Philosophers, Mathematicians, Naturalists, Mediciners, Alchymists,
Apothecaries, Surgeons, Doctors of both Civil and Canon Law, and Divines both
for conttoversies and positive doctrine, together with the primest Grammarians,
Rhetoricians, Logicians, and others, professors of other Arts and Disciplines
at Paris, plied their Studys in their private cells, for the space of a month,
exceeding hard, and with huge pains and labor set all their brains awork, how
to contrive the knurriest arguments, and most difficult questions could be
devised, thereby to puzzle him in the resolving of them, Meander him in his
answers, put him out of his Medium, and drive him to a nonplus: nor did they
forget to premonish the ablest there of Foreign Nations not to be unprepared
to dispute with him in their own maternal dialects; and that sometimes
metrically, sometimes otherwise, pro libitu. All this while, the admirable
Scot (for so from thence forth he was called) minding more his Hawking,
Hunting, Tilting, Vaulting, riding of well-managed Horses, tossing of the Pike,
handling of the Musket, flourishing of Colors, Dancing, Fencing, Swimming
Jumping, throwing of the Bar, playing at the Tennis, Baloon, or Long-catch; and
sometimes at the house-Games of Dice, Cards, playing at the Chess, Billiards,
Trou-Madam, and other such like Chambersports, Singing, playing on the Lute,
and other Musical Instruments, Masking, Balling, Reveling, and (which did most
of all divert, or rather distract him from his speculations and serious
employments) being more addicted to, and plying closer the courting of handsome
Ladies, and a jovial cup in the company of Bacchanalian Blades, then the
forecasting how to avoid shun, and escape the snares; grins, and nets of the
hard, obscure, and hidden arguments, ridles, and demands to be made, framed,
and woven by the professors, Doctors, and others of that thricerenowned
University: there arose upon him an aspersion of too great proness to such like
debordings and youthful emancipations, which occasioned one less acquainted
with himself, then his reputation, to subjoyn (some two weeks before the great
day appointed) to that program of his, which was fixed on the Sorbonegate,
these words: If you would meet with this monster of perfection, to make search
for him, either in the Tavern or Bawdyhouse, is the readyest way to find him.
By reason of which expression (though truly as I think, both scandalous and
false) the eminent sparks of the University (imagining that those papers of
provocation had been set up to another end, but to scoff and delude them, in
making them waste their spirits upon quirks and quiddities, more then is
fitting) did resent a little of their former toil, and slack their studyes,
becoming almost regardless thereof, till the several peals of bells ringing an
hour or two before the time assigned, gave warning that the party was not to
flee the barriers, nor decline the hardship of Academical assaults: but on the
contrary, so confident in his former resolution, that he would not shrink to
sustain the shock of all their disceptations. This sudden alarm so awaked them
out of their last fortnights Lethargy, that calling to mind, the best way they
might, the fruits of the foregoing months labor, they hyed to the forenamed
School with all diligence; Where, after all of them had, according to their
several degrees and qualities, seated themselves, and that by reason of the
noise occasioned through the great confluence of people, which so strange a
novelty brought thither out of curiosity, an universal silence was commanded,
the Orator of the University in most fluent Latin, addressing his speech to
Crichtoun, extolled him for his literature, and other good parts, and for that
confident opinion he had of his own sufficiency, in thinking himself able to
justle in matters of learning with the whole University of Paris. Critchtoun
answering him in no less eloquent terms of Latin, after he had most heartily
thanked him for his elogies, so undeservedly bestowed, and darted some high
encomions upon the University and the Professors therein; he very ingenuously
protested, that he did not emit his programs out of any ambition to he esteemed
able to enter in competition with the University, but merely to be honored
with the favor of a public conference with the learned men thereof: in
complements after this manner ultro citroque habitis, tossed to and again,
retorted, contrerisposted, backreverted and now and then graced with a quip or
a clinch for the better relish of the ear; being unwilling in this kind of
straining courtesy, to yield to other, they spent a full half hour and more:
for he being the center to which the innumerable diameters of the discourses of
that circulary convention did tend, although none was to answer, but he, any of
them all according to the order of their prescribed series, were permitted to
reply, or comence new motions, on any subject in what Language soever, and
howsoever expressed; to all which he being bound to tender himself a
respondent, in matter and form suitable to the impugners propounding, he did
first so transcendently acquit himself of that circumstantial kind of Oratory,
that, by well-couched periods, and neatly running syllables, in all the the
twelve Languages, both in verse and prose, he expressed to the life his
Courtship and civility: and afterward, when the Rector of the University
(unwilling to have any more time bestowed on superficial Rhetoric, or to have
that wasted on the fondness of quaint phrases, which might be better employed
in a reciprocacyof discussing scientifically the nature of substantial things)
gave direction to the Professors to fall on, each according to the dignity or
precedence of his Faculty, and that conform to the order given: some
Metaphysical notions were set abroach, then Mathematical; and of those,
Arithmetical, Geometrical, Astronomical, Musical, Optical, Cosmographical,
Trigonometrical, Statical, and so forth through all the other branches of the
prime and mother-Sciences thereof: the next bout was through all Natural
Philosophy, according to Aristoles method, from the Acroamaticks, going along
the speculation of the nature of the heavens, and that of the generation and
corruption of sublinary things, even to the consideration of the soul and its
faculties: in sequel hereof, they had a hint at Chemical extractions, and spoke
of the principles of corporeal and mixed bodies, according to the precepts of
that Art. After this, they disputed of medecin, in all its Thereapeutick,
Pharmacopeutick, and Chirurgical parts; and not leaving Natural Magic
untouched, they had exquisite disceptations concerning the secrets thereof.
From thence they proceeded to Moral Philosophy, where debating of the true
enumeration of all virtues and vices, they had most learned ratiocinations
about the chief good of the life of man: and seeing the Oecumenicks and
Politics are parts of that Philosophy, they argued learnedly of all the
several sorts of governments, with their defects and advantages; whereupon
perpending, that, without an established Law, all the duties of ruling and
subjection, to the utter ruin of humane society, would he be as often
violated, as the irregularity of passion, seconded with power, should give way
thereto. The Sorbonist, Canonical, and Civilian Doctors most judiciously argued
with him about the most prudential Maxims, Sentences, Ordinances, Acts, and
Statutes for ordering all manner of persons in their consciences, bodies,
fortunes, and repuon: nor was there an end put to those literate exercitations,
till the Grammarians, Rethoricians, Poets and Logicians had assailed him with
all the subtleties and nicest quodlibets their respective habits could afford.
Now when, to the admiration of all that were there, the incomparable Crichtoun
had, in all these faculties above written, and in any of the twelve Languages,
wherein he was spoke to, whether in verse or prose, held tack to all the
disputants, who were accounted the ablest Scholars upon the earth, in each
their own profession; and publicly evidenced such an Universality of
knowledge, and accurate promptness ln resolving of doubts, distinguishing of
obscurities, expressing the members of a distinction in adaequate terms of Art,
explaining those compendious terms with words of a more easy apprehension, to
the prostrating of the sublimest mysteries to any vulgar capacity; and with all
excogitable variety of learning (to his own everlasting fame) entertained,
after that kind, the nimble witted Parisians from nine a clock in the morning,
till six at night; The Rector now finding it high time to give some relaxation
to these worthy spirits, which during such a long space had been so intensively
bent upon the abstrusest speculations, rose up, and, saluting the Divine
Crichtoun, after he had made an elegant Panegyric, or Encomiastick speech of
half an hours continuance, tending to nothing else but the extolling of him
for the rare and most singular gifts, wherewith God and Nature had endowed him,
he descended from his chair, and, attended by three or four of the most
especial Professors, presented him with a Diomond Ring and a purse full of Gold;
wishing him to accept thereof, if not as a recompense proportionable to his
merit, yet as a badge of love, and testimony of the Universities favor toward
him. At the tender of which ceremony, therewas so great a plaudite in the
School, such a humming and clapping of hands, that all the concavities of the
Colleges there about, did tesound with the echo of the noise thereof.

Notwithstanding the great honor, thus purchased by him for his literatory
accomplishments; and that many excellent spirits, to obtain the like, would be
content to postpose all other employments to the enjoyment of their studyes;
he, nevertheless, the very next day (to refresh his brains, as he said, for
the toil of the former days work) went to the Louvre in a Buff-suit, more like
a favorite of Mars, then one of the Muses minions; where in presence of some
Princes of the Court, and great Ladies, that came to behold his gallantry, he
carried away the Ring fifteen times on end, and broke as many Lances on the
Saracen.

When for a quarter of a year together, he after this manner had disported
himself (what Martially, what Scholastically) with the best qualified men in
any Faculty so ever, that so large a City (which is called the words
Abridgement) was able to afford, and now and then solaced these his more
serious recreations (for all was but sport to him) with the alluring
imbellishments of the tendrer Sex, whose inamorato that he might be, was their
ambition; He on a sudden took tesolution to leave the Court of France, and
return to Italy, where he had been bred for many years together; which design
he prosecuting within the space of a month (without troubling himself with
long journeys) he arrived at the Court of Mantua, where immediately after his
abord (as has been told already) he fought the memorable combat, whose
description is above related. Here was it that the learned and valiant
Crichtoun was pleased to cast anehor, and fix his abode; nor could he almost
otherwise do, without disobliging the Duke, and the Prince his eldest son; by
either whereof he was so dearly beloved, that none of them would permit him by
any means to leave their Court, whereof he was the only Privado: the object of
all men's Love, and subject of their discourse: the example of the great ones,
and wonder of the meaner people; the paramour of the female sex, and paragon
of his own; in the glory of which high estimation having resided at that Court
above two whole years, the reputation of gentlemen there was hardly otherwise
valued, but by the measure of his acquaintance: nor were the young unmaryed
Ladies, of all the most eminent places thereabounts, any thing respected of one
another, that had not either a lock of his hair, or copy of verses of his
composing. Nevertheless it happening on a Shrove-tuesday at night (at which
time it is in Italy very customary for men of great sobriety, modesty, and
civil behavior all the rest of the year, to give themselves over on that day
of carnavale (as theycall it) to all manner of riot, drunkenness, and
incontinency, which that they may do with the least imputation they can to
their credit, they go maskt and mum'd with vizards on their faces, and in the
disguise of a Zanni or Pantaloon to ventilate their fopperies, and sometimes
intolerable enormities, without suspicion of being known) that this ever
renowned Crichtoun (who, in the afternoon of that day, at the desire of my Lord
Duke (the whole Court striving which should exceed other in foolery, and
devising of the best sports to excite laughter; neither my Lord, the Duchess,
nor Prince, being exempted from acting their parts, as well as they could) upon
a theater set up for the purpose, begun to prank it, a la Venetiana) with such
a flourish of mimick, and ethopoetick gestures, that all the courtiers of both
sexes, even those that a little before that, were fondest of their own
conceits, at the fight of his so inimitable a garb, from ravishing actors, that
they were before turned then ravished spectators. O with how great liveliness
did he represent the conditions of all manner of men! how naturally did he set
before the eyes of the beholders the rogueries of all professions, from the
overweening Monarch, to the peevish Swain, through all intermediate degrees of
the superficial courtion or proud warrior, dissembled Churchman, doting old
man, cozening Lawyer, lying traveler, covetous Merchant, rude seaman pedantick
Scolar, the amourous shepherd, heard, envious artisan, vainglorious master,
and tricky servant; he did with such variety display the several humors of all
these sorts of people, and with a so bewitching Energy, that he seemed to be
the original, they the counterfeit; and they the resemblance whereof he was the
prototype: he had all the jeers, squibs, flouts, bulls, quips, taunts, whims,
jests, clinches, gybes, mokes, jerks, with all the several kinds of
equivocations, and other sophistical captions, that could properly be adapted
to the person by whose representation he intended to inveagle the company into
a fit of mirth; and would keep in that miscelany discourse of his (which was
all for the spleen, and nothing for the gall) such a climacterical and
mercurially digested method, that when the fancy of the hearers was tickled
with any rare conceit, and that the jovial blood was moved, he held it going,
with another new device upon the back of the first, and another, yet another,
and another again, succeeding one another for the promoval of what is a
stirring into a higher agitation; till in the closure of the luxuriant period,
the decumanal wave of the oddest whimzy of al, enforced the charmed spirits of
the auditory (for affording room to its apprehension) suddenly to burst forth
into a laughter; which commonly lasted just so long, as he had leisure to
withdraw behind the skreen, shift off with the help of a Page, the suite he had
on, apparel himself with another, and return to the stage to act afresh; for by
that time their transported, disparpled, and sublimated fancies, by the
wonderfully operating engines of his solacious inventions, had from the hight
to which the inward scrues, wheels, and pullies of his wit had elevated them,
descended by degrees into their wonted stations, he was ready for the
personating of another carriage; whereof, to the number of fourteen several
kinds (during the five hours space that at the Dukes desire, the solicitation
of the Court, and his own recreation, he was pleased to histrionize it) he
showed himself so natural a representative, that any would have thought he had
been so many several actors, differing in all things else, save the only
stature of the body; With this advantage above the most of other actors, whose
tongue, with its oral implements, is the only instrument of their minds
disclosing, that, besides his mouth with its appurtenances, he lodged almost a
several orator in every member of his body; his head, his eyes, his shoulders,
arms, hands, fingers, thighs, legs, feet and breast, being able to decipher
any passion, whose character he purposed to give.

First, he did present himself with a Crown on his head, a Scepter in his hand,
being clothed in a purple robe furred with Ermyne: after that, with a Miter on
his head, a Crosier in his hand, and accoutred with a pair of Lawn-sleeves:
and thereafter, with a Helmet on his head, the Visiere up, a commanding-stick
in his hand, and arrayed in a Buff-suit, with a scarf about his middle. Then, in
a rich apparel, after the newest fashion, did he show himself (like another
Sejanus) with a Periwig daubed with Cypres powder: in sequel of that, he came
out with a three cornered cap on his head, some parchments in his hand, and
writings hanging at his girdle like Chancery Bills; and next to that, with a
furred Gown about him, an ingot of gold in his hand, and a bag full of money by
his side; after all this, he appears again clad in a country-jacket, with a
prong in his hand, and a Monmouthlike-cap on his head: then very shortly after,
with a Palmers coat upon him, a Bourdon in his hand, and some few cockle-shels
stuck to his hat, he looked as if he had come in pilgrimage from Saint Michael;
immediately after that, he domineers it in a bare unlined Gown, with a pair of
whips in the one hand, and Corderius in the other: and in suite thereof, he
honder spondered it with a pair of Pannier-like breeches, a Mountera-Cap on his
head, and a knife in a wooden sheath dagger-ways by his side; about the latter
end he comes forth again with a square in one hand, a rule in the other, and a
leather apron before him: then very quickly after, with a scrip by his side, a
sheep-hook in his hand, and a basket full of flowers to make nosegayes for his
Mistress: now drawing to a closure, he rants it first in cuerpo, and vapouring
it with gingling spurrs, and his arms a kenbol like a Don Diego he strouts it,
and by the loftiness of his gate plays the Capitan Spavento: then in the very
twinkling of an eye, you would have seen him again issue forth with a cloak
upon his arm, in a Livery garment, thereby representing the serving-man: and
lastly, at one time amongst those other, he came out with a long gray beard,
and bucked ruff, crouching on a staff tip't with the head of a Barbers Cithern,
and his gloves hanging by a button at his girdle.

Those fifteen several personages he did represent with such excellency of
garb, and exquisiteness of language, that condignely to perpend the subtlety of
the invention, the method of the disposition, the neatness of the elocution,
the gracefulness of the action, and wonderful variety in the so dextrous
performance of all, you would have taken it for a Comedy of five Acts,
consisting of three Scenes, each composed by the best Poet in the World, and
Acted by fifteen of the best Players that ever lived, as was most evidently
made apparent to all the Spectators, in the fifth and last hour of his Action
(which according to our Western account was about six a Clock at night, and by
the Calculation of that Country, half an hour past three and twenty, at that
time of the year:) for, purposing to leave of with the setting of the Sun, with
an endeavor nevertheless to make his conclusion the masterpiece of the work,
he, to that effect, summoning all his Spirits together, which never failed to
be ready at the call of so worthy a Commander, did by their assistance, so
conglomerate, shuffle, mix and interlace the Gestures, inclinations, actions,
and very tones of the speech of those fifteen several sorts of men whose
carriages he did personate, into an inestimable Ollapodrida of immaterial
morsels of diverse kinds, suitable to the very Ambrosian relish of the Heliconian
Nymphs; that, in the Peripetia of this Drammatical exercitation* by the
enchanted transportation of the eyes and ears of its spectabundal auditorie,
one would have sworn that they all had looked with multiplying glasses, and
that (like that Angel in the Scripture whose voice was said to be like the
voice of a multitude) they heard in him alone the promiscuous speech of fifteen
several Actors; by the various ravishments of the excellencies whereof, in the
frolickness of a jocound strain beyond expectation, the logofascinated spirits
of the beholding hearers and auricularie spectators, were so on a sudden seized
upon in their risible faculties of the soul, and all their vital motions so
universally affected in this extremity of agitation, that, to avoid the
inevitable charms of his intoxicating ejaculations, and the accumulative
influences of so powerful a transportation, one of my Lady Duchess chief
Maids of honor, by the vehemency of the shock of those incomprehensible
raptures, burst forth into a laughter* to the rupture of a vein in her body;
and another young Lady, by the irresistible violence of the pleasure unawares
infused, where the tender receptibilitie of her too too tickled fancy was lest
able to hold out, so unprovidedly was surprised, that, with no less
impetuositie of ridibundal passion then (as has been told) occasioned a
fracture in the other young Ladies modesty, she, not able longer to support
the well beloved burden of so excessive delight, and intransing joys of such
Mercurial exhilarations, through the ineffable ecstasy of an overmastered
apprehension, fell back in a swown, without the appearance of any other life
into her, then what by the most refined wits of theological speculators is
conceived to be exe^ced by the purest parts of the separated entelechies of
blessed Saints in their sublimest conversations with the celestial hierarchies:
this accident procured the incoming of an Apothecarie with Restoratives, as the
other did that of a Surgeon with consolidative medicaments. The admirable
Crichtoun now perceiving that it was drawing somewhat late, and that our
occidental rays of Phoebus were upon their turning oriental to the other
hemisphere of the terrestrial Globe; being withal jealous; that the
uninterrupted operation of the exuberant diversity of his jovialissime
entertainment, by a continuate winding up of the humors there present to a
higher, yet higher, and still higher pitch; above the supremest Lydian note of
the harmony of voluptuousness, should, in such a case, through the too
intensive stretching of the already-super-elated strings of their imagination,
with a transcendencie overreaching Ela, and beyond the well-concerted gam of
rational equanimitie, involve the remainder of that illustrious company into
the sweet Labyrinth and mellifluent aufractuosities of a Lacinious delectation,
productive of the same inconvenices which befell the two before named-Ladies;
whose delicacie of constitution, though sooner overcome, did not argue, but
that the same extranean causes from him proceeding of their pathetick
alteration, might by a longer insisting in an efficacious agencie, and
unremitted working of all the consecutively-imprinted degrees, that the
capacity of the patient is able to contain, prevail at last, and have the
same predominancie over the dispositions of the strongest complexioned males of
that splendid society; did, in his own ordinary wearing-apparel, with the
countenance of a Prince, and garb befitting the person of a so well bred
Gentleman, and cavalier (...), full of Majesty, and repleat with all
excogitable civilitie, (to the amazement of all that beheld his heroic
gesture) present himself to epilogate this his almost extemporanean Comedy,
though of five hours continuance without intermission: and that with a
peroration so neatly uttred, so distinctly pronounced, and in such elegancie of
selected terms expressed, by a diction so periodically contexed with Isocoly
of members, that the matter thereof tending in all humility to beseech the
Highnesses of the Duke, Prince, and Duchess, together with the remanent Lords,
Ladies, Knights, Gentlemen, and others of both sexes of that honorable
convention, to vouchsafe him the favor to excuse his that afternoons escaped
extravagancies, and to lay the blame of the indigested irregularity of his wits
excursions, and the abortive issues of his disordered brain, upon the
customarily-dispensed-with privileges in those Cisalpinal regions, to
authorize such like impertinences at Carnavalian festivals: and that, although
(according to the most commonly received opinion in that Country, after the
nature of Load-him (a game at cards) where he that wins loses) he who, at that
season of the year, plays the fool most egregiously, is reputed the wisest
man; he nevertheless not being ambitious of the fame of enjoying good
qualities, by virtue of the Antiphrasis of the fruition of bad ones, did merely
undergo that emancipatorie task of a so profuse liberty; and to no other end
embraced the practicing of such roaming and exorbitant diversions, but to give
an evident, or rather infallible demonstration of his eternally-bound duty to
the house of Mantua and an inviolable testimony of his never to be altered
design, in prosecuting all the occasions possible to be laid hold on, that can
in any manner of way prove conducible to the advancement of, and contributing
to the readiest means for improving those advantages that may best promove the
faculties of making all his choice endeavors, and utmost abilities at all
times, effectual to the long wished for furtherance of his most cordial and
endeared service to the serenissime highnesses of my Lord Duke, Prince and
Duchess, and of consecrating with all addicted obsequiousness, and submissive
devotion, his everlasting obedience to the illustrious Shrine of their joint
commands. Then incontinently addressing himself to the Lords, Ladies, and
others of that Rotonda (which, for his daigning to be its inmate, though but
for that day, might be accounted in nothing inferior to the great Colisee of
Rome, or Amphitheater at Neems) with a stately carriage, and port suitable to
so prime a gallant, he did cast a look on all the corners thereof, so
bewitchingly aminable, and magnetically efficacious, as if in his eyes had bin a
muster of ten thousand Cupids eagerly striving who should most deeply pierce
the hearts of the spectators with their golden darts. And truly so it fell out
(that there not being so as much one arrow shot in vain) all of them did love
him, though not after the same manner, nor for the same end: for, as the Manna
of the Arabian deserts is said to have had in the mouths of the Egyptian
Israelites the very same taste of the meat they loved best: so the Princes that
were there did mainly cherish him for his magnanimity and knowledge: his
Courtliness and sweet behavior being that for which chiefly the Noblemen did
most respect him; for his pregnancie of wit, and chivalrie in vindicating the
honor of Ladies, he was honored by the Knights: and the Esquires, and other
Gentlemen courted him for his affability, and good fellowship; the rich did
favor him for his judgment, and ingeniosity: and for his liberality and
munificence, he was blessed by the poor; the old men affected him, for his
constancy and wisdom: and the young for his mirth and gallantry; the Scholars
were enamoured of him for his learning and eloquence, and the Soldiers for his
integrity and valor; the Merchants, for his upright dealing and honesty,
praised and extolled him; and the Artificers for his goodness and benignity;
the chastest Lady of that place would have hugged and embraced him for his
discretion, and ingenuity: whilst for his beauty and comeliness of person he
was (at least in the fervency of their desires) the paramour of the less
continent: he was dearly beloved of the fair women, because he was handsome; and
of the fairest more dearly, because he was handsomer: in a word, the affections
of the beholders (like so many several diameters, drawn from the circumference
of their various intents) did all concenter in the point of his perfection.
After a so considerable insinuation, and gaining of so much ground upon the
hearts of the auditory, (though in shorter space then the time of a flash of
lightning) he went on (as before) in the same thread of the conclusive part of
his discourse, with a resolution not to cut it, till the over-abounding
passions of the company their exorbitant motions, and discomposed gestures,
through excess of joy and mirth, should be all of them quieted, calmed, and
pacified, and every man, woman, and maid there (according to their humor)
reseated in the same integrity they were at first: which when by the
articulatest elocution of the most significant words, expressive of the
choicest things that fancy could suggest, and (conform to the matters
variety) elevating or depressing, flat or sharply accinating it, with that
proportion of tone that was most consonant with the purpose) he had attained
unto, and by his verbal harmony, and melodious utterance, settled all their
distempered pleasures, and brought their disorderly raised spirits into their
former capsuls, he with a tongue tip't with silver, after the various Diapasons
of all his other expressions; and making of a leg, for the spruceness of its
courtsie, of greater decorement to him then cloth of gold and purple, farewel'd
the company with a complement of one period so exquisitely delivered, and so
well attended by the gracefulness of his hand and foot, with the quaint
miniardise of the rest of his body, in the performance of such ceremonies as
are usual at a court-like departing, that from the theater he had gone into a
lobbie, from thence along three spacious chambers, whence descending a
back-staire, he past through a low gallerie, which led him to that outter gate,
where a coach with six horses did attend him, before that magnificent
convention of both sexes, (to whom that room, wherein they all were, seemed in
his absence to be as a body without a soul) had the full leisure to recollect
their spirits (which by the neatness of his so curious a close, were
quoquoversedly scattered with admiration) to advise on the best expediency how
to dispose of themselves for the future of that licentious night: during which
time of their being thus in a maze, a proper young Lady (if ever there was any
in the world) whose dispersed spirits, by her wonderful delight in his
accomplishments, were by the power of Cupid, with the assistance of his mother,
instantly gathered and replaced, did upon his retiring (without taking notice
of the intent of any other) rise up out of her box, issue forth at a
posterne-door, into some secret transes, from whence going down a few steps,
that brought her to a parlour, she went through a large hall; by the wicket of
one end whereof, as she entered on the street, she encountered with Crichtoun,
who was but even then come to the aforesaid Coach, which was hers; unto which
sans ceremony (waving the frivolous windings of dilatory circumstances) they
both stepped up together, without any other in their company, save a waiting
gentlewoman that sat in the furthest side of the Coach, a Page that lifted up
the boot thereof, and walked by it, and one Lacky that ran before with a
kindled torch in his hand, all domestic servants of hers, as were the
Coachman and postillion; who driving apace (and having but half a mile to go)
did, with all the expedition required, set down my Lady with her beloved mate
at the great gate of her own palace; through the wicket whereof (because she
would not stay till the whole were made wide open) they entered both; and
injunction being given, that forthwith after the setting up of the Coach and
horses, the gate should be made fast and none, more then was already, permitted
to come within her Court that night, they jointly went along a private passage,
which led them to a Lantern Scalier, whose each step was twelve foot long;
thence mounting up a pair of stairs, they past through and traversed above
nine several rooms on a floor, before they reached her bedchamber; which in
the interim of the progress of their transitory walk, was with such mutual
cordialness so unanimously aimed at, that never did the passengers of a ship in
a tedious voyage, long for a favorable wind with greater uniformity of desire,
then the blessed hearts of that amorous and amiable couple, were, without the
meanest variety of a wish, in every jot united. Nevertheless at last they
entered in it, or rather in an Alcoranal paradise; where nothing tending to the
pleasure of all the senses was wanting: the weather being a little chil and
coldish, they on a blew Velvet couch sat by one another, toward a Char-coale
fire burning in a silver Brasero, whilst in the next room adjacent thereto, a
pretty little round table of Cedar-wood was a covering for the supping of them
two together: the cates prepared for them, and a week before that time bespoke,
were of the choicest dainties, and most delicious junkets, that all the
territories of Italy were able to afford; and that deservedly: for all the
Roman Empire could not produce a completer pair to taste them: in beauty she
was supreme, in pedigree equal with the best, in spirit not inferior to any,
and, in matter of affection, a great admirer of Crichtoun, which was none of
her least perfections: she many times used to repair to my Lady Dutchesses
Court, where now and then the Prince would cast himself (as a l'improviste)
into her way, to catch hold the more conveniently of some one or other
opportunity for receiving her employments; with the favor whereof he very
often protested, if she would vouchsafe to honor him, and be pleased to
gratify his best endeavouors with her only gracious acceptance of them, none
breathing should be able to discharge that duty with more zeal to her service,
nor reap more inward satisfaction in the performance of it; for that his
obedience could not be crowned with greater glory, then by that of a
permanently-fixed attendance upon her commandments. His Highness complements
(whereof to this noble Lady he was at all times very liberal) remained never
longer unexchanged, then after they were delivered; and that in a coin so
precious, for language, matter, phrase, and elocution, that he was still
assured of his being repayed with interest: by means of which odds of her
retaliation, she (though unknown to her self) conquered his affections, and he
from thenceforth became her inamorato: but with so close and secret a mind did
he harbor in his heart, that new love, and nourish the fire thereof in his
veins, that remotely skonsing it from the knowledge of all men, he did not so
much as acquaint therewith his most intimate friend Crichtoun; who, by that the
Sun had deprest our Western horizon by one half of the quadrant of his Orb,
did, after supper, with his sweet Lady (whom he had by the hand) return again
to the bedchamber, wherein formerly they were; and there, without losing of
time (which by unnecessary puntilios of strained civility, and affected
formalities of officious respect, is very frequently, but too much lavished
away, and heedlesly regarded, by the young Adonises, and faint-hearted
initiants in the exercises of the Cytheraean Academy) they barred all the
ceremonies of pindarising their discourse, and sprucifying it in a la mode
salutations, their mutual carriage showing it self (as it were) in a mean
betwixt the conjugal of man and wife, and fraternal conversation of brother and
sister; in the reciprocacy of their love, transcending both; in the purity of
their thoughts, equal to this; and in fruition of pleasure, nothing inferior to
the other: for when, after the waiting damsel had, by putting her beautiful
Mistress into her Nocturnal dress, quite impoverished the ornaments of her that
days wear, in robbing them of the inestimably rich treasure which they
enclosed; and then performed the same office to the Lord of her Ladies
affections, by laying aside the impestring bulk of his journal abiliaments, and
fitting him, in the singlest manner possible, with the most genuine habit a la
Cypriana that Cupid could devise; she, as it became an obsequious servant, and
maid observant of her Mistrisses directions, bidding them good night with the
inarticulate voice of an humble courtesy, locked the doors of the room behind
her, and shut them both in to the reverence of one another, him to her
discretion, her to his mercy, and both to the passion of each other: who then
finding themselves not only together, but alone with other, were in an instant
transported both of them with an equal kind of rapture: for as he looked on
her, and saw the splendour of the beams of her bright eyes, and with what
refulgency her Alabaster-like skin did shine through the thin cawle of her
Idalian garments, her appearance was like the Antartick Oriency of a Western
Aurore, or Acronick rising of the most radiant constellation of the firmament:
and whilst she viewed him, and perceived the portliness of his garb* comeliness
of his face, sweetness of his countenance, and majesty in his very chevelure;
with the goodliness of his frame, proportion of his limbs, and symmetry in all
the parts and joints of his body, which through the cobweb slenderness of his
Cyllenian vestments, were represented almost in their puris naturalibus his
resemblance was like that of Aeneas to, Dido, when she said, that he was in
face and shoulders like a god; or rather to her he seemed as to the female
deities did Ganimed, when, after being carried up to heaven, he was brought
into the presence of Jupiter. Thus for a while their eloquence was mute, and
all they spoke, was but with the eye and hand; yet so perswasively, by virtue
of the intermutual unlimitedness of their visotactil sensation, that each part
and portion of the persons of either, was obvious to the sight and touch of the
persons of both; the visuriency of either, by ushering the tacturiency of both,
made the attrectation of both co^sequent to the inspection of either: here was
it that Passion was active, and Action passive; they both being overcome by
other, and each the conqueror. To speak of her hirquitalliency at the
elevation of the pole of his Microcosme, or of his luxuriousness to erect a
gnomon on her horizontal dyal, will perhaps be held by some to be expressions
full of obscoeness, and offensive to the purity of chaste ears: yet seeing she
was to be his wife, and that she could not be such without consummation of
marriage, which signifies the same thing in effect, it may be thought, as
definitiones Logicae verificantur in rebus, if the exerced act be lawful, that
the diction which suppones it; can be of no great transgression, unless you
would call it a solaecisme, or that vice in grammar which imports the
copulating of the masculine with the feminine gender. But as the misery of the
life of man is such, that bitterness for the most part is subsequent to
pleasure, and joy the prognostic of grief to come; so the admirable Crichtoun
(or to resume my discourse where I broke off, I say it hapened on a
Shrovetuesday at night, that the ever-renowned Crichtoun) was warned by a great
noise in the streets, to be ready for the acting of another part; for the
Prince (who till that time from the first hour of the night inclusively, for
the space of four hours together, with all his attendants, had done nothing
else, but rant it, roar, and roam from one Tavern to another, with haut-bois,
flutes, and trumpets, drinking healths, breaking glasses, tossing pots,
whitling themselves with Septembral juice, tumbling in the kennel, and acting
all the devisable feats of madness, at least so many as in their irregular
judgments did seem might contrevalue all the penance they should be able to do
for them the whole Lent thereafter) being ambitious to have a kiss of his
Mistress hand (for so, in that too frolic humor of his, he was pleased to call
this young Lady) before he should go to bed; with nine Gentlemen at his back,
and four pages carrying wax tapers before him, comes to the place where
Crichtoun and the foresaid Lady were (though the Prince knew nothing of
Crichtoun's being there) and knocks at the outer gate thereof. No answer is
made at first; for the whole house was in a profound silene, and all of them in
the possession of Morphee, save that blessed pair of pigeon-like lovers, in
whom Cupid, for the discharge of Hymenaean rites, had inspired a joint
determination to turn that whole nights rest to motion: but the fates being
pleased otherways to dispose of things then as they proposed them, the clapper
is up again, and they rap with a flap, till a threefold clap made the sound to
rebound. With this the Porter awakes, looks out at a lattice-window of his
lodge, and seeing them all with masks and vizards on their faces, asked them
what their desire was, or what it might be that moved them to come so late in
such a disguise? The Prince himself answered, that they were Gentlemen desirous
only to salute my Lady; which courtesy when obtained, they should forthwith
be gone. The porter advertiseth the page, and tells him all; who doing the same
to the waiting Gentlewoman, she, to receive orders from her Mistress, opens the
chamberdoore, enters in, relates the story, and demands direction from my Lady;
who immediately bids her call the page to her: she does it; he comes, and
enquiring what the will of her signoria was with him, she enjoynes him to go
down and beseech those Gentlemen to be pleased to have her excused for that
night, because she was abed, and not so well as she could wish, to bear them
company; yet if they conceived any fault in her, she should strive to make them
amends for it, some other time: the page accordingly acquits himself of what is
recommended to him; for after he had caused open the wicket of the gate, and
faced the street, he first saluted them, with that Court-like dexterity, which
did bespeak him a well-educated boy, and of good parentage; then told them,
that he was commanded by his Lady Mistress to entreat them (seeing she knew not
what they were, and that their wearing of vizards did in civility debar her
from enquiring after their names) to take in good part her remitting of that
their visit to another time, by reason of her present indisposure, and great
need of rest; which if, they should have any pretext to except against, she
would heartily make atonement for it, and given them satisfaction at any other
time. The Princes answer was, that he thought not but that he should have been
admitted with less ceremony, and that though the time of the night, and his
Lady-mistris her being in a posture of rest, might seem to plead somewhat for
the non-disturbance of her desired solitariness; that nevertheless the
uncontrolled privileges of the season exempting them from all prescribed (and
at all other times observed) boundaries, might in the carnavaleceve, and
supremest night of its law transcendent jollities, by the custom of the whole
Country, very well apologize for that trespass. Which words being spoken, he,
without giving the Page leisure to reply, pretending it was cold in the
streets, rusht in at the open wicket even into the Coutt, with all his
gentlemen, and Torch-bearers, each one whereof was no less cup-shotten then
himself. The Page astonished at such unexpected rudeness, said, with an audible
voice, What do you mean, gentlemen? do you intend to break in by violence, and
at such an undue time enforce my Lady to grant you admittance. Look, I pray
you, to your own reputations; and if regardless of any thing else, consider
what imputation, and stain of credit will lie upon you, thus to commit an
enormous action, because of some color of justifying it by immunities of set
times, grounded upon no reason but mere toleration, without any other warrant
then a feeble inveterate prescription; therefore let me beseech you, gentlemen,
if you love your selves, and the continuation of your own good names, or tender
anykind of respect to the honor of Ladys, that you would be pleased of your own
accords, to choose rather to return from whence you came, or go whither elsewhere
you will, then toimagin anyrational man will think that your masks and vizards
can be sufficient covers, wherewith to hide and palliate the deformedness of
this obtrusive incivility. One of the Princes gentlemen (whose brains the
fumes of Greek and Italian wines had a little intoxicated) laying hold only
upon the last word (all the rest having escaped both his imagination and
memory, like an empty sound which makes no impression) and most eagerly
grasping at it (like a snarling curr, that in his gnarring snatcheth at the
tail) echoes it, incivility; then coming up closer to him, and saying, how
now Jackanapes, whom do you twit with incivility, he gave him such a sound
thwack over the left shoulder with his sword, scabard and all, that the noise
thereof reached to all the corners of my Ladies bedchamber; at which the
generous Page (who besides his breeding otherwise, was the son of a nobleman)
being a little commoved and vexed at an affront so undeservedly received, and
barbarously given, told the Esquire who had wronged him, that if he had but had
one drop of any good blood within him, he never would have offered to strike a
gentleman that wanted a weapon wherewith to defend himself; and that although
he was but of fourteen years of age, and for strength but as a springal or
stripling in regard of him, he should nevertheless (would any of those other
nine gentlemen (as he called them) be pleased to favor him but with the lend
of a sword) take upon him even then, and on that place, to humble his
cockes-comb, pull his crest a little lower down, and make him feign (for the
safety of his life) to acknowledge that he is but a base and unworthy man.
Whilst the gentleman was about to have shapen him an answer, the Prince, being
very much taken with the discretion, wit, garb, and courage of the boy,
commanded the other to silence; and forthwith taking the speech in hand
himself, commended him very much for his loyalty to his Mistress; and (for his
better ingratiating in the Pages favor) presented him with a rich Saphir, to
show him but the way to my Ladies Chamber, where he vowed that (as he was a
gentleman) he would make no longer stay then barely might afford him the time
to kiss her hands, and take his leave. The sweet boy (being more incensed at
the manner of that offer of the prince (whom he knew not) then at the
discourtesie he had sustained by his aforesaid gentleman) plainly assured him,
that he might very well put up his Saphir into his pocket again; for that all
the gifts in the world should never be able to gain that of him, which had not
ground enough in reason for persuading the grant thereof without them.

After that the Prince and Pomponacio (for so they called the Page) had thus
for a long time together debated to and again, the reasons for and against the
intended visit, with so little success on either side, that the more artifice
was used in the Rhetoric, the less effect it had in the persuasion: The Prince
unwilling to miss of his mark, and not having in all the quivers of his reason
one shaft wherewith to hit it, resolved to interpose some authority with his
argumentations, and where the foxes skin could not serve, to make use of the
Lions: to the prosecuting of which intent, he with his vinomadefied retinue,
resolved to press in upon the Page, and, maugre his will, to get up stairs,
and take their fortune in the quest of the Chamber they aimed at: for albeit
the stradling as wide as he could, of pretty Pomponacio at the door whereat
they made account to force their passage, did for a while retard their design,
because of their chariness to struggle with so hopeful a youth, and tender imp
of so great expectation, yet at last, being loath to fail of their end, by how
indirect means soever they might attain thereto, they were in the very action
of crowning their violence with prevalency, when the admirable and
ever-renowned Crichtoun, who at the Princes first manning of the Court taking
^he Alarm, stepped from the shrine of Venus, to the Oracle of Pallas armata; and
by the help of the waiting gentlewoman, having apparelled himself with a
paludamental vesture, after the antic fashion of the illustrious Romans, both
for that he minded not to make himself then known, that to walk then in such
like disguise was the anniversary custom of all that country, and that all
both gentlemen and others standing in that Court, were in their mascaradal
garments; with his sword in his hand, like a messenger from the gods, came down
to relieve the Page from the post whereat he stood Sentry; and when (as the
light of the minor Planets appears not before the glorious rays of Titan) he
had obscured the irradiancy of Pomponacio with his more effulgent presence, and
that under pretext of turning him to the Page to desire him to stand behind
him, as he did, he had exposed the full view of his left side (so far as the
light of Torches could make it perceivable) to the lookers on, who, being all
in cuerpo carrying swords in their hands in stead of cloaks about them, imagined
really, by the badge or cognizance they saw near his heart, that he was one of
my Ladies chief domestic servants: he addressed his discourse to the Prince,
and the nine gentlemen that were with him; neither of all whereof, as they were
accoutred, was he able (either by the light of the Tapers, or that of the Moon,
which was then but in the first week of its waxing, it being the Tuesday next
to the first new Moon that followed the purification day) to discern in any
manner of way what they were: and for that he perceived by their unstedfast
postures, that the influence of the grape had made them subjects to Jacchus,
and that their extranean-like demeanor toward him (not without some
amazement) did manifest his certainty of their not knowing him; he therefore
with another kind of intonation (that his speech might not bewray him) then
that which waited upon his usual note, of utterance, made a pithy Panegyric in
praise of those that endeavored, by their good fellowship, and Bacchanalian
compagnionry, to cheer up their hearts with precious liquour, and renew the
golden age; whence descending to a more particular application, he very much
applauded the ten gentlemen, for their being pleased (out of their devotion to
the Lyaean god, who had with great respect been bred and elevated amongst the
Nymphs) not to forget, amidst the most sacred plying of their symposiasms, that
duty to Ladies which was incumbent on them to be performed in the discharge of
a visit: then wh^eling neatly about to fetch another careere, he discreetly
represented to them all the necessary circumstances at such a visit observable,
and how the infringing of the meanest title or particle of any one thereof,
would quite disconcert the mutual harmony it should produce, and bring an
unspeakable disparagement to the credits and honors of all guilty of the like
delinquency. In amplifying hereof, and working upon their passions, he let go
so many secret springs, and inward resorts of eloquence, that being all
persuaded of the unseasonableness of the time, and unreasonableness of the
suit, none of them, for a thousand ducats that night, would have adventured to
make any further progress in that after which a little before they had been so
eager: so profound was the character of reverence toward that Lady, which he so
insinuatingly had imprinted into the hearts of them all; wherefore they
purposing to insist no longer upon the visitatory design, did cast their minds
on a sudden upon another far more haire-brained consideration; when the Prince
to one of his chief gentlemen said, We will do this good fellow no wrong; yet
before we go hence, let us try what courage is in him, that after we have made
him flee for it, we may to morrow make one excuse for all, to the Lady whom he
serves. Do not you see (says he) how he dandleth the sword in his hand, as if
he were about to braveer us, and how he is decked and trimmed up in his
clothes, like another Hector of Troy, but I doubt, if he be so martial, he
speaks too well to be valiant: he is certainly more Mercurial then military;
therefore let us make him turn his back, that we may spy if, as another
Mercury, he has any wings on his heels. This foolish chat no sooner was
blattered out to the ears of three of his gentlemen, that were nearest to him,
but the sudden drawing of their swords, though but injest, made the other 6 who
heard not the Prince, as if they had bin mad, to adventure the rashness
wherewith the spirit of wine had inspired them, against the prudensequal and
invincible fortitude of the matchless Crichtoun; who not being accustomed to
turn his back to those that had any project against his breast, most manfully
sustained their encounter; which (although furious at first) appearing
nevertheless unto him (because of the odds of ten to one) not to have been in
earnest, he for twenty several bouts, did but ward their blows, and pary with
the fort of his sword, till by plying the defensive part too long, he had
received one thrust in the thigh, and another in the arm; the trickling of his
blood from the wounds whereof, prompted his heroic spirit (as at a desperate
stake to have at all or none) to make his tith outvytheir stock, and set upon
them all* in which resolution when from the door whereat he stood, he had
lanched forth three paces in the Court (having lovely Pomponacio behind him, to
give him warning in case of surprisal in the rear, and all his ten adversaries
in a front before him, who, making up above a quadrant of that periphery
whereof his body was the center, were about, from the exterior points of all
their right shoulder-blades, along the additional line of their arms and
tucks, to lodge home in him so many truculent semi-diameters) he retrograding
their intention, and beginning his agency, where they would have made him a
patient, in as short space as the most diagrammatically-skilled hand, could
have been able to describe lines representative of the distance 'twixt the
earth and the several kardagas, or horary expeditions of the Suns Diurnal
motion, from his aequinoxial horizontality to the top of his Meridian hight
(which, with the help of a ruler by six draughts of a pen, is quickly
delineated) livered out six several thrusts against them, by virtue whereof he
made such speedy work upon the respective segments of that debauched
circumference, through the red-ink-marks, which his streightdrawn strokes
imprinted, that being alonged from the center-point of his own courage, and
with a thunder-bolt-like-swiftness of hand radiated upon their bodies, he
discussed a whole quadrant of those ten, whereof four and twenty make the
circle; and laying six of the most enraged of them on their backs, left (in the
other four) but a Sextant of the aforesaid ring, to avenge the death of their
dismal associates. Of which quaternity, the Prince (being most concerned in the
effects of this disaster, as being the only cause thereof (though his
intentions levelled at another issue) and like to burst with shame to see
himself loadned on all sides with so much dishonor, by the incomparable valor
of one single man) did set forward at the swords point, to essay if in his
person so much lost credit might be recovered, and to that purpose coming
within distance, was upon the advancing of a thurst in quart; when the most
agil Crichtoun pareing it in the same ward, smoothly glided a long the Princes
sword, and being master of its feeble, was upon the very instant of making his
Highness very low, and laying his honor in the dust, when one of the three
Courtiers whom fortune had favored not to fall by the hand of Crichtoun, cried
aloud Hold, hold, kill not the Prince: at which words the courteous Crichtoun
recoyling, and putting himself out of distance, the Prince pulled off his
vizard, and throwing it away, show his face so fully, that the noble-hearted
Crichtoun, being sensible of his mistake, and sorry so many of the Princes
servants should have enforced him, in his own defense, to become the actor of
their destruction, made unto the Prince a very low obeisance; and setting his
left knee to the ground (as if he had been to receive the honor of Knighthood)
with his right hand presented him the hilts of his own conquering sword, with
the point thereof toward his own breast, wishing his highness to excuse his not
knowning him in that disguise, and to be pleased to pardon what unluckily had
ensued upon the necessity of his defending himself, which (at such an exigent)
might have befaln to any other, that were not minded to abandon their lives to
the indiscretion of others. The Prince, in the throne of whose judgment the
rebellious vapors of the Tun had installed Nemesis, and caused the irascible
faculty shake off the sovereignty of reason, being without himself, and unable
to restrain the impetuosity of the wills first motion, runs Crichtoun through
the heart with his own sword, and kills him: in the interim of which lamentable
accident, the sweet and beautiful Lady (who by this time had slipped her self
in-a cloth-of-Gold petticoat, in the anterior fente whereof was an asteristick
ouch, wherein were inchased fifteen several diamonds, representative of the
constellation of the primest Stars in the sign of Virgo; had enriched a tissue
gown and wastcoat of brocado with the precious treasure of her Ivory body; and
put the foot-stals of those Marble pillars which did support her Microcosme,
into a pair of incarnation Velvet slippers embroydered with purle) being
descended to the lower door (which jetted out to the courtwards) where
Pomponacio was standing, with the curled tresses of her discheveled hair
dangling over her shoulders, by the love-knots of whose naturally-guilded
filaments were made fast the hearts of many gallant sparks, who from their
liberty of ranging after other beauties, were more forcibly curbed by those
capillary fetters, than by so many chains of iron; and in the dadalian
windings of the crisped pleats whereof, did lie in ambush a whole brigade of
Paphian Archers, to bring the loftiest Martialists to stoop to the shrine of
Cupid; and, Arachne-like, now careering, now caracoling it alongest the
Polygonal plainness of its twisted threads) seize on the affections of all whose
looks should be involved in her locks; and, with a presentation exposing to the
beholders all the perfections that ever yet were by the graces conferred on the
female sex, all the excellencies of Juno, Venus, and Minerva; the other
feminean Deities, and semi-goddesses of former ages, seeming to be of new
revived, and within her compiled, as the compactedst abbridgement of all their
best endowments; stepped a pace or two into the Court (with all the celerity
that the intermixed passions of love and indignation was able to prompt her to:
during which time which certainly was very short, because, to the motions of
her angelically-composed body, the quantity attending the matter of its
constitution was no more obstructive, then were the various exquisite qualities
flowing from the form thereof, wherein there was no blemish) the eyes of the
Princes thoughts, and those were with him (for the influences of Cupid are like
the actions of generation, which are said to be in instanti) pryed into, spyed,
and surveyed from the top of that sublimely-framed head, which culminated her
accomplishments, down along the wonderful symmetry of her divinely-proportioned
countenance; from the glorious light of whose two luminaries, Apollo might have
borrowed rays to court his Daphne, and Diana her Endymion: even to the rubies
of those lips, where two Cupids still were kissing one another for joy of being
so near the enjoyment of her two rows of pea^les enclosed within them; and from
thence through the most graceful objects of all her intermediate parts, to the
heaven-like polished prominences of her mellifluent and heroinal breast, whose
porphyr streaks (like arches of the ecliptic and colures, or azimuch and
Almicantar-circles intersecting other) expansed in pretty veinelets (through
whose sweet conduits run the delicious streams of Nectar, wherewith were
cherished the pretty sucklings of the Cyprian goddess) smiled on one another
to see their courses regulated by the two niple-poles above them elevated, in
each their own hemisphere; whose magnetic virtue, by attracting hearts, and
sympathy in their refocillation, had a more impowering ascendent over poetic
lovers, for furnishing their brains with choice of fancy, then ever had the
two tops of Parnassus-hill, when animated or assisted by all the wits of the
Pierian Muses: then from the snow-white galaxy betwixt those gemel-monts, whose
milken paths, like to the plains of Thessaly, do by reflection calefie, to that
procuberant and convexe Ivory, whose meditullian node, compared with that
other, where the ecliptic cuts the aequinoxial, did far surpass it in that
property whereby the night is brought in competition with the day: whence
having past the line, and seeming to depress the former pole to elevate
another, the inward prospect of their mind discovered a new America, or land
unknown, in whose subterranean and intestine cells were secret mines of greater
worth, then those of either Tibar or Peru, for that besides the working in them
could not but give delight unto the Mineralist, their metal was so reciptible
for impression, and to the mint so pliable, that Alchymists profoundly versed
in Chemical extractions, and such as knew how to imbue it with Syndon, and
crown the Magisterum with the elixir, instead of treasures Merchants bring from
the Inda's, would have educed little worlds, more worth then gold or silver.
All this from their imagination being convoyed into the penitissim corners of
their fouls in that short space which I have already told, she rending her
garments, and tearing her hair, like one of the graces possessed with a fury,
spoke thus: O villains! what have you done? you vipers of men, that have thus
basely slain the valiant Crichtoun, the sword of his own sex, and buckler of
ours, the glory of this age, and restorer of the lost honor of the Court of
Mantua: O Crichtoun, Crichtoun! At which last words, the Prince hearing them
uttered by the Lady in the world he loved best, and of the man in the world he
most affected, was suddenly seized upon by such extremity of sorrow for the
unhappiness of that lamentable mischance, that not being able to sustain the
rays of that beauty, whose percing aspect made him conscious of his guilt, he
fell flat upon his face, like to a dead man: but knowing omne simile not to be
idem, he quickly arose; and, to make his body be what it appeared, fixed the
hilt of the sword wherewith he had killed Crichtoun, fast betwixt two stones,
at the foot of a marble statue standing in the Court (after the fashion, of
those staves with iron pikes at both ends (commonly called Swedish feathers)
when stuck into the ground to fence Musketeers from the charge of horse) then
having recoyled a little from it, was fetching a race to run his breast (which
for that purpose he had made open) upon the point thereof (as did Cato
Vticensis after his lost hopes of the recovery of the Commonwealth of Rome) and
assuredly (according to that his intent) had made a speedy end of himself, but
that his three Gentlemen (one by stopping him in his course, another by laying
hold on him by the middle, and the third by taking away the sword) hindered the
desperate project of that autochtony. The Prince being carried away in that
mad, frantic, and distracted humor (befitting a Bedlam better then a
Serralio) into his own palace, where all manner of edge-tools were kept from
him all that sad night, for fear of executing his former design of
self-murder: as soon as to his father my Lord Duke on the next morning by
seven a clock (which by the usual computation of that Country, came at that
season of the year to be near upon fourteen hours, or fourteen a clock) the
story of the former nights tragedy was related and that he had solemnly vowed
he should either have his son hanged, or his head struck off, for the
committing of a so ingrate, enormous, and detestable crime; one of his
courtiers told him, that (by all appearance) his son would save his highness
justice a labor, and give it nothing to do; for that he was like to hang
himself, or after some other manner of way to turn his own Atropos. The whole
Court wore mourning for him full three quarters of a year together: his funeral
was very stately, and on his hearse were stuck more Epitaphs, Elegies,
Threnodies, and Epicediums, then, if digested into one book, would have
out-bulk't all Homers works; some of them being couched in such exquisite and
fine Latin, that you would have thought great Virgil, and Baptista Mantuanus,
for the love of their mother-City, had quit the Elysian fields to grace his
obsequies: and other of them (besides what was done in other languages)
composed in so neat Italian, and so purely fancied, as if Ariosto, Dante,
Petrark, and B^mbo had been purposely resuscitated, to stretch even to the
utmost, their Poetic vein, to the honor of this brave man; whose picture till
this hour is to be seen in the bed-chambers or galleries of the most of the
great men of that Nation, representing him on horseback, with a Lance in one
hand, and a Book in the other: and most of the young Ladies likewise, that were
any thing handsome, in a memorial of his worth, had his effigies in a little
oval tablet of gold, hanging 'twixt their breasts; and held (for many years
together) that Metamazion, or intermammilary ornament, an as necessary outward
pendicle for the better setting forth of their accoutrements, as either Fan,
Watch, or Stomacher. My Lord Duke, upon the young Lady that was Crichtoun's
Mistress, and future wife (although she had good rents and revenues of her own
by inheritance) was pleased to conferr a pension of five hundred ducats a year:
the prince also bestowed as much on her, during all the days of his life,
which was but short; for he did not long enjoy himself after the cross fate of
so miserable an accident. The sweet Lady (like a Turtle bewailing the loss of
her mate) spent all the rest of her time in a continual solitariness; and
resolved, as none before Crichtoun had the possession of her body, that no man
breathing should enjoy it after his decease.

The verity of this story I have here related concerning this incomparable
Crichtoun, may be certified by above two thousand men yet living, who have
known him: and truly of his acquaintance there had been a far greater number,
but that before he was full 32 years of age, he was killed, as you have heard.
And here I put an end to the Admirable Scot.

The Scene of the choicest acts of this late Heroes of our time having been the
Country of Italy, the chief State whereof is Venice; it cannot be amiss (as I
have done for Spain, France, Holland, Denmark, Swedland, and Germany) that I
make mention of these four Scottish Colonels, Colonel Douglas, Colonel
Balantine, Colonel Lion, and Colonel Anderson; who (within these very few
years) have done most excellent service to the Venetian Commonwealth: nor can I
well forget that Sea-Captain, Captain William Scot, whose martial achievements
in the defense of that State against the Turks, may very well admit him to be
ranked amongst the Colonels: he was Vice Admiral to the Venetian Fleet, and the
only renowned bane and terror of Mohammedan Navigators: whether they had
Galleys, Galeoons, Galiegrosses, or huge war-ships, it was all one to him; he
set upon all alike, saying still, The more they were, the manyer he would kill;
and the stronger that the encounter should happen to be, the greater would be
his honor, and his prise the richer. He oftentimes so cleared the Archipelago
of the Mussulmans, that the Ottoman family at the very gates of Constantinople,
would quake at the report of his victories: and did so ferret them out of all
the creeks of the Adriatic gulf, and so shrewdly put them to it, that
sometimes they did not know in what part of the mediterranean they might best
shelter themselves from the fury of his blows: many of their mariners turned
land-souldiers for fear of him; and of their maritime officers, several took
charge of Caravans, to escape his hand, which for many years together lay so
heavy upon them, that he was cried up for another Don Jean d' Austria, or Duke
d' Orea, by the enemies of that Scythian generation; in spite of which, and
the rancour of all their unchristian hearts, he dyed but some eighteen months
ago in his bed of a fever in the Isle of Candia.

Now as besides those Colonels above recited, many other Scottish Colonels since
the Jubilee of 1600. till the year 1640. have faithfully served the Venetian
State against both the Christian and Turkish Emperors: so; in the intervals of
that time, have these following Scottish Colonels been in the service of the
King of Pole, against both the Moscoviter, Turk, and Swed; to wit, Colonel
Lermond, Colonel Wilson, Colonel Hunter, Colonel Robert Scot, Colonel Gordon,
Colonel Wood, Colonel Spang, Colonel Gun, Colonel Robertson, Colonel Rower, and
several others.

And seeing we are come so far on in the deduction of the Scottish Colonels, who
for the space of thirty or forty years, without reckoning the last ten, have
been so famous for their valor, in the continent of Europe (from whence the
Isle of Britain excludes it self) that neither thick nor thin, hunger nor
plenty, nor heat nor cold, was said to have been able to restrain them from
giving proof thereof; and that from the hot Climates of Spain, Italy, and
France, we have in prosecuting the thread of this discourse, traveled through
those of a mediocer temper of the Low countries, Denmark and Hungary even to
the cold regions of Germany, Swedland, and Pole; I hold it expedient before I
shut up this enumeration of Scottish Colonels into a period, that the very
Scyths and Sarmats, even to the almost subarctick incolaries, be introduced to
bear record of the magnanimity of the Scottish Nation; which, nevertheless
(because I would not trespass upon the Readers patience, in making the
nomenclature too prolixe) I make account to do, by setting down only the names
of those Scottish Colonels that served under the great Duke of Moscovy, against
the Tartar and Polonian; viz. Colonel Alexander Crawford, Colo- Alexander
Gordon, Colonel William Keith, Colonel George Mathuson, Colonel Patrick
Kinindmond, and Colonel Thomas Garne, who (for the hieght and grosseness of his
person, being in his stature taller, and greater in his compass of body, then
any within six domes about him) was elected King of Bucharia; the inhabitants
of that Country being more inclined to tender their obedience to a man of a
burly pitch like him, (whose magnitude being every way proportionable in all
its dimensions, and consisting rather in bones then flesh, was no load to the
mind, nor hindrance to the activity of his body) then to a lower-sized man;
because they would shun equality (as near as they could) with him, of whom they
should make choice to be their Sovereign; they esteeming nothing more
disgraceful, nor of greater disparagement to the reputation of that State, then
that their King should, through disadvantage of statute, be looked down upon by
any whose affairs (of concernment perhaps for the weal of the Crown) might
occasion a mutual conference face to face. He had Ambassadors sent to him to
receive the Crown, Scepter, Sword, and all the other royal cognizances
belonging to the Supreme Majesty of that Nation: but I heard him say, that the
only reason why he refused their splendid offers, and would not undergo the
charge of that regal dignity, was, because he had no stomach to be circumcised:
however this uncircumcised Garne, agnamed the Sclavonian, and upright Gentile
(for that he loves good fellowship, and is of a very Gentile conversation)
served as a Colonel, together with the forenamed five, and other unmentioned
Colonels of the Scottish Nation in that service, against the crim Tartar, under
the command of both his and their compatriot, Sir Alexander Leslie,
Generalissimo of all the forces of the whole Empire of Russia: which charge
(the wars against the Tartarian beginning afresh) he has re-obtained, and is
in the plenary enjoyment thereof (as I believe) at this same instant time; and
that with such approbation for fidelity and valor, that never any has been
more faithful in the discharge of his duty, nor of a better conduct in the
ininfinite dangers through which he has past.

I shall only here by the way, before I proceed any further, make bold to
desire the Reader to consider (seeing so short a space as thirty or four and
thirty years time has produced so great a number of Colonels, and others above
that degree of the Scottish Nation, universally renowned for their valor and
military achievements in all the Foreign and transmarine Countries, States,
and Kingdoms of Christendom) what vast number of Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors,
Captains, Lieutenants, Ensigns, etc. besides the collateral officers of an
army, such as Adjutants, Quartermasters, Commissaries, Scoutmasters, Marshals,
and so forth through all the other offices belonging to the Milice of a Nation,
either by Sea or Land, should be found of Scottish men to have been since they
year one thousand and six hundred, in the many several outlandish wars of
Europe; which I cannot think (if prejudicacy be laid aside) but that it will so
dispose the Reader, that he will acknowledge the Scottish Nation to have been an
honorable Nation (and that of late too) in their numerousness of able and
gallant men totally devoted to the shrine of Mars; of which sort as I have
omitted many worthy and renowned Colonels abroad, so will I not insist upon the
praise of two of our countrymen, Sir John Hume of Eatoun by name, and Francis
Sinclair, natural son to the late Earl of Catnes; the first whereof in his
travels through Italy, by his overmastering, both at the blunt and sharp, the
best swordmen and fence-masters of that country, acquired the reputation of the
skilfullest man in the world at the Rapeer-point, yet being killed at a battle
in Denmark some few years ago, to show that there wanted not another of the
same Scottish Nation to supply his place, and to inherit every whit as
deservedly that hight of fame conferred on him for his valor, the most
courageous and magnanimous acts of the aforesaid Francis Sinclair will manifest
it to the full, with almost the universal testimony of all Spain, Italy, and
Germany, which for many years together were the theaters of his never-daunted
prowess. To relate all the duels wherein he has been victorious, and but to
sum them together, it would amount to a greater number, then all the lessons
that the most conscientious master of Escrime that is, does usually give in a
whole three years space, to him whom he intends to make a proficient in that
faculty: therefore in stead of all (as by the dimension of Hercules foot, one
may judge of the stature of his body; and by the taste of a spoonful (as the
saying is) to know what kind of liquor is in a Tun) I will only make mention
of two actions of his, one done at the Emperors Court in Vienne, and the other
at Madrid in Spain.

The first was thus: A cerrain gallant nobleman of high- Germany (who by the
style of Conqueror (without any other addition) in duels, wherein he had
overthrown all those of any Nation that ever coped with him) having repaired to
the great City of Vienne, to accresce his reputation in some more degrees, by
the subjection of any proud spirit there, eager in that sort of contestation,
whereof he heard there were many; and notice being given to him of this
Sinclair, who had a perfect sympathy with him in that kind of adventuring
humor, they very quickly met with one another, and had no sooner exchanged
three words, when time and place being assigned for debating the combat, they
determined to take nothing in hand, till first it were made known, who should
(to the very hazard of their lives) bear clear away the palm, and reap the
credit of the bravest Champion: but the news thereof being carried to the
Emperor (who being unwilling that the victor should terminate the concertation
in the blood of the vanquished, and yet desirous for his own sport, that by
them somewhat might be done before him, in matter of trial which of them should
prove most skilful in the handling of his arms) he enjoined them, at a
perfixed time, in his own presence to decide the controversy with Foyles: and
for the better animating them thereto, assured them, that which of them soever
should give the other the first three free bouts, should, for his salary or
epinicion, have a pair of Spurs of beaten Gold set with Diamonds. The
combatants very heartily embraced the condition, and were glad to turn the
sharp to blunt, to gain the Gold Spurs: by which means, their hope of
overcoming on both sides, having cheerfully brought them to the appointed place
and time designed for the purpose, they had no sooner adjusted themselves in
equal terms for Foyles and every thing else befitting that jeopardless
monomachy, but Sinclair (at first, before he came within full distance, to try
the manner of his adversaries play) made a flourish or two of very nimble and
most exquisite falsifyings; whereat the other (conceiving them for
really-intended thrusts) was so disordred in his motion, that, offering to
ward, where he needed not, and taking the Alarm too hot, Sinclair was so
confident of his own sufficiency against that High-Dutchman, that when he had
asked the Emperor, for how many Franch bouts his Majesty would adjudge the Spurs
to be gained, and that the Emperor's answer was, For the first three; Sinclair
replied, If he did not give him five on end, he should be content to forfeit
the Spurs, and two hundred Crowns besides: whereupon immediately facing his
adversary (to let him know that many ward without a cause, that cannot pary
when they should) with the coinstantanean swiftness of hand and foot, gave him
de pie-forme, a terrible slap on the breast, wherewith the German Lord did so
stagger, that before he could fully recover himself, the blow was doubled, and
redoubled, with a sound thwack on the back of those, seconded with another
bounce, not leaving him, till with a push, and a thump again he had hit him
seven several times, and that with the same confidence and facility, that the
usher of a fencinghall uses to alonge against his Masters plastron. The
Emperor, by the thud of each stroke, which farthered his counting, having
reckoned beyond the number of the five promised bouts, and unwilling Sinclair
should lack of his due, or the other have his ribs broken, cried aloud, Hola,
forbear, enough: whereupon the duellists desisting, the Emperor required them
both to stand before him; who seeing the seven marks which the button of
Sinclairs foil, whitened with chalk, had imprinted in the others black Satin
doublet, and how they lay in order after the manner of the situation of the
seven Stars of the little Bear, laughed heartily (for he was a piece of an
Astronomer, and a great favourer of Mathematicians) then addressing his speech
to Sinclair (who had so much natural Arithmetic, as to know that seven
included five) asked him, why in livering in of his thrusts he exceeded the
promised number, seeing five was susficient for gaining of the prize; and why
being pleased to make them seven, he had fixed them in their stations after the
fashion of a Charlewaine? Sinclair (to whom though Astronomy might have
signified somewhat to eat, for any thing he knew of the Science, had
nevertheless the perspicacity to make the word Charlewaine serviceable to his
present purpose) very promptly answered, Sir, I did so place them, in honor of
my master CHARLES King of great Britain; and gave in two venees more then I was
obliged to, to give your Caesarean Majesty to understand, that, in the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, whereof that Isle consists, there are many
thousands more expert then I, in matter of Martial feats. At which answer the
Emperor was so well pleased, that he gave him the Spurs as his due for the
first five, and a gold chain for the other two.

In the mean while (for the Emperors better diversion) a certain Spanish
Hidalgo of the Archduke Leopoldo's Court, made bold to relate to his Imperial
Majesty, how the said Francis Sinclair had in the City of Madrid performed a
more notable exploit, and of far greater adventure, which was this.

Eight Spanish Gentlemen being suspicious of Sinclair's too intimate
familiarity with a kinswoman of theirs (whom they called Prima, that is to say,
a she-cozen) did all together set upon him at one time, with their swords
drawn; which unexpected assault moved him to say, Gentlemen, I doubt not but
you are valiant men; therefore if you would have your desire of me, my entreaty
is only that you would take it as it becomes men of valor, and that by trying
your fortune against mine, at the swords point, one after another. The
Spaniards pretending to be men of honor, not only promised to do what he
required, but, the better to assure him that they would prove faithful to him
in their promise, swore all of them upon a cross which they made with their
swords, that they would not fail therein, should it cost them all their lives.
In the extremity that Sinclair was, this kind of unhoped-for honest dealing did
very much encourage him, especially he knowing that he and they all had but
Toledo-blades, whose fashion was then to be all of one length and size; in a
word, conform to paction, they fell to it, and that most cleverly, though with
such fatality on the Spanish side, that in less then the space of half an hour
he killed seven of them Epassyterotically, that is, one after another;
gratifying the eighth (to testify he had done no wrong to the rest) with the
enjoyment of his life, who, rather then to undergo the hazard of the destiny
of his forerunners, chused to abandon his vindicative humor, and leave
unrevenged the blood and honor of his male and female cosens.

Much more may be said of him, but that I will not now supererogate in
magnifying the fulfillment of the Readers expectation, by the performance of
more then I promised; being resolved, for brevities sake, to pass over with
silence many hundreds of our country (such as Robert Scot, who was the deviser
of Leathern guns) that were in other parts much esteemed for their inventions
of warlike Engines.

And that since the year a thousand and sixhundred, before which time no action
has been performed anywhere, nor from that time, till this within the Isle of
Britain, by any of those Colonels and others, whom I have here before recited,
for which I have praised them, or otherways mentioned any of them; but by way
of designation of their names, in relation to their service abroad: nor amongst
them all have I nominated above five or six, that either served in, or did so
much as look upon the wars of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and yet I expect
not to merit blame, albeit of those general persons, and Colonels of the
Scottish Nation (whereof there is a great multitude) that have served (since the
year 1641.) in these our late wars of England, Scotland, and Ireland, I make no
mention, because multitudo is no more virtus then magnitudo; for though there
be some (and those but very some) amongst them, that have been pretty well
principled in reason, and had true honor before their eyes; yet seeing the
great mobil of the rest, by circumvolving them into a contrary motion, has
retarded their action, and made their virtue abortive, in not expressing their
names, I do them favor, by such concealment obviating the imputation, which
they deserve for having been in so bad company, and undersphering themselves to
the bodies of those vaster orbs (whether of the State, Milice, or Church of
Scotland) whose rapidity of violence might hurry them into a course quite
opposite to the goodness of their own inclination. For whoever they be (whether
civil or Ecclesiastical) of the Scottish Nation, whom the English can with any
kind of reason upbraid with covetousness, the Commons of Scotland with
oppression, or other States and Countries with treachery and dissimulation; it
is my opinion, that their names should not otherwise be recorded, but as
Beacons are set up where there are dangerous passages by Sea, that such thrifty
navigators (whether coetaneans or successors) as intend to sail with safety
into the harbor of a good conscience, may thereby avoid the rocks and shelves
of their greedy, Tyrannous, and hypocritical dealings: nor can it be a
sufficient excuse for any of those officers to say they thought they could not
offend God therein, for that the Kirk did warrant them in what they did; seeing
they might very well know, that it becomes such, as would take upon them a
charge over and against the lives of others in the respective preservation and
destruction of their souldier-friends and foes, to have principles within
themselves for the regulating of their outward actions, and not to be driven
like fools for advice sake to yield an implicit obedience to the oracles of
the Delphian Presbytery, whose greatest Enthusiasts (for all its cryed-up
infallibility) have not possibly the skill to distinguish betwixt Rape-seed and
Musket-powder. If any say that by taking such a course, their motion seems to
be the more Celestial, because (in imitation of the upper Orbs) it is furthered
by the assistance of an external intelligence; I answer, that according to the
opinion of him in whose Philosophy they read those separated animations, to
each of the heavens is allowed an informant as well as assisting soul: and
though that were not, the intelligences are so far different, that there is
hardly any similitude, whereupon to fix the comparison: for those superior
ones are pure simplicissim acts, insusceptible of passion, and without all
matter, or potentiality of being affected with any alteration; but these are
gross mixed patients, subject to all the disorders of the inferior appetites,
plunged in terrestrial dross, and for their profit or lucre in this world,
liable to any new impressions. That the Gentry then, and Nobility of Scotland,
whereof for the most part did consist those fresh-water-officers, should by
their codrawing in the Presbyterian yoke, have plowed such deep and bloody
furrows upon the backs of the commons of their own native soil, is not only
abominable, but a thing ridiculous, and an extreme scandal to the Nation: for
when some Lord or Lord there (whose tender conscience could embrace no
Religion that was not gainefull) had, for having given his voice (perhaps) to
the augmentation of a Ministers stipend, or done such like thing tending to the
glory of the new Diana of Ephesus, obtained a Commission for the levying of a
Regiment of horse, foot, or dragoons, under pretext of fighting for God against
the Malignants and Sectaries; then was it that by uncessant quarterings,
exacting of trencher-money, and other most exorbitant pressures upon the poor
tenandry of that country, such cruelty and detestable villainy was used, and
that oftentimes by one neighbor to another, under the notion of maintaining
the Covenant, and the cause of God, that hardly have we heard in any age of
such abominations done by either Turk or Infidel: and all out of a devotion to
the blessed sum of money, which the master of these oppressed tenants, for
saving of his land from being laid wast, must needs disburse: for most of those
Kirk-officers of Regiments, and their subordinado's, were but very seldom well
pleased with the production of either man or horse, how apt soever they might
seem to prove for military service, alleging some fault or other to the horse;
and that the man, for lack of zeal (for any thing they knew) to the Covenant,
might procure a judgment from heaven upon the whole army; that therefore they
would take but money, thereby the better to enable them to provide for such men
and horses, as they might put confidence into. And if it chanced (as oftentimes
it did) that a country-Gentleman, out-putter of foot or horse, being scarce of
money, should prove so untractable, as to condescend to nothing but what
literally he was bound to; then by, virtue of the power wherewith they were
entrusted, to see their soldiers well clothed, armed, and accommodated with
transport-money, and other such appurtenances, they had such a faculty of
undervaluing whatever was not good silver and gold, that, to make up the
deficiencies, according to their rates, would extend to so great a sum, that
hardly could any liable to a levy, that was refractary to their desire of
having money save so much as one single sixpence by his emission of either
horse or foot: so fine a trick they had with their counterfeit Religion, to
make an honest poor gentlemen glad to choose the worst of two evils, for
shunning a third of their own contrivance, worse then they both.

And when at any time the innocent Gentlemen, in hope of commiseration would
present their grievances to the respectvie Committees of the Shires, seldom or
never was there any prevention of, or reparation for the aforesaid abuse:
especially in the North of Scotland, of all the parts whereof, the Committees
of the Shires of Innernass and Ross, whether jointly or separately sitting,
proved the most barbarous and inhumane; it being a commonly-received practice
amongst their loggerhead stick wisdoms, not only to pass these and such like
enormities with the foresaid officers, but to gratify them besides, for the
laying of a burden upon their neighbors, which they should have undergone
themselves: yea, to such a height did their covetousness and hypocrisy reach,
that the better to ingratiate themselves in the favors of the soldiery, for
the saving of their pence, when the officers (out of their laziness) would be
unwilling to travel forty or fifty miles from their quarters for the taking up
of mantenance, or any arreer due of horse and foot-levies* they took this
savage and unchristian course, they would point at any whom they had a peck at,
pretending he was no good Covenanter, and that he favored toleration; and for
that cause (being both judges and parties themselves) would ordain him, under
pain of quartering and plundring, to advance to the insatiable officers so much
money, as the debt pretended to be due by those remote inhabitants (though mere
strangers to him) did extend to: by which means it ordinarily fell out, that
the civillest men in all the country, and most pliable to good order, were the
greatest sufferers; and the basest, the greedyest, and the most unworthy of the
benefit of honest conversation, the only men that were exempted, and had
immunities.

Now, when many of these Lord and Lord Kirk-officers had, by such
unconscionable means, and so diametrally opposite to all honor and common
honesty, acquired great sums of money, then was it that, like good Simeons of
iniquity, they had recourse to their brother Levi, for framing of
Protestations; their conscience not serving them to fight for a King, that was
like to espouse a malignant interest; under which cover, free from the tempest
of war (like fruitful brood-geese) they did stay at home to hatch young
chickens of pecunial interest, out of those prodigious eggs which the very
substance of the commons had laid down to them (with a curse) to sit upon.

Yet, if for fashion sake, at the instigation of inferior officers, who were
nothing so greedy as they, some show of muster was to be made of soldiers to
be sent to Sterlin-leaguer, or anywhere else; then were these same very men,
whom (out of their pretended zeal to the good cause) they had formerly cast,
either for malignancy or infencibility, and in lieu of each of them accepted of
fifty or threescore dolars, more or less, enrolled in their Troops or
Companies; when for the matter of three or four dolars, with the consent of a
cup of good Ale, and some promise of future plunder, they had purchased their
good wills to take on with them; they approving themselves by such insinuating
means, good servants, in being able by the talent of their three dolars, to do
the State that service, for the which the poor Country-Gentleman must pay
threescore, and be forced to quit his man to boot.

Truly those are not the Scottish Colonels whom I intend to commend for valor,
it being fitter to recommend them to posterity, as vipers, who, to work out a
livelihood to themselves, have not stuck to tear the very bowels of their
mother country, and bury its honor in the dust.

Such were not those Scottish Col. I formerly mentioned, whose great vassalages
abroad, and enterprises of most magnanimous adventures, undertaken and
performed by them in other countries, might very well make a poorer climate
then Scotland enter in competition with a richer soil.

Yet seeing the intellectual faculties have their virtues as well as the moral;
and that learning in some measure is no less commendable then fortitude, as
those aforementioned Scottish men have been famous beyond sea for the military
part, so might I mention thrice as many more of that Nation, as I have set down,
of warlike officers, who since the year one thousand and six hundred, have
deserved, in all those aforesaid countries of France, Italy, Spain, Flanders,
Holland, Denmark, Germany, Pole, Hungary, and Swedland, where they lived, great
renown for their exquisite abilities in all kind of literature; the greatest
part of whose names I deem expedient for the present to conceal, thereby to do
the more honor to some, whose magnanimity and other good parts now to
commemorate, would make one appear (in the opinions of many) guilty of the like
trespass with them, that, in the days of Nero, called Rome by its proper name,
after he had decreed to give it the title of Neroniana.

Nevertheless being to speak a little of some of them, before I lanch forth to
cross the seas, I must salute that most learned and worthy gentleman, and most
indeared minion of the Muses, Master Alexander Ross, who has written manyer
excellent books in Latin and English, what in prose, what in verse, then he
has lived years; and although I cannot remember all, yet to set down so many
of them as on a sudden I can call to mind, will I not forget; to the end the
Reader, by the perusal of the works of so universal a scholar, may reap some
knowledge when he comes to read

His Virgilius Evangelizans in thirteen several books (a piece truly, which
when set forth with that decorement of plates it is to have in its next
edition, will evidently show that he has apparelled the Evangelists in more
splendid garments, and royal robes, then (without prejudice be it spoken) his
compatriots Buchanan and Jhonstoun, have, in their Paraphrastick translation of
the Psalms, done the King and Prophet David.) His four books of the Judaick
wars, entitled, De rebus Judaicis libri quatuor, couched in most excellent
hexameters; his book penned against a Jesuit, in neat Latin prose, called
Rasuratonsoris; his Chymera Pythagorica contra Lansbergium; his Additions to
Wollebius and Vrsinus; his book called The new planet no planet; his
Meditations upon predestination; his book entitled the pictures of the
conscience; his Questions upon Genesis; his Religions Apotheosis; his
Melissomachia; his Virgilius Triumphans; his four curious books of Epigrams in
Latin Elegiacks; his Mel heliconium; his Colloquia plautina; his
Mystagoguspoeticus; his Medicus medicatus; his Philosophical touchstone; his
Arcana Microcosmi; his observations upon Sir Walter Rawley; his Marrow of
History, or Epitome of Sir Walter Rawleigh' works; his great Chronology in the
English tongue (set forth in folio) deducing all the most memorable things,
that have occurred since the Macedonian war, till within some ten or twelve
years to this time: and his many other learned Treatises, whose titles I either
know not, or have forgot.

Besides all these Volumes, Books, and Tractates here recited, he composed
above three hundred exquisite Sermons, which (after he had redacted them into
an order and diction fit for the press) were, by the merciless fury of Vulcan,
destroyed all in one night, to the great grief of many preachers, to whom they
would have been every whit as useful as Sir Edward Cooks reports are to the
Lawyers. But that which I as much deplore, and am as unfainedly sorry for, is,
that the fire, which (on that fatal night) had seized on the house and closet
where those his Sermons were consumed, had totally reduced to ashes the very
desks wherein were locked up several Metaphysical, Physical, Moral, and
Dialectical Manuscripts; whose conflagration by Philosophers is as much to be
bewailed, as by Theologically-affected spirits, was that of his most divine
elucubrations.

This loss truly was irrecoverable, therefore by him at last digested, because
he could not help it: but that some losses of another nature, before and after
that time by him sustained, have as yet not been repaired, lies as a load upon
this land, whereof I wish it were disburthened; seeing it is in behalf of him,
who for his piety, Theological endowments, Philosophy, Eloquence, and Poesy,
is so eminently qualified, that (according to the Metempsychosis of Pythagoras)
one would think, that the souls of Socrates, Chrysostom, Aristotle, Ciceron,
and Virgil have been transformed into the substantial faculties of that
entelechy, wherewith, by such a conflated transanimation, he is informed and
sublimely inspired. He spends the substance of his own lamp, for the weal of
others; should it not then be recruited with new oil by those that have been
enlightened by it? Many enjoy great benefices (and that deservedly enough) for
the good they do to their coaevals only; how much more meritoriously should he
then be dealt with, whose literate erogations reach to this and after-ages? A
lease for life of any parcel of land is of less value, then the hereditary
purchase thereof: so he of whom posterior generations reap a benefit, ought
more to be regarded, then they whose actions perish with themselves. Humane
reason, and common sense it self instructs us, that dotations,
mortifications, and other honorary recompenses, should be most subfervient to
the use of those, that afford literatory adminicularies of the longest
continuance, for the improvement of our sense and reason.

Therefore could I wish (nor can I wish a a thing more just) that this
reverend, worthy, and learned gentleman Master Rosse, to whom this age is so
much beholden, and for whom posterity will be little beholden to this age, if
it prove unthankful to him, were (as he is a favorite of Minerva) courted by
the opulent men of our time, as Danae was by Jupiter; or that they had as much
of Mecaena's soul, as he has of Virgil's: for if so it were, or that this
Isle, of all Christendom, would but begin to taste of the happiness of so wise
a course, virtue would so prosper, and learning flourish, by his
encouragements, and the endeavors of others in imitation of him, that the
Christians needed lie no longer under the reproach of ignorance, which the
oriental Nations fix upon them in the terms of seeing but with one eye; but
in the instance of great Britain alone (to vindicate (in matter of knowledge)
the reputation of this our Western world) make the Chinese, by very force of
reason (of whose authority above them they are not ashamed) be glad to confess,
that the Europaeans, as well as themselves, look out with both their eyes, and
have no blinkard minds. Of which kind of brave men, renowned for perspicacy of
sight in the ready perceiving of intellectual objects, and that in gradu
excellenti, is this Master Rosse: the more ample expressing of whose deserved
Elogies, that I remit unto another time, will I hope be taken in better part,
that I intend to praise him again; because Laus ought to be virtutis assecla;
and he is always doing good.

Therefore lest I should interrupt him, I will into France, Spain, and other
countries, to take a view of some great scholars of the Scottish Nation, who of
late have been highly esteemed for their learning in foreign parts: of which
number, he that first presents himself is one Sinclair, an excellent
Mathematician, professor Regius, and possessor of the chair of Ramus (though
long after his time) in the University of Paris: he wrote besides other books,
one in folio, de quadratura circuli. Of the same profession, and of his
acquaintance, there was one Anderson, who likewise lived long in Paris, and was
for his abilities in the Mathematical Sciences, accounted the profoundlyest
principled of any man of his time: in his studyes he plied hardest the
equations of Algebra, the speculations of the irrational lines, the proportions
of regular bodies, and sections of the cone; for though he was excellently well
skilled in the Theory of the planets, and Astronomy; the Optics, Catoptricks,
Dioptricks, the Orthographical, Stereographicial, and Schenographical
projections; in Cosmography, Geography, Trigonometry, and Geodesie; in the
Staticks, Music, and all other parts or pendicles, Sciences, Faculties, or
Arts of, or belonging to the disciplines Mathematical in general, or any
portion thereof in its essence or dependances: yet taking delight to pry into
the greatest difficulties, to soar where others could not reach, and (like
another Archimedes) to work wonders by Geometry, and the secrets of numbers;
and having a body too weak to sustain the vehement intensiveness of so high a
spirit, he dyed young, with that respect nevertheless to succeeding ages, that
he left behind him a Posthumary-book, entitled Andersom opera, wherein men
versed in the subject of the things therein contained, will reap great delight
and satisfaction.

There was another called Doctor Seaton, not a Doctor of Divinity, but one that
had his degrees at Padua, and was Doctor utriusque juris; for whose pregnancy
of wit, and vast skill in all the mysteries of the Civil and Canon Laws, being
accounted one of the ablest men that ever breathed, he was most heartily
desired by Pope Vrbane the eighth to stay at Rome; and the better to encourage
him thereto, made him chief professor of the Sapience (a College in Rome so
called) where although he lived a pretty while with great honor and reputation,
yet at last, (as he was a proud man) falling at some ods with il collegio
Romano, the supreamest seat of the Jesuits, and that wherein the general of
that numerous society has his constant residence, he had the courage to
adventure coping with them where they were strongest, and in matter of any kind
of learning, to give defiance to their greatest scholars; which he did do with
such a hight of spirit, and in such a lofty and bravashing humor, that
(although there was never yet that Ecclesiastical incorporation, wherein there
was so great universality of literature, or multiplicity of learned men) he
nevertheless misregarding what estimation they were in with others, and totally
reposing on the stock or basis of his own knowledge, openly gave it out, that
if those Teatinos (his choler not suffering him to give them their own name of
Jesuits) would offer any longer to continue in vexing him with their frivolous
chat, and captious argumentations, to the impugning of his opinions (and yet in
matters of Religion, they were both of one and the same faith) he would (like a
Hercules amongst so many Myrmidons) fall in within the very midst of them, so
besquatter them on all sides, and, with the granads of his invincible
arguments, put the brains of all and each of them in such a fire, that they
should never be able (pump as they would) to find in all the celluls thereof
one drop of either reason or learning, wherewith to quench it.

This unequal undertaking of one against so many, whereof some were greater
courtiers with his Papal Holiness then he, shortened his abode at Rome; and
thereafter did him so much prejudice in his travels through Italy, and France,
that when at any time he became scarce of money (to which exigent his
prodigality often brought him) he could not as before expect an ayuda de costa
(as they call it) or viaticum from any Prince of the territories through which
he was to pass; because the channels of their liberality were stopped, by the
rancour and hatred of his conventual adversaries.

When nevertheless he was at the lowest ebb of his fortune, his learning, and
incomparable facility, in expressing any thing with all the choicest ornaments
of, and incident varieties to the perfection of the Latin elocution, raised
him to the dignity of being possessed with the chair of Lipsius, and professing
humanity (in Italy called buone letere) in the famous University of Lovan: yet
(like Mercury) unapt to fix long in any one place, deserting Lovan, he repaired
to Paris, where he was held in exceeding great reputation for his good parts
and so universally beloved, that both Laics and Churchmen, courtiers and
Scholars, gentlemen and Merchants, and almost all manner of people, willing to
learn some new thing or other (for, as says Aristotle, every one is desirous
of knowledge) were ambitious of the enjoyment of his company, and ravished with
his conversation. For besides that the matter of his discourse was strong,
sententious, and witty, he spoke Latin, as if he had been another Livy or
Salustius; nor, had he been a native of all the three countries of France,
Italy, and Germany, could he have expressed himself (as still he did when he had
occasion) with more selected variety of words, nimbler volubility of utterance,
or greater terity, for tone, phrase, and accent in all the three Languages
thereto belonging.

I have seen him circled about at the Louvre, with a ring of French Lords and
gentlemen, who hearkened to his discourse with so great attention, that none of
them, so long as he was pleased to speak, would offer to interrupt him; to the
end that the pearls falling from his mouth, might be the more orderly
congested in the several treasures of their judgments: the ablest advocates,
barristers, or counselors at law of all the parliament of Paris, even amongst
those that did usually plead en la chamber doree, did many times visit him at
his house, to get his advice in hard debatable points. He came also to that
sublime pitch of good diction even in the French tongue, that there having
past, by virtue of a frequent intercourse, several missives in that idiom,
betwixt him and le sieur de Balzak, who by the quaintest Romancealists of
France, and daintiest complementers of all its lushions youth, was almost
uncontrollably esteemed in eloquence to have surpassed Ciceron; the strain of
Seatons letters was so high, the fancy so pure, the words so well connexed, and
the cadence so just, that Balzak (infinitely taken with its fluent, yet concise
Oratory) to do him the honor that was truly due unto him) most lovingly
presented him with a golden pen, in acknowledgement of Seatons excelling him,
both in Retorick and the art of persuasion; which gift proceeding from so great
an orator, and for a supereminency in that faculty wherein himself, without
contradiction, was held the chiefest of this and all former ages that ever were
born in the French Nation, could not choose but be acounted honorable. Many
learned books were written by this Seaton in the Latin tongue, whose titles
(to speak ingenuously) I cannot hit upon.

There was another Scottish man, named Cameron, who, within these few years, was
so renowned for learning over all the provinces of France, that, besides his
being esteemed for the faculties of the mind, the ablest man of all that
Country, he was commonly designed (because of his universal reading) by the
title of the walking Liberary; by which he being no less known then by his own
name, he therefore took occasion to set forth an excellent book in Latin, and
that in folio, entitled, Bibliotheca movens; which afterward was translated
into the English Language.

To mention those former Scottish men, and forget their compatriot Barclay, the
Author of Argenis Icon animorum, and other exquisite Treatises, translated out
of Latin into the Languages almost of every country, where use is made of
printing, would argue in me a great neglect: it shall suffice nevertheless for
this time, that I have named him; for I hope the Reader will save me a labor,
and extol his praises to as great hight, when he shall be pleased to take the
pains to peruse his works.

Yet that the learning of the travelers of the Scottish Nation may not seem to
be tied to the climate of France (although all Scots, by the privilege of the
laws of that kingdom, be naturalized French, and that all the French kings,
since the days of Charlemaine, which is about a thousand years since, by
reason of their fidelity to that Crown, have put such real confidence in the
Scots, that whither soever the King of France goes, the Scots are nearest to
him of any, and the chief guard on which he reposeth for the preservation of
his royal person) there was a Scottish man named Melvil, who in the year 1627.
had a pension of King Philip the fourth, of six hundred ducats a year, for his
skilfulness in the Hebrew, Caldean, Syraick, Ethiopian, Samaritan, and Arabic
tongues, beyond all the Christians that ever were born in Europe. The service
he did do the Spanish King in those languages (especially the Arabic and
Caldean (which, after great search made over all his ample territories, and
several other Kingdoms besides, for some able man to undergo the task, could
not be got performed by any but him) was to translate into Latin or Spanish
some few books of those six hundred great volumes, taken by Don Juan de
Austria, at the battle of Lepanto, from the great Turk, which now lie in the
great Library of the magnifick palace of the Escurial, some seven leagues
Westward from Madrid, and otherwise called San lorenco el real. Of those and
many other mental abilities of that nature, he gave after that most excellent
proofs, both at Rome, Naples, and Venice.

That most learned Latin book in folio, Treating of all the Mathematical Arts
and Sciences, which was written by that Scottish gentleman Sempil, resident in
Madrid, shows that Scottish spirits can produce good fruits, even in hot
climates.

Another named Gordon, of the Scottish Nation likewise, wrote a great Latin book
in folio, of Chronology, which is exceeding useful for such as in a short time
would attain to the knowledge of many histories.

Another Gordon also beyond sea, penned several books of divinity in an
excellent style of Latin. Of which kind of books, but more profoundly couched,
another Scot named Turneboll, wrote a great many. These four eminent Scots I
have put together, because they were societaries by the name of Jesus, vulgarly
called Jesuits; some whereof are living as yet; and none of those that are not,
dyed above fourteen years ago.

Methinks I were to blame, should I in this nomenclature leave out Dempster,
who for his learning was famous over all Italy, had made a learned addition to
Rossinus, and written several other excellent books in Lat in; amongst which,
that which does most highly recommend him to posterity, is the work which he
penned of five thousand illustrious Scots, the last liver whereof (as is
related in the 64. page of this book) dyed above fifty years since; for which,
together with the other good parts wherewith he was endowed, himself was truly
illustrious.

Balfour, a professor of Philosophy in Bourdeaux, wrote an excellent book in
Latin upon the morals: so did another of the Scottish Nation, named Donaldson,
upon the same very subject and that very accurately. Primrose a Scottish man,
who was a preacher in French at Bourdeaux, and afterward became one of the
three that preached in the French Church at London, wrote several good books
both in Latin and French. Doctor Liddel penned an exquisite book of Physic,
and so did Doctor William Gordon; and both in the Latin tongue: which two
Doctors were for their learning renownedover all Germany. Pontaeus a Scottish
man, though bred most of his time in France, by several writings of his obvious
to the curious Reader, gave no small testimony of his learning.

There was a professor of the Scottish Nation within these sixteen years in
Somure, who spoke Greek with as great ease, as ever Cicero did Latin; and
could have expressed himself in it as well, and as promptly, as in any other
Language: yet the most of the Scottish Nation never having astricked themselves
so much to the propriety of words, as to the knowledge of things, where there
was one preceptor of Languages amongst them, there were above forty professors
of Philosophy: nay, to so high a pitch did the glory of the Scottish Nation
attain over all the parts of France, and for so long time together continue in
that obtained hight, by virtue of an ascendant the French conceived the Scots
to have above all Nations, in matter of their subtlety in Philosophical
disceptations, that there has not been till of late, for these several ages
together, any Lord, Gentleman, or other in all that Country, who being desirous
to have his son instructed in the principles of Philosophy, would entrust him
to the discipline of any other, then a Scottish Master; of whom they were no
less proud then Philip was of Aristotle, or Tullius of Cratippus. And if it
occurred (as very often it did) that a pretender to a place in any French
University, having in his tenderer years been subferulary to some other kind of
schooling, should enter in competition with another aiming at the same charge
and dignity, whose learning flowed from a Caledonian source commonly the first
was rejected, and the other preferred: education of youth in all grounds of
literature, under teachers of the Scottish nation, being then held by all the
inhabitants of France, to have been attended (caeteris paribus) with greater
proficiency, then any other manner of breeding subordinate to the documents of
those of another Country. Nor are the French the only men have harbored this
good opinion of the Scots, in behalf of their inward abilitles; but many times
the Spaniards, Italians, Flemins, Dutch, Hungarians, Sweds, and Polonians, have
testified their being of the same mind, by the promotions whereunto, for their
learning, they in all those Nations, at several times have attained.

Here nevertheless it is to be understood, that neither these
dispersedly-preferred Scots, were all of one and the same Religion, nor yet any
one of them a Presbyterian. Some of them were, and are as yet Popish Prelates,
such as the Bishop of Vezon, and Chalmers Bishop of Neems, and Signor Georgio
Con (who wrote likewise some books in Latin) was by his intimacy with Pope
Vrban's Nephew Don Francesco Don Antonio, and Don Tadaeo Barbarini, and for his
endeavoring to advance the Catholico-pontificial interest in great Britain, to
have been dignified with a Cardinals hat, which (by all appearance) immediately
after his departure from London, he would have obtained as soon as he had come
to Rome, had death not prevented him by the way in the City of Genua: but had
he returned to this Island with it, I doubt it would have proved ere now as
fatal to him, as another such like cap in Queen Mary's time had done to his
compatriot Cardinal Betoun.

By this as it is perceivable that all Scots are not Presbyterians, nor yet all
Scots Papists: so would not I have the reputation of any learned man of the
Scottish Nation to be buried in oblivion, because of his being of this or this,
or that, or you, or of that other Religion; no more then if we should cease to
give learning and moral virtues their due, in the behalf of pregnant and good
spirits born and bred in several climates; which to withhold from them (whether
Perisians, Heteroscians or Amphiscians, would prove very absurd to the humane
ingenuity or ingenuous humanity of a true Cosmopolite.

For we see how the various aspect of the heavens, in their asteristick and
planetary influences, according to the diversity of our sublunary situations,
disposes the inclinations of the earths respective inhabitants differently;
whence (as is said in the 56. page of this book) The Spaniards are proud, the
French inconstant, the Italians lascivious, etc. and every Nation almost in
their humor, not only discrepant from one another, but each having some
disorderly motion, which another has not, makes the other to be possessed with
some irregularity which the former wants.

We know the Hollanders are more penurious then the high- Germans* and they
more intemperate then the Spaniards, who again are more lecherous then the
Hollanders. Now seeing ex malis moribus bonae oriuntur leges* and that vices,
like diseases of the body, must be cured by contraries, it will clearly follow,
there being vices contrary to other, as well as vice to virtue, that the Laws
curbing thoses vices in the opposite extremes, must needs be very dissonant
from one another.

Do not we see that in Holland to play the Merchant is accounted honorable,
although it be thought disgraceful in high- Germany, for a gentleman to use
anykind of traffic? The Spaniard holds him worse then a beast, that is at any
time drunk; yet the Dutchman esteems him no good fellow, that sometimes is
not. The Hollander deems him unworthy of the name of man, that fornicates
before he marry; but the Spaniard hardly does repute him a Man, who has not
exercised those male-abilities whereby he is distinguished from the woman.

Thus, according to the Genius of each climate, statutes, acts, and ordinances
being instituted for the regulating of men's actions; and our obedience to
superior powers by custom becoming (as it were) natural, we by experience
find, that the Religion wherewith men are most accustomed, lies best to their
consciences.

For that it is so, we know by the vehemence of fidimplicitaries, of whom some
will choose to lose their lives before they quit their Religion, although they
be altogether ignorant of what they should believe till they ask the Minister;
whose custom (to make their consciences subservient to their choler) is to
principle them with the negative faith, without any great positive doctrine
(for so begins the Covenant) of which kind of zealous disciples was that
covenanting gentleman, who burnt a great many historical and Philosophical
books, thinking they had been books of Popery; he taking them to be such,
because of the red letters he saw in their titles and inscriptions.

Nor shall we need to think it strange, that in the world there are so many
several Religions, if we consider that the diverse temperaments of our bodies
alter our inclinations, from whose disparity arise repugnant laws, which long
obedience makes it seem a sacrilege to violate. In my opinion, truly, there is
nothing more natural then variety yea, and that sometimes with opposition. Are
not we composed of the four elements, which have their contrary as well as
symbolizing qualities? and does not the manner of their mixture, and the
degrees (by more or less) of the qualities from thence flowing in the
constitution of men's bodies, disagree in all the persons of the world? Hence
some are Melancholious, some Phlegmatic, some Choleric, and some Sanguinean;
and every one of those more or less, according to the humor that affects him
in its quantity and quality.

Thus if men were left to themselves, every one would have a several religion;
but seeing to reap good from one another, we must to one another apply our
selves; and that this application without conformity, would prove destructive;
therefore is it that the individuals of mankind have been still pleased to
forego some natural interest they had in peculiar differences, the better to
erect an uniformity in their society, for that self-preservation, which is the
chief end of their designs.

This making either a King or State, we come then to have laws imposed on us
according to the climate or disposition of the people. And although I know
there be a difference bewixt divine and humane institutions, and that it is
fitting wicked thoughts be punished as well as words or actions: Yet do I
appeal to the judgment of any that will (in casting his eye upon the world, as
it is and still has been) consider but the various governments in the
regulating of the deeds of the consciences of men; if he find it not to be
true, that over the whole universe, amongst the Christians, Jews, Paynims, and
Mahumetans, both in this and former ages, religions almost have been still
distinguished by secular soveraignties, each State having its own profession,
and the faith of one climate being incompatible with that of another; and yet
in the duties commonly observed 'twixt neighbor and neighbor in matter of
buying and selling, trucking, changing, and such like sociable commutations,
there is as great unanimity by the most part of the world, maintained even in
the bonds of honesty, as if (as they know what pleases God, should please
them) they were of the opinion of Tamarlain, who believed, that God was best
pleased with diversity of Religions, variety of worship, dissentaneousness of
faith, and multiformity of devotion.

For this cause prescinding from the Religion of any of my compatriots, which
if displeasing to God, will no doubt at last displease themselves, and hurry
upon them that punishment which we ought not to aggravate before its time, by
detaining from them what praise to them is due for the natural and moral
accomplishments wherewith God has endowed them for our benefit; for in
praising them, we praise God, who has made them the instruments of doing us
good.

These three profound and universal scholars of the Scottish Nation, Tyry of the
house of Drumkilbo, Mackbrek, and Broun, deserve a rank in this list of men of
literature, as well as Chisum the Bishop of Vezon, and others of the Romish
faith above mentioned, and for whose praises I have already apologized. Tyry
wrote books of Divinity in a most acurate strain; and being assistant to the
general of the Jesuits, was the second person of all that vast Ecclesiastical
republic, which reaches as far as to the outmost territories of all the
Christian Kings and States of the whole continent of the world: a higher place
then which amongst them, no stranger ever attained to in Italy, which is the
place of their supremest jurisdiction. Mackbrek is eminent for his literature
in Pole, and Broun in Germany; and both of them authors of good books.

To hit upon the names of others such as these of the Scottish Nation, renowned
for learning even in remoter parts of the world, it would be a task not so
proper for any, as for the great traveler Lithco, a compatriot likewayes of
theirs, who in nineteen years space traveled three times by land over all the
known parts almost of Europe, Asia, and Africa, as by a book of a pretty bulk
in quarto set forth by himself, is more evidently made manifest: the said
Lithco also is an author of several other books; and so was Simon Graham a
great traveler and very good scholar, as does appear by many books of his
emission; but being otherwise too licentious, and given over to all manner of
debordings, the most of the praise I will give him, will be to excuse him, in
these terms of Aristotle: Nullum magnum ingenium sine mixtura dementiae.

Some other eminent men for literature of the Scottish Nation, besides those
formerly rehearsed, have been much esteemed of abroad, although they were no
Roman Catholics; such as Doctor John Forbas, who was a professor of Divinity
in Leyden, and wrote an excellent book of Divinity in folio, called Irenicon.
Doctor Read likewise was an able scholar, as may appear by his book of Anatomy,
and other learned writtings.

Now seeing I am from beyond sea bringing the enumeration of my scholars
homewards, I cannot forget the names of Doctor Baleanquel, Doctor Sibbalds,
Doctor Stuart, and Doctor Michel, all able Divines, and sometimes beneficed men
in England.

How much the protestant says owes to Doctor Robert Baron for his learned
Treatises (against Turnebol the Jesuit) de objecto formali fidei, I leave to
be judged by those that have perused them. To the conversatiof Doctor William
Lesly (who is one of the most profound and universal scholars now living) his
friends and acquaintance of any literature are very much beholding, but to any
books of his emission, nothing at all; whereat every one that knows him,
wondreth exceedingly: and truly so they may; for though scripturiency be a
fault in feeble pens, and that Socrates the most learned man of his time set
forth no works: yet can none of these two reasons excuse his not evulging
somewhat to the public view, because he is known to have an able pen, whose
draughts would grace the paper with impressions of inestimable worth: nor is
the example of Socrates able to a pologize for him, unless he had such
disciples as Plato and Aristotle, who having seposited in their brains the
scientifick treasures of their masters knowledge, did afterward (in their own
works) communicate them to the utility of future generations: yet that this
Caledonian Socrates (though willing) could not of late have been able to
dispose of his talent, did proceed from the merciless dealings of some wicked
Anites, Lycons, and Melits of the Covenant; the cruelty of whose perverse zeal,
will keep the effects of his virtue still at under, till by the persuasion of
some honest Lysias, the authority of the land be pleased to reseat him into his
former condition, with all the encouragements that ought to attend so prime a
man.

Doctor John Gordon sometime Minister of Elgin, Doctor William Hogstoun, and
Doctor James Sibbet, are men who have given great proof of their learning, as
well by Treatises which they have divulged, as in all manner of Academical
exercitations. Doctor William Guild deserves by himself to be remembered, both
for that he has committed to the press many good books tending to the
edification of the soul, and bettering of the mind; and that of all the
Divines that have lived in Scotland these hundred years, he has been the most
charitable, and who bestowed most of his own to public uses. The lovingness of
his heart dilates it self to many, and the center of his desires is the Common
weal: in matter of great edifices, where he builds not, he repaires; and many
Churches, Hospitals, Colleges and Bridges, have been the objects of his
beneficence. But to show the virtue of this man beyond thousands of others
richer then he, even of those that had a nearer and more immediate call to the
performance of such charitable offices, when he was principal of the old
College of Aberdeen, and that at a time, when, by reason of the sword
everywhere raging through the land, all schools almost were laid waste; so
great was his industry, so prudent his government, and so liberal his
erogations, that the number of the scholars there, all the time that he ruled,
did by threescore and ten a year, exceed the greatest confluence that ever was
therein since the foundation of that University; to which I wish all happiness,
because of him for whom this book is intended, who learned there the elements
of his Philosophy, under the conduct of one Master William Seaton, who was his
tutor; a very able preacher truly, and good scholar, and whom I would extol
yet higher, but that being under the consistorian lash, some critic Presbyters
may do him injury, by pretending his dislike of them, for being praised by him,
who idolizeth not their authority.

The same reason invites me not to insist upon the praises of Master William
Lawder preacher at Ava, a good Divine, and excellent Poet, both in Latin and
English. And for the same cause must I forbear to spend encomions upon that
worthy Gentleman Master David Leech, who is a most fluent Poet in the Latin
tongue, an exquisite Philosopher and profound Theolog.

Seeing I am come to speak again of Scottish Poets, which have flourished of
late, the foresaid Master Leech has an elder brother named John, who has set
forth four or five most excellent books of Epigrams and Eclogues in the Latin
Tongue. One Master Andrew Ramsey likewise has been the Author of books of very
good Epigrams in Latin. Several others in that Nation are and have been of
late very good Latin Poets; amongst which I must needs commemorate Doctor
Arthur Jhonstoun, a Physician by profession, yet such a one as had been so
sweetly imbued by the springs of Helieon, that before he was full three and
twenty years of age, he was laureated Poet at Paris, and that most deservedly,
as may appear by his Par^rgon, his Paraphrastick translation of the Psalms,
(wherein if he excel not, I am sure he equaleth Buchanan) and some other
Treatises by name to me unknown.

His brother also Doctor William Jhonstoun was a good Poet in Latin, and a
good Mathematician, acknowledged to be such (which was none of his meanest
praises) by Master Robert Gordon of Straloch, one of the ablest men of Scotland
in the Mathematical Faculties, and who, of all Mathematicians, has done it
most honor, by having taken the pains to set down all the Shires and Countries
thereof in most exact Geographical Maps; which design though intended,
essayed, and blocked by many others, yet was never brought to its full and
complete perfection, but by this gentleman of the name of Gordon, entitled the
Lord of Straloch; who being loath his virtue and learning should expire with
himself, has the most hopeful and best educated children of any whosoever
within two hundred miles of his house.

These Mathematical blades put me in mind of that Dr. Liddel (of whom, for his
abilities in Physic, I made mention in p. 186. which I had reason to do,
because of his learned books written in Latin, de Diaeta, de febribus, and de
Methodo Medicinae) who for his profoundness in these Siences of sensible
immaterial objects, was everywhere much renowned, especially at Francfort de
maine, Francfort on the oder, and Heidelberg, where he was almost as well
known, as the Monstrous Bacchanalian Tun, that stood three in his time. He was
an eminent professor of the Mathematics, a disciple of the most excellent
Astronomer, Tycho Brahe, and condisciple of that worthy Longomontanus: yet in
imitation of Aristotle (whose doctrine with great proficiency he had imbued)
esteeming more of truth then of either Socrates or Plato, when the new Star
began to appear in the constellation of Cassiopeia, there was concerning it
such an intershocking of opinions, betwixt Tycho Brahe and Doctor Liddel,
evulged in print to the open view of the world, that the understanding Reader
could not but have commended both for all, and yet (in giving each his due)
praised Tycho Brahe most for Astronomy, and Liddel for his knowledge above him
in all the other parts of Philosophy.

As this Doctor Liddel was a gallant Mathematician, and exquisite Physician; so
being desirous to propagate learning to future ages, and to make his own
kindred the more enamoured of the sweetness thereof, especially in Mathematical
Sciences, he bequeathed forty pounds English money a year, to the new College
of the University of Aberdeen, for the maintenance of a Mathematical professor;
with this proviso, that the nearest of his own kinsemen (caeteris paribus)
should be preferred before any other. This any rational man would think
reasonable; nor was it truly much controverted for the space of fourteen or
fifteen years together, after the making of the Legacy; at which time his
Nephew on the brothers side being a child, and but then initiated to the rude
elements of Latin, one Doctor William Jhonstoun was preferred to the place,
because there was none, at that time, of Doctor Liddels consanguinity able to
discharge it: a reason verily relevant enough.

But by your leave, good Reader, when Doctor William Jhonstoun dyed, and that
Doctor Liddels Nephew, Master Duncan Liddel by name, was then of that maturity
of Age, and provection of skill in most of the disciplines Mathematical, as was
sufficient for the exercise of that duty, and the meriting of his uncles
benefice; did the good men rulers at the helm there, make any conscience of
the honest Doctors latter will? no, forsooth; the oracle must be first
consulted with: The Ministerian Philoplutaries (my tongue forks it, I have
mistaken it seems one word for another, I should have said Philosophers)
thought fit otherwise to dispose thereof; for, say they, Master Duncan Liddel
has committed the heinous sin of fornication, and begot a young Lass with
child, therefore his uncles Testament must be made void, in what relates to
his enjoyment of that dotation. O brave Logic, and curious commentary upon a
later Will for the better explication of the mind of the defunct! Which
Presbyterian doctrine, had it bin in request in the days of Socrates, what
fine pass would the world have been brought to ever since that time, by that
ignorance which should have over-clouded us, through our being destitute of the
works of Plato, Aristotle, and Euclid, with all the Scholiasts that have
glossed on them these two thousand years past; for, by all appearance, those
three prime Grecians would have been forced in their younger years to betake
themselves to some other profession then Philosophy, for want of a master to
instruct them in the principles thereof; for the Presbytery of Athens (no
doubt) would have pearched up poor Socrates upon a penitentiary Pew, and outed
him of his place, for having two wives at once (neither whereof, whether
Xantippe, or Myrto, was either so handsome or good as Master Liddels concubine)
and in lieu of that trespasser, supplied the Academical chair with the breech
of a more sanctified brother, whose zealous jobernolisme would never have
affected the Antipresbyterian spirits of Plato, Euclid, or Aristotle; nor
gained to his school any disciples, who should have been able from such a
muddy fountain to derive any clear springs of learning to after-ages, nor
benefit posterity with any other kind of literate works, then such as the
pretended holy men (and accusers of Socrates) Anitus, Lycon, and Melitus by
name, did set forth; which to the eyes of both body and mind, have ever since
their time, been of the color of the Duke of Vandomes cloak, invisible.

But if one durst make bold to speak to those great professors of piety, I
would advise them out of the Evangile, to take the beam out of their own eye,
before they meddle with the moat that is in their neighbors; and to consider,
that the sin of theft which they committed, in robbing Master Liddel of his
due, is a far more heinous transgression, then that single fornication; for
which, besides the forfeiture of what was mortified to him, he was by them for
a long time together most rigorously persecuted.

Nor do I think their fault can be better expiated, then by fulfilling the
contents of the legacy, and investing Liddal in his own right; which that I may
seem to avouch with the better ground of reason, I dare almost persuade my
self, that there is not any within the Isle of Britain, with whom (taking in
all the Mathematical Arts and Sciences together, practical and theoretick) he
will not be well pleased (upon occasion) to adventure a dispute for superiority
in the most, and that with a willingness to forego and renounce any claim,
title, or privilege he can, or may pretend to for the chair of Mathematical
professor in new Aberdeen, in case of non-prevalency.

This is more (some will say) then his outside does promise, and that to look
to him, one would not think he had such abilities. What then? do not we see in
Apothecaries shops, pots of the same worth and fashion contain drugs of a
different, value, and sometimes the most precious ointment put in the coursest
box? so may a little and plain man in outward shape enclose a mind high and
sublime enough; a giant like spirit in a low stature, being able to overtop a
Colossus with Pygmaean endowments.

But were there no other Remora or obstruction to retard his intended progress
in Mathematical designs, the inward qualifications of his mind to the
advancement of those Sciences, would quickly raise his person to a greater
estimation: yet truly as he is in London for the present, I can no better
compare him, then to an Automatary engine, wherein there are many several
springs, resorts and wheels, which though when once put into a motion, would
produce most admirable effects, are nevertheless forced, for want of a
convenient Agent to give them the due brangle, to lie immobile, and without
efficacy.

Such an Agent is a Mecaenas, a Patron, a promover of learning, a favorer of
the Muses, and protector of Sholars: in the production of which kind of worthy
men, were this land a lone but a little more fertile, not only great Britain,
but the whole world besides would be the better for it.

As for such of the Scottish Nation as of late have been famous for English
Poesy, the first that occurs, is Sir William Alexander, afterward created
Earl of Sterlin: he made an insertion to Sir Philip Sidneys Arcadia, and
composed several Tragedies, Comedies, and other kind of Poems which are extant
in a book of his in folio, entitled Sterlins works. The purity of this
Gentleman's vein was quite spoiled by the corruptness of his courtiership; and
so much the greater pity; for by all appearance, had he been contented with
that mediocrity of fortune he was born unto, and not aspired to those grandeurs
of the Court, which could not without pride be prosecuted, nor maintained
without covetousness, he might have made a far better account of himself. It
did not satisfy his ambition to have a laurel from the Muses, and be esteemed
a King amongst Poets, but he must be King of some new foundland; and like
another Alexander indeed, searching after new worlds, have the sovereignty of
Nova Scotia. He was born a Poet, and aimed to be a King; therefore would he
have his royal title from King James, who was born a King, and aimed to be a
Poet. Had the stopped there, it had been well: but the flame of his honor must
have some oil wherewith to nourish it. Like another King Arthur, he must have
his Knights, though nothing limited to so small a number: for how many soever
that could have looked out but for one day like gentlemen, and given him but
one hundred and fifty pounds Sterlin (without any need of a key^or opening the
gate to enter through the Temple of Virtue, which in former times was the only
way to honor) they had a scale from him whereby to ascend unto the platformes
of Virtue; which they treading underfoot, did slight the ordinary passages, and
to take the more sudden possession of the Temple of honor, went upon obscure
bypath of their own, toward some secret Angiports and dark posterndoors,
which were so narrow, that few of them could get in, till they had left all
their gallantry behind them; yet such being their resolution, that in they
would, and be worshipful upon any terms, they misregarded all formerly-used
steps of promotion, accounting them but unnecessary; and most rudely rushing in
unto the very Sanctuary, they immediately hung out the Orange colors, to
testify their conquest of the honor of Knight-Baronet.

Their King nevertheless, not to stain his Royal dignity, or to seem to merit
the imputation of selling honor to his subjects, did for their money give them
land, and that in so ample a measure, that every one of his Knight-Baronets had
for his hundred and fifty pounds Sterlin heritably disponed unto him six
thousand good and sufficient Acres of Nova Scotia ground, which being but at
the rate of six pence an Acre, could not be thought very dear, considering how
prettily in the respective parchments of disposition they were bounded and
designed fruitful corne-land, watered with pleasant rivers, running along
most excellent and spacious Meadows; nor did there want abundance of Oaken
groves in the midst of very fertile plains (for if they wanted any thing, it
was the Scrivener or Writers fault; for he gave order, as soon as he received
the three thousand Scots marks, that there should be no defect of quantity or
quality, in measure or goodness of land) and here and there most delicious
gardens and orchards, with whatever else could in matter of delightful-ground,
best content their fancies; as if they had made purchase amongst them of the
Elysian fields, or Mahumets Paradise.

After this manner my Lord Sterlin for a while was very noble; and according to
the rate of Sterlin money, was as twelve other Lords in the matter of that
frankness of disposition, which not permitting him to dodge it upon inches and
else, better and worse, made him not stand to give to each of his champions
territories of the best and the most: and although there should have happened a
thousand Acres more to be put in the Charter or writing of disposition then was
agreed upon at first; he cared not; half a piece to the Clerk was able to make
him dispense with that. But at last, when he had enrolled some two or three
hundred Knights, who, for their hundred and fifty pieces each, had purchased
amongst them several millions of Neocaledonian Acres, confirmed to them and
theirs for ever, under the great seal, the affixing whereof was to cost each of
them but thirty pieces more, finding that the society was not like to become
any more numerous, and that the ancient gentry of Scotland esteemed of such a
whimsical dignity as of a disparagement rather then addition to their former
honor, he bethought himself of a course more profitable for himself, and the
future establishment of his own state; in prosecuting whereof, without the
advice of his Knights (who represented both his Houses of Parliament, Clergy
and all) like an absolute King indeed, disponed heritably to the French, for a
matter of five or six thousand pounds English money, both the dominion and
propriety of the whole continent of that kingdom of Nova Scotia, leaving the
new Baronets to search for land amongst the Selenits in the Moon, or turn
Knights of the Sun: so dearly have they bought their Orange Riban, which (all
circumstances considered) is and will be no more honorable to them or their
posterity, then it is or has been profitable to either.

What I have said here, is not by way of digression, but to very good purpose,
and pertinent to the subject in hand; for as arms and arts commonly are
paralleled, and that Pallas goes arms with a Helmet, I held it expedient, lest
the list of the Scholars set down in this place, should in matter of
preeminence be too far over-peered by the roll of the soldiers above recited,
that my Lord Sterlin should here represent the place of a King for the
literatory part, as well as there did the great uncircumcised Garne for the
military; and bring nova Scotia in competition with Bucharia.

Besides this Lord Alexander, Drummon and Wishart have published very good
Poems in English. Nor is Master Ogilvy to be forgot, whose translation of
Virgil, and of the fables of Aesop in very excellent English verses, most
evidently manifests that the perfection of the English tongue is not so
narrowly confined, but that it may extend it self beyond the natives on this
side of Barwick.

I might have named some more Scottish Poets both in English and Latin, but
that besides (as I often told) I intend not to make a complete enumeration of
all, there is a Latin book extant, which passes by the name of Deliciae
poetarum Scotorum, wherein the Reader may find many (even of those that have
lived of late years) whom I have here ommitted; as I have done several other
able men of the Scottish Nation in other faculties, such as Master David
Chalmers, who in Italy penned a very good book, and that in neat Latin,
treating of the Antiquities of Scotland; and had it printed at Paris: as also
one Simson, who wrote in Latin four exquisite books of Hieroglyphics: and one
Heart in the City of London at this present, who wrote the Fort royal of
Scripture, etc.

The excellency of Doctor William Davison in Alchymy above all the men now
living in the world, whereof by his wonderful experiments he gives daily
proof, although his learned books published in the Latin tongue did not
evidence it, meriteth well to have his name recorded in this place: and after
him, Doctor Leeth (though in time before him) designed in Paris, where he lived
by the name of Letu; who, as in the practice and theory of Medicine he excelled
all the Doctors of France, so in testimony of the approbation he had for his
exquisiteness in that faculty, he left behind him the greatest estate of any
of that profession then; as the vast means possessed by his sons and daughters
there as yet, can testify.

Amongst those eminent Doctors of Physic, I ought not to forget Doctor Fraser;
who was made Doctor at Toulouse, with the universal approbation and applause of
that famous University; and afterward succeeded to Doctor Arthur Jhonstoun's
place of Physician in ordinary to the late King. There is another Scottish
gentleman likewise, of the name of Wallace (in France called Devalois) who
enjoys (and has so done these many years) the dignity of a prime counselor
of the Parliament of Grenoble, the capital City of the Province of Dauphine; and
is withal the chief favorite and the only trustee of the grand Mareshal de
Criky.

Now as in this Heterogenean miscellany we have proceeded from the body to the
purse, that is, Metonymically, from the Physician to the Lawyer: so after the
same desultory method (which may be well excused in this unpremeditated, and
almost extemporanean Treatise,) we may for the souls sake (which in this later
age (so far as metaphors may with proper significations enter in competition)
has been no less subject to poverty and diseases than any of the former two)
have another hint at some of our late Scottish Divines; the first whereof, and
that prioritate dignitatis, that to my memory presents himself, is Doctor
William Forbas, principal once of the College of New Aberdeen, and afterward
made Bishop of Edinburgh; who was so able a scholar, that since the days of
Scotus subtiles, there was never any that professed either Divinity or
Philosophy in Scotland, that in either of those faculties did parallel him. He
left Manuscripts of great learning behind him, which as I am informed were
bought at a good rate by Doctor Laud late Archbishop of Canterbury, and primate
of England; Whose spiritual brother Spotteswood, late Archbishop of Saint
Andrews, and Chancellor of Scotland, was likewise endowed with a great deal of
learning; by means whereof although he wrote many good books, yet that wherein
he bestowed most pains, was a large book in folio, entitled The history of the
Church of Scotland; which I believe was never printed: yet the Manuscript
thereof, written with Spotteswod's own hand, I saw presented at Whitehall, in
the Lobby betwixt the little gallery and Privy Chamber, now called the
Admiralty Court, by Maxwel late Bishop of Rosse, to the late King, who even
then delivered it to his Secretary of State for Scotland, William Earl of
Lanerick by name, who was the same Duke Hamiltouu of Hamiltoun, that was killed
at Worcester, and only brother to James Duke by the same aforesaid title, who
two years before that, lost his head at Westminster in the Palace-yard: but
what became of that Manuscript afterward, I cannot tell; but this I know, that
the tenderer thereof (upon his knees to his late Majesty, as the gift of a
deceased man; for the Author dyed but the very day before) Master John Maxwel
by name, was a very learned man, and Author of some good books. Yet lest the
Readers humor should be inflamed with the mentioning of these three malignant
prelates, I must afford him for Antidote another Trinity of a
contraryoperation, all in one dose, the ingredients whereof are Henderson,
Gillespick, and Rutherford; named Alexander, George, and Samuel, all Masters
truly, and have been so to my knowledge these twelve years past; which three
have been or are (for the first two of them are dead) very able and learned
men; whose books nevertheless (for they were all Authors) I will in some things
no otherwise commend, then Andraeas Rivetus professor of Leyden, did the
doctrine of Buchanan and Knox; whose rashness (in apologizing for them) he
ascribed prae fervido Scotorum ingenio, and ad audendum prompto.

Truly, and without flattery be it spoken, (for I believe none that knows me,
will twit me with that vice) the Nation of Scotland has, besides those I have
here nominated, produced several excellent spirits (and that of late too) whose
abilities by the Presbyterian persecution, and the indigence it has brought
upon them, have been quite smothered, and hid as a candle under a bushel.

Many learned books, written in Scotland, for want of able and skillful
Printers, and other necessaries requisite for works of such liberal
undertaking, have perished; and sometimes after they are ready for the press
(if the Author in the interim happen to die) the wife and children (for the most
part) like rats and mice (that prefer the chest where the bread and cheese is
kept, to the coffer wherein is the silver and gold) to save a little money,
make use of the aforesaid papers (without any regard to the precious things
contained in them) to fold perhaps their butter and cheese into, or to other
less honorable employments. So unfortunate a thing it is, that either good
spirits should be struck with penury, or that their writings should fall into
the hands of ignorants.

That poverty is an enemy to the exercise of virtue, and that non facile
emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat res angusta domi, is not unknown to any
acquainted with Plutocracy, or the sovereign power of money: but if the great
men of the land would be pleased to salve that sore (which possibly would not
be so expensive to them as either their hawks or hounds) then peradventure
would these ingenious blades sing out aloud, and cheerfully, with Martial, Sunt
Mecaenates non deerunt flacce Marones; and it might very probably be, and that
in a short space, that, by such gallant incitements (through a virtuous
emulation who should most excel other) Scotland would produce, for Philosophy,
Astronomy, Natural Magic, Poesy, and other such like faculties, as able men
as ever were Duns-Scotus, Sacroboscus, Reginaldus Scotus, and other compatriots
of these three Scots, whose names I would not insert in the roll of the rest,
because they flourished before the year 1600.

Now as I have not mentioned any Scottish man to praise him for eminent actions
done by him, either in the field or school, preceding the year 1600. (which if
I had had a mind to do, I would not have omitted the naming of the several
Constables of France, Admirals, and Generals of Armies, that have been of the
Scottish Nation in the French service: neither would I have forgot the high and
honorable employments the Scots had of Charlemaine the first occidental
Emperor, nor the great exploits performed by the Scots under the conduct of
Godfrey de Bullion in the Conquest of Jerusalem, and afterward under his
successors in the kingdoms of Syria, Antiochia, and Egypt, against the
Saracens; nor what was done by the Scots in defense of the territories of
Spain against the Moors and Aethiopians: as also, I would have spoken a
little of the Dukes of Chasteau le roy, and Dukes of Aubigny that were Scots;
and of Count Betun, and Count de Mongomery, who killed the King of France in
tilting) so is it, that of all those I have named, whether for Milice or
Literature (so far short I have fallen in the number of the whole) that not only
has the greatest part of them all been natives of the North of Scotland, but
hardly have both the South and West of that country, produced the fifth part of
them: Such a fruitful Seminary has that otherwise obscure climate of the
world, proved in the affording of excellent spirits both sor arms and arts.
Whether what I have related here of the warriors and Scholars of the Scottish
Nation that have been famous abroad, be not for uncontrollable truths received
in other countries, by those that have been eyewitnesses to their actions, I
appeal to Sir Oliver Fleemin, master of the Ceremonies, and to Master Dury;
who, as they are both men of good judgment, and have been travelers in other
States and Kingdoms; so am I certainly persuaded that they cannot be altogether
estranged from the report of the good reputation of those their compatriots in
the places through which they passed: which I believe the rather, for that most
of them do know Sir Oliver Fleemin to be a man of excellent good parts, wise in
counsel, experienced in affairs of State, true to his trust, and in six or
seven of the chief Languages of Christendom, the ablest, liveliest, and most
pertinent spokes-man of this age: and that also they are not ignorant of the
most eminent endowments wherewith Master John Dury (in Germany and France,
where his learning is highly extolled, entitled Duraeus) has his mind
qualified and imbellished: in Reason he is strongly principled, and allows
prudence to be a directress of his actions: he does not subordinate his faith
to the affairs of the world, although it agree not with his faith to
gainestand an established authority: he holds it more lawful to yield obedience
to a power set up above us, then, to the hazard of the ruin of a Country, to
erect another; he loves an honest peace, and the ways that tend to it; and
with thankfulness pays the favors of protection: he reverenceth the
all-seeing providence in the change of government; and where it commands,
there he yields Allegiance. But if the Reader would have a more genuine
Character of his worth, and that which shall represent him with a greater
liveliness, his best course will be to have recourse to the perusal of the
several Treatises composed by him, whereof he has emitted good store.

Notwithstanding all I have written in praise of Sir Oliver Fleemin, and Master
John Dury, I would expatiate my pen a little more at large upon this
encomiastick strain, in behalf of them both, but that I hope ere long to
extol them again by way of duty, when they shall be pleased out of their love
and respect to Sir Thomas Vrquhart (who is the only man for whom this book is
intended; for whether he be the Author, or some other that is but a friend or
servant of his, it is not material, seeing the furtherance of his weal, and
credit of his country, is the mere scope thereof, and end whereat it buts) to
interpone their favor with the members of the Parliament and Council of State
(seeing they are the only two of the Scottish Nation, that as yet have any kind
of intimacy with either of these high Courts) and second him in his just
demands, to the obtaining of what in this Tractate is desired in his name. And
although nothing of those kind of good offices has by them hitherto been
performed to him, lest perhaps their offering to open their mouth for any in
whom there was suspicion of malignancy, might breed dislike and diminution of
trust; yet must I needs desire them now to lay aside those needless fears, and
groundless apprehensions, and like real friends indeed, bestir themselves to do
that Gentleman a courtesy, which cannot choose (though per impossible he were
unthankful) but carry along with it, like all other actions of virtue, its own
remuneration and reward: and if by mischance (which I hope shall not occur)
their forwardness in solicitation procure a reprehensory check, then let them
lay the blame upon this page, which I shall take upon my shoulder, and bear the
burden of all; there is no enchantment there. But that, Amicus certus in re
incerta cernitur, was a saying of King James, of whom to make no mention
amongst the literate men of the Scottish Nation, that have flourished since
1600. would argue in me no less debility of memory, then Massala Corvinus was
subject to, who forgot his own name: for besides that he was a King, history
can hardly afford us amongst all the kings that ever were (Solomon and Alfonso
of Aragon being laid aside) any one that was near so learned as he: as is
apparent by that book in folio, entitled King James his works, and several
other learned Treatises of his, which in that book are not contained.

In this list of arms and arts-men, King James obtaines a rank amongst the
Scholars; because the soldiery did repute him no favourer of their faculty.
His Majesty is placed last, as in a Parliamentary procession, and brings up
the rear, as General Ruven Leads on the Van: for as Ruven was such a mere
soldier, that he could neither read nor write; so King James was such a mere
scholar, that he could neither fight by sea nor land. He thought James the
peaceable a more Royal style, then William the Conqueror; and would not have
changed his Motto of Beati pacifici for the title of Sylla felix, although it
had been accompanied with the victory over a thousand Mariuses; yet in his
days were the Scots in good repute, and their gallantry over almost all
countries did deserve it.

Then was it that the name of a Scot was honorable over all the world, and that
the glory of their ancestors was a passport and safe conduct sufficient for
any traveler of that country. In confirmation whereof, I have heard it related
of him, who is the (...) of his discourse, and to whose weal it is
subordinated, that after his peragration of France, Spain; and Italy, and that
for speaking some of those languages with the liveliness of the country accent;
they would have had him pass for a Native, he plainly told them (without making
bones thereof) that truly he thought he had as much honor by his own country,
which did contrevalue the riches and fertility of those Nations, by the valor,
learning, and honesty, wherein it did parallel, if not surpass them. Which
assertion of his was with pregnant reasons so well backed by him, that he was
not much gainesaid therein by any in all those kingdoms. But should he offer
now to stand upon such high terms, and enter the lists with a spirit of
competition, it fears me that in stead of Laudatives and panegyricks, which
formerly he used, he would be constrained to have recourse to vindications and
apologies: The toil whereof, in saying one and the same thing over and over
again, with the misfortune of being the less believed the more they spoke, has
proved of late almost insupportable to the favorers of that Nation, whose
inhabitants, in foreign peregrinations, must now altogether, in their greatest
difficulties, depend upon the mere stock of their own merit, with an abatement
of more then the half of its value, by reason of the national imputation:
whilst in former times, men of meaner endowments would in sharper extremities,
at the hands of stranger-people, have carried through with more specious
advantages, by the only virtue of the credit and good name of the country in
general; Which, by twice as many abilities as ever were in that land, both for
martial prowess, and favor of the Muses, in the persons of private men, can
never in the opinion of neighbour-States and Kingdoms, be raised to so great a
hight, as public obloquy has deprest it. For as that City whose common
treasure is well stored with money, though all its burgers severally be but
poor, is better able to maintain its reputation, then that other, all whose
Citizens are rich, without a considerable bank, the experience whereof history
gives us, in the deduction of the wars betwixt the Venetians and Genois: even
so will a man of indifferent qualifications, the fame of whose country
remains unreproached, obtain a more amicable admittance to the societies of
most men, then another of thrice more accomplished parts, that is the native of
a soil of an opprobrious name; which although, after mature examination, it
should seem not to deserve, yet upon the slipperiest ground that is of honor
questioned, a very scandal once emitted, will both touch and stick.

This maintaining of the reputation of the Scots in these latter days, has at
several times, in foreign countries, occasioned adventuring of the single
combat, against such inconsiderate blabs, as readily upon any small (though
groundless) misreport are prodigal of reproaches, and cast aspersions on men of
the most immaculate carriage: many instances hereof I could produce; but to
avoid prolixity, I will refer the manifestation of the truth thereof to the
testimony of Captain John Mercer, whom I might have nominated for his
excellency in the sword, with Sir John Hume of Eatoun, and Francis Sinclair but
that in a treatise of this nature, where the subjected matter does not all at
once present it self to the memory, to place each one in order as he comes, is
methodo doctrinae nothing repugnant to the true series of the purpose in hand.

What ascendant he has over others at the single rapeer, has been many times
very amply expressed by my Lord of Newcastle, and the late Earl of Essex, and
(as I am infomed) by this same Earl of Salisbury, besides diverse others, who
have been eyewitnesses to the various proofs, he has given of his
exquisiteness in the art of defense; amonst whom Sir John Carnegy, and Sir
David Cuningham, are best able to relate, what with their own eyes they saw him
do at Angiers, a City in France, where, after many exasperating provocations,
he at last, to vindicate both his own fame, and that of his Native country,
overthrew, in the presence of sundry gentlemen and Ladies, one of the most
renowned for the faculty of escrime, that was in all that Kingdom. Some such
trials are reported to have been undergone by him here in England, with so much
applause, and deserved approbation, as from the mouths of men very skilful in
that gladiatory profession, has extracted (out of their sincerity of heart) an
unfeigned commendation of being the best sword-man of the Isle of great Britain;
Which I say, not to disparage any of the English Nation; for that I know there
are in it as truly valourous men, as any one breathing in the world: and of as
good conduct for the improving of their courage, and making it effectual
against their declared enemies; but that he has some secret puntilios in the
exercise of the single sword-fight, by pursuing all manner of wards with
falsifying, binding, and battering of the sword, after a fashion of his own,
with all due observance of time and distance; by providing, in case the
adversary after a finda, going to the parade, discover his breast to caveat, and
give him in a thrust in quart, with ecarting and volting the body: to alonge a
stoccade coupee au ventre les deux pieds en sautant, and other such excellent
feats, which the judgment conceiving, and the eye perceiving, the hand and
foot, by virtue of a constant practice, execute with an incredible nimbleness
and agility; to the perfection whereof, although a martially-disposed gentleman
do never attain, it can no more derogate from his eminency in Military
employments, then it does eclipse the credit of a commander in chief of
cavalry, not to make a well-managed horse to go so neatly terre a terre, the
incavalar, the ripolone, the passades, the corvetti, the serpegiar, the two
steps and a leap, the mezere, the gallop galliard, le saut de mouton, and other
such like pleasant aires, as would a cavallerizo or master of the noble art of
riding. Notwithstanding the frequent hazards, which many besides this Capt.
Mercer, (whom now I will not nominate) have run themselves upon, in defense of
the good name of the Scots, the nature nevertheless of common spirits is
(without any forecast of danger) to proclaim the disease of some, to be a
leprosy cleaving to the body of the wholeNation.

Which custom truly, as it is disapprovable, for that the innocent do thereby
suffer for the fault of the guilty; so do I the more dislike it, that the
gentleman who in this treatise is the most concerned, when after that to my
knowledge he had received some favor with expectation of greater ones, it no
sooner happened, by his servants or some else, to be known of what country he
was, but immediately the effectual courtesies formerly intended toward him,
were exchanged into mere superficial complements, and general civilities; with
this assurance nevertheless, that out of their respects to him, they should
abstain, in all times coming, from doing any injury to his compatriots: which
hope of preservation of his countrymen, upon the basis of his single
reputation, from the danger of future prejudice, did afford him no small
contentment, although the name of his country, in matter of himself, did prove
a very dismal obstruction to the prosecuting of his own good fortune: and to
speak ingenuously, seeing it is the case of many good spirits and worthy
gentlemen besides him, I could heartily wish, as no man is anywhere praised for
his mothers being in such or such a place at the instant of his birth, that
also nowhere any should receive the least detriment, either in his means or
estimation, for his parents residence when he was born.

Those productions of mere chance, and concomitances of what is totally out of
the reach of our power to command, were understood by the wise and generous men
of old, to deserve so little influence for procuring good or bad to the
enjoyers of them, that Anacharsis, although a native of Scythia, which was then
a more savage country then at this time it is, albeit now it be the seminary of
a wilder people then ever Scotland did bring forth, was by Greece, the most
judicious Nation in the world, with great applause enrolled in the sacred
septenary of the most highly-renowned men, for prudence and true wisdom, that
ever lived there: and Oxales, notwithstanding his being a high-lander of Genua,
and born amidst the barren mountains of Liguria, was nevertheless by the mighty
Emperor Tamarlain, although a stranger and of a different religion to the
boot, dignified with the charge and title of one of the prime generals of that
vast Asiatick army which overthrew the Turkish Bajazet.

In imitation of which specious and remarkable examples, that the State of this
Isle, without regard to Ephestian or Exotic Country, exterior concernements,
adjuncts of fortune, or any thing beyond the Sphere of our wills activity,
should consider of men according to the fruits (whether good or bad, true or
false) of the several acts and habits respectively, which, before the interior
faculties by frequent iteration were therewith affected, did at first depend
upon our own election, it is both my desire and expectation for that the
gentleman, whose interest I herebyintend to promove, does openly defy very
calumny it self to be able to lay any thing to his charge, either for
tergiversation, covetousness, or hypocrisy, the three foul blots wherewith
his country is stained by those, that, for the blemish of a few, would asperse
the whole, and upon all lay the imputation of faults done but by some

I dare swear with a safe conscience, that he ntver coveted the goods of any,
nor is desirous of any more in matter of worldly means, then the peaceable
possession of what is properly his own: he never put his hand to any kind of
oath, nor thinks fit to tie his conscience to the implicit injunctions of any
Ecclesiastical tyranny. He never violated trust; always kept his parole; and
accounted no crime more detestable, then the breach of faith. He never received
money from King nor Parliament, State nor Court; but in all employments,
whether preparatory to, or executional in war, was still his own paymaster, and
had orders from himself. He was neither in Duke Hamiltons engagement, nor at
the field of Dunbar: nor was he ever forced, in all the several fights he has
been in, to give ground to the enemy, before the day of Worcester-battel. To be
masked with the veil of hypocrisy, he reputes abominable, and gross
dissimulation to contrast the ingenuity of a freeborn spirit. All flattering,
smoothing and flinching for by-ends, he utterly disliketh, and thinks no better
of adulatory assentations, then of a Gnatonick sycophantizing, or parasitical
cogging: he loves to be open-hearted, and of an explicit discourse, choosing
rather by such means to speak what is true, to the advantage of the good, then
to conceal wickedness under a counterfeit garb of devotion.

By virtue of which liberty, though reasonably assumed by him, and never
exceeding the limits of prudential prescription, he in a little book lately
published, of the genealogy of his house, had (after the manner of his
predecessors, who for distinction sake were usually entitled by appellative
designations) his proper name affected with the agnominal addition of the word
parresiastes, which signifies one that speaks honestly with freedom: not but
that above all things he approves of secrecy in the managing of affairs of
moment, and holds the life of all great businesses to consist in the
closeness of counsel, whilst they are in agitation; but as a woman should not
sit with her face masked, in the company of her friends at dinner, nor a man
keep himself always skulking behind a buckler, where there is no apearance of
a foe; so should the affectedness of a servil silence utterly be exploded, when
veracity of elocution is the more commendable quality.

This bound he never yet transgressed; and still purposes to be faithful to
his trust. I am not now to dispute the mutual relation of protection and
obedience; and how far, to the power God has placed above us (in imitation of
Christ) we are bound to suceumb. Those that are thoroughly acquainted with him
know his inclinations, both that he will undertake nothing contrary to his
conscience, that he will regulate his conscience by the Canons of a
well-grounded faith, and true dictamen of reason, and that to the utmost of his
power he will perform whatever he promises. As for those that know him not,
and yet would in the censure of him as liberally criticize it, as if they were
his cardiognosts, and fully versed in his intentions; if they be not men in
whom he is concerned, as having authority above him, he will never vex his
brain, nor toil his pen, to couch a fancy, or bestow one drop of ink upon
them for their satisfaction. It does suffice him, that the main ground of all
his proceedings, is honesty; that he endeavoreth the prosecuting of just ends
by upright means: and seeing the events of things are not in the power of man,
he voluntarily recommendeth unto providence the overruling of the rest: he
has no prejudicate principles, nor will he be wedded to self-opinions.

And yet (as I conceive it) he believes, that there is no government (whether
Ecclesiastical or Civil) upon earth, that is jure divino, if that divine right
be taken in a sense secluding all other forms of government (save it alone)
from the privilege of that title; those piae frauds and political whimsies
being obtruded upon tender consciences, to no other end, but that, without
expense of war, theymight be pliable in their obedience to the injunctions of
the Vicegerents of the Law, merely by deterring them from acting any thing
contrary to the will of the primitive Legislator, for fear of Celestial
punishment.

As for Pacts and Covenants, it is my opinion that he thinks they are no
further obligatory, (and consequently being annihilated, no more to be
mentioned much less urged) when the ground whereupon they were built, or cause
for which they were taken, are not in vigor to have any more influence upon
the contracters: for idem est non esse and non operari; Non entium nullae sunt
affectiones: and sublato fundamento tolluntur and emnia quae illi
superstruuntur.

I am confident the consistorian party will be so ill pleased with the freedom
of this expression, that they will account him a malignant or a sectary that
has penned it; therefore (in my conceit) to use their cavilling idiom, a
malignant and independent will better sympathize with one another, then either
of them with the Presbyter; whose principles how consistent they are with
Monarchy, or any other kind of temporal sovereignty, let any many judge that is
versed in the story of Geneva, the civil wars of France and Bohemia, and
history of queen Mary of Scotland; although what has been done by the Kirkists
these last dozen of years, had been altogether buried in oblivion, that nothing
had been known of their unanimous opposition by the Presbyterian armies at
Dunslaw, Newburne, Marston-moor, and Hereford to the late Kings designs,
crowned by his own imprisonment at Newcastle and Holmby; and that after
proclaiming Charles the second, at the marker-cross of Edinburgh, king of the
three Realms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; that they had wounded him, and
shed his blood, in the persons of the peerage of Huntely and Montrose, had been
utterly forgotten.

What gallant Subjects these Presbyterians have been, are for the present, and
will prove in times coming, to any kind of Secular power, you may perceive by
King James his (...), the late King's (...), and this young King's (...): they
to Basilical Rule (or any other Temporal Sovereignty) being in all its genders
(and that at all occasions) as infectious as ever was the Basilisk's sight to
the eye of man.

For of a King they only make use, for their own ends; and so they will of any
other Supreme Magistracy, that is not of their own erection. Their Kings are
but as the Kings of Lacedemon, whom the Ephors presumed to fine, for any small
offense: or as the Puppy-Kings, which, after children have trimmed with bits of
Taffata, and ends of Silver-lace, and set them upon Wainscoat Cupboards besides
Marmalade and Sugar-cakes, are oftentimes disposed of (even by those that did
pretend so much respect unto them) for a two-peny Custard, a pound of Figs, or
mess of Cream.

Verily, I think they make use of Kings in their Consistorian State, as we do
of Card-kings in playing at the Hundred; any one whereof, if there be
appearance of a better game without him, and that the exchange of him for
another incoming Card is like to conduce more for drawing of the stake) is by
good gamesters without any ceremony discarded: Or as the French on the
Epiphany-day use their Roy de la ^ebve, or king of the bean; whom, after they
have honored with drinking of his Health, and shouting aloud, Le Roy boit, le
Roy boit, they make pay for all the reckoning; not leaving him sometimes one
penny, rather then that the exorbitancie of their debosh should not be satisfied
to the full. They may be likewise said to use their King, as the players at
Nine-pins do the middle Kyle, which they call the king; at whose fall alone
they aim, the sooner to obtain the gaining of their prize: or as about
Christmats we do the King of Misrule; whom we invest with that title to no
other end, but to countenance the Bacchanalian Riots and preposterous disorders
of the family, where he is installed.

The truth of all this, appears by their demeanor to Charles the second; whom
they crowned their King at Sterlin, and who, (though he be, for comeliness of
person, valor, affability, mercy, piety, closeness of counsel, veracity,
foresight, knowledge, and other virtues both Moral and Intellectual, in nothing
inferior to any of his hundred and ten predecessors) had nevertheless no more
rule in effect over the Presbyterian Senate of Scotland, then any of the six
foresaid mockkings had above those by whom they were dignified with the
splendor of Royal pomp.

That it is so, I appeal to the course taken by them, for assisting him whom
they called their King, against them whom I must confess they hate more then
him: for, admitting of none to have any charge in State, Church, or Army, but
such as had sworn to the eternity of the Covenant, and inerrability of the
Presbyterian See, lest otherwise, like Achan's wedge, they should bring a
judgment upon the Land; some Lords, and many others so principled, after that
by their King they had been entrusted with Commissions to levy Regiments of
both Horse and Foot, together with other Officers subordinate to them, did,
under pretext of making the King a glorious King, and the Covenant to triumph
at the gates of Rome, with a pseudo-sanctimonial trick of zeal,
Legerdemain-subtilty, and performing the admirable feats of making a little
weak man, unfit for Military service, a tall, strong, and warlike champion, and
that only by the sweet Charm of laying twenty Rexdolars upon his head and
shoulders; as also by the Arch-angelical enchantment of fifteen double Angels,
had the skill to make an Irish hobbie, or Galloway-nag, as sufficient for their
Field-fight, as any Spanish Genet, or Naples courser.

In prosecution of which wonderful exploits, some of them approved themselves
such exquisite Alchymists, that many of both the Cavalry and Infantry, with
their Arms, Ammunition, and Apparel, were by them converted into pure gold and
silver: by means whereof, although the Army shrunk into half the proposed
number, in both Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, and all the most necessary
accommodations for either Camp, Leaguer, or March, was chymically transformed
into the aforesaid wel-beloved metal, they nevertheless put such undoubted
confidence into the goodness of their Cause, that, by virtue thereof, no less
miraculous acts were expected and promised by the prophecies of their
Neo-Levites out of Scripture, achieved by them against the Malignants and
Sectaries, then those of Gideon with his water-lappers, and Jonathan with his
Armor-bearer, against the Midianites and Philist^^^* to so great a height did
their presumption reach: and yet when it came to the push, those that had
received greatest profit by the Country Assesments, and ruined with cruellest
exactions the poor Yeomanry, were the first that returned homewards, being loath
to hazard their precious persons, lest they should seem to trust to the arm of
flesh.

Notwithstanding this backsliding from Martial prowess of the godly Officers,
with the epenthesis of an^ (in which number I inrol not al, but the greater
part of those that were commissionated with the Scot-Ecclesiastical
approbation) their rancour and spleen being still more and more sharpened
against the English Nation, they in their tedious pharisaical prayers before
Supper, and Sesquihoral Graces upon a dish of Skink, and leg of Mutton, would
so imbue the minds of the poor swains (on whose charge they were) with
vaticinations of help from heaven, against the Sennacheribs that were about to
infest Hezokiah's host, and the peace of their Israel, that the innocent
sufferers having sustained more prejudice by quartering, plundering, and
continual impositions of those their hypocritical countrymen, then ever their
predecessors had done by all the devastations of the ancient English, Saxons,
Danes, and Romans; the holier they were in outward show, their actions proving
still the more diabolical; they, in recompense of those aerial, or rather fiery
ejaculations, recommended the avenging of their wrongs to God, and heartily
loaded them (and that deservedly) with as many curses and execrations as they
had lost of pence; the pretty effect of a good Cause, and result suitable to the
project of making the Jure-divine Presbytery a Government, which, besides its
Universality and Eternity, should, in matter of Dominion, be, for its
sublimity, placed above all the Potentates ^n the earth; preferring, by that
account, a Scottish Moderator to a Roman Dictator; although they minded not,
that such as claimed most right to this Generalissima-Jurisdiction, were,
unknown to themselves, chained in fetters of iron, as slaves to the tyranny of
two insolent masters, the Concupiscible and Irascible appetites.

Who doubts, that is not blinded with the ablepsie of an implicit zeal, but
that, by such contrivements, the three foresaid Dominions, together with Wales,
were as fully projected to be subject to the uncontrolable commands of the
Kirk, as the territories of Romania, Vrbino, Ferrara, and Avignon, to the Sea
of Rome; though with this advantage on the Popes side, that joint to the power
wherewith he is invested by his Papality, he rules over those parts by the
right of a Secular Prince; which title they cannot pretend to.

Were those Kirk-men free from covetousness and ambition, whereinto that most
of them are no less deeply plunged then any Laick in the world, sufficient
proof, within these two years, has been given in Scotland, by their laying
claim to the fifth part of all the rents of the Land, under the notion of
Tithes; devesting Noblemen of their rights of Patronages, and bringing their
persons to stand before them on Penitentiary Pews (like so many varlets) in
mendiciary and gausapinal garments, not so much for any trespass they had
committed, as thereby to confirm the Sovereignty of their Hierarchical
jurisdiction, which is neither Monarchical, Aristocratical, nor Democratical,
but a mere Plutarchy, Plutocracy, or rather Plutomanie; so madly they hale
after money, and the trash of this world. If so, I say, they were not guilty of
suchlike enormities; and that, according to their talk of things above, their
lives were answerable, or yet the result of their Acts, when all together in
Assemblies, Synods, or Presbyteries they are congregated into one body; then to
require such matters, might in some measure seem excusable; because an
unfeigned zeal to the furtherance of Learning, Piety, and good works, should be
seconded with power and wealth: but that for a mere aerial discourse of those,
whose hearts are ingulphed in the dross of worldly affections, others should
part from their own means and dignities to enrich the wives and children of
hypocrites, is a crying sin before God (contrary to Saint Paul's admonition,
who accounts men infidels that do so) and the abusing of those benefits he
has vouchsafed to allow us, for the maintetenance of our families, and
provision for posterity.

Is there any more common saying over all Scotland in the mouths of the
Laics, then that the Minister is the greediest man in the Parish, most
unwilling to bestow any thing in deeds of charity? and that the richer they
become, (without prejudice be it spoken of some honest men amongst them) the
more wretched they are? grounding that assertion on this, That by their daily
practice, both severally and conjunctly, it is found, that for their splendor
and inrichment, most of them do immire their spirits into earthly projects, not
caring by what sordid means they may attain their aims: and if they make any
kind of sermocination tending in outward appearance to godliness (which seldom
they do, being enjoined by their Ecclesiastical authority to preach to the
times, that is, to rail against Malignants and Sectaries, or those whom they
suppose to be their enemies) they do it but as those Augurs of old, of whom
Aulus Gellius speaking, says, Aures verbis ditant alienas, suas ut auro
locupletent crumenas.

I know I touch here a string of a harsh sound to the Kirk, of a note dissonant
from their proposed harmony* and quite out of the systeme of the intended
oecumenick government by them concerted: but seeing there are few will be taken
with the melody of such a democratical hierarchy, that have not preallably
been stung with the tarantula of a preposterous ambition, I will insist no
longer on this purpose; and that so much the rather, that he, whose writings I
in this tractate intermix with my own, tempers his Heliconian water with more
honey then vinegar, and prefers the Epigrammatical to the Satyrick strain; for
althoug (I think) there be hardly any in Scotland that proportionably has
suffered more prejudice by the Kirk then himself; his own Ministers (to wit,
those that preach in the Churches whereof himself is patron, Master Gilbert
Anderson, Master Robert Williamson, and Master Charles Pape by name, serving
the Cures of Cromarty, Kirkmichel, and Cullicudden) having done what lay in
them, for the furtherance of their own covetous ends, to his utter undoing:
for the first of those three, (for no other cause, but that the said Sir Thomas
would not authorize the standing of a certain Pew (in that Country called a
desk) in the Church of Cromarty, put in without his consent, by a professed
enemy to his House, who had plotted the ruin thereof; and one that had no Land
in the parish) did so rail against him and his family in the Pulpit at several
times, both before his face, and in his absence, and with such opprobrious
terms, more like a scolding Tripe-sellers wife, then good Minister, squirting
the poison of detraction and abominable falsehood (unfit for the chair of
verity) in the ears of his tenandry, who were the only auditors, did most
ingrately and despightfully so calumniate and revile their Master, his own
patron and benefactor, that the scandalous and reproachful words striving which
of them should first discharge against him its steel-pointed dart, did,
oftentimes, like clusters of hemlock, or wormwood dipped in vinegar, stick in
his throat; he being almost ready to choke with the aconital bitterness and
venom thereof, till the razor of extreme passion, by cutting them into
articulate sounds; and very rage it self, in the highest degree, by procuring a
vomit, had made him spue them out of his mouth, into rude indigested lumps,
like so many toads and vipers that had burst their gall.

As for the other two, notwithstanding that they had been borne, and their
Fathers before them, vassals to his house, and the predecessor of one of them
had shelter in that Land, by reason of slaughter committed by him, when there
was no refuge for him anywhere else in Scotland; and that the other had never
been admitted to any Church, had it not been for the favor of his foresaid
patron, who, contrary to the will of his own friends, and great reluctance of
the ministry it self, was both the nominater and chuser of him to that
function; and that before his admission, he did faithfully protest he should
all the days of his life remain contented with that competency of portion the
late incumbent in that charge did enjoy before him: they nevertheless behaved
themselves so peevishly and unthankfully toward their forenamed patron and
Master, that, by virtue of an unjust decree both procured and purchased from a
promiscous knot of men like themselves, they used all their utmost endeavors,
in absence of their above-recited Patron (to whom and unto whose house they
they had been so much beholding) to outlaw him, and declare him rebel (by open
proclamation, at the market-cross of the head Town of his own shire) in case
he did not condescend to the grant of that augmentation of stipend, which they
demanded, conform to the tenor of the abovementioned decree; the injustice
whereof will appear, when examined by any rational judge.

Now the best is, when by some moderate Gentlemen it was expostulated, why
against their Master, Patron, and benefactor, they should have dealt with such
severity and rigor, contrary to all reason and equity; their answer was, They
were enforced and necessitated so to do, by the synodal and presbyterial
conventions of the Kirk, under pain of deprivation, and expulsion from their
benefices: I will not say, (...), but may safely think that a well-sanctified
mother will not have a so ill-instructed brat, and that injuria humana cannot
be the lawful daughter of a jure divino parent.

Yet have I heard him, notwithstanding all these wrongs, several times avouch,
that from his heart he honors the ministerial function, and could wish that
each of them had a competency of livelihood, to the end that for not lacking
what is necessary for him, he might not be distracted from the seriousness of
his speculative imploiments, with which above all things he would have one
busied, that were admitted to that charge; and to be a man of a choice
integrity of life, and approved literature: he always esteeming Philosophy, in
all its Mathematical, natural, and prudential demonstrations, rules, and
precepts, so convenient for inbellishing the mind of him whose vocation it is,
to be sequestered from the toil of worldly affairs; that the Reason and Will of
man being thereby illuminated, and directed toward the objects of truth and
goodness, a Churchman or pretender to divinity regardless of those sciences,
might be justly suspected to be ignorant of God, by caring so little for the
knowledge of his creatures, and upon a sacred text oftentimes to make an
unhallowed comment.

I have heard him likewise say, he would be glad, that in every Parish of
Scotland there were a free School and a standing Library, in the custody of
the Minister; with this proviso, that none of the books should be embezeled by
him, or any of his successors; and he empowered to persuade his parishioners,
in all he could, to be liberal in their dotations toward the School, and
magnifying of the Library: To the end that besides the good would thereby
redound to all good Spirits, it might prove a great encouragement to the
Stationer and Printer; that, being the noblest profession amongst Merchants;
and this, amongst Artificers.

As also to entreat the Civil Magistrate, by the severity of the Law, to curb
the insolency of such notorious and scandalous sinners as should prove
unpliable to the stamp of his wholesome admonitions.

As for his wife and children, if he follow the footsteps of Solomon, and ask
sincerely for wisdom of God before he wed, he will undoubtedly endow him with
wealth sufficient for both; for whoever marieth, if he be wise, will either
have a virtuous or a monyed woman to his mariage-bed; by means of either
whereof, the discretion and foresight of a judicious husband, will provide a
dowry for her, and education for her issue; which, in a well-policied Country,
is better then a patrimony.

The taking of this course, will advance learning, further piety, improve all
moral virtues establish true honor in the land* make trades flourish,
merchandise prosper, the yeomanry industrious, Gentlemen happy, and the
ministers themselves richer then when their minds were totally bent on the
purchase of money: for, as patterns of godliness without morosity, and
literature without affectation (being men qualified as aforesaid) by their
sweetness of conversation, and influence of doctrine, they would gain so much
ground upon the hearts of their acquaintance, that Countrymen would not only
gratify them daily, and load them with variety of presents, but would also
after their decease rather choose to starve themselves, then suffer the wives
and children of persons so obliging, to be in any want or indigence: specially
if the traffic and civility of Scotland were promoved by a close union with
England, not heterogeneal (as timber and stone upon ice stick sometimes
together) bound by the frost of a conquering Sword; but homogeneated by
naturalization, and the mutual enjoyment of the same privileges and
immunities; which design being once by King James set abroach, although some of
his compatriot subjects, out of ambition to be called rather profound Scholars
and nimble wits* then good Countrymen and loyal Counselors, did
pertinaciously withstand the motion.

Yet seeing a wedge of Wainscot is fittest and most proper for cleaving of an
oaken tree, and that Sir Francis Bacon, othewise designed by the titles of Lord
Verulam, and Viscount Saint Albans, was pleased to make a speech thereupon in
the Honorable House of Commons, in the fifth year of King James his reign in
this Dominion; it is the humble desire of the Author, that the States of this
Isle vouchsafe to take notice of his reasons (he being both a wise man and a
good English man) after the manner as follows.

He begins his discourse thus:

IT may please you, Master Speaker, preface will I use none, but put my self
upon your good opinions to which I have been accustomed beyond my deservings;
neither will I hold you in suspense what way I will choose, but now at the first
declare my self, that I mean to counsel the House to naturalize the nation of
Scotland; wherein nevertheless I have a request unto you, which is of more
efficacy to the purpose I have in hand, then all that I shall say afterward,
and it is the same request which Demosthenes did more then once, in great
causes of estate, make to the people of Athens, that when they took into their
hands the balls, whereby to give their voices (according as the manner of them
was) they would raise their thoughts, and lay aside those considerations which
their private vocations and degrees might minister and represent unto them, and
would take upon them cogitations and minds agreeable to the dignity and honor
of the estate.

For, Master Speaker, as it was aptly and sharply said by Alexander to
Parmenio, when upon their recital of the great offers which Darius made,
Parmenio said unto him, I would accept these offers, were I as Alexander, he
turned it upon him again, so would I (says he) were I as Parmenio: So in this
cause, if an honest English merchant (I do not single out that state in
disgrace, for this Island ever held it honorable, but only for an instance of
private profession) if an English Merchant should say, Surely I would proceed
no further in the union, were I as the King, it might be reasonably answered,
No more would the King, were he as an English Merchant: and the like may be
said of a Gentleman in the Country, be he never so worthy or sufficient; or of
a lawyer, be he never so wise or learned; or of any other particular condition
in this Kingdom: for certainly (Master Speaker) if a man shall be only or
chiefly sensible of those respects which his particular affection and degree
shall suggest and infuse into him, and not enter into true and worthy
considerations of estate, we shall never be able aright to give Counsel, or
take Counsel, in this matter; for if this request be granted, I account the
cause obtained.

Having begun his speech after this manner, he proceeds yet further; and first,
he fully answers all the arguments, concerning inconveniences that have been
alleged to ensue, in case of giving way to this naturalization: next, he
discloseth what greater inconveniences would assuredly befall this Land, if
they did not condescend to the union: and lastly, what gain and benefit would
redound to England by means thereof: all which he displayeth in that learned
speech, with such exquisite reasons, and impartial judgment, that, without
prejudicacie of opinion, and sense-perverting passion, there is nothing to be
said against it.

He rests not here, but in another passage thereof, after his having
acknowledged the difference or disparity betwixt the two Nations in matter of
external means, giving therein the advantage to England, as the richer Country;
he expresses himself in these words: Indeed it must be confessed, that for the
goods of the mind and body, they are alteri nos: for, to do them but right, we
know in their capacity and understandings, they are a People ingenious, in
labor industrious, in courage valiant, in body hard, active, and comely: more
might be said, but in commending themwe, do but in effect commend ourselves;
for they are of one part and continent with us; and, the truth is, we are
participant both of their virtues and vices, etc.

He says furthermore, in illustration of the inconveniences which England will
incur, in case of non-naturalizing the Scots, that whatsoever several Kingdoms
or Estates have been united in Sovereignty, if that union has not been
fortified and bound in with a further union, and namely that which is now in
question (of naturalization) this has followed, that at one time or other they
have broken, being upon all occasions apt to relapse and revolt to the former
separation. Of this assertion the first example that I will set before you, is
of the memorable union which was between the Romans and the Latins, which
continued from the battle at the Lake of Regilla for many years, until the
Consulship of Caius Plautius, andLucius Aemilius Mammercus: at which time there
began, about this very point of Naturalization, that War which was calledBellum
sociale, being the most bloody and pernicious War that ever the Roman State
endured; wherein, after numbers of battles, and infinite Sieges and surprisals
of Towns, the Romans in the end prevailed, and mastered the Latins: And as
they had the honor of the War, so looking back into what perdition and
confusion they were near to have been brought, they presently naturalized them
all.

Immediately thereafter, setting before our eyes the example of Sparta, and the
rest of Peloponnesus their associates, he says thus: The State of Sparta was a
nice and jealous State of this point of imparting Naturalization to their
confederates: but what was the issue of it? After they held them in a kind of
society and amity for diverse years, upon the first occasion given, which was
no more then the surprisal of the Castle ofThebes, by certain desperate
conspirators in the habit of masters, there insued forthwith a general revolt
and defection of their associates; which was the ruin of their State, never
after to be recovered.

In the same dicourse he introduces another example, though of latter times,
which is this, that notwithstanding the Kingdom ofAragon had in the persons of
Ferdinand andIsabella been united with the rest of Spain, and that it had so
continued for many years, yet because it was severed and divided from the other
Kingdoms of Spain in this point of naturalization, it fell out so, that, long
after that, upon the voice of a condemned man, out of the grate of a Prison,
toward the street, that cried Libertad, libertad, there was raised a dangerous
rebellion* which with great difficulty was suppressed with an army royal: after
which victory nevertheless, to shun further inconvenience, they were
incorporated with Castile, and the remanent regions of Spain* Pisa likewise
being united unto Florence, without the benefit of naturalization, upon the
first sight of Charles the eighth of France his expedition into Italy did
revolt; yet afterward it was reunited, and did obtain the foresaid benefit.

A little after, the better to persuade the Parliament to the said
Naturalization of the Scots, he subjoineth these words. On the other part
(Master Speaker) because it is true which the Logicians say Opposita juxta se
posita clarius elucescunt; let us take a view, and we shall find, that
wheresoever Kingdoms and States have been united* and that union incorporated
by the bond of Naturalization mutually, you shall never observe them afterward
upon any occasion of trouble or otherwise, to break and sever again; as we see
most evidently before our eyes* in our Provinces of France; that is to
say,Guyen Provence Normandy, Britain, which notwithstanding the infinite
infesting troubles of that Kingdom, never offered to break again. We see the
like effect in all the Kingdoms of Spain, which are mutually naturalized; as
Castile, Leon, Valenicia, Andaluzia, Granada, Murcia, Toledo, Catalonia, and
the rest, except Aragon, which held the contrary course, and therefore had the
contrary success: and lastly, we see the like effect in our Nation, which never
rent asunder after it was united; so as we now scarce know, whether the
Heptarchy was a true story, or a fable: and therefore (Master Speaker) when I
revolve with my self these examples, and others, so lively expressing the
necessity of a Naturalization, to avoid a relapse into a separation, I must
say, I do believe (and I would be sorry to be found a Prophet in it) that except
we proceed with this naturalization, though not perhaps in his Majesty's time,
who has such interest in both Nations* yet in the mean time of his
descendents, these Realms will be in continual danger to divide and break
again. Now if any man be of that careless mind,Maneat nostros ea cura nepotes;
or of that hard mind, to leave things to be tried by the sharpest sword: sure I
am, he is not of Saint Paul's opinion, who affirms that whosoever uses not
foresight, and provision for his family, is worse then an Infidel; much more if
we shall not use foresight for these two Kingdoms, that comprehend in them so
many families, but leave things open to the peril of future division.

And so forth going on very efficaciously in confirmation of the premises, he
proceeds to the benefits which arise to England by knitting the knot surer and
straiter between these two Realms, by communicating Naturalization to Scotland:
his words are these.

The benefits may appear to be two; the one surety, the other greatness:
touching surety (Master Speaker) it was well said byTitus Quintus the Roman,
touching the state of Peloponnesus, that the tortoise is safe within her shell,
Testudo intertegumen tuta est; but if there be any parts that lie open, they
endanger all the rest. We know well, that although the State at this time be in
a happy peace, yet for the time past, the more ancient Enemy is the French, and
the more the late Spaniard; and both these had as it were their several
postern-gates, whereby they might have approach and entrance to annoy us:
France had Scotland, andSpaine had Ireland; for these were but the two accesses
which did comfort and encourage both these Enemies to assail and trouble us:
we see that of Scotland is cut off by the union of these two Kingdoms, if that
it shall be made constant and permanent; that of Ireland is cut off likewise by
the convenient situation of the west of Scotland toward the north of Ireland,
where the sore was, which we see being suddenly closed by means of this salve;
so that as now there are no parts of the State exposed to danger to be a
temptation to the ambition of Forrainers, but their approaches and avenues are
taken away: for I do little doubt, but these Forrainers, who had so little
success when they had those advanvantages, will have much less comfort now,
that they be taken from them. And so much for surety.

He goes on: For greatness (Master Speaker) I think a man may speak it soberly,
and without bravery, that this Kingdom of England having Scotland
united,Ireland reduced, and shipping maintained, is one of the greatest
Monarchies, in forces truly esteemed, that has been in the world; for
certainly the kingdoms here on earth, have a resemblance with the kingdom of
heaven, which our Savior compares not to any great kernel or nut, but to a
very small grain, yet such a one as is apt to grow and spread; and such do I
take to be the constitution of this kingdom, if indeed our country be referred
to greatness and power, and not quenched too much with the consideration of
utility and wealth. For (Master Speaker) was it not, think you, a true answer
that Solon of Greece made to rich King Croesus of Lydia, when he showed unto
him a great quantity of gold, that he had gathered together, in ostentation of
his greatness and might? but Solon said to him contrary to his expectation,
Why, sir, if another come that has better iron then you, he will be Lord of
all your gold. Neither is the authority of Machiavel to be despised, who
scorneth that proverb of State, taken first from a speech of Mucianus,
Thatmoneys are the sinews of war; and says there are no true sinews of war,
but the very arms of valiant men.

Nay more (Master Speaker) whosoever shall look into the seminary and beginning
of the Monarchies of the world, he shall find them founded in poverty.

Persia, a country barren and poor in respect of Media, which they reduced.

Macedon, a kingdom ignoble and mercenary, until the time of Philip the son
ofAmintas.

Rome had a poor and pastoral beginning.

The Turks* a band of Sarmachian Scyths, that in a vagabond manner made
incursion upon that part of Asia which is calledTurcomania; out of which, after
much variety of fortune, sprung the Ottoman family, now the terror of the
world.

So we know the Goths, Vandals, Alans, Huns, Lombards, Normans, and the rest of
the Northern people, in one age of the world, made their descent and expedition
upon theRoman Empire; and came not at rovers, to carry away prey, and be gone
again, but planted themselves in a number of rich and fruitful provinces,
where not only their generations, but their names remain to this day; witness
Lombardy, Catalonia, a word composed of Goth and Alan, Andaluzia, a name
corrupted from Vandalitia; Hungaria, Normandy, and others: nay, the fortune of
the Swisses of late years, which are bred in a barren and mountanous country,
is not to be forgotten; who first ruined the Duke of Burgundy, the same who had
almost ruined the kingdom of France, what time after the battle near Granson,
the rich Jewel of Burgundy, prised at many thousands, was sold for a few pence,
by a commonSwisse, that knew no more what a jewel meant, then did Aesops cock:
and again, the same nation, in revenge of a scorn, was the ruin of the French
kings affairs in Italy, Lowis the twelfth; for that king, when he was pressed
somewhat rudely by an agent of the Swissers to raise their pensions, broke into
words of choler, What (says he) will those villains of the mountains put a
task upon me? which words lost him his Duchy of Milan, and chased him out
ofItaly.

All which examples (Master Speaker) do well prove Solons opinion of the
Authority and majesty that iron has over gold. For confirmation hereof, a
little after* he says, Seeing the nation of Spain, which of ancient time
served many ages, first under Carthage, then under Rome, after under Saracens,
Goths, and others, should of late years take unto them that spirit as to dream
of a Monarchy in the West, only because they have raised from some wild and
unarmed people, mines and store of gold; and on the other side, that this
Island of Britain, seated and named as it is, and that has, I make no
question, the best iron in the world, that is, the best soldiers of the world,
shall think of nothing but accounts and audits,meum and tuum, and I cannot tell
what, is truly very strange. Finally, he closes that his speech with this
period, I have spoken (Master Speaker) out of the fountain of my heart,
Credidi, propter quod loquutus sum; I believed, therefore I spoke. So my duty
is performed: the judgment is yours; God direct it for the best.

In another speech (again) used by the said Sir Francis Bacon, in the lower
house of Parliament, by occasion of a motion concerning the union of Laws, he
spoke thus.

And it please you (Master Speaker) were it now a time to wish as it is to
advise, no man should be more forward, or more earnest then my self in this
wish, that his Majesty's subjects of England and Scotland were governed by one
law; and that for many reasons.

First* Because it will be an infallible assurance, that there will never be
any relapse in succeeding ages to a separation.

Secondly, Dulcis tractus pari jugo; if the draught lie most upon us, and the
yoke lie least on them, or inverse-wise, it is not equal.

Thirdly, The qualities, and (as I may term it) the elements of their Laws and
ours are such as do promise an excellent temperature in the compounded body;
for if the prerogative here be too indefinite, it may be the liberty there is
too unbounded: if our laws and proceedings be too prolix and formal, it may be
theirs are too informal and summary.

Fourthly, I do discern, to my understanding, there will be no great difficulty
in this work: for their Laws by that I can learn, compared with ours, are like
their Language: for as their Language has the same roots that ours has, but
has a little more mixture of Latin and French: so their Laws and customs have
the like grounds that ours have, with a little more mixture of the civil Law
and French customs.

Lastly, The mean to this work seems to me no less excellent, then the work
it self; for if both Laws shall be united, it is of necessity* for preparation
and inducement thereunto, that our own laws be renewed and recompiled, then the
which, I think there cannot be a work more politick^ more honorable nor more
beneficial to the subjects of the land for all ages; for this continual heaping
up of Laws without digesting them, makes but a Chaos and confusion, and
turns the Laws many times to become but snares to the people: and therefore
this work I esteem to be indeed a work (rightly to term it) Heroical, and that
which if I might live to see, I would not desire to live after. So that for
this good wish of union of Laws, I do consent to the full. A little after he
says, that this union of Laws should not precede the naturalization, nor go
along with it paripassu* but altogether succeed it, and that not in the
precedence of an instant, but in distance of time, because the union of Laws
will ask a great time to be perfected, both for the compiling and for the
passing of them; during all which time, if this mark of strangeness should be
denied to be taken away, I fear it may induce such a habit of strangeness, as
will rather be an impediment then a preparation to further proceeding.

And albeit in the conclusion of his speech he says, that he holds this
motion of union of Laws very worthy, and arising from very good minds, but not
proper for that time; yet do I think that, for this time, and as the juncture
of affairs is for the present, it is very proper and expedient.

Therefore, although, in some parcels of the foresaid discourse not here
recited, many pregnant reasons to those that opposed the naturalization of the
Scots, because that Nation was annexed to England by inheritance, and not
conquest, be exhibited, to show that the grant of the benefit thereof should
not be obstructed, for that Scotland was not a conquered Country; as also why
the Scots unwilligness to receive the English Laws, should be no impediment to
their Naturalization: and that in Robert Calvin's Case, which is extant to be
seen in the seventh book of Sir Edward Cook's Reports, many excellent things
are deduced in favor of the post^ati of that Realm, notwithstanding the
diversity of Laws, and Scotland's then unacknowledged subordination to the mere
Authority of this Land; Yet seeing the face of affairs is quite altered from
what it was then, and that the English civility and good carriage may gain so
much upon the affections of the people there, as to make them in a very short
space to be of the same Customs, Manners, and Language with them; I do really
believe if Sir Francis Bacon and Sir Edward Cook were now living, that both of
them would unanimously advise the State and Soverainty of this Island to allow
unto Scotland (which neither is nor never was a Kingdom more then Wales was of
old) the same privileges and immunities (in every thing) that Wales now has,
(and which the Scots have in France, a transmarine Country) to enjoy everywhere
in all things, the emoluments and benefit competent to the freeborn subjects
of England; and to this effect, to empower that Nation with liberty to choose
their representattves to be sen hither to this their sovereign Parliament,
that the public trustees of England, Scotland, and Wales, may at Westminster
jointly concur for the weal of the whole Isle, as members of one and the same
incorporation. These two Knights, one whereof was Lord high Chancellor of
England* and the other Atturny General, and Lord chief Justice of the Common
pleas, were good and wise men, full of honor, free from prevarication and
by-respects, learned Lawyers, excellent Scholars, fluent Orators and (above
all) worthy, loving, and sincere patriots of England; for which cause I hope so
many exquisite qualities meeting (as it were) in one constellation, by virtue
of a powerful influence upon the minds of the supreme Senate of the Land,
will incline the hearts of every one not to dissent from the Judgment and
approbation of these two so eminent Judges and zealous English men; and that so
much the rather, that to the accomplishment of so commendable a work, we are
conducted by nature it self, which, having made us divisos orb Britannos,
shows, (by the antiperistatick faculty of a fountain or spring-well in the
Summer season, whose nature is to be the colder within it self, the greater
circumobresistence of heat be in the air, which surrounds it) that we should
cordially close to one another, unite our Forces, and the more vigourously
improve the internal strength we have of our selves, the greater that the
outward opposition and hostility appear against us of the circumjacent
outlandish Nations which inviron us on all sides.

This was not heeded in ancient times, by reason of the surquedry of the old
English, who looked on the Scots with a malignant aspect; and the profound
policy of the French, in casting (for their own ends) the spirit of division
betwixt the two Nations, to widen the breach. But now that the English have
attained to a greater dexterity in encompassing their facienda's of State, and
deeper reach in considering what for the future may prove most honorable and
lucrative, will (like an expert Physician to a patient sick of a Consumption in
his noble parts, who applies cordials and not corosives; and lenitives rather
then cauters) strive more (as I imagine) to gain the love and affection of the
Scots, thereby to save the expense of any more blood or money, then for
overthrowing them quite in both their bodies and fortunes, to maintain the
charge of an everlasting war against the storms of the climate, the fierceness
of discontented People, inaccessibility of the hills, and sometimes universal
penury, the mother of plague and famine; all which inconveniences may be easily
prevented without any charge at all, by the sole gaining of the hearts of the
country.

By which means, patching up old rents, cementing what formerly was broken, and
by making of ancient foes new friends, we will strengthen our selves, and
weaken our enemies; and raise the Isle of Britain to that height of glory, that
it will become formidable to all the world besides.

In the mean while, the better to incorporate the three Dominions of England,
Scotland, and Wales, and more firmly to consolidate their union, it were not
amiss (in my opinion) that (as little rivers, which use to lose their names
when they run along into the current of a great flood) they have their own
peculiar titles laid aside, and totally dischaged into the vast gulf of that
of Great Britain.

But if upon any emergent occasion, it be thought fit to make mention of
Ireland, and the several Dominions of Brttain, in an orderly enumeration, to
place Ireland (as I conceive it) before Scotland, is very preposterous; not but
that Ireland is a far more fertile Country, and that the Irish may be as good as
any men: that the Scots in these latter years may be much degenerated from the
magnanimity of their Forefathers, and that the succeeding progeny may perhaps
prove little better; or as you will: for be the soil or climate never so good
or bad, with a permanence, or rather immutability in either of those qualities,
the respective natives and inhabitants thereof will nevertheless, according to
the change of times, be subject to a vicissitude of vice and virtue, as may
appear by the inclinations of the Greeks and Romans now, compared with those of
their Ancestors, in the days of Xerxes and Hannibal: but only that I conceive
priority to be more due to Scotland (although I should speak nothing of its
more immaculate reputation both abroad and at home, and of a longer series of
Sovereigns that swayed Scepter there in a continuate uninterrupted succession)
and that because of its greater conformity with, and proximity to the Nation of
England; the People whereof, if they would imitate the fashion of the warlike
Romans, should say, Scots and Irish, as the Romans did, Latins and Gauls, or
Latins and Sicilians, by reason of the Latins vicinity and nearer adjacence to
Rome; although Sicilie was more fruitful and opulent then Latium, and the
Gauls more populous and every whit as fierce in the field as the Latins.

I am afraid that I have trespassed a little upon the patience of the Reader,
by insisting so long in my discourse upon Scotland: yet in regard of my
obligation and bound duty to the Author of the above-recited lost Papers, whose
native soil it is, I could hardly do less, seeing it is for the good of him,
that this whole tractate is compiled, and to his behalf, who expects not, (as
has been said already in the 203 page, and abundantly proved by the fifteenth
Axiom) either recompense or punishment for his Countries sake: he likewise
hops, by virtue of the said axiom, that his being a mere Prisoner of war,
without any further delinquencie, will not militate much against him* if the
subjects of the Land, by inventions of his, attain to what is conducible to
them, in saving of expense, as by the discovery proffered to the public, he is
able to make good, when required thereto: that either money or lands, if not
both, should be due to him for the disclosure of so prime a secret, is clearly
demonstrated by the sixteenth: and that the State will be no less courteous and
favorable to him, then to any other Prisoner of war proportionably, is plainly
evidenced by the seventeenth: That the supreme authority of the Isle, in matter
of the liberty of his person, and that of his brothers and menial servants,
together with the enjoyment of his own houses, lands and rents, free from
sequestration, confiscation, composition, and garisoning, should allow him the
same conditions granted to any other no more deserving then himself, is
manifestly proved by the eighteenth: that therefore he should obtain the
greater favors (as aforesaid) is proved by the nineteeth: and that if to no
other prisoner of all his Country be truly competent, but to himself alone, the
ample character (in all its branches, as it is specified in the 232, 233, 234,
and 235, pages) which I have given of him, and could not conceal, being much
less then his due; then, in stead of a recompense for the surplusage of wherein
others are defective, which he covets not, none certainly of all the Scottish
Nation, whether Prisoner or other, should receive from the State so great
favors and courtesies as himself, because (without prejudice be it spoke to
any man) he did from the beginning of these intestine broils walk in an even,
if not a more constant track of blameless carriage, free from hypocrisy,
coveousness, and tergiversation, then any of his compatriots: that
notwithstanding the strictness of his allegience to supreme authority, and the
many ties of obedience that lie upon any subject whatsoever, he may by virtue
of his own merit deserve a reward from the State, is clear by the twentieth:
and that for the imparting of this invention and others, to public acceptance,
which are so properly his own, that no other brain, that ever was or is, did
contribute any thing to their eduction, he may lawfully claim right to a
competency of retribution, is made patent by the one and twentieth.

And lastly, the Author desiring no more but the grant of the foresaid demands,
although by the strict rule of commutative justice, it should seem to be a
reward by too many stages inferior to the discovery of so prime an invention;
yet that the State does him neither wrong nor injustice therein, provided he be
not denied of what he requires, is fully cleared by the two and twentieth or
last Axiom.

This Apodictick course by a compositive method theorematically to infer
consequences from infallible maxims, with all possible succinctness, I thought
fit to embrace; because, to have analytically couched those verities, by
mounting the scale of their probatition upon the prosyllogistick steps of
variously-amplified confirmations, would have been a procedure for its
prolixity unsuitable to the pregnancy of the State, whose intuitive spirits can
at the first hearing discern the strength of manifold conclusions (without the
labor of subsuming) in the very bowels and chaos of their principles.

I could truly (having before my eyes some known Treatises of the Author, whose
Muse I honor, and the strain of whose pen to imitate, is my greatest
ambition) have enlarged this discourse with a choicer variety of phrase; and
made it overflow the field of the readers understanding, with an inundation of
greater eloquence: and that one way, Tropologetically, by Metonymical,
Ironical, Metaphorical, and Synecdochical instruments of elocution, in all
their several kinds, Artificially affected, according to the nature of the
subject, with emphatical expressions, in things of great concernment with
Catachrestical, in matters of meaner moment; attended on each side respectively
with an Epiplectick and Exegetick Modification; with Hyperbolical, either
Epitatically or Hypocoristically, as the purpose required to be Elated or
Extenuated, they qualifying Metaphors, and accompanied with Apostrophes; and
lastly, with Allegories of all sorts, whether Apologal, Affabulatory,
Parabolary, Aenigmatick, or Paraemial. And on the other part,
Schematologetically adorning the proposed Theme with the most especial and
chief flowers of the Garden of Rhetoric, and omiting no figure either of
Diction or Sentence, that might contribute to the ears enchantment, or
persuasion of the hearer.

I could have introduced, in case of obscurity, Synonymal, Exargastick, and
Palilogetick Elucidations; for sweetness of phrase, Antimetathetick
commutations of Epithets: for the vehement excitation of a matter, exclamations
in the front, and Epiphonema's in the rear. I could have used, for the
promptlyer stirring up of passion, Apostrophal and Prosopopocial diversions:
and for the appensing and settling of them* some Epanorthotick revocations, and
Aposiopetick restraints. I could have inserted Dialogismes* displaying their
Interrogatory part with communicatively-Pysmatick and Sustentative flourishes;
or Proleptically, with the refutative Schemes of Anticipation and Subjection:
and that part which concerns the Responsory, with the figures of permission and
concession.

Speeches extending a matter beyond what it is, Auxetically, Digressively,
Transititiously, by Ratiocination, Aetiology, Circumlocution; and other ways I
could have made use of: as likewise with words diminishing the worth of a
thing* Tapinotically, Periphrastically, by rejection, translation, and other
means, I could have served my self.

There is neither definition Distribution, Epitrochism, Increment, Catacterism,
Hypotyposis, or any Schem figurating a speech by reason of what is in the thing
to our purpose thereby signified, that I needed to have omitted: nor, had I
been so pleased, would I have past by the figurative expressions of what is
without any thing of the matter in hand; whether Paradigmatical, Iconical,
Symbolical, by comparison, or any other kind of Simile: or yet Paradoxical,
Paramologetick, Paradiastolary, Antipophoretick, Cromatick, or any other way of
figurating a speech by opposition, being formules of Oratory, whereby we
subjoyn what is not expected* confess something that can do us no harm* yield
to one of the members, that the other may be removed; allow an argument, to
oppose a stronger; mix praise with dispraise, and so forth through all manner
of illustration and decorement of purposes by contrarieties, and repugnance.

All those Figures and Tropes* besides what are not here mentioned (these
Synecdochically standing for all, to shun the tediousness of a too prolixe
enumeration) I could have adhibited to the embellishment of this Tractate, had
not the matter it self been more prevalent with me, then the superficial
formality of a quaint discourse.

I could have firreted out of Topic Celluls such variety of arguments tending
to my purpose, and seconded them with so many diverse refutations,
confirmations, and Prosyllogistick deductions, as after the large manner of
their several amplifications according to the rules of Art would, contexed
together, have framed a book of a great quarto size, in an Arithmetical
proportion of length to its other two Dimensions of breadth and thickness; that
is to say, its breadth should exceed the thickness thereof by the same number of
inches and no more, that it is surpassed by the length; in which considering
the body thereof could be contained no less then seven quires of paper at
least; and yet notwithstanding this so great a bulk, I could have disposed the
contents of its whole subjected matter so appositely into partitions, for
facilitating an impression in the Readers memory, and presented it to the
understanding in so sprucela garb, that spirits blessed with leisure, and free
from the urgency of serious employments, would happily have bestowed as
liberally some few hours thereon, as on the perusal of a new-coined Romancy,
or strange history of love-adventures.

For although the figures and tropes above rehearsed seem in their actu signato
(as they signify mere notional circumstances, affections, adjuncts, and
dependences on words, to be a little Pedantical, and to the smooth touch of a
delicate ear, somewhat harsh and scabrous: yet in their exerced act (as they
suppone for things reduplicatively as things in the first apprehension of the
mind by them signified) I could, even in far abstruser purposes, have so fitly
adjusted them with apt and proper terms, and with such perspicuity couched
them, as would have been suitable to the capacities of courtiers and young
Ladies, whose tender hearing, for the most part, being more taken with the
insinuating harmony of a well-concerted period, in its Isocoletick and
parisonal members, then with the never-so-pithy a fancy of a learned subject,
destitute of the Illustriousness of so Pathetick ornaments, will sooner convey
persuasion to the interior faculties, from the ravishing assault of a
well-disciplined diction, in a parade of curiosly-mustered words in their
several ranks and files, then by the vigor and fierceness of never so many
powerful squadrons of a promiscuously-digested elocution into bare Logical
arguments: for the sweetness of their disposition is more easily gained by
undermining passion, then storming reason; and by the music and Symmetry of a
discourse in its external appurtenances, then by all the puissance imaginary of
the ditty or purpose disclosed by it.

But seeing the prime scope of this Treatise is to testify my utmost
endeavors to do all the service I can to Sir Thomas Vrquhart, both for the
procuring of his liberty, and entreating the State, whose prisoner he is, to
allow him the enjoyment of his own, lest by his thraldom and distress (useful
to no man) the public should be deprived of those excellent inventions, whose
emission totally depends upon the grant of his enlargement and freedom in
both estate and person: and that to a State which respects substance more
then ceremony, the body more then the shadow, and solidity more then
ostentation, it would argue great indiscretion in me, to become no other ways
a suitor for that worthy gentleman then by emancipating my vein upon the full
carreer of Rhetorical excursions, approving my self thereby like to those
Navigators, Gunners, and Horsemen, who use more sail then ballast, more powder
then ball, and employ the spur more then the bridle:

Therefore is it, that laying aside all the considerations of those advantages
and prerogatives a neat expression in fluent terms has over the milder sex
and Miniard youth, and setting before my eyes the reverence and gravity of
those supereminent men to whom my expectation of their non-refusal of my
request has emboldened me to make my addresses; I hold it now expedient
(without further ado) to stop the current of my pen, and, in token of the duty
I owe to him whose cause I here assert, to give way to his more literate and
complete elucubrations; which that they may the sooner appear to the eyes of
the world, for the advancement of both virtue and learning, I yet once more,
and that most heartily, beseech the present State, Parliament, and supreme
Council of great Britain, to vouchsafe unto the aforesaid Sir Thomas Vrquhart
of Cromarty knight, heritable Sheriff and proprietary thereof, a grant of the
releasement of his person from any imprisonment whereunto at the discretion of
those that took his parole he is engaged; the possession likewise of his house
of Cromarty free from garisoning, and the enjoyment of his whole estate in
lands, without affecting it with any other either public or private burden
then has been of his own contracting, and that with the dignities thereto
belonging of hereditary Sheriff-ship, patronage of the three Churches there,
and Admiralty of the Seas betwixt Catness and Innernass inclusively (with
subordination nevertheless to the high Admiral of the land) together with all
the other privileges and immunities, which, both in his person, and that of
his predecessors, has been from time to time accounted due by inheriitance to
the house of Cromarty, and that for the love of the whole Island on which he
offers, in compensation, to bestow a benefit (under pain of forfeiture of all
he has) of ten times more worth. As this is my humble petition, so is it
conform to the desires of all the best spirits of England, Scotland, Wales, and
Ireland.

Pity it were to refuse such,
As ask but l^ttle, and give much.
The List of those Scots mentioned in this book, who have been Generals abroad
within these fifty years.
Sir Patrick Ruven. Genesis Ruderford. Lord Spence. S. Alexander Lesly, Dux
foederis. S. Alexander Lesly in Moscovy. James King. Marquis Lesly. Marquis
Hamilton.
The List of other Scottish Officers mentioned in in this Treatise, who were all
Colonels abroad, and some of them General persons.
Lieutenant Generals. David Lesly. S. James Livingstoun. William Bailif.
Major Generals. Lodovick Lindsay. Robert Monro. Thomas Ker. S. David Drumond.
S. James Lumsden. Robert Lumsden. S. John Hepburn. Lord James Douglas.
Watchtoun Hepburn. John Lesly.
Colonels. Alexander Hamilton, General of the Artillery. Alexander Ramsay,
Quartermaster General. Col. Anderson. Earl of Argyle. Col. Armestrong. Earl of
Bacluch. S. James Balantine. S. William Balantine. S. David Balfour. S. Henry
Balfour. Col. Boyd. Col. Brog. Col. Bruce. James Cockburne. Col. Colon. Lord
Colvil. Alex. Crawford. Col. Crichtoun. Alex. Cuningam. George Cuningam. Robert
Cuningam. William Cuningam. George Douglas. Col. Douglas. Col. Douglas. Col.
Edinton. Col. Edmond. Col. Erskin. Alex. Forbas. Alex. Forbas. Arthur Forbas.
Fines Forbas. John Forbas. Lord Forbas. S. John Fulerton. Thomas Garne. Alex.
Gordon. Alex. Gordon. John Gordon. Col. Gordon. S. Andrew Gray. William Gun.
Col. Gun. S. Frederick Hamilton. James Hamilton. John Hamilton. Hugh Hamilton.
S. Francis Henderson. S. John Henderson. Thomas Hume. Col. Hunter. Edward
Johnston. James Johnston. William Johnston. S. John Innes. Earl of Iruin.
William Keith. Jhon Kinindmond. Patrick Kinindmond. Thomas Kinindmond. William
Kinindmond. Walter Lecky. Col. Lermond. Alex. Lesly. George Lesly. John Lesly.
Robert Lesly. Col. Liddel. Andrew Lindsay. George Lindsay. Col. Litheo. Col.
Livingstoun. Robert Lumsden. Col. Lion. Col. Mathuson. S. John Meldrum. Assen
Monro. Fowls Monro. Hector Monro. Obstel Monro. Col. Morison. S. Pat. Morray.
Col. Mouat. Col. Ramsey. James Ramsey. Lord Reay. Col. Robertson. Col. Rower.
Frances Ruven. John Ruven. L. Sancomb. Col. Sandilands. Robert Scot. James
Seaton. James Seaton. S. John Seaton. William Sempil. Francis Sinclair. Col.
Spang. James Spence. L. Spynay. Robert Stuart. Thomas Thomson. John Urquhart.
Col. Wederburne. Col. Wilson.

I Have not mentioned here Lieutenant General John Midletoun, Lieutenant
General Sir William Balfour, nor General Major Sir George Monro, etc. because
they returned from the foreign countries, where they did officiate (though in
places over both horse and foot of great concernment) before they had obtained
the charge of Colonels.

As for pricking down into colums those other Scots in my book renowned for
literature and personal valor, I held it not expedient; for that the sum of
them does fall so far short of the number I have omitted, that proportioned to
the aggregate of all who in that Nation, since the year 1650. (without
reckoning any entrusted in military employments, either at home or abroad) have
deserved praise in Arms and Arts, jointly or dis-junctively, it would bear the
Analogy (to use a lesser definite for a greater indefinite) of a
subnovitripartient eights; that is to say in plain English, the whole being the
Dividend, and my Nomenclature the Divisor, the quotient would be nine, with a
fraction of three eights: or yet more clearly, as the Proportion of 72. to 675.

FINIS.

