TO FRIENDS IN IRELAND, And elsewhere; A Mournful Word to the merry-hearted in
Zion; with a word of Comfort to her Bowed down Mourners.

Written in great Exercise of Soul and Spirit in obedience to the LORD.

By THOMAS UPSHER.

Woe to you that laugh now, for you shall mourn and weep.

Luke 6. verse. 25. Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor Jesting, but
giving thanks.

Ephesians. 5. verse. 4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

Matthew. 5. verse. 4. These are they which came out of great tribulations, and
have washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb.

Rev. 7.14. Printed in the Year 1699.

A mournful Word to the merry hearted in Zion, with a Word of Comfort to her
Bowed down Mourners.
FRIENDS that profess the self-denying way of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, (who was a
Man of sorrows, and deeply acquainted with grief,) and yet are of a jolly
spirit, and of a merry heart, who can laugh and jest at pleasure, saying, There
is no harm in it.

I have this to say to you, whether you will hear or forbear, that the Lord is
displeased with you, and calls for Mourning and Weeping in secret places,
instead of Laughter and Jesting in Company. And I must needs tell you, that if
ever you were rightly bowed, and humbled in a sense of your lost and undon
states, and were made to lament and mourn in the sight and feeling of your
wretchedness, you have too soon quitted that Exercise; you have not past often
enough through the fire, neither have you been baptized enough with the Waters
of many tribulations. You have not drunk sufficiently of the Cup of trembling
at the hand of the Lord, and therefore you must come down from your pleasant
and delightful Seats, and be humbled as in Dust and Ashes before the Lord of
Hosts, whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem; and you must pass
through it again, and again, till all your dross is taken away, and all your
light chaff be burnt up. O Friends, you are those that are at ease in Zion, and
have taken up a rest too soon, and now the Lord is about to disturb you, and
rouse you up out of your false security; Blessed are those that are willing to
come forth to Judgment at the sound and Alarm of the Trumpet of his eternal
Word, for I proclaim in the Lords power that the time hastens and draws on
apace; that Judgment shall eminently and searchingly begin at the House of God,
in his Sanctuary, amongst his people that are peculiarly called by his name;
and the unfaithful, the Hippocrite, and Rotten-hearted, shall tremble with the
shaking horror of his searching Judgments. And you that are jolly spirited,
merry hearted, and that take liberty to laugh, joque, and jest at pleasure, the
very Pillars of your House shall tremble, you shall weep and mourn in solitary
places, and strew your tears in secret Corners.

Therefore take warning I pray you, and be humbled before the Lord, and cry
mightily to him night and day, that he may take vengeance speedily upon that
idle and airy Spirit, from whence springs these things that are contrary to the
mournful followers of the Lord Jesus Christ. O I entreat you watch and pray,
yea, cry mightily to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, that he may crucify and
utterly slay this Nature in you, which has often lead you to forgetfulness of
God, and has veiled and darkened you many times.

Is it not think you very sorrowful to consider how a great many in a little
time after they have come out of a good Meeting, where they have been under a
sense of the Lords power, and have been reached with a tendering Visitation,
fall to idle, silly, needless discourse, and it may be to laughter and jesting,
which I declare is as contrary to what they were before as darkness to Light;
and tell them of it, they will say, they think no harm; Well I tell you there
is harm in it, you hurt your selves and others, and you lay a stumbling block
in the way of the weak; you are bad Examples, you give occasion to them that
are without; for though they may seem to be pleased with your Company and
Conversation, they will slily ridicule and slight you as to Religion, and will,
as I have heard some say, such an one is as merry as we; for all his serious
Principles he will jest, and laugh, and joak, and speak at large, as well as we.

These things are not of a good savor; how do you think this will answer the
End of your holy calling, which is to be the salt of the Earth, as Lights in
the World, as a City set on a hill that cannot be hid. Trees of Righteousness
bringing forth much fruit to the glory of God, fruits of self-denial, heavenly
fruits, while you are on Earth, giving a manifest Testimony that you are true
followers of the Lamb through great tribulations. I would have you consider
Christ's Words in the 6th. of Luke, woe to you that laugh now for you shall-weep
and mourn; And also the Apostles Words, Ephesians 5th. where he speaks of
Fornication, Covetousness, Uncleanness, and Filthiness; telling them these
things do not become Saints, neither foolish talking, nor jesting, but rather
giving of thanks. And consider Christ Jesus your Captain and Savior, of whom
it is said he was never seen to laugh, but had often been seen to weep.

It is to be feared some of you will harden your hearts, and put at least a
silent slight upon this Warning and Counsel; But such shall know assuredly in a
day of distress and bitter adversity, (which shall certainly be their portion)
that these sayings are not idle tales, nor yet such little matters as some
would make them; though while they are far and full, and in a day of prosperity
they may kick against Reproof, and puff up their hearts in wantonness against
this tender advice.

Methinks, some will be ready to say, What would have us Melancholy,
Morose, always reserved and shut up from innocent Communication? I answer no,
for that would be an extreme on the other hand: that which I am deeply
concerned to speak against, is Laughter, foolish Talking, and Jesting, and such
like. And that which I am speaking for, is Temperance, Sobriety and Moderation,
with watchfulness over our Words, Actions, Deportment, and behavior, at all
times, and in all places, upon all occasions, remembering the saying of our Lord
Jesus Christ, That we must give an account at the day of Judgment for every
idle Word we shall speak.

I do tell you again in much assurance, that the great God of the Spirits of
all flesh calls for mourning at your hands, and happy shall they be that answer
his Call in time.

And now I am under a necessity to remind you of the late Prophecy of that
ancient eminent and faithful Messenger and Minister of Jesus Christ, William
Edmondson, in Dublin, at this half Years Meeting: The substance of which was,
That a dreadful day of distress was hastening on apace, and should surely come,
in which the Lord would dung the Ground in this and other Nations, with the
Carcasses of Men, and that the Lord would shake the fair and lofty Buildings of
many, with their pleasant things that they have delighted in. And this will
surely come to pass as ever it was spoken; Therefore Friends be not of an
unbelieving Heart, O surely that Council is good to you, which the Lord by the
Prophet Amos gave to Israel, when he threatened them with fore Judgment, which
was on this wise: Thus will I do unto thee O Israel, and because I will do this
unto thee, prepare to meet thy God O Israel, Amos 4.

But my Heart mourns. Ah I am dissressed in my Soul, my bowels are pained
within me for the sake of those that will have their own Will; and go on their
old Road, let the Servants of the Lord say what they will as his Ambassadors
and Ministers: But I am satisfied there is a Remnant that will embrace this
Warning and Council, and forsake, leave off, and turn their backs upon these
foolish things, and thankfully come and drink a bitter Cup of Condemnation and
Judgment for their By-past-Jests, Laughter, and wantonness of speech and
behavior: And they shall come to mourn for all these things, by which they
regardlesly past away much precious time, and are greatly behind hand in their
days work of Salvation, which is to be wrought in fear and trembling, Phil. 2.
verse. 12. Not in Laughter and Jesting, and they shall mourn and lament because
of their misspent time, and they shall be diligent to redeem it, and they
shall redeem it.

And the Lord will make these brave and honorable Men and Women in his Work
and Service, and will make them shine in his comeliness in the life of
Righteousness and self-denial, and their last days shall be their best days,
the nearer they grow to their Grave, the nearer they shall be to the Lord, and
the clearer shall be their assurance by his Spirit of his eternal love to them.

Finally my Friends, to whom I am writing in the bowed downness and grief of my
Spirit, I pray you, I beseech you with beseechings, take warning; take the
Council, and Advice of a poor Servant of the Lord; haste and come away out of
these foolish customs and practices, and touch with them no more for ever, then
shall my sorrowful Soul rejoice in the Lord for your sakes, and you shall reap
the peace and advantage of it to your poor immortal Souls, when life and time,
with all these lower Comforts shall fail you.

So to the Light and Spirit of Truth I commit you, which will readily show you
in your selves those things that are contrary to the life of Christ, and will
give you power against them if you be faithful to its blessed and holy
discoveries: And it will enable you to shine forth in sobriety, gravity,
humility, and temperance, in all things to the Glory of the everlasting God,
and the promotion of a self-denying life, then shall it be well with you,
whatever Judgments, Calamities and Miseries, come upon the Children of
disobedience.

And now a few Words of Comfort to those that are bowed down Mourners in Zion,
who are faithful to the Lord, but are deeply afflicted with Temptations, Trials
and Buffettings many ways, which makes them to fear, they shall not hold out to
the End. Dear Friends, I can call you dear, for so you are to the Lord and to
my Soul, and I will surely show you what the Lord has shown and sealed to me in
the Word of life, which is on this wise.

That you are his Peculiar and Choice Jewels, and he has a very tender regard
to you, and as you have your Eye to him, and cleave to his Spirit in your
Hearts, he will surely keep you as the Apple of his Eye, and he will not suffer
the devourer to destroy you; and though at times you may be tossed with tempests,
and deeply afflicted and hardly beset on every hand, and may seem for a time as
if you were forsaken of the Lord, and you may be ready to doubt whether ever he
will appear to your Joy and Comfort again: And though it may be so that you think
your Condition not to be equaled, and are like poor David who said in his
distress, after he had seen the great deliverance of the Lord at several times,
I shall one day fall by the hand of Saul. Yet the Lord God of his sure mercies
gave him to see the desire of his Soul at last, and delivers him out of all
distress. Even so will the Lord do for you, whose minds are stayed upon him,
and truly trust in him, and therefore let patience have its perfect Work, and
endeavor to be content with the dealings of the Lord, for he knows best what
is best for you: And have a great care you are not instrumental for want of
Patience to increase your Exercise. For I know by my own Experience, that when
the Lord brings the Soul into the fiery Furnace, which is the Spirit of
Judgment and burning, Isa. 4. then the Enemy he works to make it uneasy and
restless under the purifying Judgments of the Lord; And then if it be not
watchful it grows impatient, and here a cloud of Exercises and Doubtings comes
over it, and some^imes is almost brought to the Gates and Jaws of Despair. And
thus a hultitude of unprofitable Afflictions has come upon some for want of
Patience and for want of being resigned and given up in all things to the Will
of God, to trust their All in his hands being faithful and diligent in his Work.

Again, sometimes the LORD is pleased to hide his Face for a moment, for the
exercise of the Soul, according to his great Wisdom for its good; Then the
Enemy he works again to bring into impatience, and if he prevails, then he
labors in the next place, to set the Soul at work for it self without the
LORD, to get enjoyments of its own, and kindle sparks of Fire, by the heat and
Struglings of its own Spirit. And now again abundance of exercises follows upon
this, for these emty Flashes holds not long; when the Soul comes to be sensible
it lies down in sorrow, and sometimes the LORD is pleased to suffer it to
dwell, as in a Land of Drought for a season, and now is ready to be cast down
into great discouragements again: And all this is for want of true patience,
and a free and constant giving up of the will to the will of GOD, and to become
as Clay in the Hand of the Potter, Read Isa. 50. verse. 10, 11.

And therefore this is the word of Advice, which I tenderly give unto all such,
as are in deep exercises of Affliction, upon your Souls account.

Wait often upon the LORD, not only in Meetings but out of Meetings also, that
you may feel his Power to subject your Wills to his Will, and in every thing to
be resigned to his dispose and dealings, and then Hard things will be made
Easy, and Bitter things will be made Sweet: And in the LORD's time, through
many Tribulations, you shall come forth as Gold Seven times Refined, and your
Warfare shall be accomplished, and your Iniquity pardoned, and you shall dwell
for ever in that City, where the Inhabitants shall not say I am Sick, but the
People that dwell therein shall be all Righteous, and the LORD shall be your
everlasting Light, and their GOD their Glory, and the days of your Mourning
shall be ended, for Sorrow and Sighing shall flee away.

And then you Bowed down ones of many Afflictions, you shall lift up your Bowed
down heads, and by living experience sing that blessed Song of Zion, That the
LORD GOD eternal has turned your Captivity as the streams of the South, and
has done great things for you, whereof you are glad, he has turned your barren
Wilderness and desolate Desert, into an holy and heavenly Paradise, where you
Eat of the Tree of Life, and Drink of the Water of Life freely.

I can say my Heart overflows with love to you poor afflicted Souls every
where, and I do simpathize with you according to my experience, and do pray to
the LORD for you, that you may have Patience, and be resigned into the hand of
the LORD, subject to his will in all things; and then never doubt but he that
has laid the Foundation, will in his own time lay the Top-Stone also, I say
this flows forth in a Spring of pure Love to you.

From one, who (tho young in Years) have past through many deep Exercises, and
have seen the wonderful deliverances of the LORD, in many great Temptations,
and have as much reason as any man living to keep humble, and low, and
watchful, before the LORD, all the remainder of the days of my Pilgrimage.

Thomas Upsher.
Dublin 15th of the 3d Month, 1699.
The End.

