A NEW DISCOVERY OF Old Pontifical Practices For the maintenance of the
PRELATES Authority and HIERARCHY. EVINCED By their Tyrannical persecution of
that Reverend, Learned, Pious, and worthy Minister of JESUS CHRIST, Mr. JOHN
UDALL, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. To give satisfaction to all those
that blindely endeavor to uphold Episcopal Government, that their Lordly Rule
in the purest times of the said Queen, is the very same with that they have
exercised ever since, even to these times. Together with the Prelates devises
to make him submit, and to subscribe to submissions of their own contriving and
invention. And also King JAMES his Letter out of Scotland to the Queen, in the
behalf of Mr. Vdall and other persesecuted Ministers in her Realm.

My Son fear thou the Lord and the King: and meddle not with them that are
given to change. Prove. 24. 21. London, Printed for Stephen Bowtell, and are to
be sold at his Shop in Popes-head-Alley, 1643.

AN INTRODUCTION By way of ADVERTISEMENT To the READER.
IN these prejudicate opinionated times it is difficult to give satisfaction,
that the Bishops illegal and unconscionable courses, have always, without any
variation, bin one and the same; but if the impartial Reader will deigne to
peruse this ensuing Relation of Mr. Vdalls harsh usuage by* them, he shall
find no mutation, neither in their Counsels nor Actions: They were
persecuters from all Antiquity, of such as disclosed the dissonancy, between
their Authority, and the true rule of the word of God, as all Ancient and
Neoterick Histories record, both Domestic and Exoticke: And in this Kingdom,
they have not only vented their fury against good men in the times of Popery
as in the Reigns of King Edward the third, Richard the second* and Henry the
fourth; against John Wicklisse, and such as they termed Lollards, even until
the Reigns of King Edward the fixed, and Queen Elizabeth, but also in her
time, when Popery was relegated, and the Protestant Religion began to dispell
the misty fog of error and Ignorance; yet the relics of Darkness could not
endure the true light of perfect Reformation; which this worthy Person Mr.
Vdall, striving to introduce, was by the instigation of the Prelates, hurried
from his Ministry at Newcastle, in the depth of Winter and in the bitterest
weather that could be, brought to be Examined by the Lords of the Queens
Council; and because contrary to the Laws of the Land, he would not betray
himself, he was by them committed to the Gate House, and there to be kept
close Prisoner, and not to be suffered to have pen, ink or paper, or any body
to speak with him, his wife being also debarred his company, and his
Chamber-fellowes being professed Papists, Seminary Priests and Traitors: from
thence he was conveyed to the White Lion in Southwarke, and at the Assizes
holden in Croydon, 24 ^uly, 1590. was brought to the Bar with Fetters on his
Legs, and there Indicted for maliciously publishing a scandalous and infamous
Libell against the Queen, and no testimonies viv. ^ voce produced to attest
the same, but only depositions of men taken in the High Commission Court,
(which by the Laws of the Land was no Court of Record) and Reports upon
hearsay urged against him, his witnesses not being permitted to testify in
his behalf, because it was against the Queen, (which notwithstanding the Laws
allow, both in Felony and in Treason) and the words of the Stature 23 Eliz.
cap. 2. wrested by the Judges, viz. Baron Clarke and Sergeant Puckering, that
because the Book of Demonstration of Discipline, whereof he was supposed the
Author, and for which he was then Indicted, was against the Bishops that
exercised the Government appointed them by the Queen, therefore by consequent
it was against her Royal Person; and because that he strove against the
Prelates, who were put in Authority by the Queen, therefore he did strive
against her, which was contrary to the Maxim of Law, That no penal or
criminal Statute which concerns a man's life, ought to ^e extended beyond the
power of natural words of the same (such an awing power have the Bishops
always carried over the Laws, Judges and Lawyers, as to overruled them all,
and to make them sing ^lacebo) and then the said Judges directed the Jury to
find him the Author of that Book, without legal proof, and to leave the
Felony to them, which they said, was resolved by all the Judges of the Land,
and the Jury for fear complying with them, found him guilty of Felony, being
drawn thereunto by a promise, that it should be no further danger unto him but
tend to his good; for which afterward, they were exceedingly grieved and
troubled. Then they kept him in durance for half a year uncondemned and at
the Assizes in February after, holden in Southwarke, used all the means and
persuasions they could exc^gitate, to make him submit and relinquish his Tenets
against the Bishops, which he refusing to yield unto, had the sentence of death
pronounced against him by Puckering, but they not daring to execute him,
because his Adertions were the constant Doctrine of all the Reformed Churches
in Christendom, he was Reprived by the Queens special Command, then the Court
Chaplains repaired unto him, and tendered ready written submissions unto him,
which he rejected; and being persuaded by a friend of his to solicit Sir
Walter ^awleigh to obtain his pardon and freedom, he wrote unto him, and sent
him also a Confession of the several points which he maintained; in the
interim came unto him Dr. Nowe^^ Deane of Paul's, a man in those days famous
for his Learning and pretended piety, who brought another submission unto him,
whereunto he at the first refused to subscribe; but after some advice and
consideration he assented and attested it; but afterward perceiving that this
was a trick of Legerdemaine used by the Deane, (who had engaged the word and
faith of a Christian* to obtain his Remission and Liberty) which would be a
means to hasten his end, he wrote to the Deane modestly* reprehending him for
that prestigious device, desi^ing him to leave no stone unturned, that might
further his Liberty, or at least to clear his own conscience from being any
way Accessory to his death. While these affairs were in agitation, JAMES King
of Scotland wrote a Letter to the Queen, wherein he requested, that Mr. Vdall,
Mr. Car^wright and other Ministers of the Gospel in her Realm for their
dissent from the Bishops and others of her Clergy, touching matters of
Conscience, might not be hardly dealt with, but that at his intercession they
might be released from their Restraints, and not further prosecuted for their
professions of the Gospel and their Consciences, etc. Hereupon Mr. Vdall, who
was conveyed to the Assizes at Kingston, and as was supposed, should have bin
executed there, was immediately returned from thence by the Judges unto the
White Lion, in the Evening before the first day thereof: And afterward geting
a Copy of his Indictment* by the Lord Treasurers procurement, he framed a
pardon upon the same and sent it to the Privy Council* who r^ferred him to the
Archbishop; but his anger was still immortal, neither would he relent, or
condescend to his freedom, notwithstanding all his Petitions nor all the
entreaties of Honorable persons, and others of good quality that mediated for
him.

At last the Turkey Merchants sued to the Archbishop, that he might go into
Guinea to teach their Traffiquers in that place, who assented thereunto upon
condition, that they would be bound he should go as soon as he had his
liberty, but when 2 of the ancients of that Company desired to have the
Archbishops hand thereunto, he refused to subscribe, unless they would be
bound not only for his present departure but that he should remain there
until he had the Queens License to return again into England etc.

These premises being duly perpended, let any indifferent man give a solid
reason, why such Episcopal Government should be restored; for how they
deported themselves in those pure times of Queen Elizabeth, (as it is now
termed) by this Relation is made apparent; and in the time of King James there
was no alteration, for it is well known that they persecuted Mr. Dighton and
other good men for mere Ceremonies, and silenced also many worthy Ministers in
his Reign; yet it is observable that they seduced that Learned King, after he
once came amongst them; and that is evident by the difference between his
Letter in this Relation, and his conclusive sentence to maintain the Prelates
Authority, at the Conference at Hampton Court, in the first year of his
Reign. Likewise in this King Charles his time* they have stopped the mouths of
sedulous and faithful Preachers; they have abolished Lectures, mutilated,
stigmatized, whipped and tortured sundry of the Clergy and Laity, as Mr. Burton
Dr. Bastwicke, Mr. Prynne, Dr. Leighton and others, for disclosing their
Tyranny and abuses: and yet some silly men are so far enamoured of them that
they had rather a destructive Episcopacy should roughly sway in this Kingdom,
then that a preservative Parliament should free both Clergy and Laity from such
Scorpions stings.

And since experience in all ages evinceth, that wheresoever Episcopacy is,
there will be Tyranny therefore all the truly Reformed Churches in Europe have
abolished the cause, that thereby the effect might also be utterly extinguished.

To conclude, this pious and worthy person Mr John Vdall, (as this ensuing
Relation testifies) stood firm and constant for the Reforma^ion even to
death, and would not be deterred from it, though strictly imprisoned, fettered,
condemned, and bereft of all worldly comforts, which should prove a Mirror to
all of that Tribe, but especially to his own Posterity, to instruct them not to
deflect from so singular a pattern, and deviate into oblique and erroneous
courses lest those objurgations of the Prophet be justly applied to them, as
namely Hosea 7. 11. Ephraim is also like a Dove deceived, without heart: they
call to Egypt; they go to Ashur, etc. The same is reiterated, Hosea 12. 1.
Ephraim is fed with the wind, and follows after the East wind, he
increases daily lies and destruction, and they do make a Covenant with Ashur,
and oil is carried into Egypt.

And these places of Scripture may one day heavily reflect upon Mr. Ephraim
Vdall his Son unworthy of such a Father, who has forgotten to follow his
Fathers steps, but runeth a retrograde course from them, in erecting a new
Rail at his own charge about the Communion Table in his Church, since the
former was removed by the Order of Parliament; and delivering the Elements to
none but those that come up to his Rail; and denied to subscribe for moneys
for the defense of the King and Parliament; refusing to read the Orders that
come from the Parliament or Lord Major of London, but none was so forward as
lie in permiting the Book of sports on the Lords day and the Prayer against
the Scots to be read in his Church, and as it seems, he loves the Parliament
so little that he never prays for good success to their Army, but on the
contrary he prays, That the hand of vengeance may strike such as take up
Arms against the King: And no one can judge, but that the intent of such
expressions are only the calling for vengeance on the heads of those, who
endeavor to defend Religion, Laws and Liberties, against those Traiterous and
wicked Counselors which have too much intercourse with his Majesty. And by
report, his House is a receptacle for disaffected Ministers that frequently
resort thither, and as it may be conjectured by the persons, little good is
hatched amongst them; and he is grown into such estimation with Birds of that
feather, that Doctors, Proctors and such Malcontents against the Parliament
are his constant Auditors.

The Apostles Council is good and salubrious, Study to be quiet and do your
own business, 1 Thessalonians 4. 11. which if all perverse Spirits would have
practiced* these miserable distracters would never have ingulphed us in this
unnatural War.

Farewell
The Particular EXAMINATIONS, Arraignement and Condemnation, of JOHN VDALL,
Minister of the word of GOD, together with such things as passed between him
and others by occasion thereof.
SEeing you desire to understand the particular things that have passed betwixt
me and them in authority, that have from time to time molested me; I am
willing to satisfy you at this time, in that which concerns this my last and
greatest trouble, that ever befell me; for that it brought me to Prison,
referring you to get the former of* etc. by such means as you may, and to
learn the particulars of my Arraignement of those that heard it, seeing it was
at the public Assizes, in the presence of many hundreds, diverse whereof I
think were both able and willing to t^ke note thereof.

After that I was silenced at Kingston (in manner as appears in the papers
that contain a particular remembrance of the same) I rested about hal a year
preparing my self to a private life for that I saw so little hope of return
into my ministry, or any rest in it, to the good of the Church. But God would
not have it so: For means were made by some, that feared God in Newcastle upon
Tyne to the Earl of Huntington to send me thither who did so and I was
received thither in such sort as contented me, and joined in the ministry of
the word there with two godly men, Mr. Houldesworth the Pastor, and Mr. Bamford
a teacher, through whose joint l^bours God vouchsafed so to draw the people to
the love of the word, (no^withstanding that the Plague was grievous in the
Town all the while I was there, and consumed above 2000 of the Inhabitan^s) as
we had hope in time to see much fruit and receive great comfort of our labors.
But the enemy so envyed the same that after a Years abode there, I was fetched
thence by letters from the Lord Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain in the name of the
whole council. Whereupon I came thence, December ^9 1589. in the forest
weather that could be, yet through Gods mercy I and Christopher Applebie (whom
the Major appointed to conduct me) came safe to London, January 9* and upon the
13. being Tuesday I appeared at my Lo. Cobhams house in the Blackfryers, before
my L. Cobham, my Lo. Buckhurst, my L. Anderson, the Bish. of Rochester, Mr.
Fort^scue, Mr. Egerton, the Queens solicitor, Doctor Aubery* Doct. Lewen. Then
was I called in before them, whereupon my Lord Anderson said unto me.

Anderson. How long have you bin a^ Newcastle?


Vdall. About a year if it please your Lordship.


Anderson. Why went you from Kingston upon Thames?


Vdall Because I was silenced there, and was called to Newcastle.


Rochester. What calling had you thither?


Vdall. The people made means to my Lord of Huntingdon, who sent me thither.


Roch. Had you the allowance of the Bishop of that Diocese?


Vdall. There was none at that time.


Roch. Then you should have gone to the Archbishop.


Vdall. There was no Archbishop at York neither.


Anders. You are called hither to answer concerning certain books which are
thoug^t to be of your making.


Vda. If it be for any of Martins books (according as my Lord Chamberlaines
letters that fetched me import) I have already answered, and am ready so to do
again.


Ander. Where have you answered, and in what manner?


Vda. At Lambeth a year and a half ago, I cleared my self not to be the
author, nor to know who he was.


Ander. Is this true Mr. Beadle?


Beadle. I have heard that their was such a thing, but I was not there at it,
if it please your Lordship.


Aubery, Lewen There was such a thing, as my Lords Grace told us.


Vda. I am the hardlier dealt withal to be fetched up so far at this time
of the year. I have had a journey I would not wish unto my enemy.


Roch. You may thank your own dealing in matters that you should not have
meddled withal.


Ander. It is more then I heard that ever you were called to answer, but you
are to answer concerning other books.


Vda. I hope your Lordships will not urge me to any others, seeing I was sent
for about those.


Ander. You must answer to others also: what say you to those Books, A
Demonstration or a Dialogue. etc. did you not make them?


Vda. I cannot answer thereunto.


Ander. Why would you clear your self of Martin, and not of these, but that
you are guilty herein?


Vda. Not so my Lord, I have reason to answer in the one, but not in the other.


Ander. I pray you let us hear what reason, for I cannot conceive of it,
seeing they are all written concerning one matter.


V. This is the matter my Lo, I hold the matter proposed in them al to be one
but I would not be thought to handle it in that manner, which the former Books
do, and because I think otherwise of the latter, I care not though they
should be fathered upon me.


Buckhu. But I pray you tell me know you not Penry?


Vda. Yes my Lord that I do.


Buckhu. And do you not know him to be Martin.


Vda. No surely, neither do I think him to be Martin.


Buck. What is your Reason?


Vda. This my Lord, when first it came out he (understanding that some gave out
that he was thought to be the author, wrote a letter to a friend in London,
wherein he did deny it, with such terms as declare him to be ignorant and
clear in it.


Buck. Where is that letter?


Vda. Indeed I cannot now show you, for I have forgotten unto whom it was
written.


Buck. You will not tell where it is.


Vda. Why my Lord it tends to the clearing of one and the accusing of none.


Buck. Can you tell where Penry is?


Vda. No surely my Lord.


Buck. When did you see him?


Vda. About a quarter of a year ago.


Buck. Where ^id you see him?


Vda. He called at my door and saluted me.


Buck. Nay he remained belike with you?


Vda. No indeed he neither came in my house, neither did he so much as drink
with me.


Buck. How came you acquainted with him.


Vda. I think at Cambridge, but I have been often in his Company


Buck. Where.


Vda. At diverse places, and namely in mine own house whilst I dwelt at
Kingston.


Buck. What cause had you to be so often in his company?


Vda. He being a Scholar and Student in Divinity, and one whom I always
thought to be an honest man your Lordship may easily conceive he cause. Here
was much to this same effect spoken about Mr. Penry and my being at Mrs. Cranes
house at Moulsley and with her, etc. which I always answered, as in the like
case concerning M. Horton of Richmond before the Archbishop.


Then Doctor Lewen reading my answers to those questions, that had been by the
Archbishop propounded unto me concerning my papers in my study, and namely the
notes of my several conferences, with the Bishops and their Officer* I was
asked as I remember by Mr. Fortescue.

Fortescue. Why did you pen such things and keep them.


Roch. Because he and such like might apisbly imitate the Mart^rs of former
times, and account themselves persecuted by us as those were by the Popish
Bishops.


Vda. The cause is this, for that in the quickness of wit and readiness of
memory in youth those things may be spoken, that in age will be more easily
made use of in writing then otherwise, the memory of man not being infinite.


Ander. What say you did you make these books, or know you who made them?


Vda. I cannot answer to that question, my Lord.


Ander. You had as good say you were the author.


Vda. That will not follow; but if you think so, I cannot do withal.


Cobha. Mr. Vdall if you be not the author say so, and if you be confess it,
you may find favor.


Vdall. My Lord I think the author for any thing I know did well and I know
that he is enquired after to be punished and therefore I think it my duty to
hinder the finding of him out, which I cannot do better then thuss


Ander. And why so I pray you?


Vda. Because if every one that is suspected do deny it, the author at the
length must needs be found out.


Ander. Why dare you not confess it if you be the author of it? dare you not
stand to your own doings?


Vda. I professed before that I liked of the books and the matter handled in
them, but whether I made them or no I will not answer, neither of any other
book of that argument, whatsoever goes without name if you should ask me for
the reason alleged before, besides that if I were the author I think that by
Law I need not answer.


Ander. That is true if it concerned the loss of your life.


Vda. I pray your Lordship, does not the Law say generally No man shall be put
to answer without pres^ntment before Justices or things of record, or by due
process or writ original, etc. A^no 42. Edw. 3. cap* 5.


Ander. That is Law and it is ont Law.


Vda. I understand you not my Lord, It is a Statute which is in force if it be
not repealed.


Ander. I tell you by law you ought to answer in this case*


Vda. Good my Lord show me this favor to tell me in what book of the Law I
shall find it, for I profess to understand, the Latin, French, and English
tongues, wherein all the laws be written.


Fortescue. You are very cunning in the law, I pray you by what law did you
preach at New^astle being f^rbidden at Kingston.


Vd. I Know no law against it, seeing it was the official Doctor Hone, who did
silence me, whose authority reaches, not out of his Arch-deaconry.


Fortescue. What was the cause for which you were silenced?


Vda. Surely I cannot tell nor yet imagine saving the secret suggestions of Mr*
Harvie


Fortescue. To be ignorant of that, is crassa et supina ignorantia.


Vda. No Sir the action was crassa et supina injurta.


And. Well what say ^^u to those books, who made them and where were they
printed.


Vda. Though I could tell your Lordship, yet dare I not for the reasons before
alleged.


Roch. I pray you let me ask you a question or two concerning your book.


Vda. It is not yet proved to be mine, but I will answer to any thing
concerning the matter of the Book so far as I know.


Roch. You call it a Demonstration, I pray you what is a Demonstration? I
believe you know not what it is.


Vda. If you had asked me that question when I was a boy in Cambridge of a
years standing it had been^ a note of ignorance in me, to have been unable to
answer you.


Roch. Surely it seems by the frame of the Syllogismes and reasons, in it,
that you know it not if you be the author of that book, I read none of it
late, but in the Parliament time sitting in a morning in the house I read some
of it, and it seemed to me in many things, not to conclude probably much less
demonstratively.


Vda. I will show you as I take it why the author called it a Demonstration,
because the reason which is usually brought to prove the conclusions is
commonly drawn from a place of Scripture, which has more force in it to
manifest the conclusion (...) then any of Aristotle's proofs drawn as they
say, ex primis, veris, necessarijs et immediatis causis.


Roch. Indeed that which is proved by the Scrip^ures is proved most
Demonstratively, but the proofs in that Book are far from any such.


Vda. Let that be the question and try it in some one.


Ander. My Lord of Rochester, I pray you let us make short work with him,
offer him a Book; will you swear to answer to such things as shall be
demanded of you in the behalf of our Sovereign Lady the Queen?


Vda. I will take an oath of Allegiance to her Majesty, wherein I will
acknowledge her Supremacy according to Statute, and promise my obedience as
becomes a Subject, but to swear to accuse my self or others, I think you
have no Law for it.


Ander. Mr. Soliciter, I pray you tell him the Law in this point.


Then Mr. Solliciter (who had sitten all the while very soberly, noteing what
passed (and if a man's mind may be known by his countenance seemed to mislike
the course holden against me, upon my Lord Andersons commandment) stood up,
and putting off his hat unto me said:

Eger. Mr. Vdall, I am sorry that you will not answer nor take an oath, which
by Law you ought to do: I can assure you, your Answers are like the Seminary
Priests Answers, for hey say, there is no Law to compel them to take an oath
to accuse themselves.


Vda. Sir, If it be a liberty by Law, there is no reason why they should not
challenge it, for (though they be very bad ones) they are Subjects* and until
they be condemned by Law, may require all the benefits of Subjects, neither is
that any reason, that their Answering so, should make the claim of less value
for me, seeing that herein we are Subjects alike, though otherwise of a most
contrary disposition.


Buck. My Lord, it is no standing with him thus, what say thou, will thou
take the oath?


Vda. My Lord, I have said as much thereunto as I can.


Then they commanded me to go forth, and they consulted a little space and
called me again, at which time almost every one of them, used many words to
persuade me to a confess a truth, saying the Queen was merciful, and that
otherwise it would go hardly with me: to whom I said, My Lords, I know not
that I have offended her Majesty, when it is proved that I have I hope her
mercy will not then be too late, howsoever it be I dare not take this oath.

Awbery Lewen. You have heretofore taken it, and why will you not take it now?


Vda. Indeed you call to remembrance a good reason to refuse it, I was called
to Answer to certain Articles upon mine oath heretofore, which I voluntarily
did, and freely confessed that against my self, concerning my judgment and
preaching of the points of Discipline, which could never have bin proved; and
when my friends labored to have me restored to my place; the Archbishop
answered, that there was sufficient matter against me, by mine own confession,
why I should not be restored; whereupon I Covenanted with mine own heart, never
to be mine own tormentor in that sort again.


And. Whatsoever be the issue of it, you must do your duty and deal plainly
with the Magistrate.


Vda. I take my duty to be in this case, not to answer, nor the Magistrates to
require it of me, seeing the Apostle says, Receive not an accusation against
an Elder* under two or three witnesses, which Semanca the Spanish Inquisitor
alleges to the same purpose.


Buck. What, you are an Elder are you?


Vda. My Lord, howsoever the word Elder be taken, whether so largely as I and
any Brethren that desire the Discipline do take it, or only for a Minister of
the word, as our adversaries understand it, I am an Elder.


Roch. It is true my Lord, that an Elder in that place contains all such as
he is, but none else.


Buck. Yea but they would have other Elders to govern the Church, which desire
of theirs, when it com^th to pass, I will give over my Barony, and become an
Elder.


Vda. If your Lorship understood what great pains and small worldly recompense
belongs to that office, you would never say so.


Roch. The day is past, and we must make an end, will you take the Oath?


Vda. I dare not take it.


Roch. Then you must go to prison, and it will go hard with you* for you must
remain there until you be glad to take it.


Vda. Gods will be done, I had rather go to prison with a good conscience*
then to be at liberty with an ill one.


Roch. Your sentence f^r this time is to go to the Gate House close Prisoner,
and you are beholding to my Lords here, that they have heard you so long.


Vda. I acknowledge it, and do humbly thank their Honors for it.


And when they were all gone, my Lord Cobham stayed me to speak to me, who told
me that it might be, he and others wished things to be amended as* well as I,
but the time served not, and therefore he wished me not to stand in it, and I
praying his Lordships good favor, he promised to do for me what he could, for
which I humbly thanked him, and so was carried to the Gatehouse by a Messenger,
who delivered me with a Warrant to be kept close prisoner, and not be suffered
to have pen ink or paper* or any body to speak with me. Thus I remained there
half a year, in all which time my wife could not get leave to come unto me,
saying only that in the heareing of the Keeper she might speak to me, and I to
her, of such things as he should think meet, notwithstanding that she made
suit to the Commissioners, yea unto the body of the Council, for some more
liberty: all which time my Chamber fellows were Seminary Priests, Traitors and
professed Papists. At the end of half a year, I was removed to the
VVhite-Lyon in Southwarke, and so carried to the Assizes at Croydon, where what
was done, I will not mention, seeing there were present such as were both able,
and I th^nk willing to set down, unto whose report I refer those that would
know the same.

A collection of such things as were truly gathered concerning the
Arraignement of Mr. John Udall, at the Assizes at Croydon the 24. and 25. of
July, 1590. noted faithfully by such as were beholders of the same.
MAster John Vdall, Minister of the word of God at Newcastle in the North,
being suspected to be the Author of a Book, called a Demonstration of
Discipline, was sent for to come to London, who at his coming was committed
close prisoner at the Gate House at Westminster, from whence (after he had b^n
kept close there the space of six months and above) he was in like manner
committed to the prison of the White Lion in Southwarck, and from thence the
22. of July, was carried to the Assizes held at Croydon in the County of
Surrey, where were appointed for that Assizes to be Judges, Baron Clarke and
Sergeant Puckering, who according to the custom, gave the charge of the
Assizes: wherein Baron Clarke showed the intent of their coming thither, which
he referred to 3 heads, viz. The safety of the Church, the good of the Common
wealth, and the preservation and honor of her most Excellent Majesty: And then
speaking of these in particular, he showed the great use and necessity of Laws,
and giving our Laws their due commendation, he preferred them before all other
Laws of any other Nation in the world, and further declared how near they were
for outward government, to the Laws of God* wherein he noted some particulars
of them; showing that as the Laws of God did condemn Blasphemers* Idolaters,
prophaners of the Sabath rebellious and disobedient against Superiors.
Murderers Adulterers, Thieves, raylers, and false witnesses: for most of these
or all of them, he showed particular Statutes of our land that condemned them,
and showed the punishments of them. Then he showed, that as the law of God
would not have any to be condemned, but their cause must first be heard, and
that not in corners, but in the gates and public places, that all might hear
and see with what equity they were dealt withal: so also our laws condemned
none but in public places, and those that were accused had free liberty to
say what they could for themselves; and as the law of God condemned none, but
in public places, and when there were witnesses to prove the guiltiness of
the offenders; so also our law condemns none but plain evidences and true
witnesses must be produced against them. Many other things he spoke of, which
is too long to rehearse, but this is the sum of it: After the charge given, the
prisoners were brought forth, amongst whom Mr. Vdal^ came, having fetters on
his legs, which moved many greatly to lament to see a Minister of the Gospel,
brought the foremost as principal of so many Malefactors: then were the
prisoners called by name* and answered severally to their names, who were no
further dealt withal for that time, by reason of many other things that the
Judges were busied withal: the next day in the morning, the Judges being set,
and the prisoners standing at the Bar, one John Pepper a felon and a robber by
the high way, was called forth to answer to his Indictment, and according to
the order he held up his hand at the Bar and pleaded for himself, that he was
not guilty; and being demanded by whom he would be tried, he referred himself
to be tried by God and and the Country: After whom there were five or six
others called, and were tried as the first was. Then was Mr. Vdall called and
commanded to hold up his hand at the Bar, who held up his hand accordingly.
Then was his Indictment read, being thus: John Vdall, late of London Clerk,
thou art indicted etc. The form of which Indictment was as against murderers,
namely, that he not having the fear of God before his eyes but being stirred
up by the instigation and motion of the Devil, did maliciously publish a
slanderous and infamous libell against the Queens Majesty, her Crown and
Dignity: and being asked wheteher he were guilty or not guilty? he answered
thus:

Vda. My Lords* may it please you to hear me a word or two.


Iud. Cla. Answer first to the Iuditement and then you shall be heard.


Vda, My Lords I beseech you hear me first a word or twain.


Iud. Say on.


Vda. My case is rare, and such as has not bin heard of heretofore, and
consists upon diverse points of law, I humbly crave of your Lordships to grant
me to Answer by Council if it may be.


Iud. Cl. You cannot have it, and therefore answer to your Indictment.


Vda. Then I answer (my Lrods) that I am not guilty.


Iud. Cl. How will thou he tried?


Vda* I do desire to be tried by an Inquest of learned men, but seeing I shall
not I am contented to be tried by the ordinary course as these men before me
are, that is (as you use to say) By God and the Country.


Then the Clerk of the Assizes said to the parties A reigned (after he had
read the names of the Jury before them) These men whose names you have heard,
are to go upon your lives and your deaths, loooke upon them when they are
called to be sworn* and if you know any cause, take exception against them.
Then the rest of the Felons having nothing to say, Mr. Vdall said My Lords, I
am ignorant of the law in this point, I pray you therefore show me the manner
of challenging the Jury, how many I may challenge, and whether I may render a
reason of the same.

Iu. I think you will know a cause in your conscience; before you challenge any
of them.


Vd. Then I pray you my L. how many am I by law permitted to challenge?


Iud. Nay I am not to t^ll you that, I sit to judge, and not to give you
counsel.


Then Mr. Vdal keeping silence, Proclamation was made according to the manner
that if any man could give in evidence against John Vdall, prisoner at the Bar*
that they should come into the Court and be heard. Then Mr. Daulton stood up.
And in the mean while Mr. Vdall said to the Judges thus: My Lords* I beseech
you answer me to one question before Mr. Daulton begin to speak:

Jud. Sa^ on.


Vda. Is it permitted me by law to answer to those things in particular which
are brought to prove this Indictment?


Jud. It is permitted.


Vda. Then I humbly crave of your Lordships to grant me two Petitions, which I
think will greatly further both him in speaking, me in answering and also be a
more ready help to the memory of the Jury, that they may be able to bear the
matter away.


Jud* What are your Petitions?


Vda. The first is, that when Mr. Daulton has spoken to one point what he can*
I may answer to that before he proceed any further lest my memory being
overwhelmed with multitude of matter, I should forget to answer to some points
of importance and the Jury made the l^sse able to discern of the particulars.
The second is, that it might please you to grant me to answer without
interruption.


Jud. You shall have them b^th granted.


Dau. Then Mr. Daulton said, Mr. Udall you have these Petitions grandte you, I
desire the same of you. And then he desiring leave of the Judges, before he
should prove the Indictment, to say something touching this, that this man and
such as he is do maintain, etc. After leave given him* he used a very long
speech to the great disgrace and slander of the cause, and those men that
professed the same especially of Mr. Udall, and making mention in the same his
Speech* of five several Books of Common Prayer, made by such as desire
Reformation, he affirmed, that in one of the said Books there was horrible
Blasphemy in these words of the consecration of the Lords Supper, Take eat
this is my Body, drink this is my blood. Then he cried out saving, Oh horrible
^lasphemy, and taking occasion upon the variety of these Books, he affirmed
that there was no constancy in these men; And whereas one of the Books does
allow, that over every Congregation there should be a faithful Pastor, that is
quoth he, a Shepherd, whereby they may take the Government out of her
Majesty's hand, and so bring her Majesty to be one of their Sheep; no quoth
he, her Majesty is no Sheep under any Shepherd in the wo^ld* except Christ:
and for the government that these men do seek for, I am assured there is none
such to be found in the word of God.


Vda. Mr. Daulton has used a very large speech, which does nothing concern to
prove the Indictment or me in particular, and therefore seeing I am not called
hither to dispute (and if I would I should not be permitted) I will not answer
it, only thus much will I say, (if it please your Lordships) that seeing Mr.
Daulton is by profession a Lawyer, and the cause is yet in question amongst the
learned Divines* methinks it had bin more modesty for Mr. Daulton to have
suspend^d ^^s judgment un ill the Controversy had bin determined amongst
them* to whose profession it belongs* especially seeing Mr. Daulton knows
in his conscience, that he has heretofore carried some show of ^^keing to the
cause which now he speaks against.


Jud. Sir, Sir, answer to the matter that Mr. Daulton h^th against you, Mr.
Daulton proceed to the proof of the points of the Indictment.


Daul. My masters, you of the Jury, etc. I will prove, first that he had a
malicious intent in making of this Book: secondly, that he is the Author of
it: and thirdly, that these matters contained in the Indictment are Felony by
the Statute Eliz. 23. cap. 2.


Then was Mr. Beadle the Register called* who was sworn that these
Examinations following* were as the parties themselves confessed the same: And
to prove the first, the Clarke of the Assizes caused Stephen Chatfield to be
called into the Court, to give in evidence against John Vdall, but he appeared
not at all, for which the Judges were offended and Sergeant Puckering said,
there was a Warrant sen^ for him, whereupon some standing by affirmed* that the
Warrant came after his departure from home. Then Mr. Daulton said, that he went
out of the way of purpose, and Judge Clarke said, Mr. Vdall you are glad of
that. Mr. Vdall answered:

Vda. My Lords, I wish heartily he had bin here for as I am sure he never could
say any thing against me to prove this point, so I have heard and am able to
prove it to be true that he is very sorry that ever he made any complaint
against me* confessing he did it in his anger, when Martin came first out; and
by their suggestions, whom he has proved since by experience to be very bad
men.


Dault. It is no great matter whether he be here or no* for we have his
Articles, against you, and your own confession to prove this point sufficiently.


Then were Mr. Chatfields Articles (that he brought to the Archbishop against
Mr. Vdall) read by the Clarke* containing a report of certain written papers,
tending as he supposed, to the making of such a Book as this is, and thereupon
asked Mr. Vdall whose writing they were, who answered, they are a friends of
mine, whereunto Chatfield replied, wishing him to take heed of them, and to rid
his hands of them, and to return them to his friend from whom he had them, for
he doubted they concerned the State. These papers he saw in Mr. Vdall* Study at
Kingston. Also he further says, that at an other time, he having conferred
with Mr. Udall in a certain field by Kingston, called little* field, about his
putting to silence, he says, that the said Mr. Vdall uttered these words, That
if they put him to silence, he would give the Bishops such a blow as they never
had.

Vda. May it please your Lordships that I may answer to these things in
particular.


Jud. Say on let us hear your Answer.


Vda. I was accused this time two years upon the words of Chatfield, that
these papers that he did see in my study, should be the matter of Martyn
Marprelate, and because I cleared my self of that, it is now brought to prove
an other matter, but it proves nothing unless it were set down in particular
what they were.


Daul. It proves this, that you had a purpose to write this Book, and those
things were collections from your friends and preparations thereunto.


Vda. Let the Jury consider how that point is proved by it. Besides it may be
proved, that this Book was extant in men's hands before the conference between
Chatfield and me, therefore how can it be proved that this is the Book that
should give them such a blow.


Dault. But you cannot deny the second point, that you had a pretenced malice,
for it is extant in your own confession; Read his answer to those Articles of
Mr. Chatfield. Then the Clarke read his answer to this effect, tha^ if the
Bishops put him to silence, they would give him occasion and leisure to be
employed in writing against them. Then said Mr. Daulton, is not this most
evident, what can be plainer then it is?


Vda* I pray your Lordships to give me leave to explain these things.


Iud. Say on and be brief.


Vda. Mr. Chatfield told me that he was commanded to come to Kingst^n and be
resident there; of purpose that I might be put to silence, and that there might
not appear any want of a preacher* I being put down. Whereupon I said in
effect, as is above rehearsed: but I pray you hear in what sense these words
were uttered.


Iud. The matter is clear, and we see what you can say to it well enough,
proceed Mr. Daulton to the proof of the second point.


Dault. And that you be the Author of this slanderous and infamous libell, it
shall be proved clearly to the Jury before your face; then said he to the
Clerk read the answer of Ni^holas Thompkins, which was made upon his oath
before her Majesty's High Commissioners Then was read to this effect that
Thompkins knew that Mr. Udall was the Author of that Book called the
Demonstration, for he said, that Mr. Udall himself told him so. Also that he
saw either in mr. Udalls house, or in some other place in Kingst^ne a Catalogue
of all the Books that Mr. Udall had made, amongst which the Demonstration was
one.


Daul. You see here that this is clear and a sufficient testimony.


Vda. It carries some show, but it is nothing.


Iud. Do you c^ll the testimony of one being an honest man, and upon his Oath,
before the High Commissioners to be nothing, can you answer it?


Vda. My Lords* I answer it thus, denying it to be his testimony, for if it be,
why is he not present to verify it face to f^ce, according to the Law?


Iud. Puck: It is verified to be his true Answer under the hon^s of Dr. Auberie
and Dr. Lewen, the latter wher^of c^nfirmed it before me upon his corporal
Oath.


Dault. You can take no exceptions against that, and will you say he is not an
honest man?


Vda. I am persuaded he was amazed, and answered he knew not what, for he has
reported it so diversely, that it seeme^h ^ee remembers not what he said.


Iud. But the Oath of Thompkins is to be preferred before his bare rep^^t.


Ude. My Lords I answer, I protest unto you (and will verify it upon my Oath*
if it please you) that he told me the day before I was committed, at his
Masters house, that he could not say, neither would he for a tho^sand pounds
affirm any more then this t^a^ he heard me say, I would not doubt but set my
name to that Book if I might have indifferent Judges. And further (if it
please you my Lords) here are some witnesses that upon their Oaths will
testify, how diversely he has reported of his confession to this thing, if it
please your Lordships to accept them. And the witnesses offering themselves to
be heard, were answered; that because their witness was against the Queens
Majesty, they could not be heard. And after other Speeches passing, Mr. Udall
said:


Uda. My Lords, the speech of the Catalogue is most vain, and has no sense in
it, for can I have made so many Books, as that I need make a Catalogue of
t^em? It may be my Lords, he saw a Catalogue of the Books in my Study, wherein
if that were one, it is ^ather an argument that I made it not, for men use not
to put their own works in the Catalogue of those that they have in their Study.


Daul, You of the Jury consider this, that Thompkins was Mrs. Cranes man, and
one that was privy to all the Printing that was at her House, and M^, Udall
used to go often thither.


Uda. All that is nothing to me, what if I used to go thither, she is of my
acquaintance I know her to be an honest Gentle woman, what can you gather by
any of these things? why is not Thompkins here to d^clare his testimony, and to
say what he can?


Daul. He is beyond the Seas about merchandises, sent away by Mr. Gore who
married Mrs. Cranes daughter.


Vda. How does that appear he is no merchant but a serving-man, and if he were
what is that to me, but it cannot be proved that Mr. Gore did send him so that
here is nothing but bare papers to show for evidence against me.


Then there was much said to prove that the testimony of a man absent was
sufficient if it were proved to be his upon the oaths of others. And then the
judge said.

Judge. What say you? did you make the book (Vdall) yea or no, what say you to
it, w^ll you be sworn? will you take your oath that you made it not? we will
offer you that favor, which never any indicted of felony had before, take your
oath and swear you did it not and it shall suffice.


Vda. My Lords I pray you hear me to this, if I would have done so before the
Lords of Her Majesty's Privy Counsel that committed me, I had not come
hither, but I neither then might nor may do so now; whereof I pray you let me
show a reason to the Jury. I and many more do think the book to be good* for
any thing we can find in it, and to be written in defense of a cause which we
take to be most true. Now the Author is sought for that he may be punished for
some speeches that may be wrested in the book* therefore least he should be
found (if one after another that are suspected do deny it) it is thought best
every one neither to confess nor to deny, yea though we suffer some punishment
rather then the author being found out should suffer extremity.


Judge. Nay this is but a shift, I will go further with you, will you but say
upon your honesty that you made it not? and you shall see what shall be said
unto you?


Vda. My Lords it is all one I make a conscience of my word as of my oath, for
I must give account for both. This is no direct course in this place.


Judge. You of the Jury consider this* This argues that if he were not guilty
he would clear himself, and consider well of it* And then speaking to Mr.
Vdall, he said do not stand in it but confess it and submit your self to
the Queens mercy before the Jury find you guilty.


Vda. My Lord I answer that according to my indictment I am not guilty, every
point whereof must be proved or else the whole is false. And I beseech your
Lordships give me leave and I will be very brief. My conscience does not
accuse me, that I have so much as offended her Majesty, her Council* or the
meanest of her people in any thing, I have done concerning this cause, for if I
should, of all other I deserved the least favor being one that professed to
teach others loyalty to her Majesty, and love one to another, and would you
have me to confess a fault where there is none, no I cannot do it neither
will I: wherefore proceed in your course begun.


Daul. We have yet more proof then this, though yet this were sufficient of it
self, wherefore read the other examinations. Then was read the confession of
Henry Sharp of Northampton who upon his oath before my Lord Chancellor had
said that he ^eard Mr. Penry say that Mr. Vdall was the Author of the
Demonstration.


Vda. Sharp and I were never above once in company together (to my
remembrance) neither knew he ever any of my dealings. This is nothing to prove
me the Author of the Book, reports be uncertain, and if reports be true the
Archbishop himself told me that Mr. Penry made it, which is more forcible for
me, then any of Sharpes reports can be against me.


Daul. You mistake the matter, the force of the point rests in Mr Penryes
report, who was one of your great acquaintance and familiars, and you and
Walgrave and he were at Mrs. Cranes house.


Vda. Here is one man's saying that another said so, let the Jury consider of
what force this proof is, if you have any more let it appear.


Judge. Clarke. You of the Jury have not to enquire whether he be guilty of the
Fel^ny but whether he be the Author of the Book, for it is already set down
by the judgment of all the Judges in the Land, that whosoever was author of
that book was guilty the Statute of Felony, and this is declared ab^ve half a
year ag^ne.


Vda. Though it be so determined already, yet I pray your Lordships give me
leave to show that which I have to say and I will be very brief and it is to
prove, that though I were found to be the author, yet it cannot be within the
compass of that Stature, An. 23. Eliz. cap. 2. whereupon the indictment is
framed.


Judge. You shall be heard to say for your self what you can, therefore say on.


Vda. Though I be not by Profession a lawyer, yet I think I can show it
clearly by these reasons following. First, The intent of the lawmakers,
(which always is to be regarded in these cases) is to be considered which
appears in the Preface of the Statute in these words; To suppress the malice
of those that be evil affected to her highness. Now I pray you consider this,
how can it be? or how is it possible that a Preacher of the same Religion which
her Majesty professes, and maintains who is known continually to pray unto
God for her highness prosperity and happiness both of soul and Body; How is
it possible I say, that such a one should be maliciously affected toward her?
Therefore it is evident that the Statute was made against the Papists, who use
to slander her Highness with the terms of Heretic, etc. and no way against
us for I dare boldly say of my self, and in the name of all my brethren.
Cursed is he of God, and he deserves doubtless to be hated of men that does
imagine the least hurt against her Highness. Secondly, the matter that makes
a man a Felon by that Statute, must proceeed from a malicious intent against
her highness, which I or any such as I am can no way justly be charged with:
pattly for that which is said before, and partly for that my course of teaching
and living in this Country these 9 years (saving this last year, wherein I
have been absent) is known to have tended to no other end then the provoking
and persuading of the people to like of and yield obedience unto her Majesty,
and the Religion received in her Dominions, for the proof whereof I refer my
self to the consciences of all men in the Country that have known me: And
further it is likely that I who have bin trained up in the Universities under
Her Majesty's protection and have always bended my Studies to the advancement
of the sincerity of the Gospel* so that those small crumbs of learning which I
have gatheted, I do acknowledge to have received by her Majesty's means These
things considered, how can it be that I should be evil affected toward her
Highness, whom I protest I unfaynedly reverence? And therefore the worst that
the author can be charged withal is his overheat and to much vebemency by
reason of his zeal against the abuses, and not any malice against her
Majesty, or the meanest of her subjects: Again the matter to bring it within
the compass of the Statute must be false. But this book is written in the
behalf of a most true cause. Lastly the end of it, must be either to the
defamation of the Queens Majesty or stirring up of insurrection, sedition, or
Rebellion. For the former I trust that the whole course of our behavior both
in our Ministry and conversation, declares it self to be so far from
seeking to defame her highness as it tends to the uttermost of our powers,
to the advancement, of her Honor. For I am persuaded that there is none of us
that would refuse to undergo any pain whereby her Majesty might any way be
the better honored, yea we would not refuse if need so required, to lay down
our lives for redeeming of the least aching of her majesty's little finger
wherewith she might be grieved. Now for the second end which is the moving or
staring ^p of Rebellion etc. I pray your Lordships, and you of the Jury to
consider this, There have been since the first day of her majesty's Reign,
learned men that have desired the advancemen^ of this cause and many of the
people that affected it. and yet has it never appeared that by occasion
hereof, there has in all this time bin any in any place that have raised any
Insurrection or sedition: yea this book which is now in question has bin
extant these 2 years, yet I trust neither your Lordships nor any here present
can show that any people in any corner of the Land, nay it cannot be justly
proved that any one person has taken any occasion hereby to enterprise any
such matter, and therefore the making of this book cannot be Felony. Besides
all this if there had bin any such thing meant by the Author, or received by
the people, as the Indictment charge me withal, (which is the defamation of
her Highness government) yet (as I take it) it should not be felony by that
Statute, for the whole course of it, declares, that it is only meant of them
that defame her Highness Person, and not her Government, as it is manifest by
the last proviso, wherein it is showed, that the whole Statute does determine
and end wi^h her Majesty's life: and we may not think their wisdoms that made
the Law, to be so unadvised, as to make a Law for the preservation of the
Princes Government which is continual, to last no longer then the life of one
Prince which is temporary. Therefore it seems that the Statute has no
further regard then this, that her Highness person might be preserved in that
Honor and dignity which becomes her Royal Dignity and Estate. And I do
beseech your Lordships to answer me, for I appeal to your consciences as you
will answer to God for my life, and I pray you tell the Jury whether you do
think the* intent of the Statute were in any sort meant against us, and not
rather against the Papists.


Iud. Puck. Judge Puckering said, you do not well to charge us so with our
consciences, which God only is to know: I answer you, the intent of the
Statute is against all, for so the words are.


Vdall. The words my Lord, I confess are so, but is the principal intent so?


Iud. Yea it is so.


Iud. Cla. We have heard you speak for your self to this point at large,
which is nothing to excuse you, for you cannot excuse your self to have done
it with a malicious intent against the Bishops* and that exercising that
Government which the Queen has appointed them, and so it is by consequent
against the Queen.


Vda. My Lords, I am persuaded that the Author did it not of any malice against
them, and for my self, I protest I wish them as much good as I do to my own
soul and will pray to God to give them repentance. But the cause why the
Author did so earnestly inveigh against them was this, as it seems, because
he perceived them not only to execute an Authority which he takes to be
unlawful by the word of God, but also for that they do not the tenth part of
that good, (even in those corrupt callings) which by Law they might do: and I
am persuaded, that your Lordships know in your own consciences, that they do
not the tenth part of that they are bound to do.


Iud. Clar. That is true, they do not the good that they might do; but yet that
does not excuse you* for It is plain in your Book, that you writ not against
them only, but you writ against the State, for is it not against the State
when you say, that it is more easier to live in England a Papist, an
Anabaptist, of the Family of Love, and what not? yea you say, I could live so
in a Bishops house it may be these twenty years and never be much molested for
it; what is this but a plain standering of the State? and mark the words, for
you say, you could live so in England: And does her Majesty's Laws allow of
Papists? this makes eviden^ly against you, and it is so plain that you cannot
deny it.


Vda. My Lords, if it might please you to hear me a word or two, I will show
the meaning of the Author of the Book, I beseech you to hear me and I will be
very brief: I know that the Laws of England do not allow of any such as are
mentioned in the Book, for there are godly Laws made for the punishing of
them, if they were put in execution. But this I take to be the Authors meaning,
that it is not spoken in respect of her Majesty's Government and Laws, but in
respect of the Bishops whom your Lordships know to be wholly employed in
finding us out, and punishing of us, not regarding (in a manner) the punishing
any sin else.


Iud. What Sir will you not confess any fault to be in the Book, you seek
to excuse all.


Vda. My Lords, I do acknowledge, that there was never any work of man so
perfect, but there have bin imperfections in the same, and therefore there may
be some fault in the manner, but surely none in the matter: for the Bishops
themselves will confess, that they may fail in their actions, and be partial
(as they are men) in the manner of handling of any thing; so also the Author of
this Book, being assured that the matter is without reproof, may err in the
manner, in being over-zealous in the handling of it, and this fault I will
easily confess to be in the Book my Lords; but I am sure the Author never had
any malicious intent against her Highness, or any of her Subjects.


Iud. Clar. This Book has made you to come within the compass of the
Statute, though your intent were not so, for I am sure there was Mr. Stubbs,
well known to diverse here, to be a good Subject, and an honest man, yet taking
upon him to write a a Book against her Majesty touching Mounseir, he thereby
came within the compass^ of Law, which he intended not in making of the Book,
and I am persuaded, that he did it of a good affection toward her Majesty; and
yet if this Law had bin made then, which was made since, he had died for it: so
you, though you intended not to come within the compass of the Statute, yet
the Law reaches to your fact as that did to his.


Vda. My Lords, his case and mine is not alike, for his book, concerned her
Highness person, but the Author of this Book touches only the corruptions of
the Bishops, and therefore not the person of her Majesty.


Iud. But I will prove this book to be against her Majesty's person, for her
Majesty being the supreme Governor of all persons and causes in these her
Dominions has established this kind of government in the hands of the
Bishops, which thou and thy f^llows so strive against, and they being set in
Authority for the exercising of this Government by her Majesty, thou do not
strive against them but her Majesty's person, seeing they cannot alter the
Government which the Queen has laid upon them.


Vda. My Lords, we are not ignorant of this, that her Majesty has a care that
all things might be well, and in that respect has given them often in charge,
(upon the considerations of these controversies) to see to it that nothing be
amiss, and because she has a good opinion of them for their gravity and
learning, she believes them when they say all is well and in good case,
whereas if they had the grace to look into these things, and to make them
known as they be, indeed her Majesty and the State, I doubt not, would quickly
redress them, and therefore was it that the Author did so charge them.


Then the Judge proceeding further in the book to prove him to have offended,
he took occasion by the same to speak against railing against Magistrates,
and speaking to Mr. Vdall he said in effect thus:

Iud. Cla. Sir you that should have hin a teacher of her Majesty's people,
you should have taught your self not to have rayled upon the Rulers of the
people, for do you not know what is written in the 23. of Exodus, Thou shall
not rail upon the Ruler of the people, for whosoever does so, shall die the
death. And do you not know what is written in the 23 of the Acts, where the
Apostle Paul being before the High Priest, called him a painted wall; and being
smitten by one of the high Priests Servants, it was said unto him, revilest
thou the Lords high Priest? to which Paul answered, I knew not Brethren that he
was the high Priest, lo thus did he acknowledge his fault, do you know these
things Sir?


Vda. My Lord, you know that we hold it not lawful for a Minister to be a
Civil Magistrate, and there are at least 500. in this Land amongst whom I am
the most unworthy, that are of the same judgment in this point.


Jud. But how if the Queen does give it them?


Vda. They ought not to take it. And my Lord, (if it please you) I will answer
to your proofs, though I came not hither to dispute. But in my answering, my
purpose is not to give any liberty to any man, to rail upon any that are in
Authority. Now to your proofs I say my Lords, that the place out of the 32
Exodus does rather concern your Lordships and such as are under her Majesty
for Judges, then any way to concern the Bishops: And touching the second place
out of the 23 of the Acts, where the Apostle says, Brethren I wist not that it
was the high Priest: the meaning of that place is, as if he should say, I
thought there had not bin any high Priest now, seeing Christ being come, the
high Priesthood was to cease, so that the Apostle does not acknowledge any
fault in that his Speech, for there was no lawful high Priest of that time,
neither did he acknowledge any, seeing they did end in Christ: And thus do the
best Divines expound the place.


Then after some further Speeches of this exposition, the Judge returned to the
matter of the Book again, saying, that the book did concern the State* and
said:

Iud. But Sirrah thou can not so excuse thy self, as though it touched not
the Qu. and the State, for is it not written in thy Book, that this saying
will not serve their turns, the Queen and Council will have it so: whereby
it is plain, that thou did speak against the Queen and the State.


Vda. My Lord* the Author only means this, that when we are called before the
Bishops, they were often driven to use this argument (when they had nothing
else to say for themselves) that they could be content many things were
amended, but it must be so, for the Queen and Council will have it so: And
surely herein me thinks they slander her Highness, and we tell them, that
however they bear it out here before men, yet before God that excuse will not
serve their turn.


Iud. Thou can not carry it away so, do thou not plain^ly say, that they
are not safe though they have humane Authority on their side, but he that is on
our side is mightier then they; whereby thou both abasest her Majesty, and also
do threaten them with some force and vi^lence.


Vda. It is true, that whosoever does unjustly is not safe in it, though all
the Princes in the world should desend him in it; and that is the meaning of
the Author. But to say that force and violence is threatened them, is furthest
doubtless from his meaning; for it is known to all the world, that we desire
by all good means to commend this holy cause of Reformation to her Majesty and
the State, and do not look for neither, that ever it should by any force
prevail, but that it would please God to honor her Highness with the
advancement of the same.


Jud. No, no, these are but excuses, these malicious Speeches proceeded from
thee, and were the groundwork of all these* Lihells that have bin dispersed
since, and thou art* known to be the ringleader of this faction.


Vda. There is no reason to charge me with other men's doings, every man must
answer for himself; but as for me (alas) I am no body; there are five hundred
Ministers in this land of my judgment in these things, the meanest of which I
acknowledge to be far better learned then I am. But by the way my Lords, I pray
your Lordships give me leave to say one thing which I being about to speak of
before, was interrupted, and therefore seeing now it comes into my memory, I
pray you to hear me, though it be out of time, concerning the Felony whereof I
am accused, it makes greatly for me.


Iud. What is it? let us hear what you can say?


Vda. When I was before the Lords of her Majesty's Council at the time of my
Commitment, amongst other things that I alleged against the taking of an oath
to accuse my self, I said that the thing was accounted criminal, and
therefore by law I was not to answer: my Lord Anderson said that I said true if
the case had concerned either the loss of life or limb, whereby it is manifest
that then my case was not esteemed Felony.


Iud. Though the Judges had not then concluded it, yet it was Law before, or
else it could not so be determined after; the violent course of others since,
has caused your case to be more narowly sifted.


Then the Judge (having spoken to the like effect also) said to the Jury, that
they should not need to trouble themselves to find him guilty of the Felony but
only it was sufficient if they found him guilty to be the Author of the Book,
for (quoth he) it is already determined by all the Judges of the ^^^d, that the
Author of that book was in the compass of the Statute of ^^^^ny, and this
quoth he, was concluded before we came hither: therefore you being ignorant of
the Law, and we being sworn as well as you are, you are ^o hear us, and to
take our exposition of the law: and after many other speeches, the Judges said,
go thy way, we will hear thee no longer, get thee hence, and shaking his hand
he called for the other Felons to hear their Causes.

Jury. Then the Jury said, what can we find?


Iud. Find him Author of the Book, and leave the Felony to us. And after some
other Speeches, Mr. Fuller said to the Jury, you are to find him Author of the
Book, and also guilty of a malicious intent in making it; whereat Mr. Daulton
said, what have you to do with the matter Mr. Fuller to speak to the Jury?
Then there being some noise at the Bar, Mr. Vdall could not any more be heard;
yet as he was ready to depart, he said to the Jury; you of the Jury consider
this, that you have not to consult about the life of a Seminary and Popish
Priest, but of a minister of the Gospel.


Then Judge Clarke showed the reasons to the Jury, why they must find him
guilty, saying, The evidences are manifest for the first point, that he is the
Author of the Book* and the second is a point in Law agreed upon by all the
Judges, as I have said.

So the Jury after they had heard the evidences of the other Felons at the Bar,
departed to consult about them, in which time of their consultation there came
two several messages exhorting him to submit himself, and to yield unto the
Judges before the Jury had given up their verdict, unto whom Mr. Vdall replied
willing them not to trouble him with any such matter, for he was clear in his
conscience, and therefore he was not to accuse himself; In which time also the
Jury diverse times sent and received messages from the Judges* and at the last,
the foreman of the Jury went himself unto them. Thus having debated of the
evidences of the rest of the Felons with Mr. Vdall, after the Judges had dined
the Jury brought in their verdict that he was guilty of Felony.

After that Baron Clarke had finished all other matters of Law, and that the
Iuries had given their verdicts on the Felons, finding some guilty, and some
not guilty: The Judge commanded all the prisoners to stand forth and to answer
to their names* which did so; and first mr* Vdall was called, who stood forth
at the Bar, but the Judge commanded him for that time to stand aside, saying
that he would deal with him anon: then some of the prisoners which were saved
by their books, were burnt in their hands, and for that night there was
nothing more don. Then the Judge commanding the Iay^or to bring the prisoners
betimes in the morning, commanded them to depart, and so for that time every
man departed to his place.

The second days work, being the 25. of July.
THe next morning near about 4* of the clock the prisoners were brought to the
Bar, who stayed till the coming of the Judges* who came thither by 6 of the
clock, or thereabouts, and called the prisoners by their names to receive
sentence of death; and first they began with mr. Vdall, who after he was called
was commanded to stand aside till anon, and then there were 7 Felons that
received sentence of death* who being taken aside, Mr. Vdall was called the
second time and the Clarke of the Assizes said, John Vdall hold up thy ^a^d,
what can thou allege for thy self, why thou should not receive judgment
to die.

Vda. My Lords, notwithstanding my earnest pleading and protesting of mine
innocence yesterday, which I could and would have done more clearly, but that
I was so much interrupted: yet it has pleased the Jury upon their consciences
to find me guilty of that which I thank God never entered into my heart; now
therefore must I plead another plea, and therefore I crave of your Lordships
to grant me the benefit of the pardon granted the last Parliament.


Iud. I think you can have no benefit by it, for I am deceived if it be not
excepted. Then said he to the Cleark or some other, reach me the Statute Book,
and whilst he looked in the same:


Vda. Mr. Vdall said, I pray your Lordships consider the ground of my plea,
albeit* indeed it seem to be excepted: your Lordships confessed yesterday, and
I showed it by my Lord Andersons speeches to me, that it was not thought Felony
till of late, and therefore the things that be excepted be such as be
inquirable and punishable in the Ecclesiastical Courts.


Jud. That is nothing, for if the lesser be excepted, much rather is the
greater*


Vda. My Lords, I refer it to your consciences and favorable considerations:
the words are these in the pardon, which he repeated, and they finding it to be
as he had said, the Judge said, here is no help for you: and after other
speeches between them of the meaning of the words of the pardon, the Judge
said, Mr. Vdall your Council has deceived you.


Vda. My Lords, I have not received any Council herein, for I have bin close
prisoner this half year, and therefore could not attain to have any
Council; but thus much have I gathered, which is my judgment out of the Book.


Jud. What can you allege more for your self? for this helps you not:


Vda. Nothing but mine own Innocence, but that your Lordships may proceed.


Iud. What say you? are you contented to submit your self to the Queen:


Vda. Yea, or else I were not worthy to live in her Highness Dominions.


Iud. But will you acknowledge your self to have offended her Majesty in
making this Book? she is gracious and full of mercy, it may be, that we
reporting your submisi^n unto her Majesty, may procure her pardon for you.


Vda. May it please your Lordships to hear me; The cause for which I am called
in question, I cannot forsake in any sort, for I hold it to be the undoubted
truth of God: but, etc* And then he was interrupted by Judge Puckering, who
said:


Iud. Nay stay there, you cannot go away with that speech unanswered, to buz*
into the peoples ears such a conceit, that it is an undoubted truth that you
hold; for I hold it to be an undoubted falsehood: And then he proceeded further
in a large set Speech, the effect whereof was, that this Land having bin
governed by sundry Nations, has yet kept her ancient Laws, which he affirmed
would be overthrown, if this government that these men seek for should be
established: And then he further showed, what inconventences (as he thought)
would come by the same, viz. That we having Laws and Judges appointed to decide
all Controversies; this Presbitery which these men seek for, would overthrow
all, and bring to their censure and government, all men's Causes* or else they
would Excommunicate them from their Churches; yea and they are so hot for this
Government, that they will not stay for the Magistrate, and if the Magistrate
will not, they will reform themselves, and one of them writing in a Letter to
his friend of his, says, Let us number our hot Brethren, that we may know who
will stand to it, for it is high time. So that it is plain, that if they
cannot have it with her Majesty's consent, they will have it though it make our
hearts to ache, as you say in your book* And whereas her Majesty has Revenues
belonging to her Crown out of the Church Livings, and Cathedral Churches,
these men would have her Majesty give unto them those Revenues, for the
maintenance of their Preshitery, and they would her a s^ipend allow at their
discretions, so that they would bring the Queen and the Crown under their
g^rdles.

And some of these men have gone so far, that they say plainly we have no
Church, no Sacrament, no ministers, nor any worship of God amongst us. If these
things be not loo^'t unto in time, what confusion shall we have in this land
shortly? many other things be spoke against the cause of Reformation, which I
cannot particularly lay down but this is in effect the substance of it;
concluding he said, Thus much Mr. Vdall have your speeches enforced me to
speak least the people here present (being deceived) should be carried away by
it. To which Mr. Vdall answered briefly.


Vda. My Lords it is bootelesse for me to enter disputation with you in this
place touching this matter, only this I could wish you to leave it to be first
decided by the learned Divines to whose calling it belongs. And although some
weak men wan^ing judgment have bin headily carried in seeking the furtherance
of this cause, and so for want of this government have run into some errors,
yet it is no reason to charge us with them, for your Lordships know that we
have been the men that have taken the greatest pains to reclaim them to the
joining of themselves with the Church, from which they have separated
themselves.


Judge. Clar. You are deceived it is not a matter of Divinity only, but it is a
matter of State, and within the compass of our Profession, and it is not so
greatly in controversy as you would have us to believe it is.


Vd. It is diversely debated (my Lords) and the greatest number of learned men
in Christendom do maintain the same.


Judge. How do you know that, have you bin beyond the Seas, to know the
greatest number of learned men to be of this judgment?


Vdall. Your Lordships know that all the Churches of France, the low Countries,
and of Scotland do maintain the same? besides many hundreds of learned men in
this land.


Judge. Have you been in all these Churches that you can tell so much?


Vda. I know it to be true (my Lords) for their practice does show them to be
of this judgment.


Iu. Well, if you can alleadg no more; neither will submit your self to the
Queens mercy, then hear your judgment.


Vda. My lords I was beginning to speak, but you interrupted me, I pray you
hear me, what I will say* and then do as God shall move you.


Iud. Let us hear what you will say.


Vda. As I said before so I say now, I believe the cause to be the undoubted
truth of God, and therefore in the matter I cannot by any means yield; yet
seeing by your order of law I am found to be guilty, neither can I (for the
reverence I bear to her majesty's laws) take any exceptions against you nor
the Jury, but that which you have done I acknowledge to be done in all equity
and right. Seeing I say you have found me to be guilty, whereby I cannot live
without her majesty's gracious and special favor. I acknowledge that
whatsoever I have done to the advancement of the cause. I may offend in the
manner, in which respect (if I have offended) seeing it has pleased your
Lordships and the Jury to find me guilty, I do willingly submit my self and
heartily crave her majesty's pardon.


Iud. But are you sorry, that you have offended the Queens Majesty.


Vda. I am sorry, that the course of the Law has found me to have offended.


Judge. So is every Thief that is c^ndemned sorry, that his offense is found
out, but not for the fact. This is a plain fallacy.


Vda. My Lord indeed if it were so as your Lordship does understand it, it were
a plain fallacy, but I say further, if in the manner of handling so good a
cause, there be found in me any offense against her Majesty's Laws: And I
acknowledge that in the manner of handling it Her Majesty may be justly
offended, for which I am sorry. And I protest that I have never gone about to
advance it by any other means, then by manifesting it to all men, and
tendering it to them in authority, and that by such means as might not be
contrary to the Laws of this Land, that so it might be received by Her Majesty
and the State, and this is the care of us all, howsoever we be charged with
factions.


Iud. You say if there ^e found any offense, whereby you call in question the
equity of dealing in this Court against you.


Vda. My Lords I do not neither will I, let it be looked into by you and the
rest whom it concerns, I hope you would not deal otherwise then lawfully
against me.


Iud. Puck. You say you seek no unlawful means, what can be meant but
unlawful means in the words of your Book* If it come in by that means that
will make all your hearts to ache, blame your selves: What good means ca^ be
meant by th^se word^?


Vdall. My Lords, yesterday I showed you, what I took to be the meaning of
the Author in some places of the book alleged against me in the Indictment*
and then I would have spoken unto all, but you cut me off, I pray you therefore
let me show you the meaning of the Author in those words now.


Judge. Let us hear you how you expound it.


Vda. My Lords, your Lordships must understand, that the Author takes it for
granted that the cause is Gods and must prevail, and therefore seeing God
has used all the means of his mercy to bring it in, in giving us a gracious
Prince, ^ong peace and abundance* and of stirring up some to exhibit
s^^plications to the Parliament; these things not prevailing in his mercy, he
will bring (...) some judgment as plague or famine, or some such like (...)
his is always the manner of Gods dealing.


(...) (...) expound it so, for the words import another thing.


(...) (...), the Author himself expounds it so in the words follow- (...)
says, that it must prevail, for such a judgment will overtake this Land (...)
ears of all that hear thereof to tingle, so that he means nothing (...) God
will bring it in by his own hand by judgment, if by mercy he can- (...)*


Iud. No no, your meaning was that it should be brought in by force and
violence.


Vda. God forbid! far be it from us to conceive any such Imagination. The
Author of that book does plainly show that he meant no such thing, and the
words following in the end of the Epistle do declare the same, for there he
shows by whom it is to be brought in namely by Her Majesty and her Honorable
Counselors, that they may see it, and establish the same.


Judge. Nay the meaning is, that if the Queen will not, yet you say it shall
come in, for so the words are, that it must prevail, maugre the heads of all
that stand against it.


Vda. Nay my Lords the words are maugre the malice of all that stand against
it* for there are many heads that are not maliciously bent against it, there is
great difference between malice and ^eads, sor some are against the cause
through ignorance*


Iud. It is all one in effect*


Vda. Nay (my Lords) there is great difference,


Iud. Puck. Well Mr. Vdall you were best to submit your self to the Queens
mercy and leave these courses, for I tell you that your Book is most seditio^s
and slanderous against her Majesty and the State, and yet I assure you that
your book had bin passed over, if there had not come forth presently after it
such a number of slanderous libels, as, Martin marre-prelate, Martins Epitome,
Martin Junior, or thesis martiane, Martin senior, and others such like, of
which your Book was judged to be the Ringleader.


Vda My Lords those that are learned, and do maintain this cause, do Judge
this book to be written very indifferently, howsoever it be hardly construed.
But for Martin and the rest of those Books that you have named, they were
never approved by the godly learned. And I am fully persuaded that those books
were not done by any minister, and I think there is never a minister in this
Land, that does know who Martin is. And I for my part have bin inquisitive but
I could never learn who he is.


Iud. Clar. You will not acknowledge your self faulty in any thing, and
therefore it is in value to stand any longer with you.


Vda. I will easily confess that in manner the Author has offended, for no
man can handle a cause so well but there will fault appear in it, as appears
by Job who having a good cause handled it weakly: It is easier to handle an
ill cause cunningly, then a good one well.


Iud. Nay but you have maliciously offended in publishing this Book, which
tends to the overthrowing of the State and the moving of Rebellion.


Vda. My Lords that be far from me* for we teach that in reforming things
amiss if the Prince will not consent, the weapons that Subjects are to fight
withal are repentance and prayers, patience and tears.


Iud. Yea you had done well if you had used these weapons rather then to have
made this Book.


Vda. God forbid but that we should give unto her Majesty that Honor which
justly is due unto her, for we have not taught the people to reform the State
without the Prince, and our practice has proved the same, for we never taught
any of her subjects to go before her, but to leave that Honor as belongs to
her Majesty.


Iud. Well* will you submit your self or not? for else I must proceed to
judgment, and I have no authority to favor you, neither will I stay sentence
of death according to my Office, what my brother has I know not, and therefore
shortly submit your self or else! am to pronounce sentence of death.


Vda. And I am ready to receive it: For I protest before God (not knowing that
I am to live an hour) that the cause is good, and I am contented to receive
sentence so that I may leave it to posterity how I have suffered for the cause.
But my Lords the cause excepted, I will submit my self in any thing.


Judge* Let the Cause alone and tell us no more of it, but acknowledge your
self to have offended the Queens Majesty,


Vda. I may not in any case yield in the cause, I have almost ever since I was
a Preacher of the Gospel professed it, and therefore I cannot be at this time
changed.


Judge. Let (I say) the cause alone and say what you will do.


Vda. I must needs profess it and mention it, lest it should be thought that
I have started from it, but for any thing that I have done in the manner
against Law, I am heartily sorry for it, more then this I cannot say, do with
me what you will.


Judge. But are you sorry for offending her Majesty and her laws, and be you
conten^ed to amend and to live in obedience as becomes a good subject?


Vda. I am content to seek the advancement of this cause by no other means,
then that which may stand with the laws of this Land, and the duty of a good
Subject.


Iud. I come not here to entreat you to submit your self, but you shall do
it willingly upon your knees, and crave her Majesty's mercy.


Vdall. Then Mr. Vdall kneeling down said, I refuse not any kind of submission
to Her Majesty: And I entreat your Lordships to be a means to her Majesty for
me. And if I were worthy that my poor papers might come unto Her Majesty, or
to her Honorable Council, I would write thus much unto them.


Judge. Nay will you write thus much unto us, that we may first see it and
commend it to her majesty?


Vda. I willingly do it.


Thus they dismissed him.

And this is the sum of that which I with the help of others could remember,
having not any intent to leave out or enlarge any thing further the^ the
meaning of the Speakers did intend; notwithstanding many more things were said
on both sides, especially the set Speeches of both the Judges and of Mr.
Daulton to the disgrace of the desired Reformation, which could not well be
expressed in particular, and therefore I have left them. Also many other things
Mr. Vdall purposed and begun to say, which they stopped, so that they could not
be perceived.

The Assizes being thus ended, Mr. Vdall was returned to the prison of the
White-Lyon again where he continued till the Sessions in S^ut^warke* beginning
the 18. day of February, 1590. during which time he wrote a supplication or
submission to the Queens Majesty, as follows:

To the Queens most Excellent Majesty.
MOst Gracious and dread Sovereign, The present lamentable estate wherein I
stand, being found guilty by verdict, to be Author of a Book entitled, ^
Demonstration of Discipline, and being without your gracious pardon* to die for
the same: I humbly prostrate my self at your Majesty's fe^^, submitting my
self in most humble manner as becomes a dutiful Subject, to such order as it
shall please your Highness to appoint* to whom God has given so high and
Sovereign a power as is able both to kill and to quicken, to bring to the
gates of death, and to cause to return to the comfort of life again: Before
whom standing thus convict, I am not to plead my innocence: yet I most humbly
desire it may not offend your Excellent Majesty, that I protest (of the truth
whereof I call God to witness who knows all secrets, and will judge both the
quick and the dead) that I had never any thought or imagination to publish,
write, or do any thing maliciously* or tending to the dishonor or slander of
your Majesty's Royal person or Princely estate* under whose gracious
government I have attained to so many benefits and blessings; amongst which I
most highly esteem the true knowledge and ^^a^e of God; in regard whereof, I
have bin always* ready even to adventure my life, for the preservation of your
most Royal person and defense of your Princely estate, and the same have also
taught un^o others, as a thing ^pecially commanded by God; notwithstanding
feareing the severity of justice unto death: I fly for life unto your
Majesty's most gracious mercy most humbly desiring your Highness of your
merciful compassion for relief of my poor and miserable estate, to grant me
your gracious and comfortable pardon, whereby* I may be discharged, both of the
offense and punishment* which the law has said upon me. Other hope then this
have I none* (but the trust I have in* God, according to his promises) that
your Majesty by a special gift of God, is gracious and merciful, and have
vouchsafed to show mercy even to such as were not only by imputation of law but
indeed malicious and mortal enemies to your Highnes^e, and therefore* I hope
that the same goodness of so Princely a nature may be moved, and will show
forth it self in like gracious compassion on my behalf; which gracious pardon
on my knees I most humbly crave your Excellent Majesty to grant unto me* by
which special favor being raised as it were from the dead, I promise and vow
to lead the rest of my life in all humble and dutiful obedience unto your
Majesty; praying continually for the preservation of your highness precious
life and happy government, to the honor of Almighty God, and the comfort of
all obedient and dutiful Subjects.


A Declaration of that which passed between the Judges and Mr. Vdall at the
Assizes in Southwarke Febru. 19, 1590.
BEcause you are* ^^sirous to understand of me the particular things which
passed between the Judges and me the 18* 19, and 20. days of ^^b. 1590.
Albeit I had rather you should learn it of others, yet seeing the ground of
all depends upon some things that passed between them and me in private, I am
the rather induced to satisfy your request praying that it may be kept secret
amongst those friends that may have good by it, and not given out unto any such
sort as may aggravate this heavy burden that is already said upon me. Being
called the first day of the Assizes in the afternoon Sergeant Puckering said:

Puck. We do not mean now to deal with you, only I must put you in mind that
you have made a* Petition, wherein you promise to submit your self to such
order as her Majesty shall appoint; consider of it, and look that you ^^ it,
for ^ ^an tell you, it is looked for at your hands*


Vda. I know not my Lord what you mean* I made a Petition but to her Majesty,
and will willingly perform any thing promised therein:


Puck. Well, advise well with your self and look that you do it, I tell you
aforehand.


Vda. Unless you mean that I know not your meaning.


Justice Fenner dwelling in ^urre sat on the Bench and said, Mr. Vdall, I must
needs say something unto you, I have heard much good of you, and that you are
learned, it were pity you should do otherwise then well, I pray you take heed
that those good things which are in you, be not marred for want of humility: I
tell you humility is a special virtue in a man of your Calling* the want
whereof marreth all in them that waht i^* I pray you stand not in your own
opinion too much, I have heard that you have don much good* let not humility be
wanting, etc.


Vda. My Lord, I acknowledge that humility is a virtue generally required in
men of my Calling, without which all other gifts are nothing* for God resists
the proud, and gives wisdom to the simple: and I desire that the same virtue
may be found in me; but I trust your meaning is not thereby to persuade me to
deny the truth, which I trust the Lord will keep me from, whatsoever befall me.


Fenner. I speak to you of good will, I would not have you stiff in your own
conceit.


Puck. Remember what I said unto you.


And so I was carried into a Chamber to be conferred with by some of the Bench*
etc. And when that promise which the Judge so much spoke of came to be
examined, it was nothing but a sentence in my submission to her Highness, the
meaning whereof is (as the words going before it and immediately following it
do declare) that I professed my self willing to live or die, according as that
power which God has given to her Majesty* shall appoint.

I having bin dealt withal to this effect the first day of the Assizes (by
certain of the Bench in private) as also the second day by some of them to
this effect* that I would make such a submission as would condomne the Book in
question* and justify the Hiera^chy* and perceiving that I was not to be heard
till the last day* I entreated Sir William Moore and Mr. Bowyer to be a mean
to the Judges for me* that (for as much* as* my case was rare, and I had (as I
was persuaded) sufficient to allege why (notwithstanding the verdict against
me) Judgment ought to be stayed) I might be heard overnight, that so
(according to that good council given by them unto me* to advise with my
self, and to consider what I would do) also they mig^^ have a night to think
of what I had to say, and the next day to do with me as God should move them.

Hereupon I was ^etcht forth before the Judges in private, immediately after
dinner, who using many persuasions to draw me to relent (which being in private
I will not express) told me that they sent for me, for that they understood I
desired to be heard overnight, which they were willing then and there to do: I
answered: My Lords, my meaning was not to desire private but public hearing,
seeing I have nothing to say: but such as would prevent my self, and
disappoint my public speech, if I should utter it in private: yet because
they told me their other affairs would not permit them to have any time with
me till the latter end of the Assizes, I was rather willing that I should be
prevented, then they should be constrained to determine on a sudden upon so
weighty a matter; whereupon I did draw out a paper for each of them, containing
these reasons following.

I humbly pray your Lordships to consider, whether these reasons ought not in
conscience to move you to stay the sentence notwithstanding the verdict against
me, and to be means of my release.

1. It seems that my case is not esteemed Felony by the Judges of the Land*
seeing they do usually sit in the High Commission Court, where the printing and
dispersing of the same and such like Books are usually enquired after as
transgressions of another nature.

2. No judgment in Law ought to be given in case of Felony, but upon a party
first found guilty thereof by verdict of twelve men, but I am not so, for
proof whereof I pray you it may be remembered, that your Lordship gave the
Jurie in issue only for the trial of the fact, whether I were Author of such
a Book, and freed them from enquiring the intent, without which there is no
Felony.

3. I humbly pray you to call to mind by what means the Jury was drawn to
give that verdict they did, whether they were left wholly to their own
consciences, or were wrought unto it partly by promise assuring it should be no
further danger unto me, but tend to my good; and partly by fear, as appears
in that it has bin an occasion of great grief unto some of them ever since.
And then I pray you to consider, whether upon such a verdict so drawn from
twelve simple men, Christian Judges in a good conscience, may proceed to
sentence of death?

4. In case the verdict were never so free, yet your Lordships being men of
wisdom and knowledge are to consider, whether the Statute whereupon I am
Indicted, do agree to my case in the truth and meaning of it, there being
nothing in that Book spoken of her Majesty's person, but in duty and honor;
and whether the drawing of it from her Majesty to the Bishops (as being a part
of her body politic) be not a violent depraving and wresting of the Statute,
which if it be, you being Christian Judges, cannot in a good conscience upon
such a ground proceed to sentence, contrary to your own knowledge.

5. But if the Statute be to be taken so as it is urged, it ought to be
considered that without a malicious intent against her Majesty's person, the
Statute it self makes no act forbidden by it to be Felonious; wherein I
appeal first to God, and then to all men that have seen the whole course of
my life and to your Lps. own consciences wherein I pray you to examine your
selves in the sight of God, whether either by your selves or the just report of
any other you can find me guilty of any act in all my life, that savoured of
any malice or malicious intent against her Majesty or of any other behavior
than stands with the allegiance and duty of a most dutiful and Christian
subject. Of which malice or malicious intent against her Majesty, if your
consciences clear me before God, the act wherewith I am charged being not
felony without such an intent, I hope you will consider that you cannot with a
good conscience proceed to judgment.

6. Yet if the Statute and intent were such as it is said, in case of life the
evidences ought to be pregnant and full living witnesses (I am sure by the word
of God, and I trust also by the Laws of this land) were to have bin produced
face to face to charge me. But I have none such against me, neither any other
thing* saving only papers and reports of Depositions taken by Ecclesiastical
Commissioners and others, which kind of proof the judges of the land cast away
in case of lands, and by no means allow to be sufficient, and therefore are
much less to be allowed in a case of life, which being so, your Lordships
ought to have a conscience, that upon so weak evidences sentence of death be
not pronounced.

7. But if the same that has been given in for evidence in writing, had bin
testified by men living* standing out in the presence of the Court and of me
the accused, I trust your Lordships will consider that no one of the evidences
do directly prove me to be the Author of the book in question which as it was
has little force in it as appears by this* that the Author of the chiefest
testimony is so grieved, that he is ashamed to come where he is known.
Whereupon howsoever the Jury have not discerned thereof, yet you being men of
skill and understanding, are to have regard of it, and not upon so weak and
impertinent proofs to proceed to judgment of death.

8. If all these things were such as they ought to be, yet your Lordships are
to consider (supposing me to be the author of the book in question) that the
said book for the substance of it, contains nothing but that which is taught
and believed to be a part of the Gospel of Christ, by all the best reformed
Churches in Europe; wherein nothing being diverse hom them, I cannot be
condemned without condemning in me all such Nations and Churches as hold the
same doctrine. In which (if there be no error in them) the offense commonly be
in form, circumstance and manner of writing which some men may think worthy
an admonition, some more severe worthy correction and amercement, the sharpest
cannot judge it to deserve more then some short time of imprisonment. But death
for an error of such a kind in terms and words not altogether dutiful of
certain Bishops* cannot be but extreme cruelty: Which seeing it ought to be
far from any Christian man that has the bowels of Christ in him. Surely
Christian judges professing the Gospel, for a service of the Gospel (saving
some oversight in words and terms) ought not to proceed against me (that has
endeavored to show himself a dutiful Subject and faithful minister of the
Gospel) to give sentence of death.

9. My offense not being aggravated but remaining as it was the last Assizes*
when my submission was excepted, and judgment, thereupon stayed: I trust your
favor will be the same toward me now also, seeing I am ready to do the like.

If all this prevail not, yet my Redeemer lives to whom I commend my self,
and say as sometime Jeremy said in a case not much unlike. Behold I am in your
hands do with me what seems good unto you; but know you this that if you put
me to death, you shall bring innocent blood upon your own heads and upon the
land. As the bl^ud of Abell, so the blood of Vdall, will cry to God with a loud
voice* and the righteous judge of the World, will require it at the hands of
all those that shall be guilty of it.

This is the sum of that which I delivered to the Judges.
THe Assizes being almost finished, and the other Prisoners that were called to
the Bar to have sentence of death, standing forth to hear the same* I was at
the last called, and demanded what I could say for my self, why I should not
have judgment to die. Hereupon I humbly craving audience began to this effect.

Vda. My Lords I do acknowledge that I have been hitherto proceeded against by
due course of law, and that a verdict was given in against me the last Assizes
as guilty of Felony, etc. But I do not only (as heretofore) protest mine
inno^enc^^, but also think that I have sufficient to allege why (not
withstanding the verdict) judgment ought not to be given where I entreat to be
heard.


Iud. Puck. I pray you stay, you seem in the beginning to speak contraries,
for first you acknowledge the course of law to be due, and afterward stand
upon it, that you are innocent. How can a due course of law condemn the
innocent?


Vdall. These things agree well enough, as I will show if it shall please you
to give me leave: it is by due course of law* that I have been indicted,
arraigned, have had a Jury impanelled upon me* bin accused, heard speak for my
self, and testimony produced against me. But in that the proof by witness
was insufficient and the Jury either in judgment or affection missed;
thereupon it has come to pass that (notwithstanding the due course of law)
guiltin^sse is laid upon a guiltless person. But I pray you let me proceed to
the reasons that I have to allege for my self.


Then I lest the first reason of purpose seeing I did rather wish that they
only should understand it (which they did by my papers overnight) then to blaze
it to the World so that I did begin to speak according to the second reason
mentioned before; whereupon Sergeant Puckering prayed Baron Clarke to speak,
seeing it did most concern him.

Judge. Clar. I must needs tell you, you ^^e us and the seat of Justice great
wrong, indeed ^ told the Jury what was the law in the opinion of all the judges
of the land, for it was not my private opinion as I said also at that time.


Vda. It is not material my Lord in this case what the Judges think, for
though all the Judges in the World thought so, our laws thought no man a
Felon, or capable of sentence as a Felon till he be convicted by the verdict
of 12. men.


Clar. You are so convicted as the record will testify.


Vda. I acknowledge the record against me, but I appeal to your Lordships
conscience whether you delivered not unto them speeches to this effect. As ^or
the Felony you are not so much to enquire, but only whether he made the book,
leaving the Felony to us.


Clar* You do me great wrong, I only told them the law.


Vda. Well I leave it to your Lordships favorable consideration you perceive
my reason.


Then I spoke to the third Reason, whereupon it was said.

Puck. All that you say tends to the disgracing of the Court of Justice
holden against you heretofore, the jury were left to their own consciences,
and did as they saw meet to do,


Vda. No my Lords, I speak not any thing to disgrace the court of justice, for
I acknowledge both this course and all others of the like nature, to be Gods
holy Ordinance, which I ought to reverence, neither do I speak to defame the
Jury, but only to give your Lordships occasion why you may not to proceed to
sentence, thereupon, for if the Jury did well, why should it grieve any of
them? if they did ill your Lordships may not proceed to sentence thereupon.


Puck. We cannot remember the particular circumstances that then passed*
neither are we to call in question the verdict* but it is our office to give
sentence according to it.


Vdall, I pray your Lordships tell me one thing, must the judges always give
sentence according to the Verdict, or may there not be cause to stay it?


Clar. Yes there may be cause to stay the verdict; such may the case be,


Vda. And I desire no other but that my reasons may be well weighed whether my
case be such or no.


Then I prayed for so much as they had the substance of that in writing afor
hand which I meant to say, it would please them to give me leave to say at
once what I could; lest my memory (being so much weakened and dulled be
imprisonment should fail me, and so I leave some material thing unspoken.
Then I spoke according to the 4 and 5 Reasons* whereunto little was replied
saving such as things were mentioned at my arraignment. Only Baron clarke used
a very long speech, wherein he compared Mr. Stubbs his cause and mine together
and after the end of his speech, Judge Puckering said.

Puck. Who taught you such law tell you, you are much deceived and abused in
it; one may be within the compass of Felony, though he do not directly
meant any such thing.


Vda. Your Lordship knows I pleaded these points the last Assizes, when I
came from close imprisonment to the bar: I understand English which is the
language wherein the Statute was written, and I profess my self a Scholar
and therefore to have (through Gods mercy) some understanding of the sense of
that I read. It seems to me most direct, and no otherwise to be taken then I
understand it.


Then I spoke according to the 6, and 7, reasons whereunto it was replied thus.

Puck. You are deceived in that you think the witnesses against you the less
lawful because the parties were not present. It is an ordinary thing to have
witnesses examined in the Chancery and other such like Courts, which do
remain thereof as sufficient credit for ever, as they were when the parties
oath was taken upon the same.


Vda. Then would I have answered that the case was not alike, seeing the
High Commission is no Court of Record, but I was not then suffered to speak,
for that it was said by the other Judge.


Clar. Where do you find that there must needs (by the word of God) be two
witnesses face to face?


Vda. It is so clear as the witnesses were also to have the first hand in
executing the punishment upon the party offending.


Puck. That was according to Moses Law, which we are not tied unto.


Vda. It is the word of God, which has a parpetuall equity in it, for the life
of man is so precious in the sight of God, as he would not have it taken away
without most evident and manifest proof, such as in his Law is set down.


Clar. We are not now to call in question the proofs, seeing the Jury did
think them sufficient; This speech of yours tends to prove the Jury perjured.


Vda. Not so my Lord, I think of them that they did according to their
consciences, but being men unlearned, and the case being strange unto them,
they may have don their best, and yet you being men of more knowledge and
judgment, are to look further into the matter.


Puck. Whereas you say that none of the witnesses did directly prove you the
Author of the fact, that was not necessary, for if all laid together, and the
circumstances considered do prove it, it is as good a proof as if every
witness were direct.


Vda. But the Law of God from which I trust our Laws dis-agree not, would that
every proof be direct.


Puck. And do you think indeed, that the Laws of this Land are agreeable to
the word of God.


Vda. I do not profess to know them, but surely I have so reverent an opinion
of them* that I trust the grounds of them are according to the word of God,
however in some particulars the proceedings may miss thereof.


Puck. Then the Government by Archbishops and Lord Bishops is according to the
word of God. seeing the Laws of the Land do allow them.


Vda. I pray you my Lord take me not so general, for that will not follow upon
my speeches.


P. Well you may not now disgrace the witnesses, you should have done it at
your Arraignement.


Vda. I neither meant then nor purpose now to disgrace the witnesses, but to
show the insufficiency of their testimony in this case, that your Lordships may
thereby see some reason to stay the sentence.

The first testimony that was alleged, was that of Mr. Chatfield, who
affirms, that it was not given in against me upon his oath, but only in his
anger he set his hand to, but is now sorry for it.


Puck. You should have alleged this before, it is now too late.


Vda. It is alleged too late, to prevent the verdict* but if there be any
force in it, it ought to be considered to stay the sentence* I could allege
it no sooner, because I knew it not till after the verdict.


Puck. We may not suffer you to proceed so to disgrace that which is passed
already; If you have any other thing to say, speak on* otherwise we must do
our office.


Vda. It is not my meaning howsoever you take it, to disgrace any thing passed
hertofore, only I pray you further to consider, that Thompkins whose testimony
only carried some show, protested before my commitment, that he would not for
all the world affirm me to be the Author of the Book.


Puck. Why did you not plead these things to the Jury?


Vda. I did so, and offered to produce sufficient proof for it, but your
Lordships answered, that no witnesses might be heard in my behalf, seeing it
was against the Queen, which seeme^h strange to me, for methinks it should be
for the Queen to hear al things on both sides, especially when the life of
any of her Subjects is in question.


Puck. The witnesses were then thought by the Jury sufficient to prove the
matter which we may not now call in doubt, therefore say on if you have any
more.


Vda. Then I spoke according to the eight reason, whereupon it was said,


Clar. I tell you, you are not called into question for the cause (as you call
it) nor for the body of the Book, but only for slanderous things in the
Preface against her Majesty's government, and therefore you may let the cause
alone.


Vda. But it is for the hatred borne to the cause that I am thus entreated, for
had not it bin handled in the Book, such matter as is now made of the Preface
had never bin objected against me or any other.


Puck. Well it is best for you to leave off all other pleas, and submit your
self to the Queens Majesty's mercy.


Vda. I will do so with all my heart.


Puck. But will you do it as you did the last Assizes?


Vda. Yea that I will; And so I spoke according to the last reason, whereupon
it was said:


Puck. You confessed that you were justly condemned.


Vda. I am not yet condemned:


Puck. I mean convicted by the Jury; then you acknowledged that you had
offended her Majesty, that you were sorry for it, and promised that you would
never do the like again.


Vda. My Lord, it is not for me to oppose my word and credit, (which is
nothing) against yours, I refer it to them that heard it; only I pray you give
me leave to speak of it, as I take it that it was: First, I did avow (and so I
do now, and will do whilst I live) that the cause handled in that Book, is an
undoubted truth.


Clar. How often shall we bid you leave the cause, and tell you that you are
not troubled for it.


Vda. But it is the cause that is sought to be defaced in my person, and
therefore I must and will still prof^sse it and justify it, wha^^^ver disgrace
I receive by it unto my self. I pray you let me proceed. Secondly I did
protest that I never had any purpose to deface, but ever to seek ^o honor her
Majesty and her Government. Thirdly, I professed that the course of Law against
me was due; whereby what I have meant you have heard. Fourthly, I said that I
never had any purpose to do any thing to the advancement of this cause, but
keeping my self (to the uttermost of my power) within the compass of Law.
Lastly* I never confessed my self to be Author of the Book. Then my
submission was this, that if I had don any thing to the advancement of so holy
a cause* which had brought me within compass of the Law, or might justly
offend her Majesty, I was hea^tily sorry for it; if this be not it, let me have
any other drawn, wherein the former points are justified, and I will set my
hand unto it.


Puck. But all this is nothing to your Book in particular, what say you to it?


Vda. I say this, that though I hold the matter in it to be a most manifest
truth* yet I confess the manner of handling in some part to be such as might
justly provoke her Majesty's indignation.


Puck: Because you stand so much upon the cause, as you call it, you provoke me
so, as I must needs say somewhat of it, lest the audience should think some
matter in it more then is.


Vda. My Lord, you understand my judgment therein, I beseech you speak not
against it* unless you will give me leave to reply unto you.


Puck. I may not do so, you pr^v^ke me to it, your Discipline that you stand
upon, whereupon is it grounded? forsooth upon the saying of Christ, Tell the
Church: which never was expounded these 1500. years, as you do within these
few years.


Vda. My Lord, he did abuse you that told you so, Chrysostom expounds it
thus tell the Church* that is the governors of the Church:


Puck. He meant the Governors of the Jewish Synagogue.


Vda. How can that be? when he lived above 400. years after Christ:


Puck. Was there never any that could find it out before now if it were a
truth?


Vda. Yes it has testimony sufficient if it might be received:


Puck. And lest men should think that your matter were as good as you pretend
I will tell you what I know: It is written in one of your Books, that without
an Eldership there is no salvati^n.


Vda. I am persuaded that cannot be showed.


Puck. Yes it is in Theses Martinianae, one writ that i^ is time to number our
hot Brethren. Another (Mr. Snape of Northampton by name) wrote that the Bishops
should be p^t down all in one day.

These things he did discourse of at large in an invective speech most bitter
^ending to persuade the people that we meant to rebel and set up the
Disc^pline, and pull down the Bishops by strong hand, and went about to
imp^ir^ the Queens Prerogative and patrimony. After which with much ado I got
aud^ence to this effect.


Vda. My Lord, I protest in the presence of God, and hearing of all this people
that neither I nor any of my brethren that ever I was acquainted with to my
knowledge, did so much as ever purpose or speak of any such means as your
Lordships mentions to bring in the discipline, but only by prayer to God,
supplication to her Majesty, and such other peaceable means: this is my
answer to your large invective. And whereas my Lord you seem to be so hardly
carried against the cause I would not doubt* but if I might privately confer
with you, with the blessing of God to persuade you to be a friend unto it.


And after some other speeches of other books, and the aforesaid speeches in
the books mentioned already, Judge Puckering said.

Puck. Nay I tell you there are as foul things in your own book, For do you
not say that the Church is committed to the Mistress of the Stews, and ruled by
the laws of a brothel-house,


Vda. It is spoken of the Popish Canon Law, which is an unfit to rule the
Church of Christ, as the laws of a brothel-house to govern an honest woman.


Puck. And those laws are established by her Majesty's laws.


Vda. It would trouble the learned lawyer in England to prove that.


Then Baron Clarke began a voice, tending again to compare my case to that of
Mr. Stubs, and to persuade me to submit my self telling me what good I might
do, but because he spoke low, and I said I did not well hear him, he gave
over, and prayed the other to speak, who told me his meaning, and then said.

Puck. We shall make short work with you, will you here acknowledge all the
Laws Ecclesiastical and Temporal of this Land, to be agreeable to the word
of God.


Vda. My Lord, I have disgrace enough upon me already, you may easily perceive
what I think of the present Ecclesiastical government. I pray you press me
not with these things, I can yield no further then you have heard.


Puck. Then we must do our office and pronounce sentence on you.


Vda. Gods will be done.


Puck. Yea Gods will be done on you indeed.


Then he gave sentence upon me and the rest, After which I did purpose to
speak according to the last sentence after the reasons. But the ^^amors of the
other prisoners calling to the Judges to be good unto them disappointed me
thereof. Thus was I returned to prison, what will be the issue I know not. The
Lord turn to his glory the good of his Church, and shame of his foes, and then
welcome life or death.

I being reprieved (as the Sheriff said by her Majesty's own commandment)
Doctor Bond one of the Queens Chaplains, came to me as from the Queen her
self and from the Council, with the submission that was tendered an^o to
confer with me in general, but specially to persuade me to yield thereunto,
or to take the reasons of my refusal, after two days conference we agreed
upon a form of submission, as follows.

The Form of that submission which was offered unto me, and I refused.
I John Vdall, have bin hitherto by due course of Law convicted of felony, for
penning and setting forth a certain book, called a Demonstration, of
Discipline, wherein false, slanderous and seditious matters are contained,
against her Majesty's Prerogative Royal, her Crown and Dignity and against the
laws and Government Ecclesiastical and temporal, established by Law under her
highness, and tending to the erecting of a new form of government contray to
Her said Laws. All which points I do now by the grace of God perceive to be
very dangerous to the peace of this Realm and Church, seditious in the
Commonwealth, and justly offensive to the Queens most excellent Majesty, so
as thereby I now seeing the grievousnesse of this my offense, do most humbly
on my knees before God and this presence, submit my self to the mercy of her
highness, being must sorry, that so deeply and worthily I have incurred her
Majesty's indignation against me, promising if it shall please God to move her
Royal heart to have compassion on me, a most sorrowful convicted Person,
that I will for ever hereafter forsake all such undutifull and dangerous
courses, and demean my self dutyfully and peaceably to all authorities both
Civil and Ecclesiastical established in this Realm, for I do acknowledge
them to be both lawful and godly, and to be obeyed of every faithful Subject.

The Form of that submission whereunto I did Consent and set my Hand.
With these three Protestations I do submit my self in manner as follows.
1. I hold the cause of Discipline debated in that book to be an undoubted
truth. 2. I never imagined any evil against her Majesty's Person or Estate,
but have sought to honor them both* 3. I never purposed to do or persuade any
thing whereby the Discipline might be advanced but by peaceable means,
endeavoring to keep within the compass of Law.
I John Vdall, ^ave been by due course of Law, convicted and condemned of
Felony, for penning and publishing a certain book called the Demonstration of
Discipline, In the Preface whereof some matter as also the manner of writing, I
confess to be in some part so bitter and undutifull, as deserves justly to
be censured and punished, and justly offensive to the Queens most excellent
Majesty: wherefore the trial of the Law imputing unto me all such defaults as
are in that book, and laying the punishment of the same in most grievous
manner upon me, and I seeing the grievousnesse of this offense, do most humbly
on my knees, as in the presence of God, submit my self to the mercy of her
Highness, being most sorry that so deep and just occasions should be given to
procure her Majesty's displeasure against me, promising that if it shall please
God to move her Royal heart to have compassion on me a most sorrowful
condemned person, that I will for ever hereafter forsake all undutifull and
dangerous courses, and demean my self dutifully and peaceably as becomes a
Minister of the Gospel, and as a loyal subject to the Queens most Excellent
Majesty.

At the same time that Doctor Bond was with me, I received a letter from a
Friend of mine, that did solicit Sir Walter Rawleigh for me, wherein were
these words. SIR Walter Rawleigh willed me to let you understand, that her
Majesty is informed of you, that you hold that the Church of England is no
Church, and the Sacraments of the same, no Sacraments, and that all her
Ecclesiast^^^^ ^^ws are against the word of God, and so her government, and
that all Ecclesiastical matters ought to be governed by a Presbytery, and she
her self to be subject to the censures thereof. And that for these things and
such like you are not worthy to live. But if you will write half a dozen lines
under your hand, unto Sir Walter concerning these opinions, that he may show
it to her Majesty* he hops to obtain your life. I know it is an easy thing
for you to answer all these things, and therefore do it with speed, and in your
writing to Sir Walter take knowledge, that he has sent you such word.

Hereupon I wrote a Letter to Sir Walter Rawleigh, and what I hold in these
points as follows.

To the right Honorable Sir WALTER RAWLEIGH, Knight, Lord Warden of the
Stannery.
MY duty being remembered unto your Lordship, I humbly thank your Honor for
your great and honorable care over me and for my good; whereof I trust you
shall never be ashamed, m^st humbly beseeching your good Lordship to be a mean
to appease her Majesty's indignation conceived against me, by means of some
accusations untruely suggested; for God is my witness, I have never had any
earthly thing in so precious account as to honor her Highness, and to draw
her Subjects to acknowledge with all thankefullnesse the exceeding blessings
that God bestows upon them by her Majesty's happy Government, whereof I trust
mine adversaries will be witnesses when I am dead. I have sent unto your
Lordship (as in perplexity I could upon the sodai^e) what I hold concerning
certain points declared unto me, as from your Lordship, praying that it would
please you to make known the truth thereof unto her Highness: And if neither
my submission heretofore delivered, nor these things now set down will be
accepted to draw her Highness of her gracious compassion to pardon me, that
yet it would please her Majesty (that the Land may not be charged with my
blood) to change my punishment from death to banishment. Thus trusting your
Lordship will vouchsafe me this favor, and that it will please her Majesty
thereupon graciously to consider of me, I humbly take my leave,

From the White-Lyon, Febr. 22. 1590. Your Lordships to command, John Vdall
prisoner.
1. I do believe and have often preached, that the Church of England is a part
of the true visible Church of Christ, and that the preaching of the word and
administration of the Sacraments therein are the holy Ordinances of God,
profitable and comfortable to every one that rightly partakes thereof. In which
regard I have bin and do yet desire to be a preacher in the same Church* and
have communicated in the Sacraments and Prayers therein, for the space of 7
years at Kingston, and about a year at Newcastle upon Tyne, immediately before
mine imprisonment, and therefore I do from my heart utterly renounce the
Schism whereinto the Brownists have fallen in condemning the Churches of
England, and separating themselves from communicating in the public Ministry
thereof.

2. I know no other but that the Statute Laws of this land do maintain the
holy Ministry of the word and Sacraments in such manner as any Christian may
with a safe conscience both administer therein and communicate therewithal.
Also that the Law which requires a subscription to the Articles of Religion so
far as they contain the Doctrine of Faith and Sacraments is agreeable to the
word of God.

3. I do believe that by the word of God her Majesty has, and ought to have* a
supreme Authority over all persons, in all causes, both Ecclesiastical and
Civil to enforce every man to do his duty and to be obedient in every thing
that is not contrary to the word of God. And if the Prince should command any
thing contrary to Gods word, it is not lawful for the Subjects to rebel or
resist, no not so much as in thought but with patience and humility to bear
all the punishments laid upon them* seeking only by Prayer to God, and
supplication to Authority, and such like peaceable means to have ^aults
amended.

4. I do believe that by the word of God, the Churches rightly reformed ought
to be governed Ecclesiastically by the Ministers, assisted with Elders, and
this is not my private judgment* but such as I have learned out of the word of
God, bin confirmed in by the writings of the most learned and godly men of
ancient and latter times, and have seen practiced with much peace and comfort
in the best reformed Churches in Europe, and even by those Exiles which her
Majesty to her great honor has hitherto protected.

5. I do believe that the Censures of the Church ought merely to concern the
Soul, and may not impeach any Subject, much less any Prince, in the liberty
of Body, Dominion, goods, or any earthly privilege whatsoever; and that
therefore the Papal Excommunication that deposes Princes, and freeth their
Subjects from their Allegiance or any part of Christian obedience to Civil
Authority, is blasphemous against God, injurious to all men, and directly
contrary to Gods word: neither do I believe that a Christian Prince ought
otherwise to be subject to the Censures of the Church, then our gracious Queen
professes her self to be unto the preaching of the word and administration of
the Sacraments according to the doctrine of our Church in Mr. Nowells Catechism
and the Hom: of the right use of the Church, at this day appointed publicly
to be read.

If I understand of any other thing that I am charged to hold as a strange and
private opinion, I would be willing to show my mind freely in it; for my
desire is, that her Highness might truly be informed of every thing that I
hold: so should I be sure to obtain her gracious favor, without which I do
not desire to live.




These things thus passed, I remained as before, without any great hope of
liberty, or fear of extremity, until the next Assizes drew near, at last
there came Mr. Nowell Deane of Paul's, and Mr. Doctor Andrews with a new
submission yet containing nothing one clause excepted) which was not in the
former, which I condescended unto, notwithstanding I refused presently to set
my hand unto it* (though they promised in the name of the Council, that in
yielding to it I should obtain pardon and liberty, because I would do nothing
without good advice and consideration.

The copy of the submission given me by Mr* Deane of Paul's, with his name to
it as follows.
I John Vdall have bin heretofore by due course of Law, convicted and condemned
of Felony, for penning and publishing a certain Book called The Demonstration
of Discipline, in the Preface whereof some matter, as also the manner of
handling of it. I confess in some part to be so bitter and undutifull* as
deserves justly to be censured and punished according to the Laws of th^s
Realm, established under her Highness, and justly offensive to the Queens
most excellent Majesty; wherefore I now seeing the grievousnesse of this
offense do most humbly on my knees and in the presence of God submit my self
to the mercy of her Highness, being most sorry that so deep and just occasion
should be given to procure her Majesty's d^^pl^^sure against me, promising that
if it shall please God to move her Majesty's Royal h^^rt to have compassion on
me, a most sorrowful condemned person, I will ever hereafter forsake all
undutifull seditious and dangerous courses, and demean my self dutifully and
peaceably, as becomme^h a Minister of the Gospel, and a loyal Subject of the
Queens most Excellent Majesty.

This is the true Copy of the submission ^^nt unto me from her Majesty's most
Honorable Privy-Councell. Alexander Nowell.

When I had weighed with my self, that the clause which is added may admit a
good interpretation, and the omitting of that which is left out of my former
submission, causes no ill sense of that which is set down I condescended
(being also advised thereunto by my good and godly friends) to set my hand unto
it, and thereupon wrote a Letter unto Mr. Nowell as follows.

RIght Worshipful Mr. Deane, I praise God with all my heart, that authority
has so good remembrance of my lamentable Estate, and yet more that by the same
I am for my form of submission to deal with a man of that piety and wisdom,
that you have bin worthtly in the Church long agone esteemed to be of, and so
have continued to t^^^ reverend age that you are come unto. It may please you
Sir to understand, that I have considered of the form of submission, that your
Worship brought unto me, and find nothing in it, but that in a good conscience
I can yield unto, for it requires not of me any dentall or disallowance of the
Cause of Discipline debated in the book, for which I am in question, the
substance of which doctrine I believe to be the undoubted truth of God, and
therefore ought never to deny or disallow it: Notwithstanding with my
persuasion I take God to witness, that I never purposed to do or persuade any
thing, whereby it might be advanced, but by peaceable means, endeavoring to
keep within the compass of Law* Further also the said form of submission,
charge me not with any malice against her Majesty, from which likewise I
acknowledge as in the presence of our Savior Christ, that is ready to come to
judge the quick and the dead, that I have bin always free and have carried a
Christian, loving and dutiful affection to her Majesty's Royal person and
estate, as I know by the word of God I ought to do, which being so, I have
resolved to satisfy the authority from which you brought me the said form of
submission, and at your good pleasure without further limitation simply to
subscribe it.

Good Mr. Deane in the bowels of Christ have compassion of my estate, more
ways lamentable then I can in a few or many words express, or (as I think)
any other but only the spirit that is taught to pray with groans that cannot be
uttered, and in such christian compassion by your favorable and earnest
mediation to the authority that may relieve me, procure my pardon and free
discharge, of the dangers and troubles wherein I am, that I may say with the
Prophet I shall not die, but live and declare the works of the Lord.

So shall not only my poor Wife and Children, but I hope many others praise
God for you in that respect, and my self as beholding unto you in a case of
life, continually pray for you your good estate to the Lord of life blessed for
ever.

Amen.

After I had thus set my hand hereunto, I advised also to write unto certain
of the Council and other honorable persons besides, partly to let them
understand in what sense I had yielded hereunto, and partly to entreat their
favor, and furthermore for my liberty: the copy of which letter (for it was
the same word for word to every one, the Title of their several estates
excepted) here ensues.

RIght Honorable my present lamentable condition enforces me in most humble
manner, to crave so much leisure of your Lordships from the weighty affairs of
the State, as to consider of these few lines. The Reverend Mr. Nowell Deane of
Paul's, and Mr. Doctor Andrews a few days ago brought me form of submission
(as they said) from authority with hope of favor for my life, if I would yield
unto it. Whereof having considered and finding nothing in it, but which I had
heretofore yielded unto, when Mr. Doctor Bond was with me, one clause excepted,
to wit, That the faults do deserve to be punished according to the Laws of
the Land. Which yet has no such words but may bear so good a sense as I
think may in such form submit my self, without either condemning the suite
for a further Reformation or my self as justly deserving by the Laws to die.
I cannot discern sufficient cause to refuse it, for by the hardest word that I
have by due course of Law bin convicted and condemned. I understand the form
of proceeding by ind^^ment Arraignement, Jury, Witnesses and such like as also
by that clause, that the manner of writing is in some part such as deserves
justly to be censured and punished by the laws of this Land. I mean of such
censures as the good Laws of this Land administered with Justice do ordain for
punishing of such offenses in the manner of writing which cannot be of death
without malice against her Majesty. From which (I take Almighty God to
witness) I have bin always free. In regard whereof I feared lest I might be
thought to stand too comentiously and undutifully with Authority, and too be to
careless of mine own estate, if I should not yield to such a form of
submission as they brought unto me. Wherein having yielded, as far as in
conscience I may, and as authority by their means requires of me. My most
humble suite to your Lordships is that in your Christian and honorable
compassion of my most lamentable estate, that that may please your Lordships by
your favorable mediation to her excellent Majesty, to further my most humble
suite, for my pardon and free discharge of these my grievous troubles. So shall
I be bound yet more heartily to praise God for your Honor, and to pray unto
God for your prosperous estate long to endure to the glory of Almighty God, and
to your own everlasting comfort.


WIthin four or five days after Mr. Doctor Andrews returned unto me,
signifying that all that was done was mistaken, for that was not the submission
that was meant of me, but another. Which when I had perused I sound it the same
(only the last clause left out) which was ostered me by the Judges at the
Assizes. And he said the Clarke to whom the making of the letter to Mr. Nowel
putting in one for another. And because I utterly refused to consult of it, as
having yielded before to so much as I might he prayed me to understand what I
took exceptions against and for what Reasons. So we entered into many
discourses, as first how the Discipline could be said to be against the Queens
Prerogative Royal seeing it was (as I said I did believe) expressed in the
Scriptures whereby all lawful privileges of Princes are warranted. Then we
debeted whether the Supremacy of a christian Prince be the same with an
Heathen, or diverse from it. After that whether the authority of Princes in
making Church laws be dejurt, or de facto only. And lastly of the most points
of discipline. Thus we continued 5 or 6 hours, and at last he would have no
answer of me then, but he prayed me to advise of it, for he would come again.
I answered, that the oftener he came the welcomer he should be, but I told him I
would not accept of it, yet he came twice after and took my reasons of my
refusal to yield thereunto, and promising me all the favor he could procure
me, he departed.

After this the Assizes approaching, and the general report being that it
would go hard with me. I being desirous to use any good means, did not only
solicit the Earl of Essex, and Sir Walter Rawleigh, who had heretofore dealt
for me, but also I was advised to write again unto Mr. Nowell, earnestly
charging him to take my case to heart, seeing he had promised to procure me
favor, whereupon I wrote unto him this letter following.

RIght Worshipful Mr. Nowell, as I did rejoice when I perceived that you were
employed to deal with me about my submission, because of that Reverend
estimation that you have bin so long of among the Worthies in the Church of
God, hoping, that I I should have found thereby, some comfortable means of
meditation unto authority for my release, so I am now occaisoned to fear that
all that credit with you are of, shall be used as an instrument to further and
hasten extremity upon me. For so much time being passed since I voluntarily
yielded to that submission which you brought unto me and no liberty appearing
from any place, but rather that being given out, that my submission shall be a
special means to hasten my death, and no way to procure my liberty, I am
constrained to write unto you, to let you understand, that as I look for that
end the next week at the Assizes at Kingston (where I have been a Preacher)
which has so long bin threatened, but (to the doubling of my torments deferred,
whereunto (I doubt not the Lord will strengthen me, as graciously he has
hitherto done. So I pray you as you will answer unto God for my blood, which I
am persuaded your credit being employed to the uttermost (as in the word and
faith of a Christian you promised) might have preserved that you would so take
my case to heart, as it may enforce you to leave no stone unturned which may
either further my liberty, or at lest clear your conscience from being any way
accessory to my death. For it will one day be an heavy thing to your heart, to
think that you should be set on work, and the account that is worthily made
of you, employed under pretense, yea and as it were with assurance of life and
liberty, to draw that from a Preacher and Professor of the gospel which
afterward shall be used to hasten his end: and you will say it had bin better
that you had never bin of any reckoning, then to be made an Instrument to
further such an action. This I write unto you not in any troubled affection
with the fear of death, for I thank God I am willing to end my days, and (if
it please the Lord) even in this manner and hope that my death shall further
the cause, for which I suffer more then my life. But lest I should neglect any
means which might seem to be a furtherance to prevent the same, or leave that
duty unperformed unto you, which I take my self in conscience bound to
discharge, the Lord make us willing and able to discharge every good duty,
that he enjoyneth us to his glory, the good of his Church, and our own comfort,
whether by l^fe or death.


About the same time came a Letter from the King of Scotland to a Scottish
Merchant, one Mr. Johnson lying in London, to be delivered to her Majesty (as
was said) being written in my behalf, as he had done once before when I was
close prisoner; this Letter did the Merchant deliver to her Majesty, and the
Dean of Paul's upon my Letter went to the Council, whereby whatsoever was
wrought, as soon as the Judges heard that I was brought to Kingstone where the
Assizes were then kept, I was immediately returned unto the White-Lyon in the
evening before the first day thereof. Afterward Mr. Johnson had the Copy of the
Kings Letter sent unto him, which then appeared to be written not for me alone,
but also for the rest of my Brethren the Ministers in prison for the same cause
of Discipline, the tenor of which Letter here follows.

RIght Excellent high and mighty Princess, our dearest Sister and Cosen, in
our heartiest manner we recommend us unto you: Heareing of the apprehension of
Mr. Udall and Mr. Cartwright and certain other Ministers of the Evangell
within your Realm, of whose good erudition and fruitful travells in the
Church we hear a very credible commendation; howsoever that their diversity
from the Bishops and others of your Clergy, in matters touching them in
conscience, has bin a mean by their dilation to work them your misliking; at
this present we cannot (weighing the duty which we owe to such as are afflicted
for their conscience in that profession) but by our most effectuous and earnest
Letter interpone us at your hands to any harder usage of them for that cause:
Requesting you most earnestly, that for our cause and intercession it may
please you to let them be relieved of their present strait, and whatsoever
further accusation or pursuit depending on that ground, respecting both their
former merit, in setting forth of the Evangell the simplicity of their
conscience in this defense, which cannot well be their let by compulsion, and
the great slander which could not fail to fall out upon their further
straiting for any such occasion, which we assure us your zeal to Religion,
besides the expectation we have of your good will to pleasure us, will
willingly accord to our request, having such proofs from time to time of our
like disposition to you, in any matters which you recommend unto us. And thus
Right Excellent, Right High and Mighty Princes our dear Sister and Cozen, we
commit you to Gods good protection.

From Edenborough the 12the Day of June. 1591.
The just Copy of the Kings Letter, sent to her Majesty.

PResently upon these things fell out that wretched matter of that lewd fellow
H^cket, whereby the adversary did take occasion so to slander the truth and to
disgrace the Professors of the same unto her Majesty, that I thought it
bootelesse to sue. And so I did little til the Lord Chancellor was dead and
forgotten by such as were sorry for it, so that about Easter term following, I
sued for liberty to go to Church, which was denied me being a condemned man,
but by the Lord Treasurers means I got a copy of my Indictment, which before I
could not obtain.

HEreupon I getting a pardon framed according to the Indictment, sent it with a
Petition by my Wife to the Council, who referred me to the Archbishop, unto
whom I both sent diverse Petitions and dutiful Letters, and also got many of
my friends both honorable personages and others, to sue to him, yet could not
his good will be gotten. At last the Turkey merchants having my consent to go
for a time into Guynea to teach their people, that abide in that place, if they
could procure my liberty sent unto him for his consent* who promised his good
will so that they would be bound that I should go indeed, when I had my
liberty. But when two of the Ancients of the Company went unto him for his
hand thereunto, he would not yield it* unless they would be bound not only
that I should go (which they were willing unto) but also that I should tarry
there, till I had her Majesty's license to come thence.

This Condition they could not yield unto* for that I denied to go upon any
such ground, so was their suite and my hope of liberty at an end, saving that
one Mr. Ca^ell who had bin the first beginner of it, and being to go into
Turkey did most affect it, moved the Deane of Paul's in it, who thereupon wrote
unto my Lord Keeper, persuading him of the conveniencie of that Journey for me,
and my fitness thereunto, which letter when he received he did so deal with
the Archbishop, as they both promising at their next meeting at Court to deal
with her Majesty, to sign my pardon, that so I might have liberty to go the
Voyage.

FJNJS.

