A PLEA FOR THE Common-Laws OF England: OR, An Answer to a BOOK ENTITVLED, A
good work for a good Magistrate: Or, a short Cut to great quiet. (Published by
Mr. Hugh Peter's:) So far as concerns his Proposals touching the said Laws. By
R. Vaughan of Grays-Inne.

-- Tractent fabrilia fabri.
Ignorantia Juris litigiosa, non Scientia. Cicero.
London, Printed for Francis Tyton, and are to sold at his Shop, at the three
Daggers in Fleetstreet, near the Inner Temple-gate. 1651.

To the Parliament OF ENGLAND, The SUPREME Power of this Commonwealth.
Right Honorable,
Mr. P. has dedicated his Book to you; so does the Author hereof his, wishing
no better earthly Tribunal to be judged by. Mr. P. writes against the Law out
of a Prejudice, and I out of affection to it; we may be both biased: you are
the Judges of it. I wish no greater earthly Happiness to this Nation then the
continuance of the ancient Common Laws of it, (some exuberancies of it being
lopt off, and some other parts of it, which by a non-use are buried in oblivion
being taken away) and the frequent supply of good and upright Ministers of it;
for our Law in it self is one of the most excellent humane Laws that any Nation
in the World has; The Common-Laws of this Land were never originally the
Dictates of any Conquerours Sword, or the Placita or good will and pleasure of
any King of this Nation, or to speak impartially and freely, the results of any
Parliament that ever sat in this Land, but it was a Lex non scripta, and a Jus
(as the Civilian says of his Law) quod usus approbavit; nam diuturni mores
consensu utentium comprobati, legem imitantur: it is now a Lex scripta, and we
say, That it consists of laudable and righteous Customs, iterated and
multiplied in their common use among the people of this Land time out of mind;
and so to us carried down through the successive Ages of many hundred years
ago, upon the two wheels of Reason and Convenience; so that what of it was
approved at first, and has since wanted these two helps to bring it down to
us, has by a tacit consent of the people (i.e.) by the neglect and non-use of
it, lost the force of a Law: And the other part of it, which by long use,
experience, and trial, was found beneficial, and for common good, was
deservedly baptized with the name of Common Law, it being almost a
comprehensive Rule and measure of all men's actions in this Land, how diverse
soever Actions and Accidents be, and how full soever of motion and mutations,
which (I humbly submit to your wisdoms) whether Mr. Ps. new Law can reach.
Besides, the Common Law has been so far honored by several Parliments in this
Land, as to have several Statutes made in affirmance of it; so that it like is
gold (I will not say seven, but seven times seven) tried, I shall trouble you
no longer. But take leave and remain

Your faithful Servant R. Vaughan.
Grays Inn 20. of June.
To M. Hugh Peter's.
SIR,
HAD not your Pen awaked the evil spirit of the Pasquillers of this Age, and
also given Sail to the wishes of such that would have the Justice and Innocence
of our Law to have no safe retreat for it self and its honest professors from
their debasements: I should not have ventured upon so early a Remedy against
your Books getting esteem in the world: for I am told, that it is better and
safer to meet a danger when it first moves toward us, then to encounter it in
its nearer approaches; every step and progress it makes, rendering it more
invincible, and them more unsafe that withstand it; especially if the danger be
seconded with the hurrying swindge of such men as will do a thing, because they
will do it, and have not other reason for what they do: I am sorry you should
open so wide a Casement for evil men to see the face and complexion of your
spirit, as to our Law, which (you may assure your self) is not so clear and
serene from the spots of mistakes and irregularities, as I could wish his were
who has done so much service to the Parliament as you have done: If I make a
severer construction of your meaning then you intended, you may rather thank
your own words, which made so false a report of your sense and meaning to my
understanding, then blame me, who could not find out a better Index of the
spirit and reason of what you proposed. Had I been to deal with an adversary to
the Common Cause we both have adhered to, I assure you I should have treated
and handled him in a rougher accent, if I had had the like advantage as I have
against you: I hope therefore you will be satisfied, that this answer is not
out of disrespect to you, but out of necessity to justify that which is good
and innocent, against which you writ, because you have heard ill of it, and not
because you know experimentally in it those mischiefs which you propose to be
reformed. I am

Sir, Yours affectionately. R. Vaughan.
Grayes Inn, 20. June, 1651.
An Introduction.
I Should never have troubled the Press with thi^ answer to Mr. P. his Book did
I not know the aptness of wel-disposed and credulous people to adore the
dictates of men of his Profession and conversation, and to take them up upon
trust out of the respect they have of their persons (and of his more
especially, whose indevors have been constant, and whose bent has always been
set for the public good of this Commonwealth.) For I see not any thing in his
Book as to the Law (and I will not meddle beyond the bounds of that profession,
whereof (...) am a mean Professor, and shall be glad of any occasion to assert
its justice and innocence) that can tempt a serious man to put Pen to Paper to
give it answer; it being rudis indigestaque moles, a throng or crowd of
unmarshalled expressions, full of contradictions, repetitions and
incoherencies, like the Tohu vabohu in the beginning of the Creation; now I
say, because the well-meaning or plain honest man, to whom his Book may come,
may not exclaim against the present Laws (which they know not, and which yet
are their birthright, and one of the greatest earthly Privi^dges they have,)
because Mr. P. is pleased (...) undervalue them, upon a very slender or ^o
knowledge of its foundations; I have thus ventured to be public. I may safely
affirm the Common Law is not so bad as he thinks it: it is no such jus vagum
and incertum, no such leaden Rule as gives neither security to men's persons, or
certainty to their proprieties, but it does consist ex Regulis de Jure
fabricatis; it is the product of length of time, and variety of occurrences
suited and squared, (or (at the worst) not inconsistent) with the Rules of
Scripture and Right Reason; and whatsoever part of the Law does not derive its
Parentage hence, is contrary to, or inconsistent herewith, is by all Lawyers
adjudged to be cashiered out of their approbation or counte^ance, as its refuse
and excrescences, and esteemed an obsolete and useless thing: now that Mr. P.
should be its adversary, and call it the monuments of Tyranny, and condemn it
to the Faggot, without just cause, is hard: I have therefore endeavored in a
candid way to undeceive those, who may gain credulity with him, so far as
concerns the Law in his Book, and (if it may be) to reconcile him to his
wronged (though innocent) friend, and I lay these rude and sud^ conceptions at
the feet of the same trib^nal as he has done, the Parliament of England.

That in his Book he holds that, which with some men is a maxim, Legentem
oportet credere, I will not make so severe a construction of his words as to
affirm (because I know him too well, to be so uncharitable toward him) yet I
must say that he seems nothing less (as to the greatest part of what he writes
touching the Law) then to impose upon men's intellects, that which carries very
little hint of Scripture, and color of reason along with it; we live now in a
free Commonwealth, where we hope there will be allowed no such dictators: As
our L^ has not any Principum placita for any of (...) foundations (which the
Civil Law (that is much admired by Mr. P.) has) so it will not admit of
Clericorum placita, which his Book seems to impose upon us. There is no Law
this day in the world, that does secure a man's Rem and personam with more
impregnable fences against wrong and incroachment, then the Common Law of
England does; and I will dare to say, gives speedier relief notwithstanding all
the quick dispatches and decision ^ens rights, that are pretended to be made by
the Civil Laws, if those may be credited, that have had the experience of both;
our Law may be truly said to be the result of soundest reason, and it is so;
for it was sifted through the Sive of many successive Ages; and yet I dare not
but say that it may have some chaff still remaining in it, (nay I know it has)
yet the present Authority are by little and little ventilating that chaff away;
it cannot be done all at once, and it is not to be done without much
consideration, least by plucking the Tares from amongst it, the Wheat be plucked
up also; and this Age does afford many honest, able and wise Judges and
Professors of it, that will most willingly and impartially help to sever
between its Corruption and Constitutions; and Mr. P. who has said much in his
haste against it (were he better acquainted with its principles) I believe
would unsay what he has said upon a more deliberate review of what he has
written and published. He has proposed in his Postscript of his Book, sect. 6.
That no Book should be published, or come to public view, which should not
pass the approbation of some judicious men in every faculty. Had he observed
this rule himself, I dare say, his Book had hardly, (if ever) seen the Press
when he must have consulted some of most Professions about it, and had their
consents. I do not marvel that he has so much transgressed the Rules of Reason
in this point, when I consider he so unadvisedly meddles beyond the line and
limits of his own calling, and speaks against those things which he never had
so narrow inspection into, as he ought to have, that will write of their
defects or corruptions. It is usual with God, in the course of his providence
to permit men to lapse into strange and ridiculous absurdities, when they rush
upon the reformation of those Professions which they have but a weak knowledge
of, and of which they have hardly taken the rudest view or prospect. The
Harmony of the World lies in the diversity of Professions, bounded with their
particular limits: and in the gradual subordination of the one unto the other;
And herein is the infinite wisdom of God seen most excellently that he has
appointed every man his place, and made him Steward of some part of the
Creation, and a distinct minister of his Providence, the beauty whereof does
much shine in men's keeping within the Circle of those Callings and professions
to which God (by a wise steerage of their dispositions, and by diversifying the
tendencies of their affections has shaped and timber'd their Spirits. I would
not be thought to speak this as a bar to any man from a rational and generous
Inquiry into other Professions then his own (provided he be not more abroad
then at home, where he should be,) but to advise men from a rash censure of
what they know not, and from taking up against any Profession those faint
Arguments of men, (viz.) clamours and calumnies, the common sanctuary and
refuge of such who are either malicious, or (as to the things they speak or
write against) blind in the colors of good and evil. Mr. P. in the Title Page
of his Book, tells the Reader, that facile est inventis addere; I must confess,
when I was going to read it, I expected some thing in the Reformation of the
Law, that was a res inventa; but was so foiled in my expectation, that I found
nothing new offered, that is worthy a meaner consideration then that of them to
whom he dedicates his Book; for either he has proposed that which was many
years before proposed, and is now under Consideration in Parliament to reform;
or what is already provided by old Laws long since enacted, and want nothing
but the power of the Parliament to enliven them, and to give them a
Resurrection from under the nasty rubbish of neglect (where it has been long
interred) into a more vigorous actuation and liveliness; for what else Mr. P.
has in his Book, it is either (as I humbly conceive) perplexed and obscure,
impertinent, imposble, or but unseasonably proposed: but herein I will not be
mine own Judge, because the dint of Mr. Ps. Book is against my own Profession;
and now we will see what his Proposals to the Parliament hold forth, and submit
it to the consideration of the best and wisest men. And whatsoever shall be the
censure and judgment of good and wise men touching these sudden lines of mine,
I shall quietly and without contradiction sit under the Majesty and Authority
of their Sentence.

Having thus far made my introduction to Mr. P. his Proposals for a new method
of Laws for this Commonwealth; I come now to answer his particular Propositions.
THat Mr. P. has published all and more then he knows touching the Law, I
verily believe; but whether he be willing to learn what he knows not, I cannot
tell; had he known the good of it as well as exclaimed against what he
conceives (or is told) is bad in it, I should not have doubted of more
candidness then he expresses in his Book; but let us see what Proposal first
appears.

Mr. P. first Proposes, page 28. of his Book, That Registers be settled in every
Parish, kept every year by two men chosen to that work; and all Lands, Houses
and Alienations entered therein and Copies transferred to the County Town. I
suppose Mr. P. means, That a Registry be settled, etc. Else there can be no
sense made of the first part of his Proposal; I know who writes it. And
therefore I say once for all, I shall not cavil at those things in his Book
which are ingramatical, and so near neighbors to nonsense; if by any means I
may guess at his design and end. This Proposal might have been spared, it being
already under the consideration of the Parliament, and modelled in a far better
and less chargeable way, then this is; For what a number of Registers will the
Nation be troubled with, if every Parish must have one, (when perhaps there
will not be one Deed throughout the year, (at leastwise in some years) to be
Recorded in some Parishes.) there must at least be 10000 Registers, besides the
County Register in the Commonwealth, for there are so many Parishes or
thereabouts in the Nation; and it will be hard to find in every Parish so many
able and honest men as can and will be faithful in the careful transcribing and
transferring those Records. To the second Proposal, touching the Seal with the
States Arms, I shall say nothing.

The third Proposal, is, That in every County, every hundred yearly choose three
men to be Peace makers, to hear and determine all common Controversies between
man and man, from whom they may not Appeal. That Peacemakers or Dayes-men
should be is certainly a good thing, agreeable to the mind and will of the
great Lawgiver of the World, and Awards and Arbitrements are part of that
Common Law which Mr. P. is so much against; but in a different way then he
would have it; for we say, that an Arbitrator or Peacemaker (as he terms him)
in our Law, Is a Judge indifferently chosen by both parties to end that thing
which is in controversies between them, and which they submit or refer to his
determination ad Arbitriu^. An Arbitrator has an Arbitrary Power, while he
keeps close to the thing submitted, and so far there is no appeal from him, his
sentence being absolutely conclusive, and not controulable by any Judge. But
here the Peacemakers are to be chosen by the Hundred in every County, and they
shall hear and determine every Common controversy, whether the parties submit
their Cases to them or no; and that without any appeal from them, which in
effect, is but thus much; Three men (be they wise or unwise, honest or
dishonest, fools or knaves, or both) shall be chosen by the plain and generally
ignorant Country men of every Hundred, out of themselves, to hear all common
Controversies between man and man, and to judge and determine them Arbitrarily:
And let them judge for fear or favor, right or wrong, their Decree or Sentence
shall be like the Medes and Persians, it shall be the ne-plus ultra to every
man in every Hundred. Whether this will not be of the most dangerous
consequence to the Commonwealth that can be, let him that has but half an eye
be the judge.

In the 38. page of his Book, Mr. P. would have two or more Peace makers
appointed in every Town, or Place or Ward to hear the differences and Civil
Controversies between man and man, before any go to Law, and if possible let
them end it; and he would have that done only by persuading: Surely, Mr. P. did
not warily peruse his Book after he set down his conceptions: This and the
precedent proposition are direct contradictions.

In the 28. page he would have no appeal from the Peace makers, but their
Sentence to de definitive; and page 38. he would have them only to hear it
before any go to Law, and labor to determine by persuasion if they can; I have
a far better opinion of his last Proposal then his first.

Mr. P. further says, The happiness in Government will never lie in Laws but
men: But he must not deny but good Laws and good men together may make it more
happy. And further he says, That all good men carry good Laws in their bosoms:
And do they out carry bad also? have they not a Law of Sin and Death, as well
as a Law of the Spirit of life? a Law in their members as well a Law in their
mnide? We know good men err daily, and the best of men sometimes; there is no
infallibility in their judgments, and no impossibility but a good man may be
wrongfully biased.

In the 36. page of your Book, the sixth head, you verify what is said next
before, That there are godly men not very wise nor just: We could wish they all
were both godly, just, and wise, that should have the Judicatory Seat of
decision and determination of men's interest and proprieties, according to the
good Laws made and ordained by Parliaments, and not by Peacemakers.

In Page 31. Section four, He tells us; All Entayls may be cut off for ever,
and men have liberty to bestow what they have, to whom they please, the Eldest
son having a double portion. Observe the mischief and ambiguitie of this
proposition. The mischief of it, because it designs the unsettlement of most
estates in this Nation, though conveyed upon never so valuable a consideration,
and settled forty, fifty, nay a hundred years ago, yea, though (if it should be
cut off) the prodigal Father, or other Ancestor have never so many holes in the
bottom of his purse, and be worse then the Infidel that takes not care for his
own Family; is this good council, M. P. That poor and helpless children should
without any respect had to them, be deprived of a livelihood intended and
provided for them, when none was wronged, no creditor in being; and when the
name of an estate, and not the reality of it, shall make the simple Creditor to
trust beyond discretion? for my part I think Caveat Creditor, as well as
Emptor, if he trust.

Secondly, The ambiguity of it. First, Cut of Entayls for ever, then bestow as
you please, (That is,) Entayl your estate again; what signifies this? you must
explain your self to the world, to whose censure you have submitted your book.
I and some others may conjecture what you mean. And you say, the Eldest son
shall have his double portion, as it is reasonable he should; but he will be
deprived, if you will have Estates tail to be cut off, and the Creditor let
loose a against him as well as others without respect; or else your proposition
will be partial, which a Law for public advantage should not be.

In the 32. page and the head, M. P. says; For a Body of Laws he knows none,
but what should be the result of sound reason; nor any such reason, but what
the God of wisdom has appointed; therefore the moral Law (called them ten
words) is best, and the Judicials of Moses and Solomon's rules and expements
added thereto. All honest and just lawyers will concur with you; but Mr. P.
you know there is not in all these, an express rule to judge every particular
occurring, and contingent case that happens by; why then may there not be
Regulae ex illis juribus sumptae, to decide contingent cases, (that fall not
within the letter, though they fall within the meaning and general provision
of those rules) as experience and occasion shall require; I hope you will not
deny but that this ought to be; then what is in our Law contrary to these Laws?
Let that fall to the dust, and I hope there will be none that will offer to
support them from falling: and Mr. P. must know that there is a Christian Law
of Policy, that does many times limit the law of nature and right reason, as I
need make no other explanation to him then this that there is a law of God,
that thou shall not kill; And there is a Law of the same God, that thou shall
judicially take away man's life, where his offense is commensurate to life. Here
is natural reason, and the Law of God, that I should not kill; and here is
politic reason, and a Law of God, that I should not withhold my hand from
blood in a judicial way. M. P. does further wish the Lawyers to urge these for
Law; And not those old obsolete Presidents, which will hardly prove or make a
Seamans suit, to fit our occasion: We urge nothing for Law that is against
these, or incoherent with them; if we do, we desire M.P. to tell us where, and
prove it, and we shall follow his Council else his Ipse dixit will not drive us
out of our Reason, or good opinion of the Common Laws of this Land. What he
means by our Presidents (which for the most part will be justified to be the
result of sound reason, if he will venture a calm and Christian like argument
about it) not proving a Seamans suit to fit our occasion. I know not it is
intended for a Proverb; but a very poor and perplexed one, and nothing to the
purpose to prove any thing against our law; if it be (I am sure) it will hardly
suit with my understanding, upon this occasion either to comprehend or Answer
it.

He says next in Page 33. If any lawyer be continued, let him be allowed; and
so page 43. Pro. 15. and let him plead for Justice sake; but why not continued?
is the profession unlawful? sure I am, you cannot prove it; or is it from the
corruption of some of the professors of it, that you argue against it? then let
them be found out that are corrupt: and when they are found and Adjudged so,
let them be suspended from practice, and otherwise punished according to
demerit; nigro carbone notentur. But that there should be no Lawyers, because
Fees are bottomless, is no Argument; and if you would have fewer Lawyers, be
instant with God that the peoples manners may be amended and that the Gospel
may have a more influence upon them, and that men would do as they would be
done unto; and then (if you and we succeed in our Addresses to God in this
respect,) there will be very little need of Law or Lawyers; but while Crescit
in orb dolus, there will be need of Law, and honest, and wise Lawyers. And we
may bless God that provided us such remedies. As for their Fees, let them be
regulated, as shall be thought fit by the State. You are angry with them, and
therefore no competent Judge over them.

Page 33. Sect. 6. Mr. P. says, Wills and Testaments may be Acknowledged by
the next two Justices of the peace; before whom they may be proved without any
charge, and then entered into the former Register.

But what then? when they are acknowledged, Do you suppose all Wills to be good
then? and must the Justices be Judges and Interpreters of the Wills and
Testaments of such as devise estates? are they all throughout the Nation so
quicksighted, as to discern the Intentions of Testators in their Wills? and
Judges fit to decide whether men make Wills with disposing memories and
understandings, or no? can they with ease reconcile the seeming contradictions
that often happen in diyng men's Wills, by reason of those ignorant persons that
many times they are necessitated to employ to write down their Wills? are they
so able Judges, where several Wills arise in competition one with the other to
decide the controversy aright, which should take place? and do they know how
to determine, whether, and when a Nuncupative, or a Verbal Will shall avoid a
written Will or no? If so, then let the design of your proposal prosper; if
not, you may blush to propose a thing that will prove an apparent mischief to
the Land.

Page 33. Proposition 7. Mr. P. advises, That all the old Records in the Tower
may be burnt as the Monuments of Tyranny. But he proves them no such thing;
there may be there many useless and antiquated Records; but shall all be burnt
for their sakes; are there not many Records there which may give much light to
this and the successive Ages, to see the spirit and temper of many former Ages
past. My Lord Bacon, who I am sure has the esteem of a wise man where his
Books were known, gives a contrary advice, That the ancient Volumes of the Laws
should not be quite extinguished, but at least remain in Liberaries, that in
cases of weighty consequence, we might consult the mutations of Laws past, and
sprinkle modern matters with Antiquity: Bacon Advanc. of Learning. page 452.
Aph. 63.
what reason Mr. P. has not to be of the same mind, I know not. I should have
been very glad he would have offered some thing to make the world believe he
knew it himself.

Page 34. Proposition 8. Mr. P. proposes, That no Lawyer might plead at any
Committee: but why Mr. P? nothing but a sic volo. I will suppose it must be one
or all of these three Reasons he would give; when he will not set down his own
reasons. 1. That every Committee is so wise, that it is impossible for them to
receive any satisfaction or information in any case that shall come before
them, or in any circumstance of any case, more then they of themselves can find
out. Or 2ly. That every Committee is so weak as to be hurried to and fro, and
unsettled in their judgments by the fallacies of Lawyers (and not otherwise,
for by offering Truth, their judgments are settled and fixed;) Or 3ly. Mr. P.
must intend, That every man is able to manage his own Cause to the best
advantage of Truth and himself; which I will not affirm, though he do so in
Page 42. Pro. 13. But Mr. P. you will find Lawyers to be necessary at many
Committees to plead, and to help them to overcome many difficult cases that may
lie before them; and you may assure your self (if you please) it is very safe,
many times, that for the honor of the Parliament it should be so, if the roving
and tedious Oratory of some Lawyers could be bounded within the due confines of
the Truth of those particular Cases they handle, as they are truly
circumstantiated.

The 9. Proposition in the same page, and the 18. in page 46. and the 2. in p.
35. are against arrests, and imprisonments, and for Summons to be left at men's
houses; this is already answered by the Philizers, who have offered very strong
and plausible reasons for the process of Arrest, and against Summons; which
they have published in Print, and submitted to the Parliament; under whose
consideration it now stands. And I must tell Mr. P. That some of them, that
have published these reasons, are neither of mean parts, Piety, or fidelity to
the Present Government. Mr. P. would not have any put in Prison, or punished
with a loathsome Prison, as his words are, before hearing whether he be guilty
or no. i. e. before he say, Guilty or not Guilty: but, Sir, how many men when
they are summoned in order to be heard, will come? especially as you set your
words, Any put in Prison; and when they appear and are heard, how many, or
rather how few will confess any thing against Themselves, and to their own
prejudice? as indeed they may not be urged to do: But in page 51. Proposition
2. Mr. P. Seems to allow of Prisons for criminal causes, though before he would
not have any put in Prison.

The 9th Prop. in the 34. Page, is, That none shall distrain for Taxes or other
Debt; but the Debtors outward door to be carried to the Town house; and as many
other new doors as shall be set up the shame and danger hereof will urge
payment. Why not a distress for Taxes? is not the doors taking away a kind of
distress? But should that be admitted, which you propose touching Taxes
(because it is a novelty, and may tickle the fancy of people that affect
changing, and are never well, while they are fixed, but always so when they can
toss and tumble themselves in the element of Mutation) yet how can your remedy
be adequate to the case of other Debts, can 10000 l. or 20000 l. debt, be
speedily got in by plucking off from a Debtors house the outward door? I am not
able to understand it, and I doubt the Reader neither.

Page 35. Prop. 3. Lying long in Prison before Sentence, and delay of Justice,
is cruelty: It is so, and I could wish from my soul it were not so, and that
herein you would be more earnest, and that Committees were not as much in fault
as the execution of the Law in this point; and that Prisons were kept by
honester and more conscionable men; such being indeed generally the very scum
and refuse of mankind; and for delay of Justice to men, our Law says, Nulli
negabimus, nulli deferemus justiciam; and for the execution of our Law, and
expedition of Justice and Right to every man, there was never greater care than
our now Judges of the Law do and have undergone.

Page 36. Prop. 5, 6, 7, 8. Are in substance thus much, that you would have one
or more Committees of good, Wise and just men, to receive the request and
advice of every particular Town and County for the obtaining of true Justice,
and hindering of Suits; and that no man or Court of men be always above Justice.
Sir, may not there rather be a view taken of the present Law, and what is good
in it countenanced, and its exuberances and gray headed errors expunged, with
the advice of them that have thoroughly studied it, and a digest made thereof;
and what it wants, supplied by such new Laws as it needs, it having already
almost a salve for every soar, which is one of the most excellent fruits of the
Age of our Law, that by running its course through so many Ages past, and
meeting with successive contigencies, it has brought down Rules to us framed
from experience of the former Ages: so that there is scarce a Case that wants a
Rule of justice and reason to guide it by. I may presume the Parliament, and
most of the best of men in this Commonwealth, see less need of your Committee,
then what is here proposed for the reformation of the Law.

And Mr. P. says, no man or Court of men are to be always above Justice.
AIWAIES! No, not as much as ONCE above it; and yet if you would have no Appeal
from your Peacemakers. or your 5. or 7. men, in Page 39. pro. 11. They must in
all likelihood be above justice, and be gratified with the privilege of
Impunity. 37. page, pro. 8. M. P. urges, That Privileges should be taken away,
that bring damage or hurt to the Common wealth. This is very good; provided it
be apparent that the State is prejudiced thereby; otherwise the privileges of
the City of London, and other great Cities and places may be impeached in that
which is an apparent good to them; but until M. P. does come out of his
subterfuge of Generals, into the plain field of particulars; as we are
disabled, so we are not willing to give him any further answer in this point.

Page 39 pro. 10. M. P. proposes that to the end That Justice may be near to
all men, that there be in every City, Town, or Hundred five or seven able men
appointed to determine all controversies for Debts, and Strifes, and any three
of them present to have power to give sentence: And afterward he proposes,
That in weighty cases, they may consult with learned Advocates, and Divines.
That Justice may run in clear streams by every man's door, it is already
provided by our Law: The learned Judges, (being bred up with much expense of
money and time, and wading through a Toylsom study; and therefore knowing better
to decide aright all controversies for Debt, etc. then any private Country
Gentlemen, whom he would have to be a Committee) do ride Circuit throughout all
the parts of the land to hear and determine (not arbitrarily, but by just rules
known to the people, whereof they have had long experience,) all causes of what
nature soever they be, whether Criminal or Civil. Then I pray tell us what need
is there of such a Committee, as you speak of, and of such a number of
Committee men as your proposal would have? seven in every City; seven in every
Town; and seven in every Hundred: Many Counties in the Nation have thirty or
forty Towns; besides Cities, and Hundreds; what a number of Committee men must
there be then in some Counties? at least 200. and who must pay them Salary?
must not the State? or will they serve for naught? No sure. Sir, I must tell
you, that you have not well considered what you proposed; do you think that
your proposal can tempt men out of their reasons, and conveniences to embrace
such a dangerous trifle of novelty? No Sir. Frustra fit per plur a quod fieri
potest per pauciora.

And for their consultation in weighty matters with learned Advocates and
Divines, the Judges in all weighty cases do consult again and again with
learned Advocates and Counselors; but with Divines they do not, except in
cases of conscience; And I could wish Ministers would forbear proposing for
themselves, and to labor to enlarge their privilege, to meddle beyond their
own calling, which is work enough of it self for them to do; this would be more
profitable to their Flocks, and more honorable to themselves.

Page ibid. pro. 11. He would have no Appeal from the sentence of these five,
or seven men, but in weighty matters; and that appeal is to be from themselves
to themselves; seven of them shall have power to reverse or confirm the
Judgment of seven, or a less number; or if yet an Appeal must be, it shall not
reach out of the County, for many weighty reasons: Thus much I understand of
this proposition; The greatest part of the rest of it is a riddle to me; but
why no Appeal? and if an Appeal to the seven men, or if from the seven men, not
from the Counnty? the reason given is: For many weighty reasons; what a Chimera
is this? I am sorry the world should be troubled (I say no more of it) with
such impertinencies.

Page 43. pro. 14. Let all men's testimonies be taken on oath, by notorial
writings; yet so as witnesses may be examined by word of mouth, each apart; The
testimonies of witnesses on oath are put in writing in some Courts, and
examined apart; and some other Courts by experience find it not fit so to do,
but to examine them coram populo: where Judges, Jury, and Council pro and con
watch the halting of false witnesses, if they should swear falsely; and before
so many observers of their Testimonies false witnesses very rarely escape
undiscovered.

Page 47. and 48. pro. 9. Mr. P. would have partiality prevented; then let him
not speak against the present Law, and its judges; for we know none more
impartial, neither do we believe any can be, that shall come in their stead.

Page 48. He would have great punishments inflicted on them that take gifts, or
pervert Judgment: Charge any of the present Ministers of the Law therewith,
and prove it, and you shall find the Law it self has provided them punishments
severe enough, Mag. Chapter is that nulli venden us justic. etc.
and more commensurate to those offenses then we suppose you can offer.

Page 48. pro. 20. M. P. would propose That sore punishment be inflicted upon
false witnesses. The Law of England has provided punishment sore enough for
this also.

Page 49. pro. 21. Some able men must be apppointed, to be ambulatory or
Itinerant from Court to Court to observe the injustice of these several Courts
that Mr. P. would have set up. And to inform the State of those, that they may
be punished Mr. P. Would have set up in every City, Town, and Hundred, five or
seven able men, which in each of those will (as I told the Reader) amount (in
some Counties) to 200. men and upwards: And there must be one in every City,
Town, and Hundred to observe the Irregularities of these particular Committees
(for I cannot see how it can be otherwise) which in the several Committees of a
County (by Mr P. his rule) will amount to 30. or 40. men; for fewer cannot well
observe the injustice of these several Committees that will constantly sit.
Will not this make a lean State? that it should maintain all these officers in
every County of the Commonwealth? there being 73. Counties in the Nation, and
by Mr. P. proposal there being near 230. or 240. officers in most of the said
Counties, except those which are Counties of Cities; I think the Nation will
not have much cause to rejoice in such a Multiplicity of officers.

Page 51. Mr. P. would have no malefectors against the light of nature and
Civil society escape unpunished, etc. No more will the Laws already established
in the land, nor its professors; they will all approve of this proposal.

Page 53. pro. 4. Mr. P. would have no man or Court of men to pardon any
offenders; what? not any ANY offenders, let the Circumstances or his case be
what it will, nor no Court of men to pardon? not the Parliament? this is the
very spirit and Quintessence of Cruelty (though I think Mr. P. means it not)
not warranted either by the Law of God or man, and though the next line under
this proposal be Quotations of Scripture; yet to warrant this proposition in
the latter of it by these Scriptures, is Humano Capiti cervicem jungere
equinam; and indeed most of the Places of Scripture that are cited to justify
Mr. P. propositions, are extremely misapplied. And many times contrary to the
very Tenor of what he proposes, as if they were annexed at adventure.

Page 53. pro. 5. Let no difference be made between Jew or Gentile, Bond or
Free, stranger or Native in Criminal or Civil things, etc.

There is no difference between them made by our Law in point of right between
man and man; only our Law favors a Native more then a Stranger in some
respects; as if a Stranger or Alien from beyond Sea come over into this Nation,
to live here and bring his children with him, and then purchase Lands here,
those children that were born beyond Sea ( Ireland and some small other Islands
where the Laws of this Commonwealth are current excepted) shall not inherit
these Lands; but if he has children born here in England, they shall Inherit,
because our Laws favor Natives more then Strangers, in this respect; and if
such an Alien die without any issue born in this Nation, his Lands so
purchased, come to the Commonwealth; but in most other cases, they have equal
Justice with other: I conceive this is not contradictory to any Law of God:
especially the Alien knowing the danger of purchasing Lands before hand; the
other cases in which he has not a like privilege with a Native (though they
are but few) yet are too tedious, and indeed needless to insert here.

Page 54. pro. 6. He proposes that the children and heirs of malefactors may
not be punished for their Fathers offenses in the loss of their estates that
might descend or otherwise become unto them; I acknowledge it is hard, and I
could wish with Mr. P. That the Fathers having eaten sour grapes, the childrens
Teeth may not be set on edge.

Page 56. Mr. P. proposes that thieves for ordinary stealths, (I mean not
Robbers upon high ways, or Burglers) may not be so commonly hanged as they
are. This I could wish also, (though in this there is not now such strictness
observed as the Law prescribes,) but that they be made Gally-slaves, or that
some other such course be taken with them, as not to take away their lives, and
consequently all hopes of making of them better. And I shall fully concur with
Mr. P. herein; I have ended as to Mr. P. his proposals touching the Law,
wishing him to consult a little more before he writes so rashly again; That
which concerns other professions and callings, they best can tell how to
answer, that are Professors. I will not be, as Mr. P. is, Suitor ultra crepidam.
And I have done what is here done, more hastily then the merit and honor of the
Common Law deserves; yet I hope its professors will excuse my faults (for I
conceive no other is a proper Judge of them) they being errors of love to that
which is good and just.

Major haereditas venit unjcuique nostcum. a jure and legibus, quam a
parentibus.
FINIS.

