Unto every individual Member of Parliament:
The humble Representation of diverse afflicted Women-Petitioners to the
Parliament, on the behalf of Mr. JOHN LILBURN,
SHOWS,
THat we cannot but be much sadded to see our undoubted Right of Petitioning
withheld from us, having attended several days at your House-door with an
humble Petition, desiring the making null of that most unrighteous, illegal Act
made against Mr. Lilburne by the late Parliament, although it is the known duty
of Parliaments to receive Petitions: and it is ours and the Nations undoubted
right to petition, although an Act of Parliament were made against it* Your
Honors may please to call to mind the unjust and unrighteous Acts made by
King Ahasuerus in the case of Mordecai and the Jews; yet Esther that righteous
woman being encouraged by the justness of the Cause (as we at this time are,
through the justness of Mr. Lilburn's Cause, and the common Cause of the whole
Nation) did adventure her life to petition against so unrighteous Acts obtained
by Haman the Jews enemy. Your Honors may please to consider whether the late
unjust and illegal Act against Mr. Lilburne was not obtained by such an enemy
as proud Haman was, having no more cause for so doing, then Haman had; neither
do we hope that your Honors, upon mature consideration, will have the less
regard unto our Petition, although women; judging that you will not be worse
unto us, then that Heathen King was to Esther, who did not only hear her
Petition, but reversed that Decree or Act gone forth against the Jews, and did
severely punish the obtainer thereof, as in truth we hope your Honors will
judge that man to deserve no less punishment, who obtained the said most unjust
and illegal Act against Mr. Lilburne (though a favorite, as Haman was.) Truly
we cannot but judge the said Act against Mr. John Lilburne to be of no less
concernment to our selves and the whole Nation, then unto Mr. Lilburne, since
what is done or intended against him (being against common right, and in the
face thereof) may be done unto every particular person in the Nation.

Your Honors may be pleased to call to mind that never-to-be-forgotten
deliverance obtained by the good women of England against the usurping Danes
then in this Nation. You may likewise consider the readiness and willingness of
the good women of this Nation, who did think neither their lives, nor their
husbands and servants lives and estates to be too dear a price for the gaining
of yours and the Nations ancient Rights and Liberties out of the hands of
incroachers and oppressors.

And therefore we hope, that, upon second thoughts, your Honors will not
slight the persons of your humble Petitioners, nor withold from us our
undoubted right of petitioning, since God is ever willing and ready to receive
the Petitions of all, making no difference of persons. The ancient Laws of
England are not contrary to the will of God: so that we claim it as our right
to have our Petitions heard; you having promised to govern the Nation in
righteousness: therefore we trust that you will not suffer any further
proceedings to be had upon that most unrighteous Act against Mr. Lilburne.


