The Manner of the PROCEEDINGS In the Courts of the Great Sessions In the
Counties of Mountgomery, Denbigh, and Flint; within North Wales, as it now is.

Published by R. V.

London. Printed, 1653.

To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.
Right Honorable,
THIS Sheet of Paper touching the manner of Proceedings in the Courts of the
great Sessions in the Counties of Mountgomery, Denbigh, and Flint in
North Wales, coming from an experienced and intelligent Person, into my hands,
I thought it not unseasonable in this juncture of time, when the Reformation of
the Law is the present subject of your Consideration, to offer it to your view
and perusal; you will find in it the shortness and cleerness of Proceedings,
and easiness of charge in those parts, which may something conduce to clear and
direct the way Reforming what is amiss in the course of Practice here: It is
not my intent to trouble you further, then to pray for Wisdom for you,
answerable to the difficulty of the work which you are entrusted with, on
behalf of this Common wealth: I am

Yours, and the Commonwealths Servant. R. V.

THE Manner of the Proceedings in the Courts of the great Sessions in the
Counties of Mountgomery, Denbigh and Flint, within North Wales, as it now is.
ABout three weeks before every great Sessions (by warrant from the chief
Justice of the Circuit) a general Writ of Summons is sent forth by the
Prothonotary to the Sheriff, by which the Sheriff is Commanded to proclaim
throughout his County, that the general great Sessions for the County is to be
holden, at such a day and place: And that he Summon and give warning to all
Justices of the Peace, etc. Officers, and other persons whom it does concern,
that they appear at the day and place limited by the said Writ. Which
Proclamation being made, all persons whatsoever (by the course there holden)
whether Plaintiffs or Defendants in Suits before depending, or others who
intend to Commence any Suits, and also all such who suspect any Suits may be
brought against them, are at their perils, according to the general Summons
before mentioned, to have their Attorneys in Court to prosecute and defend the
said Suits.

The Sessions being begun, The Plaintiffs who are to Commence Actions, do
retain their Attorneys, and bring their Actions, either by original Writ (as is
usual for all kind of debts not finable upon the Original) which Writs are made
returnable the first day of the Sessions, and dated fifteen days before the
Sessions, or else by Bill or Queritur, which may be either for Debt, Trespass,
or upon the Case. And whether it be by Original, or else by Bill, or Queritur,
the Defendant upon the Original, and first Bill, or Queritur, and all Process
(before appearance) thereupon awarded, is ever called in open Court, to come
forth and answer to the Plaintiff in such or such an Action (as the case is)
and if by Original, the Defendant being thereupon called, and not appearing,
then a second Writ of Summons is awarded, returnable the next day after, which
being made by the Prothonotary, and sealed with the Judicial Seal of the Court,
and returned by the Sheriff, the Defendant is thereupon a second time called
openly in Court. And if then the Defendant appear not, the Plaintiff has
Judgment by Default.

So it is also, in case the Action be brought by Queritur, or Bill, saving only
that Judgment is not in that case had before a third Writ of Summons issue,
and thereupon the Defendant being the third time called, do make Default:
whereas if by Original, there needs but one Writ of Summons, besides the
Original it self.

The first Bill or Queritur, commonly bears date the first day of the great
Sessions, or the day when the Attorney sueth it forth, and is returnable the
next day after the date of it; whereupon if the Defendant, being openly called
in Court, appear not, then a second Writ to Summon the Defendant again is
awarded; whereupon if the Defendant being the second time called, appear not,
then a third Bill or Queritur, to Summon the Defendant, is awarded; whereupon
if the Defendant being called a third time, appear not, then the Plaintiff has
Judgment by Default. And these Writs are successively awarded, and made
returnable de die in diem, and the Judgment had in three days at the most, in
cases of debt, if the Defendant appear not, but if the Defendant appear, then
the Plaintiffs Attorney declares, and upon the Defendants pleading, and not
confessing the Action, then issue is joined the same Sessions, and tried the
next Sessions after.

And it is here to be observed, that the awarding of these Process, and
obtaining of these Judgments by Default, depend upon the Sheriffs return of
any the said Writs, whether the Actions be brought by Original, or by Bill, or
Queritur: For if the Sheriff return a Summons (as usually he does in all cases
of Debt, because of the general Summons of the Sessions upon the Writ first
before mentioned, by which the Sessions was proclaimed) then those Judgments
are obtained as is before expressed. But if the Sheriff return, that the
Defendant has nothing in his Bailiffwick, whereby he may be Summoned (or
Attached) as usually he does in cases of Trespass, and upon the Case, then a
Capias to Arrest the Defendant is awarded; and a Writ of Distringas also ad
infinitum in cases of Trespass, and issues thereupon returned by the Sheriff,
until the Defendant do appear.

Neither is the Defendant in case of these Judgments thus obtained by Default,
any way prejudiced, but by his own Laches or wilfulness: For in all cases of
Debt, if he or his Attorney tender an Appearance any day within the Sessions
(or after, with consent of the Plaintiffs Attorney, before the Debt sworn) the
appearance is accepted. And if he neglect so to do, so that the Judgment
stand, yet no Execution can go forth until the Plaintiff do first swear his
Debt, and Damages for the forbearance of it, either before the Judges in open
Court, or else by special Commission, in which Case also execution of the Writ
by the Sheriff (though gone forth) is staid in the Attorneys hand by Order,
till commonly six Weeks or two Months after the Sessions, to the end that the
Defendant may satisfy the Debt before the delivery of the Writ to the Sheriff,
if he please.

In prosecution of all which kind of Actions in Debt and Trespass (which are
almost the whole business of the Sessions) the parties are not delayed above
one or two Sessions, unless by some dilatory Pleas and Demurrers (which seldom
happen) and for taking away whereof, some provision may be made: and the
Charges, unless in Cases where an issue is pleaded, and trial thereupon had,
not commonly above thirty shillings, except where the Debt being above forty
pound, is finable to the State, in case the Action be brought by Original,
which is an Imposition which the Parliament may take off if they please, and a
mere burden only to the party who is sued, when it comes to be paid. Neither
are the People in prosecuting and defending these Actions, enforced to travel
out of their own Counties.

Also in Cases of real Actions (which are very few) the proceeding as speedy,
unless it happen by multiplicity of Pleadings, occasioned by the intricacy of
Titles, and variety of Conveyances to be pleaded, which for the most part is
avoided, the Conveyances being given in Evidence.

Those Courts of the great Sessions have a Chancery within themselves, and have
had power to relieve in Cases of Equity ever since H. 8. time.

FINIS.

