DAGON Demolished: OR, Twenty Admirable Examples of Gods Severe Justice and
Displeasure against the SUBSCRIBERS of the late ENGAGEMENT, against our Lawful
Sovereign KING CHARLES the second; and the whole House of PEERS, in these
words. I do Declare and promise, that I will be True and Faithful to the
Commonwealth of England, as it is now Established without a KING or House of
LORDS.

Also against some of the Judges of the late King in the High Court of
Injustice.

PUBLISHED, To Reclaim such Fanatique persons, who have been too forward to
promote this wicked, Destructive ENGAGEMENT; and still design it, which has
wounded the Consciences of so many Godly Christians in this Kingdom.

By that late Worthy Patriot of his Country, Mr. John Vicars.

Eccles. 10. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought. God has Woollen
feet, but Iron hands. Aug. London, Printed by T. Mabb, for Edward Thomas, and
are to be sold at the Adam and Eve in Little-Brittain, 1660

The Stationer to the Reader.
Kind Reader,
THis Ensuing Narration came to my hands casually, from a Christian friend of
Mr. John Vicars, lately Deceased; from whom he had it, being written with his
own hand; The end of Publication is, that God may have the Glory, and that all
true Christian Protestants may Receive some benefit by it, which is the
unfeigned prayer of,

thy Friend, E. T.

The Westminsterian Engagement.
January 2. 1649.
I Do Declare and promise, that I will be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth of England, as it is now established without a King or House of
Lords.

The sum or substance of the penalty of not subscribing it.
BE it enacted by Authority of Parliament, that whatsoever person or persons
shall refuse the taking or subscribing of this Engagement, shall be disabled to
hold or enjoy any Place or Office of public trust, profit, or employment
whatsoever; And that if he do continue therein without any such subscription as
aforesaid, contrary to this Act of Parliament; he shall forfeit all such
offices, places or employment and profits whatsoever; and shall forfeit also
double the value of such profits and benefits as they shall have received and
taken as aforesaid: And for default of distress and sale of such offenders
goods, the offender to be imprisoned, till the said forfeitures be fully
satisfied and paid. And it is further enacted and declared, that all and every
person or persons so offending as aforesaid, is, are and shall be incapable of
Voting or giving his suffrage or consent in the choice or election of any
Officer or Magistrate in the City of London or else where, within the
Commonwealth of England. And shall also be incapable of the benefit of Law
from any Courts of Justice of this Commonwealth, in any manner of Plea
whatsoever, between Plaintiff and Defendant, in or for any Suit, Plaint, Bill,
Action, Information, Writ, Demand, Execution, or any other process whatsoever,
except only in case of Treason, Felony, or breach of the peace and good
behavior.

The Observation on this Penalty, for non-subscribing the Engagement.
THe sum of the aforesaid penalty, amounting to thus much, that every person
whatsoever, that subscribes not their Engagement, is made an absolute Outlawed
person, unable to help himself, or to be helped by any, against any wrongs or
injuries whatsoever, done to his person or estate, except as before, by them
excepted. Such a cruelty and tyranny as never was heard of in this Kingdom,
nor in any Nation, or well governed State, or Commonwealth in Christendom;
especially to be enacted or executed upon any of their Natives, or free
Denizens, though never so foul or heinous offenders (much less upon their
pious, peaceable and most honest people) save only among the Antichristian
Romanists, against those whom they call and counted Heretics.

Wherefore since the Saints godly party at Westminster (as they most
audaciously and falsely call themselves) and all the rest of their most
hypocritical adherents have been so bold thus to set up this Dagon by Gods
Ark, and their posts by Gods posts, and so deceitfully to glory and triumph in
their pretended Providence and successes, ever since their, thus, setting up
this Dagon, the Westminsterian Engagement, in opposition to the National
Covenant. I shall here, now (therefore) give the godly and impartial Reader,
diverse most remarkable examples, and apparent Demonstrations of Gods evident
and eminent wrath and indignation, expressed against them ever since their
setting up their said Dagon, in these most memorable and remarkable examples,
following:

Twenty admirable examples of Gods displeasure against Subscribers of the
Engagement, and accomplices with the late Power.
1. THen consider, admire and wonder, that upon the very first day of the
publication of the Act for taking the Engagement, which was January 4, 1650. in
the evening of that same day, did that most terrible and fearful fire by
Gunpowder break forth at Barkin-Church, near the Tower of London, the like to
which was never seen or heard of before, in or about the said City, in which
were most suddenly blown up and destroyed above a hundred houses, and above
120. persons most lamentably killed and destroyed, and their Carkases miserably
torn in pieces; among whom was Lieutenant Col. Smith, one of Sir Hardress
Wallers chief sticklers, to pull the secluded members out of the House of
Commons in Parliament. And was not this a most fearful forerunner and heavy
Harbinger of the woeful effects of this their immediately following Engagements.

2. One Mr. Mosty Minister of in Essex having taken the engagement (and that in
his own sense and limitations, to his best content, as he thought) yet was
immediately after so perplexed and distracted in his Conscience, that he could
neither Preach nor Pray, nor be at any quiet or peace within himself, till he
had procured liberty to race out his name from under the Engagement: whereunto
he had subscribed it.

3. One Col. Russell, a great favorite and Commissioner in the Army, after his
taking of the Engagement, was so vexed and distracted in his soul, that he
confessed to some of his religious friends (himself also being looked upon as a
very religious Gentleman) that immediately upon his taking the Engagement, he
found by evident symptoms, that the Devil took actual possession of him, and
made him desperately prone to commit any notorious villainy whatsoever, even to
the ravishing of his own maidservant; but afterward gave most eminent
testimonies of his true repentance, and abhorrence of his taking of it.

4. One Mr. Edward Fisher, a very tender conscientious Christian, and godly
Citizen of London, in the Old Bailey, having taken the Engagement, and though in
his own sense and limitations (as he thought to his full content) yet presently
after, being extremely grieved and perplexed in spirit, for that he had done,
therein labored to Alderman Allen to have his name raced out, but could not be
permitted, to the increase of his great grief; and thereupon fell into great
distresses and trouble of Conscience, and into pyning and languishing
sickness, caught a great fall in his house, which put his shoulder out, of
what, and lying in continual distress and perplexity of spirit, complaining
still of his taking the Engagement: thus pining and languishing away, he
shortly after died.

5. One Mr. Hall of St. Needs in Huntington-shire, having been a most eminent
professor of Religion, and extraordinarily gifted in Prayer, and godly
conference; afterward complying with the times, taking the Engagement, and
turning a great stickler with the Army; at last, turned a very So^ in matters
of Religion; and one night going forth of his house in an out-room hanged
himself, and there was found the next morning.

6. One Mr. Midgeley a Schoolmaster in Ouldham near Manchester in
Lancaster-shire, having been an Engager, and great prosecutor of his eminently
godly Minister, Mr. Constantine, and having been writing (one night) diverse
accusations, and such like papers against his said Minister, whereunto he was
hired by one Mr. Ashton a Justice of Peace of the same Parish, and by diverse
other eminent enemies of the said Mr. Constantine, because he would not take
the Engagement; and they having paid the said Mr. Midgeley for his pains; and
he going home that night, there having been a great snow on the ground, and the
weather very bitter cold, he was the next morning found dead in the snow, and
only his finger and thumb of his right hand, eaten or bitten off from his hand.

7. Also the aforesaid Mr. James Ashton of Chadarton in the said Parish of
Ouldham, once a desperate Malignant in the first War against the Parliament,
but afterward having made his peace, taken the Engagement, and turned a great
stickler for the present times; was made a Justice of Peace, and became one of
the aforesaid Mr. Constantine's greatest enemies, sequestered the said Mr.
Constantine out of his Living, and for the cause aforesaid, the refusing the
Engagement, imprisoned, and after banished him out of the County; and after
this, hearing that Mr. Constantine had preached twice or thrice in the Country,
he summoned him again to appear before him, intending to have punished him
sorely for his presumption: But in the mean season, it pleased the Lord to
strike this Mr. Ashton (who before had been a Gentleman naturally very
healthful, and of a strong constitution of body) into such a languishing
sickness, as made him daily pine away; so as no means or physic could help
him, and (which is most remarkable and fearful) before his death, he became so
full of Lice, continually, that all the shift and attendance that possible was
used, could not cleanse him from this filthy Vermin; and thus either upon the
day before or the day after Mr. Constantine's coming to Ouldham, to make his
personal appearance before him, the said Mr. Ashton thus miserably departed
this life.

8. One Mr. Bray Minister of Michaels in Lancashire, having once been a very
zealous Presbyterian to see too; at last, for the gaining of an Augmentation to
his Living, took the Engagement, turned a great zealot for the Independent
Faction, and immediately after, an Order coming for the pulling down of the
late Kings Arms in Churches; he was so hot therein, that he would needs (as he
did) pull them down himself, and sent the boards, on which the Kings Arms were
painted, home to his house, intending to have made a door of them, to one of
his rooms of his house; but it pleased the Lord presently to strike him with a
sudden and violent sickness, whereof he presently dyed, and those boards were
made his Coffin to bury him in.

9. One Sir Thomas Martin, Knight of Cambridge shire, an Engager and a great
Complyer with the times, having been a hunting in Holmby-Park, and the Deer
being fallen, stuck and opened, and he desired (together with the other
Gentlemen) to wash his hands in the Deers blood; No (said he) I had rather wash
my hands in the blood of the young King of Scots. And immediately after this,
riding home the same Day at Evening, his Horse very suddenly and violently
threw him, in which fall, he pitched on his head, mortally brake his Skull, and
shoulder, of which wounds he very shortly after died.

10. The Constable of Shaw in Lancashire, four miles from Manchester, having
taken the Engagement, was presently after so perplexed in Conscience, that
notwithstanding all the Godly Exhortations, and Comforts administered unto him
by godly neighbor Ministers, yet the apprehension of Gods wrath, for what he
had done therein, so increased upon him, that he fell distracted, and so
continued many weeks together.

11. Also one M. Rich. Smith Minister of Stoke, Prior in Worcestershire,
having taken the Engagement for the procuring of an Augmentation to his Living,
returning home from London after he had taken it, fell presently into such a
frighting horror of Conscience and Distraction of his Senses, that he had often
endeavored to beat out his own brains; But at last recovered his Senses by Gods
great mercy repented bitterly of what he had done, and thereupon in peace
departed this life in a sickneess which then took him.

12. Dr. Doris^aus, the Westminsterians Juncto's first Ambassador, sent from
them into Holland, and therefore no doubt a great Engager, and desperate
Complyer in all things with them, as in the Kings death; being arrived in
Holland, was therein immediately and suddenly assaulted and murdered as he
sat at dinner in his house.

13. Also Mr. Anthony Ascham, a Gentleman of excellent parts, being sent (as
the Juncto's the Ambassador) into Spain, very shortly after his arrival there
at Madrid, was in his own house there suddenly and most furiously set upon and
assaulted, by diverse desperate English Caviliers, and he and his Interpreter
was hen and there murdered.

14. Colonel Rainsborow, a mighty Engager and prime stickler for the power at
Westminster, a desperate header of the Levellers, and Admiral of the Navy at
Sea, was suddenly also assaulted by a company of Caviliers at Pomfrait town in
Yorkshire in an Inn, and there murdered by them.

15. Mr. Tho. Hoyle, formerly looked upon as a very pious and strictly religious
Gentleman, an Alderman of York, and Member of the Parliament; but afterward
having taken the Engagement even against his conscience, and turned a great
complyer with them at Westminster: Not long after, it pleased the Lord so to
leave him to himself, that on the very same day 12 month, that King Charles
was beheaded, yea as near as possible could be judged about the very same hour
of that day this Gentleman hanged himself in his own house at Westminster, and
was found stark dead by his woeful wife when she came home, having been abroad
that morning.

16. Mr. Shereman a Citizen and Silkman in Paternoster Row in London, who had
formerly been looked on as a godly and religious Gentleman, had been a Tryer and
an Elder in the Presbyterian Church Government, a singular good friend to Mr.
Love; then his Pastor; but afterward he turning with the times took the
Engagement, and that in form of an Oath, whereupon he was made a Common Council
man, turned a desperate enemy, and hater of the said M. Love, who shortly after
being in his shop with his wife, as perfectly well as ever ever in his life,
yet in the Evening standing at his counter in his shop, and his wife close by
him, he suddenly sunk down by her stark dead, and never spoke one word after it.

17. Also Colonel Ven a Citizen of London, formerly a great Professor of
Religion, and a long time Mr. Love's precious dear friend, and a Member of the
House of Commons in Parliament; but being turned with the times, was a great
Engager and mighty stickler for, and with them at Westminster; yea, he proved
afterward a most bitter enemy to the Presbyterian Ministers of London, and
upon occasion used those words against them, Viz. They at Westminster should
never be at quiet, till they had provided a pair of shoes and a staff for the
turbulent Presbyterian Ministers of London, and banished them out of the
Kingdom: But it pleased the Lord, that on the very next day after that horrible
abuse and banishment done to Mr. Jenkin then Minister of Christ-Church London,
in both sequestring him out of his said Living, and banishing him out of the
City, wherein this Coll. Ven had a hand also, and had most churlishly carried
himself toward Master Jenkin in the Committee even that day, whereon this godly
Minister was so censured, which was July the 6. 1650. being Thursday. It
pleased the Lord, I say, that Master Ven next Friday following, July 7. and at
night, this Coll. going to bed, as perfectly well and in health, as ever in his
life, and his wife lying by him, he fell asleep by her immediately, and slept
soundly without any complaint of the least distemper, but the next morning
about 6. of the clock his wife awaking, found him stark dead by her in the
bed, never having made the least groan, or spoken one word to her since the day
before. And thus God banished him first out of the Land of the Living.

18. One Sir Henry Holcroft, why had formerly been a great Professor of
Religion, and to see too a practiser of the power of Godliness, but afterward
drew back and Apostatized to the Independent Faction, took the Engagement, and
fell into great compliance with them, being a Committee Gentleman, and acting
strenuously for them. But immediately after this, it pleased the Lord, that he
fell into a sore disease, and much and often bleeding at his nose and mouth,
and so continued all the time of his said sinful compliance with them, and at
last fell into such fits of extreme bleedding, and strongly vomiting up even of
gobbets of blood at his mouth, and flowing out of blood at his nose with such
unstintable violence, that he most sadly departed this Life, in one of the
extreme fits thereof.

19. In August 1650. Barron Rigby, a most desperate Enemy to the Presbyterians
Church Discipline, as being a great Independent together with Baron Yates, the
two Judges for the Assizes then held at Chalmsford in Essex, two grand Engagers
(as every one may know) and deep complyers with the VVestminsterian power: They
both being at Chalimford, and hearing the Assize Sermon preached before them,
the Godly Ministers Text being out of Luke the 16. 2. Give an account of thy
Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward. Immediately after this
Sermon, it pleased the Lord to strike Judge Rigby with present sickness, so as
that they could not keep the Assizes there, but were forced to adjourn it,
promising and hoping to come again and finish it there, and went thence to
Croydon in Surry to hold the Assizes there; but having begun to sit, both Judge
Rigby his sickness so increased upon him, and the like sickness suddenly so
assaulted Judge Yates also, and with such violent pain and great distemper upon
them both, and also upon the High Sheriff of Surry then present with them, who
also was smitten with the same sickness, at that time that the Assizes was
enforced to cease there also, and they all three were speedily conveyed away
thence to London, where they all three died immediately after, even within a
seven nights space, or thereabout, of a most violent pestilential Fever; and
very many more of their Clerks, Officers, and Attendants on the said Assizes
died also at the same time, (as was generally, and most credibly informed and
reported, and I my self know one Captain Hindely, one of Judge Rigby's chief
Clerks or Officers (who died at the same time) immediately upon the very same
time of these Judges death. A most remarkable and fearful Example of Gods wrath
upon Engagers and sinful Complyers with workers of iniquity. VVoe woe therefore
to all Apostatizing Temporizers, and perfidious Backsliders, Heb. 10. 38. And
as is further most evident in those Scriptures, beneath following.

20. I shall conclude all with the memorable Example of Gods Divine Justice
upon Lockyer, an Active Agitator and Leveller in the Army, who had a principal
hand in seizing and bringing the King to his death, Cried out, Justice,
Justice, Justice, openly against him, and spit in the Kings face in
Westminster Hall as he was going to his Trial, before his condemnation,
Conducted him to the Block; and was shortly after condemned in a Counsel of War
by some of the Kings own Judges, and shot to death as a Mutinier in
PaulsChurch-yard London. Also John Lilburn's double Trial for his life; soon
after, a grand stickler against the House of Lords: The proceedings against
Saxbey, Syndercombe, and other Levellers, who were chief Instruments to bring
the King to Justice; and the Grand Opposers of the House of Lords: Also the
Imprisonments and sufferings of M. G. Harrison, Colonel Rich, Colonel Okey,
Lord Gray of Grooby, and others of the Kings condemners, who were all Engagers
against the King and House of Lords.

May it not awaken the stupid seared Consciences of all those now living, who
had any hand in these Tragedies and Engagements against King and Parliament, to
bring them to speedy and sincere public Repentance for them; Lest they fall
into the like Terrors or Judgments, as others that have so wilfully engaged
against King and House of Lords?

POSTSCRIPT.
Unto this I shall only add two Quaeries.
WHether those persons that are living, that took upon themselves the Name,
Style, and Title of the Parliament of England, Scotland and Ireland, (though by
their Writs by which they Sat, they were but the fragments of the Parliament
of England only) beheaded their Lawful Protestant King, banished his Posterity,
overturning our ancient Government it self, Consisting of King, Lords and
Commons, which Constitution continued many hundreds of years, and was the best
and fittest for these Nations that could be, and brought the Nation into such a
Labyrinth and Confusion, by endeavoring to set up an Utopian Commonwealth, a
mere New-Nothing; Whether the persons may not justly fear they may fall down
Quick into Hell, or fall into the same Exemplary Terrors, Judgments, and self
Executions with others, if they repent not for their Abominations.

2. Whether These men that set aside and repealed the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance as unlawful Oaths, which themselves took, or ought to take before
they sat in the Commons House; and also the Protestation, Solemn League and
Covenant made in Pursuance of them, and Diametrically contrary to these Oaths,
to set up a New Engagement, to which every one must Subscribe to be true and
faithful to their New Commonwealth, without King or House of Lords, bringing
all English Freemen into a New Praemunire, which thousands of our Godly
Protestant Ministers, Gentry and Freemen refused to take; whether these men
that can swallow all kind of Oaths, though directly contrary one to the other;
Neither reverence God or Man, are fit persons to be Trustees for the Nation in
this Time of Eminent Danger, now the Nation groans under so many Oppressions
and Dangers.

Hebrews 6. 4, 5, 6. It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and
have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,
and have tasted the good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come; If
they fall away, to renew them again to repentance; seeing they crucify to
themselves the Son of life afresh, and put him to an open shame. Jude 11. 12.
Woe to them, for they have gone in the way of Kain, and perished in the
gainsaying of Core. They are Trees whose fruit is withered, Twice dead and
plucked up by the roots. FINIS.

