THE Christian Education OF CHILDREN, According To the Maxims of the Sacred
Scripture, and the Instructions of the Fathers of the Church.

Written and several times Printed in French, and now Translated into English.

At Paris, By John Baptist Coignard, at the Golden Bible in S. James's-street.
1678.

With Approbation.

THE Authors Address TO HIS SISTER.
My Dearest Sister,
SInce God would so have it that I should partake with you of the goods of
Nature, and that our common Birth permits us not to have any thing of
Particular in the advantages of the World; I hope he will please to accept the
desire I have to extend this right to the Goods of Grace, and that he will
approveof my making you partaker of what I could gather in the Books of the
Church, whereby I have reserved nothing from a person whom he has rendered so
dear unto me.

Nor can I believe that the World it self, notwithstanding that it is
accustomed to disapprove the doings of them who have abandoned it, can condemn
this. For if people take it not amiss, that such as love one another by motives
of Interest, and for the Goods of this life, should make use of these Goods to
give pledges of their love to one another: why should it be any wonder, that
they who are linked together by a friendship which is totally disengaged from
the Senses, should employ Spiritual things to testify reciprocally to each
other their true affection.

Imagine not therefore, my Sister, that this Book is the effect barely of a
natural Love, which gives me entrance into all your Interests. I am excited to
write unto you by more holy and more powerful motives: it is no longer lawful
for me to act merely by them of Nature. And having drained all that this Work
includes from the Well of the Sacred Scripture, and from the Writings of the
Fathers of the Church, I may assure you that I have the least share therein.

You therefore are not to make any Reflection upon him who presents it unto
you; but apply it to your self singly for the enriching of your Soul with the
Virtues which are here discovered unto you, and which God demands of a
Christian Mother.

Consider, that you can give him no greater proofs of your Love and of your
Fidelity, than to bring up your Children according to the Laws of the Gospel
and the Counsels of the Fathers of the Church; and that you cannot offer to him
a sacrifice which will better please him, than to consecrate them to him by a
holy Education, since they are the better part of your self: nor is there any
thing which can more move him to pour forth upon you and upon them his
blessings, than the care you shall take to instruct them in his Fear and in his
Love, and to let all the World see, by engaging them to imitate their Heavenly
Father, that you look upon them as his Children.

It Is to help you in this laudable design, that I have begged of our Lord
Jesus Christ so much light as was necessary for me, to observe in the sacred
Scriptures and in the Volumes of the Fathers of the Church, those Maxims which
ought to be followed in the Education of children: that I have instantly
besought him to inspire me with such choice Advices as he would have me draw
from thence to propose them to you, if he would please to make use of me,
altogether unworthy as I am, to give you the knowledge of what your children
stand in need of, and of his designs upon you and upon them.

Consider then, if you please, this little Work, as a Collection of what is
most holy and most pure in the Doctrine of the Church, touching the Subject it
treats on. I have done no more than join the passages to one another, And if
there are some Propositions the Authors whereof are not cited, it is because
they were included in the Principles which I have established upon the
authorities of these great Saints.

Nothing now remains, but to send up to God my Prayers, that what I have done
to discharge my Conscience, may not make yours criminal: but rather that he
will effect by his Grace, that by putting in practice these wholesome Maxims and
Advices which I offer you, you may happily experience that which St. Jerome
avers, That the health and happiness of Children turns to the Glory and to the
Advantage of their Fathers and Mothers.

THE Authors Advice TO THE READER.
THis Treatise of the Christian Education of Children, was Composed Eight or
Nine Years since by a Churchman for one of his Sisters, who was engaged in
Marriage. He only proposed to himself in composing it, to assist that person in
particular, and to instruct her how she should worthily acquit her self in one
of the principal Obligations of the estate to which God had called her, which
was, to bring up her Children in the Fear and love of God. But in process of
time, this Treatise having been seen by several of his Friends, who judged it
very proper to be made public; the Respect and Submission he had to their
Opinion, obliged him to apply himself to render it fit for all Parents.

Hereupon he added several Advices and many Maxims, which he conceived might be
to them profitable; and in general he endeavored to accomodate to all sorts of
conditions, and to all manner of persons, whatever is herein contained.

He has moreover studied to present to all Fathers and to all Mothers, certain
Rules, which they may observe in the several ages of their Children; and it may
be said, That if they apply themselves, as they ought, to the Truths proposed
to them in this Book; they shall find all that can contribute to render their
Childrens Education conformable to the Rules of the Gospel.

They who are not yet engaged in Marriage, may here also learn with what spirit
they ought to undertake that State of life, and how great, difficult, and
sublime are the Obligations thereof.

They who have renounced the State of Marriage to embrace that of Religion, may
here find great subjects to praise God; in that he has not permitted them to
enter into a condition, wherein it is so hard to acquit themselves of their
duty.

Finally, all they who are encharged with the Education of Children, and who
consequently do hold the Places of Fathers and of Mothers over them, shall here
sinde the lights and succors, which are necessary to acquit themselves as they
ought.

Some perhaps will judge that we have too much descended into particulars in
some places: but the Author conceived, that his design being to prescribe
Rules, not of Speculation but of Practice, he could not enter too far into the
particulars; and that he himself ought to make some application of the Maxims
he proposes, to the end they might more easily be reduced into Practice by such
as have a mind to follow them in the conduct of their Family.

It is to be hoped that God will bestow his blessing upon this Book, because a
very special care has been taken that it should contain nothing which is not
drawn from the two most pure Fountains of Truth, which are; The Sacred
Scripture, and the Works of the Church-Father.

THE Approbation of the Doctors.
THe Education of Children, is one of the things of greatest importance in the
World. The Pagans looked upon it as the only good of the Commonwealth; they
applied thereto all their cares, and they composed Books upon this subject
which are not the least considerable of Antiquity. Which notwithstanding, one
may say, that all their Solicitude, and all their diligence proved
unprofitable: They sought a good which was impossible for them to discover: The
darkness of Paganism hindered them to acknowledge Virtue: and in instructing
others, they could never frame to themselves any other than a gross Idea
thereof, and a shadow far distant from the Verity. But the School of
Christianism ought to be replenished with Masters much more clear-sighted, and
illustrated by the Lights which shine from the Fire enkindled in the Souls of
the Faithful by the Grace of Christ Jesus. The sacred Scriptures and the works
of the Fathers furnish the Matter and Form to make people truly good: and there
may be found all the precepts which are necessary to instruct Fathers and
Mothers in what they ought to teach their Children. The Author of this Treatise
is assuredly of the number of these excellent Masters: His Piety and his
Learning sparkle out (without Ostentation) in all the passages of his Book. We
have read it with all possible exactness, and we judge it very profitable and
very necessary to be published, etc. Given at Paris, the 24 of February, 1666.

T. Fortin. Roileau.

THE CONTENTS.
The Preface. Page 1. Chap. I. Of the Excellency of Christian Marriage. page 6.
Chap. II. That the Education of Children is one of the most considerable
employs of Christianism: And of the first error which causes it to be
neglected; which is the mean Idea men have of the Christian Life. p. 14. Chap.
III. Of the Second Error which causes a neglect of the Education of Children;
which is, the little care Parents take to preserve them in Innocence. p. 25.
Chap. IV. How highly Fathers and Mothers are interessed in the Christian
Education of their Children: and in particular of what importance it is to
Mothers. p. 30. Chap. V. Wherein particularly consists the Obligation which
Fathers and Mothers have to endeavor the Christian Education of their
Children. p. 42. Chap. VI. With what Dispositions they are to labor in the
Christian Education of their Children. p. 50. Chap. VII. What Ideas or Forms
they ought to propose to themselves for their imitation in the Christian
Education of Children. p. 68. Chap. VIII. An Introduction to the Maxims, which
Christians ought to follow in the Education of Children. p. 77. Chap. IX. The
Maxims which ought to be observed to render the Education of Children
Christian. p. 84. I. Maxim. Drawn from the sacred Scripture. p. 85. II. Maxim.
Drawn from S. John Chrysostom. p. 88. III. Maxim. Concerning the manner how
Parents are to love their Children. p. 95. IV. Maxim. Concerning the care they
ought to take to disintangle Children from the World, and to inspire into them
Christian Sentiments and Feelings. p. 98. V. Maxim. Concerning the search they
ought to make of the predominant inclinations of their Children. p. 102. VI.
Maxim. Touching the Instruction of Children. p. 104. VII. Maxim. Touching the
Motives whereby to engage Children to labor, and to do what one desires of
them. p. 112. VIII. Maxim. Touching the care Parents ought to take for their
Childrens health, and of what concerns their Bodies. p. 117. IX. Maxim.
Touching what is particularly to be avoided in conversation before Children. p.
120. X. Maxim. Touching the Corrections of Children. p. 122. XI. Maxim.
Touching the differences and disagreements which Children ordinarily have with
the Domestics, and the liberties they take with them. p. 125. XII. Maxim.
Touching the freedom which is to be given to Children to express their thoughts
and opinions. p. 128. XIII. Maxim. Touching the Patience wherewith Parents are
to support their Children, and to moderate their resentments of injuries
received from others. p 132. XIV. Maxim. Touching the Equality, which Parents
are to keep among their Children. p. 140. XV. Maxim. Touching the Lodging of
Children. p. 150. XVI. Maxim. Touching the Complacency which Parents have in
their Children. p. 151. XVII. Maxim. Touching the Plays and Recreations of
Children. p. 152. XVIII. Maxim. Touching what Company ought to be permitted to
children. p. 155. XIX. Maxim. Touching the care which is to be taken to induce
children to do what they ought to their Fathers. p. 160.
Chap. X. Important Advices for the Christian Education of Children. p. 165. I.
Advice. Concerning the Exercises, and ornaments of the world. p. 165. II.
Advice. Touching worldly Songs. p. 183. III. Advice. Touching Romances. p. 194.
IV. Advice. Touching Balls, Dancings, and public Meetings. p. 203. V. Advice.
Touching Stage Plays. p. 218. VI. Advice. Touching Gaming, and against the
Wantonness and Idleness of Worldlings. p. 246. VII. Advice. That in the
Education of Children Parents should particularly propose to themselves, to
induce them to consecrate themselves to God, and to serve him. p. 280.
Chap. XI. At what Age these Maxims and these Advices ought to be applied. p.
303. Chap. XII. That these Maxims and these Advices are principally to be
followed in the Education of such Children as are designd for the world. p.
317. Chap. XIII. The means which facilitate the application of these Maxims and
Advices in the Christian Education of Children. p. 326. The I. Means. Speech,
Words, or Discourse. p. 327. The II. Means. Lecture or Reading. p. 352. The III.
Means. Example. p. 364. The IV. Means. Prayer. p. 371.
Chap. XIV. What is most opposite to the application of these Maxims and these
Advices in the Christian Education of Children. p. 394.
OF The Christian Education Of CHILDREN.
The Preface.
NOthing is more common among men then Marriage, and nothing is more unknown
then the Duties of this so common a condition: The major part of them who
engage themselves therein look only on its outside, and on that which it has
of carnal and terrestrial, and they do not at all inform themselves either of
the obligations which it includes, or of the extreme difficulties there are to
acquit ones self Christianly therein. They embark themselves and enter upon
this voyage of their whole lives, without knowing whether they go, or what
course they are to stear: and contracting an undissolvable alliance with a
strange person, they scarcely known him, who must be not only the Companion of
their happiness or unhappiness in this life, but who must be one of the
principal causes thereof, both in this life, and for all Eternity.

To embrace solemnly a Regular life under the Obedience of a Superior chosen
among many for his Virtues and for his good qualities, there must be at least a
year of trial according to the Ordinance of the Church: but to have a Maid
rank her self under the Obedience of a Husband, and take upon her the charge of
a Family, (which requires almost the submission of a Religious person, and the
prudence of a Superior), they fancy that no time is too short; they conclude
these kind of affairs in the space of a Month or Fifteen days, without making
reflection upon the dispositions and upon the qualities the persons have to
acquit themselves of these Duties.

Yet when they are once engaged, there is no more means left to give back. They
must keep on to the end of their earthly pilgrimage, and satisfy the duties of
their condition, or renounce their salvation. They may well repent themselves
of the rashness of their engagement, but they are no longer free to change it.
Wherefore they who find themselves thus tied up, seeing that God forbids them
to disengage themselves, ought to believe that it is his will they should remain
in that State, in whatever manner they entered into it; and that they should
sincerely apply themselves to know and to practice that which he demands and
expects of them.

The knowledge of these Obligations which the light of God gives to some Souls,
which are thus engaged without having maturely considered of it, is for them in
some sort the beginning of their Vocation. For if one cannot say that they were
called to the State of Marriage, yet one cannot doubt but that at least they
were called in Marriage; and that suffices to move them to remain therein in
peace and repose, according to the advice of St. Paul: Let every one remain in
the Vocation and in the State to which God has called him, 1 Cor. 7.20.

All then they have to do, is humbly to adore the designs of God upon them, to
content themselves with the measure of grace he gives them; and by not hiding
from themselves the difficulties and the obligations of their State, to resolve
to accomplish faithfully whatever God appoints them.

Now if the persons who have slieghtly engaged themselves in Marriage are
obliged not to hide from themselves the Difficulties and the Obligations of
that Estate: they who as you, my Sister, have not embraced it, but after many
Prayers and serious Reflections; may they neglect them without being unfaithful
to the lights and to the graces by which God has made them conceive the Hope
of being sanctified therein, by accomplishing the things which he exacts of
them?

Wherefore to be in a condition to practice them yet more perfectly then you
perchance have done hitherto; you must quit all humane sentiments and feelings,
and raise up your self above all the low and carnal aspects which people have
ordinarily of Marriage, to the end you may enter into the sentiments of Christ
Jesus, and into the designs he had in exalting this humane alliance to so high
a dignity.

CHAP. I. Of the Excellency of Christian Marriage.
ONe of the principal reasons which induced the Savior of the world to place
so great a dignity upon the humane alliance of Marriage, was the will he had to
sanctify by this means the generation of Children, and to give to married
persons the necessary graces to apply themselves holily to their Education.
For, as St. Augustine observes, August. l. 1. de Nupt. c. 8.
The will of faithful people not determinating it self in Marriage only to put
Children into the world to dye; but to the end that they being born again in
Christ Jesus, may receive eternal life: how could they have acquitted
themselves of this Duty with greater ease, than in receiving (when they
contract this holy alliance) the particular grace which our Lord has annexed
to it, and which he has merited for them by his Passion? It Is by this grace
that Marriage has been re-established in its first dignity, from which it was
fallen after sin, in the law of Nature, and in the law of Moses: And as the
holy Council of Trent says; It Is by it, that the natural love, (which married
persons bear to one another,) has been perfected, that the iudissoluble union
of their hearts has been strengthened, and that all their actions have been
sanctified.

The 2d. Motive which induced Christ Jesus to raise the Marriage of Christians
to the dignity of a Sacrament, was, that he might give us an exterior and
sensible sign of the infinite love he bears us, and of the strict Union he
has contracted with the Church which is his Spouse: so that the principal
glory of them whom he unites by this sacred knot, is the honor they have to
represent perfectly unto us this Divine alliance. This is that which St. Paul
admirably expresses in his Epistle to the Ephesiaus in such terms as I could
wish could be engraven in the bottom of your heart, and which I conjure you to
keep continually in your Memory.

Let the Wives, (says this Apostle) be submitted to their Husbands as they are
to God: for the Husband is the Head of the Wife, as Christ Jesus is the Head of
the Church which is his Body, and whereof he is the Savior. Wherefore as the
Church is submitted to Christ Jesus, so Women ought to be submitted in every
thing to their Husbands: And you Husbands, love your Wives as Christ Jesus has
loved his Church, and has delivered himself to death for her, to the end he
might sanctify her after he had purified her by the Word in the Water of
Baptism, and that she might appear before him full of Glory, having neither
blemish, nor wrinkle, nor any such like thing, but being holy and
irreprehensible. Thus Husbands ought to love their Wives as their own Bodies.
He who loves his Wife loves himself; for no one hates his own Flesh, but
nourishes it, and entertains it as Christ Jesus does his Church, because we are
the Members of his Body, making a part of his Flesh, and of his Bones. And it is
for this that it is said in the Scripture, that a man shall abandon his Father
and his Mother to live with his Wife, and that of two which they were, they
should become one selfsame Flesh. -- Thus let every one of you love his Wife as
himself, and let the Wife respect and honor her Husband, Ephesians. 5.22. etc.

You see by this, my Sister, that St. Paul, makes a continual Parallel of Jesus
Christ and of his Church with the Christian Bridegroom and his Spouse; that he
concludes the Duties of the Wife toward her Husband, and the Duties of the
Husband toward his Wife, of the Submission which the Church has for Christ
Jesus, and of the Grace which Christ Jesus communicates to his Church; and that
he gives no other Idea or Form of the mutual Love or Fidelity which they owe to
one another, and of the indissoluble Union which ought to be between them, than
the Love which Christ Jesus has for his Spouse, than the Fidelity which this
holy Spouse has for Christ Jesus, and than the Union which he would have with
the Church by rendering her his Body.

Must we not then aver after this great Apostle, Ephesians. 3.32. That surely
Marriage is a holy Institution in Christ Jesus and in his Church: and that it
is honorable in all, Heb. 1.4. that is to say, as the holy Fathers explicate
it, in all its parts.

Yes, my Sister, you ought to have a high esteem of the state to which God has
called you, because in like manner as it was he who having drawn Eve from the
side of Adam our first Father, gave her to him for his Spouse; it is also he who
by his invisible hand has tied the knot of the sacred cord of your Marriage,
and who gave you to your Husband.

You ought to do it, because God intending to multiply Souls which may bless
and praise him to all Eternity, has done you the favor to make choice of you
to cooperate by the production of your Children and by their Education to so
great a work.

You ought to do it, because Christ Jesus by his presence at the Marriage of
Cana in Galilee, has sanctified all them which are to be celebrated among
Christians.

You ought finally to do it, not only because there are so many holy persons in
the Old and New Testament who have lived most faintlike in Marriage, but also
because the Mother of Christ Jesus the most pure and most innocent of all
creatures was engaged in the bonds of that indissoluble alliance which you have
contracted, In such sort that if by the Vow of Virginity which she made before
the Angelical Salutation, she was (as S. Augustine relates) the model of all
the Virgins who were to come after her; S. August. lib de Virginitate. c 4.
Lib. 5. contra Julianum. c. 22.
she was no less (in the opinion of the same holy Father) the example of
Married persons, by espousing St. Joseph, and by powerfully insinuating unto
them by her prudent conduct, that Marriage ceases not truly to subsist,
although by mutual consent they should propose to themselves to live in a holy
Continence.

But above all, my Sisters, you ought to esteem your self happy, in that your
Marriage is the Sacrament and the image of that of Christ Jesus with his
Church; in that he has permitted you, and even ordained you to consider your
Husband as the Church does Christ Jesus, to have for him all the tenderness and
all the Submission you are capable of, as the Church has for Christ Jesus; to
leave your self to be conducted by his Spirit, as the Church leaves her self to
be conducted by the Spirit of Christ Jesus, to enter into all his affections
and into all his sentiments, to partake with him of all his pains and all his
afflictions, as the Church does them of Christ Jesus; and not to wear outward
Ornaments, nor make use of affected dresses but as far forth as he permits you,
as the Church has no more splendor and glory than what Christ Jesus
communicates unto her.

Now if the Patriarks and the Israelites esteemed themselves very much honored
in having Children, because the people of God were thereby much augmented; that
they hoped the Messiah might be born of their blood; and that they might
perhaps have the advantage of affording him a Father or a Mother: what Glory
may not you expect by furnishing to Jesus Christ subjects of his Mercies, and
by putting into the World Children who may become the Members and the Brothers
of the Son of God? However you will merit this Glory, my Sister, and at the
same time will acquit your self of the principal Duties of the state wherein
you are engaged, if you apply your self seriously to give your Children a truly
Christian and Holy Education, having first laid aside the false Lights and
pernicious Errors, which are the cause why the major part of Fathers and
Mothers neglect the Education of their Children, and that they have no other
Idea's than such as are altogether Carnal, and as remote from the excellency of
the estate to which they are called, as Heaven is from Earth.

CHAP. II. That the Education of Children is one of the most considerable
employs of Christianism: And of the first Error which makes it to be
neglected, which is, the mean Idea Parents have of the Christian Life.
THat which makes Parents conceive ordinarily a low Idea of the Education of
their Children, is, that they themselves have a very mean Idea of the Christian
Life. And thus as the Life they propose to lead has nothing of hard and
painful, because it is all low and carnal, they do not also apprehend any great
difficulties in the conduct of children, because they have not for them any
more noble and more heroic aims than they have for themselves

It is therefore necessary, in order to know what it is to Educate Children
Christianly, that it be understood in the first place what it is to live
Christianly; and above all it is necessary to be rid of an Illusion which
deceives the greatest part of the World, persuading it self that none but
Religious Persons are called to Sanctity; and that the common Life of
Christians has nothing that is labourious or painful.

To convince you of the contrary, it suffices, my Sister, to make you observe
that the state of Christianism is a state of Sanctity and of Innocence; that
all they who make profession thereof, ought according to the express words of
the Gospel, to be perfect as their Heavenly Father is perfect; Mat. 3.48. and
as Chrysostom. cont. vit. vitae. Mon. l. 3.
St. Chrysostom well observes, that there ought to be no other difference
between the Religious and them who live in the World, but only that these
engage themselves in the bonds of Marriage, whereas the Religious conserve all
their Liberty, and have great advantages above Married persons for the more
easy accomplishment of the promises of Baptism.

And that no doubt may remain in your spirit concerning this point, and that
you may entirely banish from thence this first Error, which causes all the
irregularities that slide into the manners of Christians; I will here simply
translate what this great Doctor of the Greek Church has written in one of his
Works, which he adresses to a faithful Father of Children.

This great Saint, after he had made appear, that persons engaged in the world
are no less obliged than the Religious to observe exactly the Commandments of
Christ Jesus which he has given us in the Gospel; because there is no
distinction in the Words, and that for example he has absolutely forbidden to
Swear, or to behold the Wife of ones Neighbor with criminal desires,
concludes, that all the other Precepts of the Gospel, which are not addressed
to one particular estate which is there expressed, extend themselves commonly
to all the world: and that by consequence our Savior having declared in
general, that true Happiness consists in Poverty of Spirit and in Tears, in the
Hunger and Thirst after Justice, in Persecutions and Sufferings; and that the
Rich and such as live in the abundance of all things, in the Divertisements and
applauses of the world, are truly unhappy; it is no more permitted to seculars
than to Religious to fancy or acknowledge any other fountains of happiness then
Poverty and Tears, Contempt and Sufferings; and that all Christians ought
equally to defy Riches, Pleasures, and Honors, as the most probable causes of
their perdition.

Thus, adds he, this distinction which is put between persons living in the
world and them who renounce it, is a mere invention of men. The holy Scripture
knows it not, but will have all Christians, and even them who are engaged in
Marriage, observe the same Rules and the same Institute as do the Religious.
Hearken to what St. Paul says, and when I name St. Paul, it is as if I produced
to you the words of Christ Jesus himself. This great Apostle writing to married
persons who labor in the Education of their Children, does he not require of
them all the exactness and all the perfection of a retired and solitary life?
For does he not cut off from them all the pleasures they might take, either in
the ornaments of clothes, or in the delicateness of drinking and of eating,
when he says: 1 Timothy 2.9. Behold the order I give you as to what concerns
the Women; I desire that they should be clad modestly, and that their manner of
clothing and dressing themselves may breath nothing but decency and chastity:
that they wear no frizled hayr, nor ornaments of Gold or of Jewels, nor
sumptuous habits; but that they be clothed as may beseem Women who make
profession of piety and who ought to make their piety appear by their manners
and actions. And when he adds in the sequel speaking of widows: Chap. 3. v. 5.
She who lives in delights, is dead according to the spirit although she be
living according to the body. And in another place, speaking of all the
faithful in general: Having what is needful to live, and wherewith to cloth
our selves we ought to be content: could he exact any thing more of Religious
persons? After St. Chrysostom has thus run over all the Rules which St. Paul
prescribes to Married people, and the conduct which he ordains them to observe;
whether for their Conversations, in which he not only forbids idle babbling and
the reciting of Fables and human Inventions, but moreover pleasant fancies and
immoderate gayeties; whether for the Meekness and for the Charity which he
enjoins them to have toward one another, not suffering them to be transported
in words against their Neighbor, Ephesians. 4. and commanding them even to be so
far affectioned to procure the good of all the World, as to abandon their
proper Interests for the conservation of Peace with their Brethren: After, I
say, that he had made it appear how St. Paul imposes upon Married persons such
Laws as the most solitary Monks have much ado to accomplish: he adds the words
following.

What can we find greater and more excellent than these Rules? And since St.
Paul commands us to be above choler, clamours, desires of Riches, of good
cheer, of magnificence in Clothes, of Vainglory, and of other Pomps of the
World; to have nothing to do with the Earth, and to mortify our Bodies: is it
not evident that he requires no less perfection in all Christians, than Christ
Jesus required in his Disciples? seeing that he even ordains us to be so dead
to sin, as if we were effectually buried and really dead to the World.

But to make you see that it is the design of the Apostle; mark that the most
powerful Argument he employs to exhort Christians to patience and Humility, is
the obligation they have to render themselves conformable to Christ Jesus. Now
if he does not ordain us to take for the model of our Life the Religious, nor
even the Apostles, but Christ Jesus himself; and if he threatens with such
horrible punishments them who imitate not this amiable Savior, what reason can
any one have to pretend that there are States in Christianism more obliging
than others to tend to a greater and higher perfection, since it is commanded
to all the world, to attain to the self same Salvation, that is to imitate
Christ Jesus? Behold that which undoubtedly overthrows the whole Universe.
People imagine that none but Religious are bound to live well, and that others
may live negligently, they are deceived, this is not so: but all the World is
obliged to follow the same Maxims, and to enter into the same Reflections.

And fancy not, (says he), that it is I who advance this Verity: It Is Christ
Jesus himself who teaches it: It Is he who is to judge the whole World, and who
will judge it according to the same Maxims; as sufficiently appears by the
rigorous Sentence he pronounced against the wicked Rich man, who is not
tormented, because he being Religious was cruel, but who burns in the flames
which shall never be quenched, because he had overmuch affection for the Pomps
of the World, and that living in the abundance of Riches and Pleasures, and
being covered with Purple and sumptuous Garments, he despised and neglected to
succor Lazarus, who was reduced to great misery.

Surely when our Lord says, come to me all you who labor and who are burdened,
and I will ease you: Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me that I am meek and
humble of Heart, and you shall find the rest of your Souls; he speaks not only
to Religious persons but to all sort of people. When he enjoins to enter into
the strait way, he lays not this command only upon Religious, but equally upon
all men. Jesus (these are the proper terms of the Gospel) said to all; If any
one will give himself to me, let him renounce himself; let him daily bear his
Cross; and let him follow me. And when he said, that if any one came to him,
and that he did not hate his Father and his Mother, his Wife, his Brethren, his
Sisters, and even his own Life, by despising all these things when there is
question of the service and of the glory of God, he could not be of the number
of his Disciples, that is to say, Christian; he did not except any Estate nor
any Profession; even as he excepted not any Father nor any Mother, when he
said, that he who loved his Son or his Daughter more than him was not worthy to
belong to him.

I conceive then, (concludes this great Doctor), that no one will be so bold
nor so contentious, as to dare to deny (after such convincing proofs) that the
Divine Laws do not equally oblige him who lives in the World, and him who is
retired out of it, to the same perfection; and that in whatever estate
Christians live, they are to beware of falling into such dangerous opinions as
thwart these verities.

They who are thus persuaded, begin, my Sister, to comprehend how difficult a
matter it is to educate Children Christianly. For this Christian Education
consisting in establishing them in a Christian Life, it must destroy in them
all that is opposite to this Life; as the love of Honors, of Pleasures, and
even of all unprofitable things. In such sort, that as in effect the Christian
Life of the common people of the World, ought not to be different from that of
Religious persons in the Interior Virtues, which make the Essence of Christian
Perfection; it is also clear that in what concerns the ground of Virtue, the
Education of Children ought not to be different from the Institutions of
Religious people, since in truth we are all Religious, of the General Religion
of Christ Jesus.

CHAP. III. Of the second Error, which causes the Neglect of the Education of
Children, which is, the little care Parents have to preserve them in Innocence.
IF the mean Idea which Parents form to themselves of the Christian Life, and
the small feeling they have in their hearts of the great Purity to which this
life obliges us, is cause of the little care they take in the Education of
Children; surely the false Imagination they have, that it is a small matter to
lose ones Innocence, and that it is easily recovered, contributes also
extremely to make Fathers and Mothers slide into this dreadful negligence. And
yet can there be a more horrible Infidelity than to violate one of the most
holy and most inviolable alliances which God has made with men, which is that
of Baptism, by which we are initiated into Christ Jesus? And what outrage
commit we not against God, says Tertullian, Tertulian de Paeniten. c. 5.
when after having renounced the Devil, who is his Enemy, and have put him
under God; we raise him up afterward, and returning to to the Devil we render
our selves his Trophee and his joy, to the end that his spirit of malice having
recovered the Prey which he had lost, may triumph in some sort over God himself.

This moved an ancient Father of the Church to say, that if one falls after
Baptism, Pacianus in Catech.
he will be in worse estate than he was before he was Baptized; because the
Devil will keep him faster bound in his fetters as a fugitive slave whom he
has overtaken in his flight; and Christ Jesus can no more henceforth suffer
death for him; since he who is resuscitated from the dead, cannot any more dye.

This moved St. Paul to say in his Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 6.4. That it is
impossible for them who have once been illuminated, who have tasted the gift
of Heaven, who have been rendered partakers of the Holy Ghost, who have been
nourished with the sacred word of God and with the hope of the happiness of
the world to come, and who after this have fallen away, should be renewed again
unto Repentance, because as much as in them lies they crucify the Son of God
afresh and expose him to open shame.

This means not, my sister, that there remains no hope of pardon for them, who
having been once delivered by Christ Jesus, re-ingage themselves by their sins
in the servitude of the Devil; for it is most true, that Christians sinning
voluntarily after the knowledge of the truth, find a Sacrifice of Propitiation
for their sins: But it means that to obtain this pardon and deserve to be again
once more purified by the Blood of this innocent Victime, the sinner must
according to the language of the Fathers, pour forth not only natural Tears,
but Tears of heart, which flow from a sincere Repentance, and perform actions
of strong Mortification and Penance above the Idea which people are wont to
form of it. So that one may say, it is much more easy to conserve the Innocence
of Baptism, than to recover it by this means when one has once lost it.
Besides, that even when one has recovered it, there is still as great a
difference between sinners converted, and them who have conserved the Innocence
of their Baptism, as there is between a Subject pardoned by a King after his
Treason, and another who has been always faithful to him; between a broken
Member which is cured, and a Member which has remained always sound and entire.

What then should not Fathers and Mothers do to hinder their Children from
falling into this dreadful misery? And since there is nothing but a Christian
Education which can preserve them; with how great zeal ought they to apply
themselves unto it? And how high an esteem ought they to conceive of a
Vocation, which engages them not only to inspire into their Children all the
sentiments of Christian Piety and of the sublimest perfection of the Gospel;
but moreover to use all sorts of precautions, and to seek out all means
possible to conserve them in their Innocence, and to estrange from them all
such things as may give the least occasion to alter or diminish in them the
charity andgrace of Christ Jesus.

CHAP. IV. How far forth Fathers and Mothers are interested in the Christian
Education of their Children: and in particular, of what Importance it is to
Mothers.
WHat Interest Fathers and Mothers have in the Christian Education of their
Children, See Eccles. 22.3. That a Child who is wise and well instructed, is
all the joy of his Father, whereas a Child who is stubborn and bred up in the
follies of the World, despises his Mother, and causes to her much sadness. And
again, Pro. 29.15. Instruct your Son, and no will be a comfort to you in all
your calamities, and will afford you great content; whereas you will receive
much confusion if he is ill educated.

And in Ecclesiasticus, Eccle. 30.3. He who well instructs his Son shall be
praised in his person, and that he shall be the subject of his glory in the
midst of his Domestics and of his Friends. If he comes to dye, adds he, it
will scarcely appear, because he leaves behind him a Successor who resembles
him. He has had the happiness and the comfort to see him himself in his life
time, and at his death he has no affliction or confusion before his Enemies,
because he leaves a Son, who can protect his family against their insults. and
acknowledge the favors of his friends.

And surely, if reasoning even according to the Maxims of the World, all the
glory of a Father and of a Mother of a Family consists in the settlement and
good government of their House, what is there more advantageous to Fathers and
to Mothers, than to have Children well educated? Since according to the Wise
man, the prudence and the good conduct of Fathers shining in the manners of
their Children, nothing can more cause their memory to be honored, than the
good Education they have given them.

What avails it to a Father, that he has heaped up a vast quantity of Riches,
that he has made many Friends, and acquired much Wealth, if he leaves
Children, who for want of good Education, will dissipate all his goods in
superfluous and criminal expenses, and who will abandon all these Friends to
join themselves to lewd persons, and to seek out companions of their debauches
and dissolution? What comfort can he expect when he shall be seized on by the
inconveniences of old age? And what help can he hope for in his Infirmities,
from them who have not obeyed him, and who have slighted him when he was yet
in the vigor of his days and could have made himself feared?

But to make use of such only Reasons as Piety furnishes us withal: what
advantage can a Father draw from a Life all Innocent and Holy, if he be
condemned by God for having neglected the Education of his Children? think not,
that I of my self do advance this astonishing proposition. It proceeds from
Saint Chrysostom; who after he had made it most evidently appear, That every
one is no less obliged to procure to the utmost of his power the salvation of
his Neighbor than his own, and that the negligence of other men's sins, is the
greatest of all crimes, concludes, that they who shall have neglected the good
Education of their Children, ought with much more reason dread to be
rigourously punished for that sole sin, notwithstanding that otherwise they
lead a virtuous and well regulated life.

He proves this Verity by a History of the Old Testament, which is known to the
whole world: it is that of the High Priest Heli, who was of himself a very good
man, and who as it appeared in the Disasters which befell him, had a great
submission to the will of God, and a most ardent zeal for Religion: but for
having contented himself to reprehend with meekness two very wicked Sons of
his, and to represent to them the heynousness of their crime without opposing
himself with all the care and force as he was bound to do, drew down the
indignation of God upon himself and his whole Family. His two Sons were slain
on the same day. The Wife of the elder of them lost her life in the pains of
Childing before her time. The Ark of the Covenant was taken by the Enemies, And
he himself unable to support such sad News, fell backward out of his Chair,
brake his brain pan, and there died. So that forty years employed in the
government of Gods people with all the justice and all the integrity
imaginable, could not hinder Heli from perishing in a miserable manner, for
having not labored in the Education of his Children with that force and vigor
which God demanded of him. This Negligence defaced all his Virtucs, and
obscured all his brave actions. And this sin, as St. Gregory observes, could
not be expiated in the sequel of ages, either by Oblations or by Sacrifices.

By this it may be seen, that Fathers and Mothers who neglect to chastise their
Children, and to oblige them to serve God, render themselves really their
Parricides and Murderers. For although these of this High Priest, even now
mentioned, were killed by the Enemies, yet it may be said, that he was himself
the prime cause of their Death, since his negligence in chastising them
diverted the succor of God from them, and put them in the power of them who
bereft them of their life. It Is thus, says St. Chrysostom, that we our selves
treat our Children with more Inhumanity, than Barbarians would do; because all
their cruelty can extend it self only upon the liberty of their bodies, whereas
we by our evil conduct reduce their Spirits into the servitude of Vices, and
suffering them to follow their passions render them bondslaves to the Devil
himself.

Can it then be wondered at, that God punishes with such severity the little
care Parents have of the Education of their Children? and can we be surprised
to see so much rigor used toward them who are the cause of the crimes they
commit, because they did not correct them, nor stifled their passions in their
birth: and furthermore, because in the judgment of the same great Doctor,
although these Children should afterward come to acknowledge themselves, and to
get out of the way of Vice to walk in that of Virtue, and that by a pure effect
of Gods Mercy they should renounce the Maxims of the World to follow them of
Christ Jesus; their parents will not nevertheless escape a most rigorous
chastisement, if they neglected their Education: because they shall be censured
to have contributed as much as in them lay to their Childrens ruin and
destruction.

Now if faults which Parents commit in this Education, draw upon them such
great evils; if in the sentiment of all the holy Fathers and of all the
Doctors, all the Imperfections and all the crimes which Children shall
contract by their negligence, shall be imputed unto them; and if their
punishments are augmented proportionably as the same Imperfections and the same
crimes shall be multiplied in them who descend from them; what Glory think you
is prepared to crown the labors of such Parents as had no other ambition than
to have Christian Children, nor other desires than to imprint deeply in their
soul the fear of Gods Justice, and the acknowledgement of his Mercy?

But how much soever Fathers are interested in the Education of their Children,
whether because of the just apprehension of the Punishments which are prepared
for them if they neglect it, or because of the comforts both temporal and
eternal which they hope from them if they apply themselves with care to their
Education: yet it is of greater consequence to Mothers, and to say better, it is
to them of the highest necessity.

I insist not upon this, that their Sex being less proper to command, and that
finding themselves subject to great Infirmities in old age, they ought to have
a greater care to instill into their Children even in their tender Infancy an
acknowledgement and a respect for themselves: I consider here only their
spiritual interest; and I say, that the means which a Mother has to sanctify
her self are reduced in a great measure to the Christian Education of her
Children.

It Is St. Paul who teaches us this Truth, when after he had spoken of the
modesty which Christian. Women ought to use in their clothes, and of the
wariness they should observe in their Words, particularly in Assemblies, as to
what concerns points of Doctrine and the Interpretation of the holy Scriptures;
he adds; 1 Timothy 2.15. They shall be saved by the Children they shall bring into
the World, by procuring that they remain in Faith, in Charity, in Sanctity, and
in a well regulated life.

As if he should say to Christian Women, according to the explication of St.
Chrysostom: My Sisters, do not thrust in your selves to procure the glory of
God and the salvation of your Neighbor by public Instructions. A woman meddled
once only with teaching, and she ruined the whole World: yet do not you afflict
your selves for this mischief, and let not your heart sink at this reproach.
God has given you a means to repair this injury which you have all received in
the person of the first Woman, and he presents to you another occasion to save
your selves, to wit, the Education of your Children, whom you ought to consider
as so many helps he affords you to arrive at his glory. Eve alone shall not be
saved by the means of her Children, but all they of her Sex shall not gain
Heaven but by the care they have taken in the Education of them whom God has
bestowed on them, in Faith, in Charity, and Innocence.

It Is upon this ground that the same Apostle will have the first thing upon
which Widows are to be examined, when they were to be chosen for the Churches
Ministry, to be, In what manner they have educated their Children: As if the
most evident mark of the Sanctity of a Mother, were that of her Children, and
that it was needless to seek any other proof of her fidelity toward God, and
of her zeal for the good of the Church, but her fidelity and her zeal to see
that the conduct and the conversation of her Children was solidly Christian.

The foundation of all this is, that Children in their low age, are much more
frequent with their Mothers than with their Fathers, and that Fathers have
right to repose themselves upon them until their riper years. And thus it
belongs to them to watch particularly over their Children in their Infancy, as
from whom God will demand a more exact account of these years, the most
important of our lives. As Children have almost always their Mothers before
their eyes; may we not presume that they do nothing but what they have seen
them do, that they have entered into all their ways; and to make use of S.
Chrysostoms terms, that it is as it were by necessity that they are become their
likes.

And moreover since nothing can be hid from Mothers concerning the secret
Inclinations of their Children, because they have been witnesses of all their
cries, of all their plays, and of all their motions: may one not without
injustice attribute to them all the unhappy effects which have followed the
Passions that they suffered to increase in their hearts; and are they not cause
of the crimes which they hindered them not to commit, by not opposing themselves
to the bad customs which they contracted under their government?

CHAP. V. Wherein particularly consists the Obligation which Parents have to
endeavor the Christian Education of their Children.
WHat we have hitherto said, sufficiently shows the Obligation which Fathers
and Mothers have to labor with care to bestow on their Children a Christian
Education; since we have made it manifest that this Education is one of the
principal Duties of persons engaged in Marriage, and that they are highly
obliged, especially the Mothers to be very careful and faithful therein. But
because one cannot be too clearly convinced of this verity; we must, my Sister,
more fully establish it, by showing that it is that which God particularly
exacts of Parents.

To be persuaded of this, there needs no more, but to consider on one side the
submission of wills to Fathers and Mothers, wherein God will have Children to
live; the feelings of love and acknowledgement which he commands them to have
for them; and the recompenses he promises them to encourage them to honor
them: and on the other side, the Authority which he gives Fathers and Mothers
over their Children, and the rigor wherewith he revenges the contempt they
receive of them.

It was not enough, says St. Chrysostom, that God in the design he had to
recommend to parents the good Education of their Children, imprinted in their
heart a natural inclination, which should so powerfully draw them, as that they
could not without using violence to themselves disobey him; he would moreover
that Children should have great respect toward their parents, thereby to
render them more dear and more agreeable, and that their Obedience and their
Love might be as so many charms which should allure them to take special care
of them in their Infancy. And since nothing more strongly engages us not to
neglect business, than the confidence they have in us, and the absolute power
they give us: could God impose a sweeter necessity upon Fathers and Mothers in
regard of their Children, than in making them their Masters; and by entrusting
them with their Education to imprint on their foreheads the authority which is
necessary to succeed therein?

By revenging so severely the injuriries done by Children to them who brought
them into the World, and punishing them with death when they offend them; does
he not solicit them, not only to educate them in the fear and in the
submission they owe to them, lest Justice should take them from them; but
moreover to nourish them in the respect and in the fidelity which they owe to
him, who is truly their Father? And what a confusion must it needs be to
parents, to see that God has taken so much care to hinder their Children from
affronting them, and that they have taken so little care that these same
Children should be hindered from treading under their feet his Commandments and
his Ordinances?

But if that which God has done in favor of Parents, permits them not to
neglect this Education, that which he has done for their Children does not
less indispensably oblige them to employ therein all their Vigilance and their
whole industry. What then? The Son of God shall annihilate himself for their
love; he shall have labored so many years, and suffered so many torments to
sanctify them; and Fathers and Mothers would not humble themselves to instruct
them, or use the least violence to themselves to form them in Virtue? He who
needs no creature, made himself poor, and rendered himself obedient even to
death, thereby to give them example, and to encourage them to contemn the
World, and to labor for Eternity: and they whose very Salvation is advanced by
the means of their Children, shall they not think of showing them the way to
Heaven, and endeavor to withdraw them from that which leads them to eternal
punishments?

He has made them members of his Body in order to make them partakers of his
Glory: and they who have had the happiness to procure this good for them,
shall they not take care to procure for them all the Spiritual Health and all
the necessary proportion to increase in Christ Jesus who is their Head, and to
receive from him by being united to him the increase which he communicates, as
St. Paul says, to all the parts of his Body, by the efficacy of his influence?

Certainly there is nothing more unjust nor more punishable than this conduct,
nor is there any thing which Fathers and Mothers ought not to do to avoid it.
They are to educate for God their Children, as he commands them, because his
sole possession can make them happy.

They ought to do it, because the exactness of his Justice will render them
responsable for all the faults these their Children shall commit by their
negligence. They ought to do it, because their labor shall receive infinite
blessings from God himself.

But above all they ought to do it; because thereby they will cut off, as much
as in them lies, the source of all the evils which are done in the World, which
is bad Education, and they will thereby re-establish the source of all good and
of all Virtues, which is good Education.

Finally, is it not this good Education which prepares the Spirits to receive
the clearest lights, and which plants in the Soul the first dispositions to all
the Virtues? Is not that it which spreads in the hearts the seed of the most
heroic actions, and which lays the Foundations of all that which must appear
best to the eyes of the whole World in the succession of ages? It fills the
Courts of Princes wih faithful, generous, and disinteressed Subjects; the
Parliaments with firm and unbiassed Magistrates and Judges; Colleges with
Religious Persons, and Secular families with prudent and charitable Masters,
and with respectful and submissive servants. In fine, it is the good Education
which augments the mystical Body of Christ Jesus, and which compleats the
number of the Elect and of the Blessed.

There Is nothing but it which can banish all the Vices reigning now in the
World; because there is but it alone which can imprint in it dread and horror.
It Is it only which can make the spirit of Poverty flourish again, by exciting
in the Hearts which it informs, a contempt of all creatures. It Is by it alone
that the love of sufferings may be re-established among Christians, by
banishing from the yet-tender Bodies the eases and delicacies of the World, and
accustoming them timely to suffer. It Is it alone which can conserve Order, and
retain Inferiors in respect and submission to their temporal and spiritual
Superiors, in using them to the practice of an exact Obedience: It Is it alone
which can revive charity and zeal toward our Neighbor, by insinuating into
them an esteem and a tenderness to all the World. Lastly, there is nothing but
it, that is capable to change the whole face of Christianisme, to produce a
happy Reformation in all the Church, to preserve Children in their Innocence
and in the grace of Baptism, and to trace in the Life of Men a lively Image of
the all-holy and all-divine Life of Christ Jesus.

CHAP. VI. With what Dispositions Parents are to labor in the Christian
Education of their Children.
I Cannot better in my judgment express to you, my Sister, the Dispositions
and sentiments in which you are obliged to labor in the Education of your
Children; than to conjure you to consider them as goods which God deposes in
your hands, and which belong not at all to you.

You will find no difficulty to enter upon these thoughts, if you well examine
that you have no share of that which is in them most considerable, that is to
say, of their souls: that what you communicate to them in regard of the Body,
is nothing but what you received from your Ancestors; and that even to speak
justly, they hold nothing from you but sin, which by an unfortunate necessity,
derived from the crime of our first parents, you could not hinder your self
from communicating unto them.

It Is for this cause that your first care, after you brought them into the
World, was to send them to the Church, to the end, that they being there
divested of the Old Man wherewith they had been clothed in your bosom, they
might take a new Nativity in Christ Jesus in the bosom of the Church; and that
the criminal Life which you communicated unto them, being as it were buried and
drowned in the Waters of Baptism, they might there receive a new life by
becoming the Members of Christ Jesus, and be enrolled in the number of the
Adoptive Children of the eternal Father, to come to be one day in Heaven
associates of the Glory of his only Son, and the coheyrs of his Kingdom.

It Is not therefore enough to have said, that you ought to look on them as the
goods of God, which he deposes in your hands; since they are really his
Children whom he has committed to your care; that it is the price of his Blood
which he consigns to you, and that he offers to you in them many favorable
occasions to make appear the zeal and the fidelity you have for his interests.

What a glory is it, my Sister, to be admitted to the same Ministry with the
Angels; to be chosen to be the visible Guardian and Governess of Souls which
Christ Jesus has redeemed with his Blood, and which he has destinated (in
quality of his Spouses) to reign with him eternally?

You are then to receive your Children at their return from the Church with
great sentiments of Humility and Reverence. And if (in the thought of St. In
his Homely, o^ the manner how Anna educated Samuel.
Chrysostom) the Mother of little Samuel respected that Child because he was
vowed to the service of the Temple; if she considered him as a Golden Vessel
designed to a sacred use, which is not to be touched but with a holy
apprehension of profaning it; and if (according to the relation of the most
ancient of our Historians, Eusebius. l. 6. c 2.
) the Father of Origin frequently discovered the bosom of his Son when he
slept, and was yet an Infant, to kiss him with much respect and reverence,
looking on him as the dwelling and tabernacle of the Holy Ghost there
inhabiting; are you to have less respect for your Children, who have in like
manner been replenished with the grace of Jesus Christ, and consecrated to the
worship of God by Baptism? Wherefore watch carefully for their conservation:
Fear to suffer profane hands to touch them: cherish them, nourish them as the
Members of Christ Jesus, and persuade your self that your House should be all
Holy, since it encloses those Children whom he has sanctified and rendered so
dear to his Church, to which they belong as being purchased by the blood of her
Bridegroom; and who puts them not into your hands, but because he expects you
should have a more tender and a more perfect care of them than strangers.

The conformity with Christ Jesus which they have received in being re-born in
the bosom of the Church, is only gross and imperfect, and according to the
terms of the Apostle St. James, they become thereby but only as a beginning of
the new creature: James 1.18. and therefore it is, that she consigns them to
your care, to the end you may make them the perfect Imitators of Christ Jesus,
that you may draw in them his Image, and that (as the Apostle says of himself,
Gal. 4.19.) you may not fear to suffer the pains and pangs of a second bringing
forth Children, till such time as Christ Jesus is formed in their actions,
their inclinations, their affections, and their cogitations.

The Church has rendered them (by the consecration she has made of them) the
living Temples of the Holy Ghost, and the animated dwellings of the Divinity:
she leaves them to you, to the end you should have the glory to finish these
Spiritual Buildings, and that you should adorn them with all the Virtues and
all the enrichings beseeming the presence of so sublime a Majesty.

She received them not into her bosom, Tertul. de coro. militum. and in l. de
Spectaculis. Cyprian. epist 7. Optatus Melevitanur. l. 5. cont. Parm. Salvian.
l. 5. de Providentia. Cyril. cat. 1. Amoros. l. de instuend. Cathecum.
Augustine. l. 2. de Symb.
but upon condition that they should wage War with the World, with the Devil,
and with themselves: she presents them to you, to the end you should direct and
fashion them for the combat, and that they may learn under your conduct to
contemn all the vanities of the World, and to triumph over all their Passions.

These are the Souls which she will introduce into the Marriage-chamber of the
Lamb; she entrusts you with them, to the end you should cloth them with
Nuptual Garments, that you should preserve their Purity and their Innocence,
that you should not permit any creature to seize upon their hearts, or rob this
celestial Bridegroom of the affection they owe him. Finally, the Church
encharges you with the Education of your children because she judges that no
other person has more Interest than you to put them in an estate to conserve
the Grace of Christ Jesus; and to continue them in the favor of this Sovereign
Monark of the whole World.

Ought you not then to tremble, my Sister, in the sight of an employ so great,
so sacred, so difficult? Can one commit small faults in the administration of a
thing so holy and so precious; And now shall we wonder that the Son of God has
raised Marriage to such a dignity, since the persons who are therein engaged,
have need of such extraordinary grace to acquit themselves, as they are bound
by their Duty, and to fill up worthily the extent of their Vocation?

What shall I do (said once St. Bernard, Bernard. Sermon. 3. Dom. Advent.
considering that he was encharged with the care of Souls) and on what side
shall I turn my self, unhappy man that I am, if I come to keep with negligence
this great Treasure wherewith I am entrusted, and this precious Depositum,
which Christ Jesus himself has judged preferable before his own Blood? If I
had gathered up the Blood of my Savior at the foot of his Cross, which I had
put into an Earthen Vessel, and should have been obliged to transport it from
one place to another; in what pain and in what a fright should I have been in
this danger? yet that in which I now find my self is nothing less: For they
have entrusted me with the care of Souls for which this wise Merchant, and who
is Wisdom it self, has given all his Blood; and this treasure is shut up in
Vessels of Earth exposed to a thousand dangers to be broken in pieces. But to
make you comprehend yet more the greatness of this danger, and the difficulty
of this employment; you must know that it is not enough for you to apply your
self to the Education of your Children by a secret inclination which Nature
forms in the heart of all Mothers, and by motives purely human, which they
cannot avoid: You will do no more if you act only in this manner, then what the
Pagans, and even the most barbarous people do as well as you; and that which in
some sort the fiercest Beasts perform more faithfully than you; But you ought
to labor herein with sentiments altogether particular of piety, and to make it
the principal part of your Devotion.

And yet who thinks of this? How many pass for good people who perchance have
never thought of offering to God the cares and labors which they propose to
employ in this Education, who have never implored his grace, nor taken care to
strengthen that which they have received upon this account, and who have never
protested to God that they would seek only his glory and his Interests in their
Children. Thus it is that by following merely the movings of Nature, which is
totally corrupted by sin, Parents without any design to distill Vice into their
Children, do notwithstanding educate them only according to the Maxims of flesh
and blood, which are contrary to them of the Gospel, and which draw them into
an unhappy necessity of following the World.

When I say, my Sister, that this Negligence of Fathers and Mothers draws the
Children to follow the World, think not that I intend to speak of the Civil
Society, and that I complain only that Parents bring not up all their Children
in the design of making them Religious. I speak of the World, which your self
has made them renounce, by making them receive Baptism; of the World which
has been excommunicated by the mouth of Christ Jesus; of the World which has
much love and much esteem for the goods of the Earth, and for the pleasures and
commodities of Life, and which has nothing but aversion and contempt for that
which God loves, and for what he commands. John 1.15. and chapter 17.

I complain with St. Chrysostom, Tom. 5. upon the 20. chap. of St. Matt.
That there are so many Mothers so affectionate for what regards their
Childrens Bodies, and so indifferent for the perfection of their Souls; That
they desire with so much passion to have them exempt from the incommodities of
this life, and that they care so little for the torments which attend them in
the other. I complain with this great Doctor, that Fathers are so sollicitous
to procure for their children great Employments and Honorable Offices, without
thinking to procure for them the the possession of God: That they purchase at
an excessive price that which must cause their loss, being unwilling to
receive as a pure gift their eternal salvation: That they afflict themselves,
and sigh to see their children in poverty, without testifying any sorrow to see
them commit crimes which deprive them of the Riches of grace.

Be afraid, my Sister, be afraid to fall into this blindness: and since it
proceeds only from the small reflection which Parents make upon the excellency
of their Vocation; consider often, that you have in custody that which is in
the world most precious, that not only the whole world was created for this
child whom you are to educate, but that Christ Jesus himself annihilated
himself for him. Hereupon protest that you will not love him, but because he
has loved him; That you will take an exact care of him because he belongs to
him; and that you embrace with humility and joy all the pains you are to
endure, in training him up to perfection, in regard of the pains and labors
which Christ Jesus suffered for him, and of the blood which he powered forth to
sanctify him.

Propose to your self, that you will establish your children as your supplement
near unto God, in the practice of the Virtues which you perhaps have neglected:
If Christ Jesus has lost in you some of his rights and dues, let him find
them in them: If you cannot have the glory of Virginity, have at least the
advantage of being Mother to a Virgin: If you have not loved your God with all
your heart, procure that he be loved by all them who depend on you. Let the
innocence and the Sanctity of your children be opposed to the errors of your
life; and let their fidelity and their Submission to his Commandments,
extenuate your Unfaithfulness and Disobedience.

St. Ambrose puts all these sentiments into the mouth of a Christian Mother,
whom he introduces thus exhorting her Daughters to Virginity:

You may (says this Holy Mother to her children) justify your Father and
discharge your Mother before God, by making appear in your conduct those graces
which we have perchance neglected, or whereof we have made bad use. The only
thing which may hinder us from repenting our selves of our Marriage, is to see
you draw some profit from the labors we have endured; and I shall esteem my
self almost as happy to be a Mother of Virgins, as if I my self had preserved
Virginity. Consider my Daughters who she was whom the Son of God coming into
the World to redeem it, chose for his Mother: She was a Virgin: Thus it is, my
Daughters, that I wish the purity of your life may repair the defects of mine.

And in the first Book which this Holy Doctor made for the Instruction of
Virgins, addressing his speech to Fathers and Mothers: You have understood,
says he to them, what are the Virtues which you ought to teach your Daughters
to practice, and what Rules you are to follow in their Education: A Virgin is a
gift the most pleasing one we can offer to God, and the richest Present which
Parents can make to his Divine Majesty: it is a sacred Hostie, the Sacrifice
whereof being daily renewed renders God propitious toward the Mother who
presents it.

Do not therefore propose to your self, my Sister, any thing that is mean or
indifferent in the Education of your Children, since you your self are so much
interessed therein, and that even the cries and tears of your children in the
cradle intercede for you with God and pray for you: as St. Jerome avers,
writing to a Roman Dame concerning her Daughter.

You have already seen the strict Obligation which all Christians have to tend
to the highest perfection; let therefore your principal care be to bring your
children to it, and let it be your only ambition to make them great Saints.

They are as so many living and precious stones wherewith God designs to build
the celestial Jerusalem; and according as they shall be found more fair, better
polished, and fitlier wrought and prepared, they shall be put in a place more
eminent, and you from them shall derive greater glory. They are in your house
as statues of Gold, which you ought to form and embellish every day, if you
desire they should represent perfectly their true Model which is Christ Jesus,
and that they should be his true Images. They are the Dwelling houses and the
Tabernacles chosen by God for his habitation: and therefore take heed (as St.
John Chrysostom advises) lest by your fault the Temple of God be turned into a
retreat of Thieves, and that Christ Jesus should give to you the same reproach,
which he gave to the Jews. Know (proceeds this Father) that the hearts of your
children become the retreats of thieves, when you permit base and servile
desires to possess them, and irregular concupiscences to master them. For it is
these sorts of affections, which (more cruel and more dangerous than theives)
ravish from them the liberty which grace gave them, and which after they have
pierced them through on all sides, and covered them with most dangerous wounds,
reduce them into the slavery of Passions and vices.

Wherefore I conjure you, my Sister, to form a resolution without delay to
proceed in such sort as that your children fall not into this accursed
servitude. Propose to your self to do all you possibly can to conserve them in
the Innocence and in the grace they received in Baptism. And since by your
offering them to the Church you tacitly obliged your self to make them keep the
pact and bargain they made with God in that Sacrament; have always that
engagement before your eyes, and seek incessantly in Prayer, in reading, and
particularly in leading a good life, such graces as are necessary for you, in
order to acquit your self faithfully of this your Duty, which is the greatest
and holiest of the World.

CHAP. VII. What Idea's or Forms they ought to propose to themselves for their
Imitation in the Christian Education of Children.
I Cannot better assist you, my Sister, in this enterprise, than by proposing
to you some Model which you may follow, and upon which you may fix your eyes to
conduct you securely in a design, wherein it is so hard a matter to succeed
well: This Model is no other than God himself: For if Fathers and Mothers in
production of their children express an Image of his fruitfulness, is it not
just that they should propose to themselves for the prime Idea of the Education
of these same Children the conduct which this Celestial Father holds in regard
of all men?

I stay not upon this, that the cares of his Providence respect only the
interests of our Souls; nor upon that, that God proposes for the end of all his
works to put us in possession of eternal happiness: I entreat you only to
observe what has been his conduct in regard of the Jewish people, whom all the
Fathers, after St. Paul, look upon as in an estate of Infancy and Puerility in
respect of Christians, whom Grace (according to St. St. Chrysostom. upon Galat.
chapter 4.
Chrysostom) has rendered ripe in years.

Behold the care God takes to retire that people out of Egypt, to separate them
from Idolaters, and to interdict them from all commerce with strangers, lest
their Example or their Doctrine should corrupt and pervert them: He gives them
his Law and his Commandments: He inspires them with a holy horror (if we may
say so) of his greatnesses and of his Majesty, to the and they should fear to
offend him. He rigorously chastises their least Infidelities and their
sinallest Disobediences. And out of the care he has to make them acknowledge
that it is he alone who supplies all their necessities, who protects them
against all their enemies, and who affords them all the goods they possess; he
endeavors to make them enter into the feelings of love and gratitude for his
bounty, and into an humble submission to the orders of his Divine Wisdom and
Will. He instructs them in the most hidden truths, and in all the Mysteries of
Christ Jesus; But he instructs them as Children, that is, by presenting only
shadows unto them and Figures, and by making them to practice after a gross
manner and accommodated to their weakness, that which the faithful in a riper
age and after the coming of Christ Jesus ought to know and exercise distinctly.

It Is thus, my Sister, that you are to prefer that which regards the spiritual
Interests of your children before all that touches their temporal good. They
must even from their tenderest years be estranged from all company which may
carry them on to Vice: you are to instill into them a great horror of sin, and
an extreme dread to displease God; you are to accustom them to bless him and
to thank him for all they have, making them to understand that it is he alone
who gives them all things by your hands, and that he is their true Father: you
ought finally according to their weak capacity make them know Christ Jesus, and
you are to apply your self singularly to cause them to imitate his actions by
insinuating into them a love of his Maxims.

Now if you being a Mother, would have me propose to you the example of a
Mother: cast your eyes, my Sister, upon the Church which is ours. Examine her
conduct, and conform to it yours by so much the more willingly, because your
Marriage Represents her Union with Christ Jesus, and the Image of her alliance
with him.

Consider how careful this holy Mother is to imprint in her children a strong
aversion from the Vanities of the World, and an ardent love for crosses and
sufferings. They are yet scarcely Born, when she makes them renounce all the
Pomps of Satan, and engraves the Cross upon the most considerable parts of
their Bodies. And what does she teach them after this, but Christ Jesus
crucified? Wherewith does she entertain them but with humiliations and with his
annihilations? And what does she represent to them in her solemnities, in her
Ceremonies, in her Ornaments, and in all that which she offers to their eyes,
but what he has done to give them the marks of his infinite love? She aims at
nothing more than to render them worthy of his graces and of his mercies. She
cannot endure they should do the least action to displease him; and the height
of her ambition is, that all Christians should live and labor only for Christ
Jesus.

It Is for this cause that although she has for them all the tenderness that
can be desired, yet she educates them in a spirit of Penance; and exercising
them in Fastings and other Mortifications disposes them (according to the
thought of Tertullian) to suffer if it is necessary Martyrdom it self; not
carrying them on to Joy, but in regard of the glory which her Bridegroom
possesses, and which he has merited for them.

Behold the care she takes to strengthen them by Confirmation in the grace and
the life which they have received in Baptism; to sustain them and to nourish
them with the Word of God, and with the Sacrament of the Altar; and finally
with what severity she punishes the least of their faults in Penance: If they
engage themselves in any Ministry which concern's Religion, she confirms upon
them the caracter of Holy Orders to introduce them into it, that they may
worthily acquit themselves therein: If they incline to Marriage, she disposes
their hearts by her Benediction to the graces which are necessary for them. In
a word, she sustains them not, she entertains them not, she nourishes them not,
but by Christ Jesus, and of Christ Jesus.

I know, my Sister, that all children are not capable of these Verities: but I
also know, that there are none of them who may not be educated in this spirit.
I know, that according to the thought of St. Augustine, Augustine l 3. de Symb.
ad Cathec. c. 4.
our Lord has chosen among the holy Innocents, children who could not so much
as speak to give testimony of his greatnesses; and he has taught us by this
conduct that there is no age incapable of Divine Mysteries; since even that was
proper for the glory of Martyrdom. I know that according to the King-Prophet,
Psalm. 8. v. 3. he establishes his sovereign Power by the mouth of children,
and even of them who hang yet at their Mothers breasts to confound his Enemies;
and that when he reprehends his Disciples for hindering these little children to
come to him, as it is mentioned in the Gospel, Mat. 19.14. these very Infants
whom he will have permitted to approach him were in the arms of their Parents,
and had not strength to support themselves.

So that there is no Mother who cannot and who ought not imitate the Church in
this ardent desire of consecrating her children to Christ Jesus, who may not
(as does the Church) cause them to suck with their Milk the love of her
Commandments, and instill into them by the modesty of their dress, and by the
simplicity she uses in such things as she gives them, a generous contempt of
all the Vanities of the World, and a great esteem of poverty; who may not, by
not educating them with that delicacy which the love of the flesh has
invented, prepare them as the Church does to endure Fasting and other Exercises
of Mortification.

And since the Mothers teach children to speak, and make them know the things
which are necessary for them, they may without doubt as the Church does, teach
them as soon the Name of Jesus as that of their Father; August. l. 6. Cnnfess.
c. 4. n. 1.
and that it is much more to the purpose to fill their memory with Christian
Verities, though they do not comprehend them, than with the follies of the
world which they comprehend full as little, and which may cause one day the
loss of their Souls.

CHAP. VIII. An Introduction to the Maxims which Christians ought to follow in
the Education of Children.
It Is not enough for the making a perfect Copy that a Painter has before him
an Original: he must moreover know perfectly the Rules of Painture, and reduce
into Practice in making this Copy all the Maxims of his Art. It suffices not
then that you propose to your self in the Education of your children these
exceilent Idea's which I have represented unto you, and which you are obliged
to imitate: You must furthermore know all the Maxims you are to follow to come
to the perfection of these Divine Originals; and you ought to know the Rules
which the Spirit of God has prescribed you, not only in the sacred Scriptures,
but particularly in the writings of the Fathers of the Church, who are its holy
Interpreters.

For experience alone cannot teach Fathers and Mothers the Education of their
Children. It oftentimes happens, that they themselves remember not in what
manner they were educated, and that they were too young to observe it in their
Brothers and Sisters who followed them.

Wherefore that you may yet clearlier understand the need you have of these
Maxims, and to discover unto you by the way upon what grounds they are
established by the Fathers of the Church, I entreat you to consider, that
although Children are sanctified in Baptism, and that they are there
replenished with the graces and gifts of the Holy Ghost; yet the concupiscence
is not taken from them in this Sacrament, and there remains in their hearts a
certain Inclination toward the creature, which is the cause of all the sins
committed in the World, and which is commonly attributed to the corruption of
Nature.

It Is this concupiscence which (in the opinion of St. S. Aug. l. 1. Conf. c. 7.
Augustine) causes children to covet the duggs of their Mothers with so much
greediness, and to seek for the bosom of their Nurse with such sensible signs
of impatience. It Is through it that they demand with so much eagerness and
tears the things which are hurtful unto them: that they are vexed and
displeased with them who will not submit to them, that they show themselves
froward against free persons, and such whose age should render venerable to
them, against their Fathers and Mothers, and against so many others who are
incomparably wiser then themselves; and that they strive even as much as they
can to hurt them by striking them, because they will not do what they desire of
them, nor will blindly obey them in things which would prove pernicious unto
them. And thus (pursues this Father) the weakness of the Body is innocent in
Children, but the spirit of Children is not so; and we suffer in them patiently
many things not because they are not bad, since one cannot suffer them in
persons more advanced in age, but because we hope they will vanish together
with their Infancy. You are therefore, my Sister, to consider your children as
totally inclined and wholly bent to evil. And do not doubt, but these
impatiences which they make appear, this obstination not to will but what
themselves will, this despite, this love of play, this disgust of their first
instructions, this curiosity, this desire of overcoming, this ardour to
command, this aversion they have from Prayer, this jealousy they conceive upon
the signs of friendship given to their Brothers or Sisters, this envy and this
desire to ravin from others all they possess; finally, the inclination they
have to lie, and the esteem they have for the glittering vanities and ornaments
of the World, proceed from the same principle which causes the hatreds, the
murders, the envies, the jealousies, the desire and the love of the goods of
the earth, and of the Pomps of the World, and which causes them to fall, who
are in a ripe and advanced age, into greater disorder.

In effect, grace being not given to man, but to perfect his Nature, the action
of grace supposes that of nature; and man must be capable to reason before he
can be assisted and sustained in his ratiocination. So that the superior part
of the soul being not capable in children to do its functions; and the
regulation of the inferior depending on its orders and its lights: this which
has no need of extraordinary succors to carry it on toward its object, but
which has a natural bent toward pleasing things, which cannot be regulated by
grace, which does not yet act in them; seizes upon the command, and gives
liberty to all the passions to sally forth, and to make appear in all the
actions of children, and in their weakest motions, the Empire they have in
their hearts, and the violence wherewith they draw them toward creatures.

And this is it, St Aug. l. 1. Confess.
(exclaims S. Augustine) which is the pretended innocence of children. There is
none for them, Lord, there is none for them, my God; and I demand your pardon
yet at this day, for having been of the number of these innocents. For it is the
very same and this first corruption of their spirit and of their heart, which
passes by sequel into all the rest of their life. Such as they were in respect
of their preceptours, and of their Masters, they are in regard of Kings and of
Magistrates. After they have committed petty-Injustices to get Nuts, Balls, and
Birds; they commit great ones to heap up Money, to get fair Houses, and to have
a multitude of Servants. Their irregularity increases with their age, as the
great Punishments which the laws ordain, succeed the light Punishments of
children. And thus, my God and my King, when you said in the Gospel, That the
Kingdom of Heaven is for them who are like to children, you did not only
propose the Innocence of their Spirit for a model of Virtue, but also the
littleness of their Bodies as the image of Humility. CHAP. IX. The Maexims
which ought to be followed, to render the Education of Children Christian.
It Is upon these Principles I have now proposed, that all the advices and all
the Maxims which the Fathers of the Church have given to Parents touching the
Education of their children, are supported. And it is without doubt for this
subject that the sacred Scripture enjoins them to use therein a holy Rigor and
a just severity: because their age being susceptible of apprehension, which is
a natural motion, there is nothing but fear that can retain them in their Duty,
and render them capable of Discipline. This you will observe in the ensuing
Maxims.

Maxims drawn from the Sacred Scripture.
SOlomon says in the Proverbs, Pro. 13.24. That he who chastises not his son
does truly hate him, and that he who loves him with a real love, watches
incessantly to his Education, and pardons him in nothing.

Pro. 22.15. That folly and the inclination to disorderly things is as it were
collected and heaped together in the heart of a Child, and that there is
nothing but a somewhat severe conduct that can drive it from thence.

Pro. 33.13. Take great heed (pursues this Wiseman), that you permit not your
children to take overmuch liberty, and that you withdraw them not your self by
a too great facility from your Discipline: for your son will not dye for being
a little chastised. You shall strike him with the rod and give him some blows;
and you will deliver at the same time his soul from Hell, by hindering him from
falling by this rational severity.

Pro. 29.15. The Wand and Correction give Wisdom: whereas a Childc left to his
own will affords nothing but confusion to his Mother.

Pro. 24.5. Educate well your Son, he will prove your comfort, and he will fill
your soul with joy.

Eccle. 52.5. Be not therefore ashamed (says Ecclesiasticus) to make show of
great solicitude and a strong application for the well bringing up of your
Children.

Eccle. 30.1. He who loves his Son chastises him for every fault he commits,
and almost continually.

Eccle. 30.8. As an untamed Horse becomes restive and hard to be managed, so a
Child who is left to himself becomes sturdy and temerarious.

Eccle. 30.9. If you nourish your Son with Milk (which is the symbol of
meekness) he will make you fearful, and you will become terrible to your self:
If you play, and render your self overfamiliar with him, he will bring you
sadness.

Eccle. 30.10. Do not laugh, nor divertise your self with your Children, for
fear lest one day you may repent it, and that in the end you be not constrained
to show extraordinary signs of sorrow and of confusion which you may receive
from them.

Eccle. 7.25.26. If you have Children, instruct them well; make them pliable
from their tender age. If you have Daughters, watch over their bodies, and
never show them an over-cheerful countenance.

You pereeive, my Sister, throughout all these passages, which are so many
Oracles of the Holy Ghost, that Fathers and Mothers are obliged to Educate
their Children with a holy severity, which hinders them from contracting bad
customs, and which by the fear of chastisements brings them to an aversion and
to a horror of the vety shadow of the least vice.

You see that God forbids them to play, to divertise themselves, and to laugh
with them; and by consequence he ordains them not to appear in their presence
but in a posture which may instill into them a respect, and which may entertain
them in the Submission and the Obedience which he himself has commanded them
to observe.

But because these advices are somewhat general, and that the multitude of
diseases causes a multiplication of the remedies; the Doctors of the Church
have treated of the Education of Children a little more in particular, and have
endeavored to prevent the other evils which proceed from the small care which
is taken therein, or from the negligences which are therein committed.

Maxims drawn from St. John Chrysostom.
ST. John Chrysostom after he had made the recital of the misfortune of the
high Priest Heli, Chrysostom. Hom. 9. in 1. Epist. ad Timoth. chapter 3
(as I have already related unto you), addressing himself to Fathers, speaks to
them in this sort: Listen to this you Fathers, and bring up your Children with
great care in the Discipline and in the Correction of our Lord. Suffer them not
ever to do such actions, which as pleasant as they are, cease not to be
malicious: and do not pardon them in any fault upon pretext of their infancy.
Keep them above all in a great restraint and in a great sobriety. Advertise
them, correct them, affright them, threaten them, and if need requires, make
them feel the effects of your threats.

You have in your Children a considerable and very precious pledge, keep it
with great care, and do all things to hinder the ravishing of it away from you.
Be not so void of reason as to take a greater care of your goods and
pofsessions, than of them for whom you heap up all those things. Exercise their
Spirits whilst they are yet tender, to Virtue and to Piety, and then you may
think of procuring for them the other commodities of life. Will you leave your
Son rich, see that he be Virtuous, and that he be Charitable: for that is the
means whereby he will increase his Patrimony, or at least it is that which will
render him as content with his pittance as if he possessed all the Earth. But
if he is vicious, great riches will only serve to furnish him wherewith to
entertain his bad customs, and to cause him to abandon himself without control
to all sorts of debauchery.

Mothers, it belongs to you to take care of the Daughters you have; and this is
not hard for you to do. Order it so, that they keep continually at home.
Instruct them principally in piety and devotion, teach them a contempt of
riches and of all worldly Pomps and Vanities. And since if you thus educate
them, they will not only save their own Souls, but moreover them of their
Husbands and of their Children; perform all that concerns them with a serious
application, as laboring in one sole person for the glory and for the
Salvation of many others. For a Daughter should go forth of the house of her
Parents, to enter into that of her Husband, perfectly instructed in every thing
that is necessary for the good government of a Family; and she ought to be so
perfect, that like as a little leaven communicates its qualities to all the
paste, so she should cause her Virtues to pass into all them whom she is to
conduct and govern.

Let the manners of your male-children be so honest, and their purity so
singular, that they may deserve praise from God and from Men. Let them learn
under your Discipline, Abstinence, and Sobriety; not to make superfluous
expenses, but to let alone all magnificence, which is commonly sought after in
things of show and luster, to employ their goods lawfully; to be submissive to
you, and to be obedient to the least of your Words.

How long shall we suffer our selves to be led by the mere feelings of the
flesh? Hom. 21. super Epist. ad Ephesians. c. 6.
and how long shall we bend downwards to the Earth? Let us prefer before all
other sollicitudes that of correcting and instructing our children in the fear
of our Lord. If your son learns from his tender Infancy to live Christianly, he
will acquire goods much more considerable, and a glory far greater, than the
World can procure him. You will not gain so much by instructing him how to heap
up exterior riches, as in teaching him how to contemn them: do so then if you
desire to make him rich; since he is truly so, who needs nothing.

Do not strive to settle him in a condition wherein he may acquire great glory
by his learning; but teach him to put a small value upon all worldly glory.
Seek not out means to make him live long upon earth, but such means as are
necessary to procure for him an eternal life in heaven. Think not of making him
so much an able man, as of rendering him a faithful man. He stands in need of
Modesty, and not of Eloquence; of good manners, and not of crafts and
subtilties; of good actions, and not of fine words; endeavor to render his
soul pure, rather than his tongue polished: Not that I forbid the instruction
of children, but it is this I cannot endure, that one should only strive to
teach them human Literature, and neglect to inform them what is necessary for
their Salvation.

Let us put our children by our prudent conduct into an estate to endure
patiently all sorts of accidents, and not to become insolent in prosperity. If
they who make the Statues and Portraits of Princes receive so much glory, why
should not we respect great recompenses for having adorned the Image of the
Sovereign of all Kings, and for having restored to him his true lineaments,
(which were defaced) by making our children conformable to Christ Jesus, by
making them meek, affable, easy to forget injuries, inclinable to do good to
all the World, to converse with all people with gentleness and humanity, and
finally to despise the Earth with all its alluring Vanities.

Behold, my Sister, after what manner St. Chrysostom conceived children should
be educated: wherein he perfectly agrees with all the other Fathers of the
Church, who all of them are of one accord in these principles, as I hope to
show you in the sequel, in the mean while because I should enlarge my self a
little too much, and that this work would swell extraordinarily, if I would
relate unto you the entire passages of the other Fathers, where these Maxims
couched; permit me to propose to you only the substance, and to represent them
to you in few words, according as I have conceived them.

Maxims concerning the manner how Parents are to love their Children.
BEar always, my Sister, a tender love to your Children, yet let it be
rational, and not concerned in their tears in such occasions wherein you must
use violence to their Inclinations. Now as these Inclinations are all corrupted
and not governed in them by reason, they will not permit them to take pleasure
and divertisement but only in such things as incline them to vice. You must not
fancy that you can wean them presently from those faulty divertisements,
without their resistance and complaint. Fortify then your heart against their
moans and tears, and resolve not to listen to the feelings of nature, when
there is question of making them feel pain, or of depriving them of some
satisfaction, rather than to suffer them to contract bad customs and to become
obstinate in their own will.

Salvian observes, that there is nothing that brings greater damage to Fathers
and Mothers, and works them greater displeasure, than the Children they have
too much loved. And you are to take so much more care and heed of this
irregular affection, by how much we see in the sacred Scripture that it has
been the origin of the greatest crimes and of the greatest irregularities of
men. For the Holy Ghost discovers unto us no other source of Idolatry, Wisdom.
4.15.
than the overstrong passion Fathers have had for their Children. And if that
which the major part of Fathers and Mothers in our days have for their
Children, makes them not to erect Altars to them, nor to offer them sacrifice;
yet it but too frequently engages them to make them their Idols to which they
sacrifice all their cares and all the quiet of their life.

Love then your Children, but with a love which is holy and disengaged from the
senses; a love which stays not on the outside, and on that which pleases the
World, as upon beauty, a good grace, a gentile garb, a pleasing humor, and a
quick vivacity in conversation, and in reparties or returning nimble jests and
replies.

Love them with a love that is strong and full of sweetness; a love which
patiently suffers their weaknesses and their infirmities, their unaptness to do
the good things you tell them, their lightnesses and even their little
disobediences, without ever altering or cooling it; but on the contrary
redoubling its ardour toward them whose infirmities of body or Spirit are the
greatest. A good Mother, says St. Bernard, most tenderly cherishes that child
whom she sees to be infirm.

4. Maxims concerning the care they ought to take to disintangle children from
the World, and to instill into them Christian sentiments and feelings.
PLace frequently before their eyes the vows they have made in Baptism; make
them comprehend them, make them love them, make them have a high esteem of
them: Let them know that the Pomps of the devil which they have renounced, are
nothing else (as St. Augustine explicates them) but the allurements of Pleasure,
Balls, Comedies, and Shows; Tertul. l. 1. explicat. Symboli ad Cathe. c. 1.
and (according to Tertullian) the complements and honors which the people of
the World render to one another, and mutually exact, the great offices and
great employs, the days specially dedicated to pastime and to debauchery, the
popular divertisements, the formed compacts and designs of voyages and walkings
abroad, the flatteries, the follies, and generally all the other actions
wherein the World makes ostentation of so great passion for gold and silver,
for ambition, for pleasures, and for the rest of the false Divinities of the
earth.

Mothers are wont to teach their children in such manner that they may conceive
a horror for the devil; who can ordinarily have no power over them but by the
means of the Vanities of the World, whereof he makes use to blind them and to
surprise them. Is it not then more rational that they should instill into them
an aversion from all that the World values, and instruct them to tremble at the
sole Name of dangerous divertisements, and at the sight of such persons, as are
not governed but by ambition and vanity?

Do you thus dexterously manage all the occasions God shall give you to inspire
into them a contempt of the World, and of the honors of the Earth which are so
passionatly sought after. In the disgraces which happen to persons of quality,
and in the death of great ones, make them to reflect on the vanity of all
humane greatnesses, and on the advantage there is to be linked to nothing but
God alone. If some one of singular piety and of eminent virtue suffers for
having undertaken the defense of the Innocent, and for the public Interest;
extol before them the glory of these sufferings, and strive to make them
relish the happiness there is in exposing ones life, goods, and quiet, rather
than to do any thing against God, against a good conscience, and against ones
King and Country.

Make use thus of all things, even in their most tender Infancy, to instill
into them Christian sentiments. In the affliction they testify to you for the
loss of their Poppets and playgames, and such other petty-toys, tell them, that
it is thus, that they ought not to set their affection upon any creature,
because they are all perishable.

If they complain to you that they have been beaten or abused: answer them,
well my Children, you must for the love of God suffer your selves to be
ill-treated. And then endeavor to make them render some small service, or show
some little civility to the persons by whom they pretend to have been misused,
or at least to make them comprehend that they must in no sort revenge
themselves: Do not at that time seek to pacify them, as Parents do ordinarily,
by speaking ill of those who offended them, or by threatening them your self, or
by exciting them to testify feelings of revenge and of displeasure against
those things (although inanimated and insensible) which seemed to have
contributed to their fall, or to the misfortune which has happened unto them.

5. Maxims concerning the search Parents should make of the predominant
Inclinations of their Children.
Study the nature of your Children and their Inclinations; and having observed
that to which they are most biassed, apply your self particularly to conquer it
if it is bad, by making them practice by little and little the contrary
actions; and if it is good, strive to strengthen it day by day by the exercise
of that Virtue which it has for its object.

The knowledge you shall get of this Inclination which reigns in them, will be
very useful to you for their particular conduct. For there are certain Passions
which must not be openly set upon, but must be battered by removing the objects
which excite them, and by presenting good ones unto which they may apply
themselves: And there are others on the contrary, which (as we may say) they
must be forced to produce, to the end that Parents may make use of the very
faults which they cause them to commit, how little soever they appear, that so
they may give them a horror and an aversion from them which are more animated.

Besides that, you ought particularly to propose to your selves in the conduct
of your Children, to follow God, and to conform your selves (as much as in you
lies) to the dispositions which he shall put into their souls; to the end that
by making use of the knowledge you have of their dispositions, you may apply
them to such things as are proper for them, and to which you shall judge they
will most freely apply themselves.

6. Maxims touching the Instruction of Children.
PRopose unto them little rewards, to engage them to remember what you teach
them: and (as says St. St. Jerome in Epist. ad Le^am.
Jerome), Gain them by small presents and by things they most esteem, as by
comfitures or poppets.

Make them acquainted with children of their own age who are well educated,
that so they may have an emulation for them, and that the praises you give them
may excite them to imitate them.

Do not hastily reprehend them if they are of somewhat a meek temper, but
encourage them sometimes by praises; and at other times causing them to render
an account of what they have learned before them of their own age, bring it so
about that they may rejoice to have out-gone them, and then ashamed to be
behind them. St. Jerome. ibidem.

Take heed above all, that they get not a hatred of Studies, lest they having
taken an aversion from them in their tender age, should retain it in their
riper years. Endeavor to make them love what they must be constrained one day
to learn and practice; to the end it may not be then a pain to them but a
pleasure, and that they may not do it by constraint, but by their own choice.
You must neglect none of these least things, when the greatest cannot well
subsist without them.

Increase and nourish in them the love of labor, by keeping them always
employed. Let the changing of their business be their divertisement; and let
pious reading succeed their prayers and employs. Time seems short when it is
divertised by good occupations.

Remember that there is no time to be lost in the instruction of children; and
that as you are to apply your self to form their manners from their most tender
years, you are also from their most tender Infancy to imprint in them the first
disposition to the Sciences.

True it is, that one can hardly during all that time teach them what they will
apprehend in one sole year of their riper age. But because they must of
necessity be employed in something, even in that age, one can assuredly do
nothing better to make them employ their time profitably, after they once begin
to speak, than in making them to study to speak naturally and in good terms:
and one should never neglect any thing which may conduce in the least to their
advantage, because they will thereby become capable to learn things of more
importance in the age in which they must learn those of less concern, if they
have not already learned them. It Is thus that advancing by little and little,
children find themselves capable in their youth of great matters; and that the
time well husbanded during their Infancy, contributes much to make them employ
more profitably the time of their following youth.

Yet they must not be too much pressed to any thing, but one is to accommodate
ones self to their strength and to the reach of their spirit. Studies have (as
it were) their Infancy as well as man: and as the strongest bodies have been
nourished with milk, and laid in a cradle in the first years of their life, so
the most eloquent Men have sent forth cries like others, and have had at their
beginning like them a difficulty to speak and to form their Letters.

Philip of Macedon had not made choice of Aristotle, who was the greatest
Philosopher of his age, to teach Alexander the beginnings of humane learning;
nor had that Philosopher undertaken that employ, had not both the one and the
other been persuaded that the first tinctures of Studies ought to be received
from the most able persons. Manage therefore, my Sister, so discreetly the
first years of your children, that all may serve to render them both more
knowing and more pious.

Cause them to learn to read in such books, where the purity of language and
the choice of good matter meet together. S. Aug. l. 1. Confess. c. 15. n. 2.
St. Augustine thanking God for having forgiven him the faults he had committed
in his Infancy by taking overmuch pleasure in vain things, which he learned by
reading the Poetical fables and fictions, says, that although it is true, that
he had learned many useful words among those follies, it was nevertheless more
true, that he might as well have learned them in more serious Lectures; and
that to do so is a sure way to instruct Children well. It Is this therefore, my
Sister, which you ought to practice in regard of yours: and to take care that
the lectures you give them in order to teach them to pronounce distinctly, and
to observe the Points and Comma's, and to discern a perfect sense from an
imperfect, be more profitable than curious.

When they shall begin to write, permit not the Copies which are given them to
be stuffed with bad manners of speaking, and with the first fancies which fall
into the mind of a Master: but provide that there may be proposed unto them
such Verses or Sentences as contain some pithy expression or some pious Rule of
Christian Morality. One may insensibly by this means replenish their memories
with the greatest Truths: and as they shall have made a strong impression in
their tenderest Infancy, they will easily present themselves to them when they
shall be more advanced in age, and capable to make good use of them.

Your principal care ought to be to cultivate their memory, and to make them
learn by heart as many things as you can. In effect, as on the one side the
spirit of children is not then capable to produce many things of it self, and
on the other side they have ordinarily a very good memory, there is scarcely
any other faculty of their soul which one can profitably exercise.

When they shall be in an estate to go to the Schools, or to have a Master in
the house, make choice of the best regulated College, and of Masters, not only
the most able, but the most pious and the most prudent. If you choose a
Coachman, a groom of the Stable, St. Chrysostom. Ser. 19. upon Matthew.
you take care (said St. Chrysostom speaking to Parents) that he be not subject
to wine, that he be not a thief, and that he be skilful in drenching and
dressing Horses. But if you will provide a Master for your children, to form
and fashion them, you trouble not your selves in the choice of him: the first
who presents himself is good enough: and yet there is no employ either greater
or of more difficulty than that is. For what is of higher importance then to
form the spirit and the heart, and to regulate all the conduct of a young man?
Great is the esteem of a skilful Painter and an Engraver: but what is their art
in comparison of his excellency who works not on a cloth, or on a
Marble-stone, but upon the spirits? Yet we neglect all these things. We trouble
not our selves to render our children Christians, but eloquent: and this very
desire is for our own interest. For the end we propose to our selves, is not
simply that they be eloquent, but that they may grow rich by their eloquence.
Now if they could become rich without being eloquent, we would slight as well
the eloquence as all the rest.

7. Maxims touching the Motives whereby to engage Children to labor, and to do
what one desires of them.
NEver propose to them for a recompense the vain Ornaments of the World;
neither make use of such things as have no value but among worldly people, to
bring them to do what you desire. It would prove a means to inspire into them a
love for such things, and to make them esteem them as true goods; whereas you
ought to study how to make them despise them. For notwithstanding that all the
goods of the earth are things in themselves indifferent, yet you ought to
propose them to children as dangerous, yea even as evil, by discovering unto
them only the disorders they cause in such as possess them. And you should
(says St. S. Jerome. epist. ad Gaudent.
Jerome) carry your self in such sort toward them, as that they may think the
World has been always in the miserable estate it now is; that they may remain
ignorant of what pleasing things passed in the ages foregone and spent; that
they may shun the Maxims and the customs which are in use at this present; and
that they may aspire after the goods which are promised to us in Heaven.

Now if you had rather follow the sentiment of them who (as the same Saint
relates) fancy that it is more to the purpose to satiate in childrens infancy
the thirst which Men, but particularly Women, have after these sorts of vanity,
to entertain it and cause it to increase in them by refusing to afford them
such Ornaments as they see others use: take care at least (as this great
Doctor advises Gaudentius) that your children may perceive how they of their
own age are praised for not using such sorts of Ornaments. Make much of them
your self in their presence: speak with praise of their modesty and of their
comportment; and insensibly strive to instill into yours a disgust of all
exterior trickings and trimmings which the World admires. Strive to make them
comprehend, that you do not allow them such things, but only because they are
yet little ones: and tell them that if they were endued with perfect reason,
you would not give them such things as are fit only for children. If we must
drive out of our hearts one desire by another; you may perchance cure that
which they have for these things of show and luster, by awaking the natural
desire which all children have of putting themselves in the rank of such
persons as are more advanced in age and in judgment.

Avoid nevertheless that unhappy conduct which St. Chrysostom reprehends in the
Parents of his time, and which is but too common in this of ours, according to
which Fathers and Mothers excite not their children to virtue, to study, and
to other laudable exercises, but only by humane and temporal considerations,
and which are all founded upon ambition and upon interest. See how this great
Saint expresses the sentiments of one of those Fathers tied to the World, by
making him speak in these terms to one of his children: Behold my Son, behold
this man; he was very meanly born, and had many other inconsiderable qualities:
and yet because he was eloquent, he passed through the greatest Offices and
employs; he has heaped up vast riches, married a wealthy wife, built proud
Palaces; finally, he has made himself dreaded and respected by all the World.
This other, O my Son, (proceeds this worldly Father,) got not the reputation he
has at Court, but because he was perfectly skilled in the Latin Tongue. And
thus it is, (exclaims this great Doctor,) that we enchant the ears of your
children to introduce into their hearts the two most violent passions which are
in the world, to wit, the desire of riches and that of vainglory, which
corrupt and stifle in their souls all the seeds of virtue; which cause to
spring up there such a quantity of thorns and briars, and which spread about so
much sand and dust, that their spirit remains barren and incapable to produce
any fruit,

It Is of this disorder that St. Augustine complains to God, S. August. l. 1.
Confess. c. 9. n. 1.
when making reflection upon the conduct they had used toward himself in the
time of his youth, and raising himself toward God, he says to him: Have I not
just cause, O my God, to deplore the miseries and the deceits which I
experienced in that age, since they proposed to me no other rule of living
well, but to follow the conduct and the advertisements of them who labored
only to inspire into me the desire and the ambition of appearing one day with
renown in the world, and to excel in this art of Eloquence which gains honor
among men, and gets false and deceitful riches. Whereby it plainly appears,
that if it is good, as we have observed, to give praises to children, it is not
to make them love the praise, nor to make them labor for vanity; but only to
make them love Virtue, which alone deserves to be praised.

8. Maxims touching the care Parents ought to take for their Childrens health,
and for what concerns their bodies.
BE not over-sollicitous to procure for them all the commodities of life: When
they shall prefs you to grant them something which is not absolutely necessary
for them, endeavor to make them understand, that Christians ought to let alone
superfluous things, that they may supply the necessities of their neighbor.
Say to them; my Children, this is not ours, God gave it not unto us, but only
that we might with it do works of charity; and we should rob the poor, if we
should waste it in things unprofitable.

But if they have some infirmity, or any disease; however you spare nothing
secretly to comfort them and to cure them, strive nevertheless to make them in
love with sufferings; accustom them to complain as little as may be, and by
little and little instill into them constancy and stability.

Repress in them such inconsiderate desires as are ordinary in that age; and
teach them, for example, so to regulate their thirst and their hunger,
according to the laws of temperance, that they may inure themselves by little
and little not to have so much as a desire to do what they know they may not do
honestly. St. Augustine for a mark of the discretion and of the prudence of a
mayd-servant extremely aged, St. August. l. 9. Conf. c. 8. n. 1.
to whom the Parents of St. Monica had committed the conduct of their
Daughters, relates, that except the hours in which they repasted themselves
very soberly at the table of their Father, whatever violent thirst they felt,
she permitted them not so much as to drink water, for fear lest they might
contract that bad custom.

The thing which I entreat you most religiously to observe, is, my Sister, to
accompany always the refusal which you are constrained to make, with so much
sweetness and such testifications of good will, that it may be to them
supportable; and by giving them such reasons as they are capable to relish,
and which relate only to their own Interest: strive to send them away better
satisfied with your refusal, then they would have been with your overmuch
easiness.

9. Maxims touching what is particularly to be avoided in conversation before
Children.
NEver suffer in their presence vices to be covered with the name of virtue:
St. Chrysostom.
Let it not be said, that it is to be of a good humor to frequent Shows, Balls
and Comedies: That it is to be liberal, to make great expenses: and that it is to
be courageous to have ambitious designs.

Permit not the name of vice to be given to virtue: to call devotion that which
is hipocrisy, liberality that which is prodigality; the love of retreat, a
savage disposition; the fear to offend God, a scrupulosity and a weakness.

Rowse up their courage without raising in them ambition: render them bold
without egging them on to rash enterprises: teach them to be meek without
effeminacy; constant without obstinacy; grave without severity; eivil and
obliging without baseness; frank and free without folly and fondness; prudent
without cousenage; secret without dissimulation; liberal without prodigality;
good husbanders without avarice; devout and religious without superstition.

Repeat unto them no less frequently then did the Mother of a great King, these
words: my children, God knows how well I love you; but I had rather an hundred
thousand times see you carried to your graves, than to see you commit one only
grievous sin. Perhaps you may be so happy as to engrave deeply in their soul
this sentiment, and to conserve them, as this Princess did this great person,
in the Innocence of their Baptism.

10. Maxims touching the correction of Children.
YOu must let pass no faults without punishment: but you must not equally
punish every fault. The blemishes which dust makes upon a garment is cleansed
by shaking it off, and not by casting water upon it or by applying fire to it.
You are to employ remedies according to the strength and the nature of the
constitution and complexion of the diseased person.

As nothing but love ought to move you to punish them, it were to be wished
that they could be persuaded that you acted toward them only by that
principle, and that you should always appear rather their Mother than their
Mistress, according to these pithy words of the Author of that letter to
Celancia. You ought to be have your self, says that excellent man, toward all
them of your house, and rule them in such sort, as that they may consider you
rather as their Mother than as their Mistress; and it must be rather the
goodness and the sweetness you testify to them, than your rigor and your
severity, which must oblige them to render you all the respect they owe you.

Above all, beware of treating them amiss, when you are in choler; and take
heed of entering into passion against any one in their presence; to the end they
may not lose the natural fear they have of angring you, and that they may
always apprehend the effects of an irritated power, whereof they never have had
the experience.

Because a child stands in awe of you, do not reprehend him, nor threaten him
upon all sorts of occasions, but only in such things as are absolutely vicious,
or which conduce to sin. Leave them in great liberty as to things indifferent,
and which will pass away as they increase in age and in judgment: and remember
that there is nothing more dangerous than to accustom children to chastisement,
because thereby one hardens them rather then corrects them.

It were to be wished that children had never heard the mention of blows or of
rods; that the sole desire to please you, or the sole dread to anger you,
regulated all their motions; and that, following the Counsel of a great Bishop,
you could bring them to respect you rather by your sweetness and by your
goodness, than by a harsh and severe carriage.

For my part, I conceive that the rigor which the sacred Scripture, in those
many passages which I have before-cited, ordains to follow in regard of
children, is exercised much more perfectly, and even according to the spirit of
God, by the refusal of a kiss or of ordinary cherishings, than by whippings or
other bad treatments of the body; and that the greatest dexterity of Fathers
and Mothers consists in rendering their children so jealous of the marks of
goodness they give them, whereby they become much afflicted at the least
coldness appearing in their countenance; that they fear nothing more than to be
deprived of their presence; and that nothing is to them more sensible, than to
see their Father or their Mother prefer the service even of an underling upon
occasions when they were disposed themselves to obey them.

11. Maxims touching the differences and disagreements which children
ordinarily have with the domestics, and the liberties they take with them.
TAke good heed that you be not transported with anger, when it chances that
the servants exclaim against your children, Inform your self gently of the
subject of their plaints and tears; and even when you shall find out that your
servants were in fault, never reprehend them in the childrens presence, for
fear they should thereupon grow insolent, and should from thence take an
occasion to be absolute in all things, and to exercise a petty-tyranny over
your domestics, upon the assurance of being supported by you in their
selfwills.

But if on the contrary your servants have chanced to say or to do something
that is bad in the presence of your children; although otherwise they may be
excusable, yet fail not to testify your being displeased, and to reprehend them
vigorously before them. The child will become wiser, says Solomon, by the
chastisement of the culpable, and of him who gives him evil example, Prove.
21.11.

Leave them not alone but as little as may be with the domestics, and
especially with Lacquais and Foot-boys. These kind of persons to insinuate
themselves and to get the favor of the children, please them ordinarily with
nothing but sottish follies, and instill nothing into them but the love of
play, of divertisement, and of vanity; and are only capable to corrupt the best
natures, and such as are most inclinable to goodness.

St. Jerome after he had recommended to a Lady of quality to use great
circumspection in the choice of such Maids as she was to take to accompany her
Daughter and to ferve her; counsels her, not to suffer them to make any
particular friendship with them, but to hinder them from talking together in
private, and from making between themselves certain petty-mysteries of I know
not how many things.

This great man knew the danger there is in leaving children to take too much
liberty with all sorts of domestics; and how much it is to be dreaded, that
this familiarity should come at last to make them lose their Innocence.

12. Maxims touching the freedom which is to be given to children to express
their thoughts and their opinions.
THis advice of St. Paul ought to be well weighed: Ephesians. 6.4. Fathers do not
irritate your children by an over harsh carriage toward them, and by using
them with overmuch rigor, but take care to educate them in the discipline and
in the fear of our Lord: lest (as he adds in another place) Coloss. 3.2. they
should fall into a discouragement of spirit and of heart. Which is as if the
Apostle had said:

Take heed of reprehending continually your children, and of treating them with
too much severity in small matters. Do not your self oblige them by your rigor
to wound the respect which they owe to you; and by commanding them things of
too great difficulty, do not constrain them to disobey you.

They must be permitted when they are a little advanced in age, to have the
liberty to present unto you their reasons and their complaints, nor ought you
to treat them harshly when they fancy they are in some sort wronged by your way
of proceeding with them.

Imitate the prudence of that charitable Father, of whom it is said in the
Gospel, that seeing his eldest son highly offended at the manner of his
receiving his younger son into his favor; and having understood that for this
cause he would not enter into the house; went forth himself to entreat him to
come in. And that son having reproached him, Luke 15.29. That he had now served
him many years without ever disobeying him in any thing he commanded, and that
nevertheless he had never bestowed on him a kid for the entertainment of his
friends: but that as soon as this his other son who had wasted his means among
harlots was arrived, he had slaughterd for him the fat calf: This good Father
far from being offended with his discourse, strives on the contrary to sweeten
his spirit with words full of tenderness and goodness: Ib. v. 31.32. My son,
(says he) you are always with me, and all that I have is yours: but it was fit
to make a feast and to rejoice; because your brother was dead, and he is
revived, he was lost and he is found again. See how this wise Father disdains
not to justify his proceedings before his son, and how he endeavors by the
testimonies of charity and of the preference which he gives him, to diminish
the resentment and the indignation he had conceived against him and against his
younger brother.

Behold what manner of proceeding you are to propose to your self, since it is
that of God himself in regard of his children, which Christ Jesus has laid
open to you under this parable. Think not, my Sister, that it is from the
authority which God has given to Fathers and to Mothers over their Children
not to make them to do what they desire of them but by the way of power and
command; nor that Children act always against the respect they owe to their
Fathers and Mothers, when they find difficulty to approve all that they do, or
all that they say.

Children ought in many occasions to submit their lights to them of their
Parents, and to prefer their judgment before their own: but it is also the duty
of Parents to communicate to their children those very lights to which they
pretend they ought to subject themselves. They ought to conduct them by truth
and not by humor and fancy; and they ought to gain their hearts by the love of
that good which they desire to instill into them, and not by captivating their
will under the yoke of a command full of threats and of terror.

St. Jerome speaking of the manner to educate children, says, that one must use
severity with much prudence; because the persons whom one treats over-severely
seek with more eagerness than they do who are left to more liberty, to divert
and comfort themselves with the trifles of the world, from the harsh usage to
which they are enslaved.

13. Maxims touching the patience wherewith Parents are to support their
children, and to moderate their resentments of injuries received from others.
It Is not enough for a Christian Father and a Christian Mother not to irritate
their children by holding over them a too severe hand in things indifferent, or
which are not absolutely criminal: they are moreover to be disposed to support
patiently their greater disobediences, and to suffer their greater outrages,
without suffering themselves to be transported to such resentments as would be
no less dismal to themselves then to their children.

We have a proof convincing this truth in a dreadful history related by St. S.
Aug. Sermon. 31. de diversis and l. 22. de civit. chap. 8.
Augustine in several of his works, and which cannot be too often presented to
Fathers and Mothers, amidst the displeasures they receive from their Children.

There was in the Town of Caesarea in Cappadocia a widow of quality who had ten
children, to wit, seven sons and three Daughters: the eldest of all these
children, so far lost the respect he ought to his Mother, that after he had
loaded her with many injurious words, he was so rash as to strike her. His
Brothers and his Sisters were witnesses of this outrage, not only without
opposing themselves, but even without speaking one sole word in defense of
their Mother. This poor Woman having her heart pierced with sorrow for so great
an injury, and suffering her self to proceed in the resentment of the affront
she had received, took a resolution to lay her curse upon her wretched son who
had so highly offended her.

Hereupon she goes forth of her at daybreak to pronounce this imprecation
against him upon the sacred Font of Baptism. The Devil presented himself to her
in her way under the form of her husbands brother who was Uncle to her
children, and questions her whether she was now going? she answered, that she
went to lay a curse upon her eldest Son because of the insupportable injury he
had done to her: then that accursed fiend who had no difficulty to find an
entrance into the heart of this Mother, which the spirit of revenge and of
anger had opened unto him, persuades her to extend her malediction upon all her
other children, since their silence rendered them no less criminalls than their
eldest brother.

This Woman therefore suffering her self to be enflamed with choler against all
her children by that envenomed counsels of this tempter, comes to clip and
embrace the Baptismal Font, spreads abroad her hair, discovers her breast, and
demands of God in this posture, that he will revenge her of all her children in
such a manner as that they may bear about them over all the earth, the marks of
the chastisement laid upon them for the outrage she received from them; and
that they may imprint by their example a terror into the spirits of all people.

Her prayer was heard so speedily, that her eldest son was struck at the same
instant with a horrible trembling in all the Members of his body: and within
less then one year all her other children were punished with the same
chastisement, one after another, according to the order of their birth.

Then this unfortunate Mother, perceiving her curses to have been so
efficacious, and being no longer able to support the reproaches which her
conscience suggested to her of her impiety, nor the confusion which she
suffered before the world for permitting her self to be transported to so great
an extremity, strangled her self, and ended her accursed life by a death yet
more accursed.

St. Augustine upon the occasion of one of these children, whose name was Paul,
and who had been miraculously cured, having caused to be read to his people the
recital which this young man had made of this History as I have now told it,
and making reflections upon the circumstances which accompany it, exclaims,
Aug. sermon. 32 de diversis.
Let children learn from this example to respect their Fathers and their
Mothers, and let Fathers and Mothers fear to fall into choler against their
children. It Is said in sacred Writ, That the blessing of a Father establishes
the House, and that the curse of a Mother roots it up even to the foundations.
This we see accomplished in these accursed children, who being at this present
vagabonds over all the earth, have no establishment in their own country, and
who not only serve for a dreadful spectacle to all men, but also by presenting
their punishment and their misery to the eyes of all them who look upon them,
should above all affright proud children, who fail in their duty toward them
who brought them into the world.

Learn then, O children, to render unto your Fathers and Mothers according to
what is commanded you in the sacred Scripture, the respect and the honor which
is due to them. But you, Fathers and Mothers, remember, when your children
offend you, that you are Fathers, and that you are Mothers: This unhappy Mother
invoked God against her children, and she was heard because God is truly just,
and because she had been truly offended. True it is, that there was but one
only among them who had injuriously struck her, and the other had only been
silent in this occasion, or had not uttered a word in her defense. But surely
God is just who heard her prayer, and who gave ear to the expressions which
grief put into her mouth. All this while what shall we say of this poor Mother?
Was not she her self punished by God with so much more rigor, by how much she
was heard more readily and more conformably to her own desires? It Is thus, my
Sister, that this great Saint believed that God permitted this Mother should
make so unhappy an end, after she had abandoned her self to such choler against
her children, to teach Fathers and Mothers not to suffer themselves to be
transported easily to such resentments, although most just in appearance; and
not easily to lay their malediction upon their children, however so reasonable
a cause they may seem to have for so doing; and never to implore the succor of
God against them during the violence of their indignation, for fear lest God
hearing the prayers which grief drew from their hearts, and granting to them
the things which passion alone inspired them to demand of him, the revenge
which they call down upon their childrens heads falls not upon their own, and
hurry them not on to despair, when the heat being passed over, and the feeling
of nature having got the upper hand, they shall perceive themselves to have
been the cause of the misery and ruin into which their wretched children are
reduced.

And this reflection ought to make so much the deeper impression in the spirit
of Fathers and Mothers, because this miserable Mother we have here spoken of,
was in desperate hazard of being damned for all eternity for having suffered
her self to be transported to that excess of revenge against her children:
whereas the said children were not punished for the fault they committed
against her, but only during this life; and that God afforded mercy to the
major part of them, at the instant prayers, and importunities of holy men, to
whom they had recourse in their affliction; as was seen in two of them who were
recovered; in one at Hippo, and in another of them at Revenna.

14. Maxims touching the Equality which Parents are to keep among their
Children.
IF God gives you many children, take care to unite them in perfect friendship
with one another; let the younger respect the elder; let the elder condescend
to the younger as being yet less rational: and make in every thing appear so
just an equality in the marks of love and tenderness toward them, that they
may have no manner of jealousy against one another. The only embroidered robe
which Jacob gave to Joseph, was cause of the hatred his Brethren conceived
against him, and that they hatched the design to take away his life.

Upon which St. Ambrose makes this pithy reflection: It very frequently falls
out, that the affection of Parents is hurtful to their children when it stays
not within the limits of a just moderation: and this happens, when either
through an overgreat goodness they pardon their faults, or that testifying more
love to some than to others, they extinguish by this preference that fraternal
affection which should keep them united in friendship. The greatest advantage
which a Father can procure to one of his children, is to leave him the love of
his Brethren, As Fathers and Mothers cannot exercise a more glorious liberality
toward their children; so also the children cannot receive from their Fathers
and Mothers a more rich Inheritance than that. It is just that nature rendering
them equal, the favor of them who gave them birth should continue them in a
perfect equality. Piety permits us not to fancy, that Money gives an advantage
to a child, since it is that very thing which ruins piety. Why then do you
still marvel that so many differences arise among Brethren upon the occasion of
a piece of land, or of a house, since one sole garment excited so much envy
among the children of Jacob?

But what, (adds this holy Doctor,) shall we blame this Patriark for
preferring one of his sons before all the rest? Can we take from Fathers and
from Mothers the liberty of loving them more whom they believe deserve better
their affection? and is it just to take from Children the emulation and the
desire of pleasing them more who gave them their birth? Finally, Jacob loved
Joseph more than all his brethren, because he foresaw that this child would be
one day more virtuous than the others, and because he discovered already in him
more visible and more illustrious marks of goodness. These last words of St.
Ambrose contain very important instructions for Fathers and Mothers. For
although they are obliged to have an equal charity for all their children, it
is notwithstanding a very hard matter not to resent sometimes in themselves
more tenderness for one than for another; and there are even some occasions
wherein they are obliged to make it more appear.

All the difficulty then consists in knowing how to regulate and to distribute
the testimonies which they give them according to the rules of Christian
charity, and according to the lights of Faith. It consists in not preferring
them who are of a more flattering and facetious humor, but also more free and
inclinable to evil, before them who make show of more coldness, but withal of
more reservedness and more modesty; not to cherish them more whom we design
for the world then them whom we will consecrate to Religion; to avoid the
disorder which a holy man of France has reprehended with so much zeal in a
Letter he addresses to all the Church; where he reproaches Fathers and Mothers
of high injustice for making greater advantages of such of their children as
followed the world, than of them who made profession of a holy and religious
life.

What is more just and more reasonable (says he), than that he will of parents
should agree with that of Christ Jesus; that they should prefer in the
distribution of their goods and of their charges them whom God has preferred
by the choice he has made of them to link them to his service? Happy he who
loves his children by the motive of divine love; who regulates the charity he
bears them, by that which he owes to Christ Jesus; who in the bonds of nature
which tie him to his children, looks upon God as their Father; who making
sacrifices to God of that which his love obliges him to give to his children,
draws for himself an eternal gain and happiness, and who lending to God (as we
may say) that which he distributes to his children, procures for himself an
everlasting recompense by procuring for them temporal commodities.

But now, (adds he) Fathers and Mothers follow Maxims far different from these,
and much deviating from the piety which here appears. They never leave less of
their goods than to such of their children to whom they should leave the
greater share in regard of him to whose service they are engaged: and they of
their family whom they least esteem, are they whom the spirit of Religion
should render most considerable. Finally, if they offer to God some one of
their children, they prefer their other Brethren before them. They judge them
unworthy to succeed them in their worldly means who are found worthy to be
dedicated to the Altar. And one may say, that their children did not become
contemptible unto them, but because they began to be precious before God.

This disorder is but too common in the age we now live in, in which Parents
content not themselves to design to the Church or to Religion such of their
children who are meanliest qualified, but they moreover even neglect their
education, and use all means imaginable to deprive them of their succession.
They strive by all manner of ways to have some Benefice fall into their hands,
and when they have once obtained it they substitute the goods of the Church and
the patrimony of Christ Jesus instead of that which was due to them by their
birth. They make them renounce all the just pretensions they have by the
natural and civil Laws: because they render them depositaries of such goods as
were designed by the piety of the faithful for the subsistence of the poor: and
they bereave them of what lawfully belonged unto them upon pretext of having
procured for them that which they cannot according to the Canons and Rules of
the Church apply even to their own uses: because it is not obtained by the ways
prescribed by the said Canons and the same Rules of the Church. As if, (says
Salvian) Parents should not rather tie themselves to leave goods to such of
their children as they know are capable to make the best use of them; and as if
they ought not to prefer them who employ their means only in works of a
charity, before them who will assuredly dissipate them in their vain and
superfluous expenses.

There is another disorder crept in among the faithful, and which no less
destroys the equality which Parents owe to their children, which is, to think
of settling them only, who either by the rank of their birth or for some
particular qualities, best please them. They fear lest by parting their goods
equally among all their children, they cannot raise up as they would the
splendor and the glory of their Family. The Eldest could not possess nor
sustain the Offices and the employs which they strive to procure for him, if
his Brothers and his Sisters should have the same advantages which he has:
they must therefore be put into such an estate as not to be able to dispute
this right with him. They must be thrust into Cloisters whether they will or
not, and they must be timely sacrificed to the interests of him whom they
design for the world and for vanity.

You cannot, my Sister, take too much care to avoid all these disorders, which
are contrary to the charity and to the Justice you owe to your children.
Endeavor therefore to keep among them a perfect equality. But if you have some
mark of tenderness and of preference to give to any one of them, let it be to
the most obedient, and to them who tend with most ardour to goodness and to
virtue; to the end that that may excite an emulation in the others, and that
they increasing all equally in the fear of God and in the pursuit of virtue,
may deserve all the like testimonies of goodness and of affection.

15. Maxims touching the lodging of Children.
TAke care not only for your Sons, but also for your Daughters, that as much as
may be they lie alone, or with such persons in whom you may have as just a
confidence as in your self.

It Is an advice which St. St. Franc. de Sales l. 1. Epist. Ep. 1.
Francis of sales gave to Madam de Chantail in prescribing her Rules for the
Education of her children. And to make her comprehend the profit hereof, he
says; that experience rendered this observation daily more and more
recommendable unto him.

In effect, because Parents neglect this Counsel, it chances not only that of
two children which are in the same bed, there is but one of them whom God draws
out of the heap of corruption, and leaves the other by a just judgment
abandoned to his irregularities; but even that both of them perish miserably by
losing the innocence they received in Baptism.

16. Maxims touching the Complacency which Parents have in their Children.
NEver approve the actions of your children in which there is on the one side
Wit, and on the other side Malice; for fear lest not knowing how to disintangle
that which there is of spiritual, from that which is of malice, in the thing
they do, they should attribute to the whole action that pleasure you take and
the praise you give them; and that thus they should accustom themselves to
practice it, and should (to please you) get a habit of telling petty lies, and
inventing tricks against their brethren or against the other domestics.

Be you very reserved in the praises you give them, even for their most
spiritual actions; and be afraid lest by relating in their presence all they do
wherein there appears wit, and by discoursing with them or of them, they should
be puffed up with pride, and so become insupportable to others.

17. Maxims touching the Plays and the Recreations of Children.
Permit them such Divertisements as are honest and not dangerous, but
moderately; for fear lest if you should keep them overlong embusied in serious
exercises, they should be disgusted with them: and lest on the contrary they
should become Idlers if you should suffer them to play continually.

It would be a great good so to order it, that their very recreations might
contribute to exercise their Judgment and their memory; that according to the
counsel of all the Fathers of the Church, they were taught to sing Psalms and
Hymns. thereby to clear their spirit in forming their voice, and to untie their
tongue in pronouncing the praises of God; and (as St. Jerome says) that they
had no Pastimes which were not to them a study.

It Is thus that this great Doctor counsels a Roman Dame, to cause letters to
be made of Box or of Ivorie, thereby to teach her Daughter by playing with
them, and mixing them together, to know the Letters, and to join them, and so
to form Syllables: And it is thus, that after children can read, one may as it
were for a divertisement show them the Map, and as they grow in age and
understanding give them a taste of the pithiest passages of the sacred and
profane History, and oblige them to repeat the same, and to remember the sacred
Genealogies and the Succession of Monarks; to the end, (says this Father,) that
by such very things which will be perhaps useless unto them, their memory may
be disposed to conserve those they are bound to know.

It would be also much to the purpose to make them play sometimes before you,
and to let them recreate themselves in your presence; because the inclinations
of children are more easily discovered in their Play. In effect, as they stand
then less upon their guards, and that joy fills their hearts, their other
passions are more free to show themselves, and they quickly manifest the
eagerness they have to gain, the desire they have to overcome others, and the
discontent they have for being conquered; so that you may thereupon manage, (as
one may say) these diverse passions, and make use of their play to instruct and
teach them not to apply themselves to it with so much heat, not to have an
eagerness for gain, not to set themselves against others when things succeed
not to their wish, not to be dejected at their losses, to preserve a certain
indifferency which is necessary to practice justice and fidelity, and to avoid
cheating and petty-cousenings which are very common among children, and which
oftentimes pass along with them in their more advanced age.

18. Maxims touching what company ought to be permitted to Children.
TAke great care that your children neither play nor converse ordinarily but
with children brought up in the fear of God. Job permitted his to recreate
themselves, but 'twas among themselves, and without strangers who might have
corrupted them and hindered them from entertaining themselves in virtuous
employs, which they always did according to the relation of Origin and of St.
John Chrysostom: and that charitable Father ceased not, during their
recreations and divertisements, to offer up to God for them his fervent prayers
and sacrifices.

St. Jerome writing to Gaudentius, gives him a very important advice, which I
desire you to mark well: It is, so to order it that his daughters should not
play nor divertise themselves but only with them of their own sex, and that
they should in no sort seek, but rather shun the frequentation of boys.

St. St. Teresa, in her life written by her self. c. 2.
Teresa, whose spirit was perfectly cleared and every way judicious, making
reflections upon the first faults of her life, attributes them to the liberty
she took in her tendrest age to converse with some of her cousin-germans. I
had, (says she) some cousin-germans who came frequently to my Fathers house. He
was very circumspect to forbid all entrance to any but to them: and would to
God he had used the same caution toward them also: for I now see the danger
there is, when one is in an age proper to receive the first seeds of virtues,
to have commerce with persons, who knowing the vanity of the world, entice
others to engage themselves therein. I was almost of the same age with my
cousins; we kept always together; they tenderly loved me, and I entertained
them with what ever I fancied would please them. They related to me the success
of their affections, and such trifles which were not very good to be heard. And
which was yet worse, my soul was sensible of impressions which have been the
cause of all her evil. Ha! were I to give counsel to Parents, I would warn
them to be well advised what persons frequent their children in that age;
because the bent of our corrupted nature bears us rather to bad than to good: I
found this in my self: for I made no profit of the great virtue and honesty of
one of my Sisters, who was much elder than my self; whereas I retained all the
evil examples which a kinsman gave me who haunted our house.

And in the sequel, after she had deplored the bad use she made of her youth
till the age of fourteen years, she exclaims: I am sometimes seized with an
astonishment, when I consider the evils which come from bad companies; nor
could I believe it, had not I my self proved it by a sad experience. It Is
principally during the time of youth that this evil is most dangerous, and this
makes me wish, that Fathers and Mothers would make their profit by the example
of my faults, to hinder by their care the like accidents: For it is but too true,
that the familiarity I had with that person did so change me, as that it left
in my soul no sign of the good nature nor of the virtues which were there
before: and it seems to me, that she and one other who lived in the same way of
folly, imprinted in my heart their wicked inclinations. You see, my Sister, by
the example and by the Words of this holy woman, how reserved you ought to be
in giving access to persons into your childrens familiarity, although their
alliance and nearness of blood permits you not to exclude them from your house;
and how you must never suffer that under this pretext of parentage your
children should contract a strict friendship with children who are not brought
up in the fear of God, which you strive to inspire into yours.

Above all, take care that your Daughters go not forth of the house without
you; and it were to be wished, that they went not abroad but only for things
absolutely necessary. The sole example of Dina, Genes. 34. who for having once
only gone forth of her Fathers house to take a view of the Daughters of the
Town of Sichem, was forced away to the excessive grief of her Father Jacob, and
of all her Brethren, may suffice to make you apprehend the gadding abroad of
your Daughters, and to oppose your self against any design they may have of
contracting acquaintance with strangers, that is, with such as have their
spirits filled with vanity, and who have not been educated, as yours, according
to the spirit of Christianism.

19. Maxims touching the care which is to be taken to induce children to do
what they ought to their Fathers.
TAke great care in particular, that your children show much respect to their
Father, that they love him, that they honor him, and that they fear him. Never
pardon their least disobedience to his orders. Suffer them not to speak
otherwise to him then with submission and respect. He who obeys his Father
gives much joy and comfort to his Mother, says the Scripture, Eccle. 3.7.

St. Paul says, That women must be submitted to their Husbands in all things:
Ephesians. And they ought to be so, says St. Chrysostom, because when they are in
good intelligence, their children are well educated, their Domestics are well
instructed, their Friends and Neighbors are marvellously edified. In fine, the
quality of head which is proper to the Husband, and which he bears in regard of
his wife, makes it sufficiently appear, that it is for him to watch over his
actions, to govern by his prudence the whole family, and to give out his orders
for the conduct of all the members which compose it. And this is it which the
illustrious Author of the letter to Celancia endeavored particularly to
insinuate unto her.

It must be in the first place, says this great man, Letter to Celancia.
that the authority remains entirely in your husband, and that all your family
may learn by your example what honor and respect they owe him: you must
therefore by your obedience make it known, that he is the Master: your humility
must raise him, and your submissions must make him to be respected by all the
rest; because your self will be so much more honored, by how much you render
to him more honor. For the man, according to the Apostle, is the head of the
woman; and the body can never appear well adorned, unless its head be well
dressed: which moves him to say elsewhere, speaking to women, that they must be
submitted to their husbands for the love of our Lord as they are obliged to be;
and the Apostle St. Peter: 1 Pet. c. 3. Wives, be ye submitted to your
husbands, to the end that if there are any who believe not the preaching of the
Word, they may be gained without the Word by the good life of their wives,
considering the purity in which you live, and the respectful fear you have for
them. If then the law of Marriage obliges wives to render honor to their
husbands, even when they are Infidels, it surely obliges them yet more strictly
when they are Christians. If this is true, my Sister, as to the least duties of
the civil life, it is much more as to what concerns the children. And by
consequence you ought in this point, as in all things, to act as much as
possibly you can jointly with your husband.

Bless our Lord for having given you a person who will never oblige you to
follow the irregularities which are crept into the World; but who on the
contrary will take care, according to the counsel of St. Jerome, that the very
clothes of his children may make them know him to whose service they were
engaged by the vows of Baptism.

But if, (as says the same Author,) a Lady of very high birth was reprehended
with much severity by an Angel, St. Jerome, Ep. ad Letam.
for having presumed, (that she might not displease her Husband,) to frizzel
the hair of her little Niece, and to trick her up a la mode; if for having
caused her to wear Pearls and Diamonds according to her condition, but not
according to the spirit of Christianism, God took away from her by death both
her husband and her children, and made appear by so sudden and so
extraordinary a chastisement, how great an aversion he has against them, (says
this great Doctor) who violate his Temples by profane ornaments, and that his
Divine Majesty so much detests and abhors them, have you not cause to tremble
and dread the just judgments of God, if you bring up your children according
to the fashion of the world against the will of him whose sentiments you have
espoused by espousing his person, and if you surprise his Religion and his
Freindship, to oblige him to condescend to the sentiments of vanity which you
desire to follow?

CHAP. X. Important Advices for the Christian Education of Children.
1. Advice. Concerning the Excesses and the Ornaments of the World.
THe love of worldly Ornaments and braveries, is in it self a great evil, says
St. John Chrysostom, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 10. in Epist. ad Colos. c. 4.
even although it should cause no other disorder than the adhesion to those
vanities, and although they might be used without scandal and without hurting
the conscience.

It Is for this reason, my Sister, that Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Jerome, and
all the other Fathers of the Church could not hinder themselves from sighing,
from complaining, and from uttering the zeal wherewith they were animated, when
they beheld how Christian women were laden with chains of gold, with Jewels,
and with precious stones; and that instead of esteeming themselves glorious to
be clothed with Christ Jesus, they had no passion but for stuffs of ignominy,
(according to the language of the Church,) and for clothes more suitable to
courtisans then to the Daughters of Christ Jesus, that is, to Children
conceived in the tears and in the torments of a God crucified.

And yet neither the dreadful threats which God thunders out against the
daughters of Jerusalem for having loved these lewd Ornaments, nor the horrible
chastisements wherewith he punished them, nor the prohibitions made by the
Apostles, nor clamours of the whole Church for the space of sixteen hundred
years, have been able to stop this exorbitancy.

Behold (says Isay) what our Lord says to the Daughters of Sion who are
arrogant and proud, who walk with stretched-out necks, with wandering eyes,
mincing as they go, making a tinckling with their feet, and trailing after them
those long tails of their robes: our Lord will bereave them with shame of all
these vain ornaments, stinks shall succeed to these sweet perfumes, and harsh
cords to their girdles of Pearls and of Diamonds, Isay. 3.16. etc.

St. Peter. 1 Pet. 3.3. etc. after he had excited Christian Wives to win their
husbands to Christ Jesus by their good example and by their good life,
recommends to them above all things, that they put not on their Ornaments to
dress themselves outwardly, by curling their hayr, by enrichings of gold, and
by bravery of clothes, but to adorn the invisible man concealed in the heart
by the incorruptible purity of a spirit full of meekness and of peace, which is
a rich and magnificent Ornament to the eyes of God. For thus it is, (adds he)
that the holy women who placed their hope in God, were wont formerly to attire
themselves, being submitted to their husbands, like Sarah, who obeyed Abraham,
calling him her Lord.

St. Paul in like manner 2 Timothy 2.9. recommends unto them, to be clothed as
honesty demands, to adorn themselves with civility, modesty and charity, and
not with frizled Perruks, nor with trimmings of gold, nor with Pearls, nor with
sumptuous habits: but as such women ought to be, who make profession of piety,
and who testify the same by their good works.

Take good heed, (said formerly St. Jerome) writing to a Lady of quality
concerning the Education of her Daughter, that you bore not her ears for the
hanging there of Jewels, and that you paint not with white and red the Face
which has been consecrated to Christ Jesus, nor give unto her Neck-laces of
Pearls, nor load her head with precious stones: Cause her by the ear you take
to possess the inward ornaments and the precious riches of the soul, wherewith
she may purchase the inestimable treasure of Salvation. From whence then
(imagine you, my Sister) springs this general disorder, and this common
obstinacy of them of your Sex in a matter which is opposite to Christianism,
but from hence that this contagion is communicated to Children by the means of
their Mothers, and particularly to daughters, who (as experience makes it
appear) are very susceptible of their Mothers manners and inclinations.

We complain that in this age, the girls of ten years old have more ambition
and vanity, than others had heretofore at thirty: We cannot endure that they
should seek to be seen and to be courted: We wonder at the eagerness they have
for companies, Comedies, Balls, and walkings abroad: but it were a matter much
more to be marvelled at, if they having received from their Fathers and from
their Mothers all the dispositions which are necessary to love nothing but
divertisements, and to seek after the occasions of vanities and of pleasures,
as they permit them to do, they should affect retiredness, and should refuse to
please the eyes of men.

Reflect seriously upon these important verities; and believe me, my Sister,
that there is nothing one ought not to do in order to instill into girls the
hatred of the vanity and of the pomp of apparel: Wherefore in such things as
are even necessary to form their body, order it so, that the advises which you
give them may not carry them on insensibly to love themselves, and furnish them
with other motives than such as the love of the world may inspire into them.

Thus when you oblige your Daughters to keep themselves straight, tell them,
that one ought to take care to conserve their stature, because God has given
it to us, and that he would we should always have our eyes elevated toward
him, to bless him, and to implore his asistance; because it is for them who have
no other love but for the things of this world to crouch their body toward the
earth; and because finally Christ Jesus has not broken the bonds wherewith we
were shackled, but to the end we should march with our head lifted up toward
Heaven. And do not tell them, that they will not be esteemed in the world if
they have not a good grace, and that people in their assemblies, make small
account of the beauty of the countenance, when the stature of the body is
crooked.

If you cloth them decently according to your condition, and according to the
rules of the Gospel, make them understand that this exterior decency ought to
be the mark of the inward purity and cleanness of their heart, and that they
are to take greater care of the Ornament of their soul then the dressing of
their body.

If, St. Jerome, to Leta.
according to the advice of St. Jerome, you permit them not to affect a certain
wantonness in the pronunciation of their words, or that they use words which
are unproper and out of date, do not tell them, that otherwise they will be
incapable to receive a complement, or to entertain a company; but tell them,
that by avoiding these defects they ought to put themselves in condition to
make others one day to know the greatnesses of God, and to excite them to
virtue.

Let them know, that the care you take to make them learn to work whether it be
in Tapistry, or in Embroderie, or in Points and Laces, proceeds not out of a
desire you have that they should deck themselves with their own works; but out
of the knowledge you have of their obligation to make good use of their time,
and of the easiness they may have by this means to help their necessitous
neighbor by their labors.

Finally, instruct them to want even things permitted and which are innocent;
to the end they may have no love for those things which are forbidden. St.
Lewis who was one of the chiefest Saints and greatest Princes of the world,
never suffered the Princesses his Daughters to wear upon Fridays, Garlands and
Coronets of Roses and of other Flowers, which were the richest ornaments of
their age; because Christ Jesus had been crowned with thorns upon that day.

This great King was far from that accursed complacency of some Mothers, who
being interiourly attracted to recollection and to a contempt of worldly
vanities, engage themselves nevertheless in dangerous conversations and
assemblies upon pretext of their having children, that it is fit they should
divertise themselves, and that they must yield something (say they) to an age
which is totally addicted to pleasure. As if these very considerations ought
not to oblige them to break off the intelligence they might have with the
world, and as if the fear of engaging their children in dangerous companies,
out of which they shall not perchance escape with so much happiness as
themselves have done, were not sufficient to make them shun these encounters,
and to move them to choose a life which is more Christian, more modest, and
more retired than the former.

This I say, my Sister, because there are many Fathers and Mothers who fancy
they can justify themselves one day before God for having quitted their
solitude to lead their children to a Ball; for having stifled the feelings they
had of a simplicity in their garments to satisfy the vanity and the ambition of
their children; for not having openly embraced all the other Maxims and all the
other counsels of the Gospel, for fear of engaging their children to follow
them, and for causing them to enter into a disgust of the Maxims and vanities
of the World. As if this unfaithfulness to the motions of a grace, which was
perchance given them for the sanctification of their children, ought not to
make them apprehend the just judgments of God; and that they were not to answer
to him for all the bad thoughts, for all the evil desires, and for all the
libertine actions done by their children in these assemblies, and which indeed
they perceived not, but which the eyes of God observed, and which his justice
will impute one day to the compliance of them who engaged them in these
dangerous occasions.

Take good heed also of imitating those Mothers, who upon pretext of sparing,
or because they are tired with the vanities and with the follies of the world,
uncloath themselves to cloth their children; and who by a kind of hypocrisy,
the most dangerous that can be imagined, not daring to follow the fashions,
which the world it felf permits only to youth, will at least satisfy their
vanity by making their daughters follow those modes, and who being themselves
no longer fit for pleasures and divertisements, render, (as says St. Jerome)
those innocent Souls the most ordinary sacrifices of pleasure.

I will not insist here to represent to you the obligation you have never to
suffer your Daughters to paint and patch themselves; to ruddy their lips and to
blacken their eye brows; to whiten their cheeks, and to seek out such other
ridiculous vanities; which the spirit of the world has invented upon pretext
of repairing the defects of nature, but in effect to satisfy the passion which
they of their Sex have to please.

That which I have now spoken of the excesses and magnificent clothes,
suffices to make you comprehend how far you ought to estrange them from those
follies; since there is less evil, according to the Fathers, in these proud
Garments, than in tricking up the face with strange colors.

St. Ambrose, among the Latin Fathers, in the books he made for the Instruction
of Virgins, highly condemns in Christian Women, curled hayr, Necklaces of
Pearls, Pendants at the Ears, and other such like ornaments. But there is
nothing which he beats down with more zeal and with greater eloquence, S.
Ambros. l. 1. de Virgin.
than the care which the women of his time took to paint themselves upon the
pretext of pleasing their husbands. He pleasantly rails at them for thus
betraying themselves by seeking in this manner strange beauties; and he
reproaches them, in that by applying themselves with so much study to change
the lineaments of their face, they condemn themselves, and render their natural
defects much more remarkable.

St. Chrysostom among the Greek Fathers, teaching husbands (who have wives
which are altogether worldlings, S Christost. ser. 10. in Matthew.
who love excessive riots, and are plunged in delights) after what manner they
are to labor to withdraw them from these irregularities; counsels them not to
begin by bereaving them of their magnificent dressings, but by taking away the
solicitude they have of painting their faces. And this holy Doctor produces
nothing upon this subject, which a Mother ought not to make use of, if she
perceives any of her Daughters to have the least inclination to these sort of
vanities. For then it is that she should represent unto her, that there is no
wise man who condemns not them that disguise thus the visage by pouders and by
borrowed colors, to force in some sort nature, and to give to themselves what
they have not; and who having been bred in the Faith and in the knowledge of
the true God, and having Christ Jesus for their head, they ought not to seek an
artificial beauty by these disguises which the Devil has invented.

Consider, (says in the sequel the said Doctor addressing his speech to all
Christian Women,) that Christ Jesus is your Bridegroom; that it is for him you
ought to adorn your selves; and then you will avoid with horror these shameful
embellishments. For Christ Jesus loves not these false and counterfeit dresses.
His will is, that his spouses should be fair, but with a true beauty. It Is that
beauty which the Prophet advises you to keep with care, when he tells you, and
the King will love your beauty.

Let us then no longer seek those studied beauties, which are as ugly as they
are vain: The works of God are complete: He has put there all that there
should be, and he has no need of you to reform them. After an excellent
Painter has finished the Kings Picture, no one dares presume to add strange
colors; and such a boldness would not pass unpunished. You have then a respect
for the work of a man; and dare you alter and corrupt the work of God? you do
not remember that there is a Hell: you tremble not at the consideration of
those flames; you forget your very soul, and you treat her unworthily without
taking any care of her, because you give all your thoughts and all your
affections to your Body.

But I mistake when I talk to you of your soul, since you give to your body no
better treatment, and that there comes to it the contrary of what you pretend:
you will appear fair by this Paint, and it serves only to make you deformed:
you will please your husband, and nothing more displeases him, and not only him
but all the world. You will pass for young, and you become thereby sooner old.
Finally, you will have your beauty admired, and every one flouts you: you
cannot without some shame look either upon your friends, and such as are your
equals, nor upon your own chambermayd; and your very looking-glass makes you
blush.

But I will not stay upon these Reasons. There are others yet more strong and
much more considerable. For you sin against God; you lose your shamefacedness
which is the glory of your Sex; you enkindle criminal flames in the hearts of
men, and you render your selves like to those infamous sacrifices of public
unchastity: Consider then with attention all these advices I have given you:
Despise for the future these Diabolical ornaments: Renounce these false
embellishments, or rather these true deformities, to embusy your self no longer
but only upon that interior and invisible beauty of the Soul, which the Angels
desire, which God loves, and which will be precious and venerable to them, to
whom you are united by a sacred tie.

You have, my Sister, in these words of this great Saint, all that is necessary
to strengthen your Daughters against the evil inclination which they of your
Sex have to make themselves fair and to please. You have there all that is
necessary to inspire into them the horror of these painted and counterfeit
beauties which they so much affect. Finally, you there find the motives which
oblige your self to educate them in the modesty and in the reservedness, which
the Christianism you profess requires.

2. Advice. Concerning Worldly Songs.
TAke a very particular care to hinder your children from learning profane
songs. I cannot, my Sister, too much recommeud this advice unto you, nor
express, as I ought, the evils which these accursed songs produce, which
nevertheless are the main divertisement and the chief joy of them who follow
the Maxims of the World.

God has given us eyes, St. Chrysostom. ser. 2. in Matthew. 1.
a mouth, and ears, to the end, says, St. Chrysostom, that we should consecrate
them to his service, that we should not talk but of him, that we should not act
but for him, that we should sing only his praises, that we should render to him
continual thanksgivings; and that by these holy exercises we should purify the
bottom of our hearts. But instead of making this use of them we profane them by
words and actions altogether vain and superfluous; and would to God they were
only superfluous, and not wicked and dangerous.

Who is he, among all you, who listen unto me, (adds this Father); that can say
by heart either one Psalm, or any other part of the Scripture, if I should
demand it of him? there would not one be found; and which is more to be
deplored, in this indifference for sacred things, you have at the same time an
ardour which out-passes that of fire it self, for such detestable things as are
only worthy of the devils. For if any one should entreat you on the contrary to
recite some one of these infamous songs and of these shameful and Diabolical
Odes, there would many be found who have learned them with care, and who would
relate them with pleasure.

Think not, my Sister, that these words are too strong to be applied to such
songs as are common in the world, and which are taught children when they begin
to speak. Those songs which pass for the most honest, include oftentimes the
most subtle poison. And if you examine all them you have ever heard, you will
observe that there are few which wound not either truth or charity; whether it
be in giving false praises to things and persons which deserve them not, or
whether it be in rending the honor and the reputation of the Neighbor, you
will mark, that there are scarcely any which are not full of bitter backbitings
and slanders, and which are not bloody Satyrs, sparing neither the sacred
persons of Sovereigns, nor of Magistrates, nor of the most innocent and pious
people: you will perceive that there are hardly any which serve not either to
express irregular passions or to entertain them; that there are few or none
which flatter not the said passions, which represent them not with a color to
disguise their horror, and to make injustice and infamy to be loved and
cherished; which are not employed to render criminal flames illustrious; which
are not stuffed with dishonest equivocations, and which bring not into the
imagination such filthy and shameful Idea's and images, that it is impossible
they should not totally wound purity.

Yet notwithstanding, how many Fathers and Mothers are there, who suffer
without any scruple, their children to fill their spirits and their memories
with these songs, which they sing with pleasure in their presence, and by their
free and frequent repetitions of them, accustom themselves insensibly to lose
their shamefacedness, though they would blush to hear them in a more advanced
age, if they had not timely inured them to this corrupted language.

Lactantius, in the abridgment he made of his Institutions, says; That one of
the dismal effects of these songs, is to leave in the heart a very great
disposition to crimes and to liberty: insomuch as they who love them, and who
make them their divertisement, suffer themselves to be easily engaged in all
manner of disorder and impiety. He adds, that they instill a disgust of all
holy things, and above all, of the sacred Scriptures; because corrupted nature
finding nothing there which flatters her, becomes distasted, and unjustly
prefers those wretched verses and songs, which foment and entertain its
passions, before the solid Truths which those holy Books discover unto it, and
which condemn its irregularities.

What care then ought not Fathers and Mothers to take, to preserve their
children from this plague which infects almost the whole world? what crime do
they not commit, not only when they please themselves to hear them sung by
their children, but even themselves teach them to sing them? St. Cyprian,
speaking of Parents who caused their Children to eat meats offered to Idols,
makes the children utter these astonishing words: Our own Fathers have been our
Murderers. And St. Augustine explicating this passage, says, that although these
children having no share in this criminal action by their own will, did not
really dye in their soul; yet their Fathers ceased not to be their Murderers;
because forasmuch as depended on them, they caused their souls to dye
spiritually.

How much more culpable are Parents who teach their children songs of
detraction or of obscenity, then these whom St. Cyprian blames? For surely the
meats offered to Idols are the creatures of God: but these Songs are the
productions of the devil, who composes them by his ministers. Those meats did
not really corrupt either the soul or the body of the Children, they only
passed through them like other victuals, without leaving in them any malignant
impression: whereas these sacrilegious songs corrupt the spirit of such as sing
them, and sticking close to their memory, prove a temptation to them as long as
they live.

Finally, as Lactantius excellently observes, Lactant. l. 6. Instit. c. 21.
whatever sweetness there is in the harmonious sounds which flatter the ears,
one may easily contemn them, because they leave no impression in the heart, and
because they adhere not (if we may say so) to the substance of the soul. But
verses which are animated with the modulation, charm the soul with their
sweetness; they get possession of the spirit of the hearer, and push him on
with violence whither they please; they persuade him to all that which they
make him fancy is agreeable, and they almost surprise him, and entirely master
his will whilst they flatter his senses: You ought not then (concludes this
Author,) conceive any thing to be sweet to your ears, but that which nourishes
your soul and renders it better: and you should particularly apply your self to
avert that Organ from vice, which is given us by God to hear his truth, and to
receive his doctrine. If you take delight in singing and in Poetry, please your
selves in warbling forth the praises of God: There is no true pleasure but that
which is evermore accompanied with virtue.

Behold, my Sister, what you are timely to instill into your Children: never
suffer any thing to be done or spoken in their presence, which is in the least
wise unbeseeming the modesty, the prudence, and the charity which is due to
your Neighbor, whereof you make profession in quality of Christian. S.
Chrystost. hom. de ann.
Permit them not to hear effeminate and lascivious songs, for fear lest they
may prove to be an unhappy charm to mollify their soul and to make them lose
all their vigor.

Endure not, that the mouths which are to be one day sanctified by the
celestial food of the Body of Christ Jesus, be profaned by infamous songs; and
that the tongues which are to be dipped in the blood of our Savior be employed
in a language which is altogether corrupted.

Have evermore present to your spirit those excellent words of St. Paul Ephesians.
5.3, 4, 17, 19. which includes the Rules of the conversation of the Faithful:
Let not fornication or any other impurity whatsoever, be so much as once named
among you: Neither filthiness, nor foolish talk, nor jesting, all which things
are disagreeable to your vocation; but rather words of thanksgiving to God. Be
not indiscreet, but know how to discern what is the will of our Lord;
entertaining your selves with Psalms, with Hymns, and with spiritual Canticles,
singing and making melody from the bottom of your hearts to the glory of our
Lord. Let all dishonest Words be banished from your mouth. Let the word of
Christ Jesus dwell in you with fullness, and replenish you with Wisdom. Instruct
and admonish one another with Psalms, with Hymns, and with Spiritual Canticles.

Thus you see, by these words of the Apostle, that Christians are not permitted
to speak the least word, not only which is dishonest, but even which is not
serious, or which has in it any thing of jesting; so far is he from suffering
them to make such things all their joy and divertisement: and that if they
sing, S. Augustine. l. 10. confess. c. 33.
it must be Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Canticles; that so by the pleasure
which touches the ears, the spirit yet weak may raise up it self to feelings of
piety, and that being more ardently moved to devotion by the tunes animated
with Divine words, it may receive with more respect and sweetness the verities
there included, and employ it self therein more profitably.

Parents who will not endeavor to follow these Apostolical Rules in the
education of their Children, and who have not absolutely forbidden them these
corrupted songs, will be found by so much the more culpable before God, by how
much it is more easy for them in this age to hinder them from it: since there
are many persons of piety who have successfully labored in putting into Verse
the Psalms, the Hymns, and the Canticles of the Church; that there are many who
have composed spiritual songs which are very sweet and pleasing; and that they
have set these Psalms, these Hymns, and these spiritual songs to very
harmonious tunes and airs, which by recreating the spirit raise it to God, and
nourish piety in the soul.

3. Advice. Concerning Romances.
It Is not yet enough, my Sister, to watch over the tender years of your
children, to hinder them from learning accursed sonnets: you must furthermore
when they are more advanced in age, and capable to apply themselves to reading,
keep carefully from them the Romances and other Books of that nature, which
only serve to instill the spirit of the world into their minds, and to ruin
in them the spirit of Christ Jesus.

I cannot better make you comprehend the importance of this Advice, then by
relating to you the words of St. Teresa, St. Teresa c. 2. of her life.
wherein you will see how dangerous it is for Mothers to indulge their children
in this point, and for themselves to take pleasure in these kind of Lectures,
which charming the spirit by agreeable dotages, corrupt the heart with real
irregularities.

It seems to me, says she, that what I am going about to relate, was to me very
prejudicial. I consider sometimes the great evil done by Parents to their
children in not endeavoring with all their authority to place continually
before their eyes the objects of virtue. For although my Mother was as virtuous
as I now have declared her, yet when I had attained the use of reason, I
remember very little, and almost nothing at all of her good qualities; whereas
the bad ones which I observed in her, did strangely hurt and damage me.

She was delighted with the reading of Romances; but this divertisement was not
to her so dangerous as it was to me, because she lost no more time than what
she employed in reading them, and that perhaps she did it only to untire her
self from the wearisome cares of her family, and to hinder her children from
worse employments: but as for me, although my Father was so much against it,
that we were forced to take care he might not perceive it, I ceased not to keep
on my ordinary custom of reading these Books, and how small soever this fault
was in my Mother, it failed not to cool my good desires, and was the cause of
my falling insensibly into other defects.

It seemed to me, that it was not evil to lose many hours of the day, and of
the night, in so vain an occupation, although I hid my self from my Father; and
I was so enchanted with the extreme pleasure I took in it, that methought I
could not be content if I had not some new Romance in my hands.

I began to imitate the Mode, to take delight in being well dressed, to take
great care of my hands, to make use of the most excellent perfumes; in a word,
to affect all the vain trimmings which my condition permitted, and which my
curiosity invented in a very great number. Indeed my intention was not bad; for
I would not in the immoderate passion which I had to be decent, give any
occasion to any person of the world to offend God; but I now acknowledge how
far these things, which during several years space appeared to me innocent, are
effectually and really criminal.

I do not think, my Sister, that any thing needs to be added to these words to
make you abhor the reading of Romances; since they discover so clearly the
greatest part of the bad effects which these fabulous Histories produce, which
the idleness and licentiousness of these later times have invented to nourish
and entertain the most dangerous passions.

For you see in the words and in the example of this holy woman, how these
unhappy lectures charm in such sort the spirits of young people by the
pernicious sweetness and the dismal pleasure they present unto them, that they
neglect all other exercises to tie themselves to this; that they make it their
only and their principal business; and that they employ the days and the
nights, even against the will of their parents, to satisfy the curiosity which
the connection of the diverse adventures they meet with in those books, excites
more and more in their spirits, as they proceed in the reading thereof.

You see how these empoysoned Lectures change all the good inclinations they
received from nature; how they chill by little and little the desires they had
for goodness; and how they banish in a short time out of their Soul all that
was there of solidity and of virtue.

You see how they instill into their Readers the love and esteem of all worldly
vanities; how they teach them to seek out means whereby to please the world, to
flatter their senses, to trick up themselves, to render themselves pleasing, to
stay and deceive the eyes; finally, to find out disguises and cunnings to
conceal that wherein the body is defective, and to place in its highest
splendor whatever may make for their advantage.

Oftentimes one is surprised to see young girls educated in a great
reservedness and in great modesty, take all on a sudden an air full of vanity
and gallanterie, and to make show of no other ardour than for that which the
world esteems, and which God abominates. One is astonished at this deplorable
change; and since they had not as yet haunted companies, one knows not well to
what it may be attributed. It Is that Fathers and Mothers have not watched over
them to hinder their reading of these dangerous books, which have instilled
into them this secret vanity, and this desire to raise in them who look upon
them those passions for which they conceived so high an esteem, by seeing them
expressed so agreeably in those Books. Those feigned and imaginary adventures
have charmed their hearts. They have redoubled the ardours of their passions,
and have permitted to pass first into their souls, and afterward into their
gestures, and into their actions all the motions they have found registered of
those fabulous Ladies. They have espoused their Maxims, their spirit, their
conduct, their language, and all their manners of proceedings. They have there
learned not to be so untractable, nor so severe, to be somewhat tender and
compassionate; to suffer themselves to be coneerned in the services,
cherishings, kindnesses and tears of their wooers; finally, to hide themselves
from themselves, and to cloak the motions of a love which is totally irregular
with the appearances of a civil honesty, and of an easy, complying and gay
humor and disposition.

Be vigilant therefore my Sister, and carefully hinder your Children from
falling into this dangerous snare, which the devil lays to entrap their
Innocence. Let them not be hurried away with this dismal torrent, which St.
Augustine says, S. Aug. l. 1. Confess. c. 16.
drags along the children of Eve into that vast and dangerous sea, out of which
they scarcely (says this Saint) can escape, and save themselves, who pass over
upon the wood of the Cross of Christ Jesus.

And let them not say, (adds this Father,) that in these Books they may learn
the purity of the language, and that it is from them that this eloquence is to
be sucked which is so necessary to persuade what one desires, and to express
with a grace ones advises and conceptions. You ought to take greater care of
the purity of your childrens heart than of that of their language. And although
there may be found good things in those books intermixed with the bad, S.
Jerome to Leta.
yet (as St. Jerome observes upon the subject of dangerous books) one needs
much discretion to seek and find out gold in the dirt, and one is ofttimes in
danger to defile himself in this search without finding what they look for.

After all, there are now an infinity of Books of Piety much better written,
from which your children may draw together, with the knowledge and the love of
Christian Verities, true Eloquence, and where they may find all the graces of
the Language without any need of seeking them in fabulous Histories, which are
only capable to quench Charity in their souls, and to enkindle there foreign
flames, which will consume by little and little all the feelings of piety which
you have endeavored to instill into them.

4. Advice. Touching, Balls, Dancings, and public meetings.
IN the occasion of scandal which the world is full of, we are not solicited to
evil at the same time by all the ways by which we are susceptible of it. But
(as Salvian observes,) Salvian. l. 6. de gubernat. Dei.
either the spirit alone is set upon by thoughts contrary to purity, or the
eyes are struck with dishonest objects, or the ears filled with discourses
opposite to charity: so that if any one of these senses suffers it self to be
engaged in the sin, the others may at the same time be exempt from it, and may
serve the soul for an instrument to raise her up from this fall.

But in Balls and Assemblies, which are at present but too common among
Christians, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, assault the spirit of young
people by all the ways whereby they may instill vice into them. They present at
the same time to all their senses all the different objects which may charm
them and allure them to evil. You may say, that they have heaped together in
the same place all that which can give entrance to pleasure into the heart of
man, by which they are wont to make themselves Masters of him.

The Ear is there charmed with the concert of Musical Instruments; and the Eyes
with every object which riot and vanity can produce and expose as most proud
and pleasing; the delight which is found in sweet odours is there awaked by
most precious parsumes and most agreeable smells; and the taste by most
delicious fruits and most exquisite dainties. Finally, there is, as it were a
general conspiration of all that voluptuousness has of allurements and of
charms to effeminate the heart of man and to flatter his several passions.

The persons who are invited to these assemblies apply themselves only to
render themselves pleasing and to make themselves to be loved. They spend whole
days in dressing, trimming, and disguising themselves, and in hiding as much as
may be all the defects of their faces: they employ all imaginable addresses and
artifices to cheat the eyes of their beholders.

All the world enters there with this disposition (which is so vain but so
precious to corrupted nature), to love and to make ones self loved. Nor is one
content to have this disposition; they explicate it by all manner of means, and
oftentimes the looks, the gestures, and the very dressings, explicate what the
tongue dares not express.

Who can represent all the snares which the devil then lays for young people?
What indiscreet compliances! What passionate respects! What dangerous
adhesions! What feigned and dissembling protestations! What vain impertinent
and Idolatrous discourses! It seems as if all they who compose these assemblies
had forgotten not only that they are Christians, but even that they are Men; so
much they make appear in their gestures, in their postures, in the motions of
their bodies, of effeminacy, of wantonness, of irregularity. You would imagine
it were a troop vowed to pleasure, and which had undertaken by common consent
to place the creature in the place of God.

I dare not here paint forth unto you what passes in the heart of all such
persons, whose passion to please and to be beloved rules all their motions.

There it is that the gross and impure vapors which arise from the dirt and
mudd of the flesh, St. Aug. l. 2. Conf. c. 2.
and from the boilings of youth, obscure the hearts and overclowd them in such
sort that they cannot discern the pure and resplendent serenity of a lawful
affection from the darksom images of an infamous love.

It Is there that they swim in this unhappy joy, and the dismal pleasure whereby
the children of the world tie themselves to base things by the irregularity of
their corrupted will, and being animated by their passions, (which as fumie
wine, dim by their imperceptible vapors the highest part of their souls,)
forget God to adhere to the creature.

What desires! What dreads! What impatiences! What envies! What jealousies!
What suspicions! What displeasures! What irregular Motions toss their spirit
and their heart? One cannot, my Sister, explicate all the interior evils which
these Assemblies ordinarily cause and produce: and without taking notice of the
quarrels, flights, and murders, which there take their birth, our tongue is too
chaste to express the other unhappy effects and the rest of the dangerous
sequels of these meetings; where the most innocent souls learn to lose their
shamefacedness, and become in the end the sacrifices of an infamous pleasure.

What shall I say of the laws and of the rules which are observed so inviolably
in these Assembles, and which the spirit of licentiousness has there
established: of that indispensable obligation, which the persons where such
meetings are made, have to open their door indifferently to all the world: of
the liberty which all young people have to enter in: to examine all the persons
who compose it; to adhere to such as best please them, to entertain them, to
lead them out to dance, and to use with them such freedoms as the Parents
would be ashamed to permit in their particular houses? Insomuch as properly
speaking the places where these sorts of Assemblies are held, are as it were
the infamous and public houses, where Parents expose their own Daughters to
the most licentious Gallants; and where these Daughters by the little modesty
and reservation which appears in their dress, in their looks, in their garb,
and in all their comportment, prostitute themselves to the eyes and to the
desires of all them who there enter, and even instill into the more moderate,
motions contrary to their duty, and who too frequently degenerate into most
shameful practices.

Shall any one wonder after this, S. Charles Bor. tract. against Dances.
if St. Charles Boromeus, in an excellent Treatise he made against Dances, and
in which he shows that they are condemned by the Holy Scripture, by the
Councils, and by the Fathers; relates that when he was yet a Student having
constrained (with his companions) a Philosopher of a very solid judgment to go
to a Ball; this Philosopher after he had well observed all the circumstances of
that assembly, and the actions which were there done, was struck with
astonishment, and presently told them, that surely it was an invention of the
Devil to destroy souls and to corrupt the manners of the faithful.

And think not, Sister, that the Dances which are done in private and with less
pomp are less dangerous.

St. Ambrose in the Books he made for the instruction of Virgins, S. Amb. l. 3.
de Virg.
and which he addressed to Marcellina his Sister, after he had set down, that
all Christians are obliged according to the precept of St. Paul, Coloss. 3. to
refer to Christ Jesus all their words and all their actions, compares
divertisements to remedies, and says, that as remedies profit not the body but
when they are used according to the advice of the Physician, and that on the
contrary they serve oftentimes to entertain the disease when they are taken
contrary to his advice: So all that we do according to the rules which Christ
Jesus, who is the Physician of our Souls, has prescribed unto us, contributes
to their health and serves them for a remedy: whereas that which is not
conformable to his spirit and to his rules, insensibly weakens and destroys her
strength. It follows then, concludes this holy Doctor, that a Christian should
place all his joy in a good conscience, and not in Feastings, in Dancings, and
in worldly Meetings. For the chastity is not in security, and the pleasure
which allures us ought to be suspected when the Dance is the companion or the
end of the divertisement we seek for. There is no one, said an Ancient, who
dances, being sober, unless he has lost his wit. If according to the very
Pagan-wisdom, drunkenness or folly is the cause of Dancing, what can we think
the sacred Scripture would insinuate unto us when it represents unto us the
Forerunner of Christ Jesus condemned to death at the desire of a Dancer, but
that the pleasure which Herod took to see the Daughter of Herodias dance before
him, was more unfortunate unto him, than the sacrilegious resentment he had of
the freedom wherewith that Saint had presumed to reprehend him?

Then after he had made reflection upon the greatness of the crime wherein this
Prince was engaged, having been as it were enchanted by this unhappy dance, and
by the boldness of this Girl in daring to dance before him, he adds these
words: What could this Daughter learn of an incestuous Mother but to lose all
Modesty? In effect, is there any thing more proper to excite shameful
passions, than to discover, as they do in dancing, those parts of the body
which nature and civility oblige to hide; then to conduct the eyes with a
certain artifice, and cause the looks to agree with the undecent postures of
the body; and then to mark with the head and all the rest of the body the
motions of a dissolute cadency?

Shall one wonder after this, if people are so easily engaged amidst the dance
to commit the greatest crimes? And what stayedness or what remainder of modesty
can there be among the tintamars and the confused noyses they make in singing,
capering, and abandoning themselves to a dissolution, which dishonours
Christianity? What say you Christian Mothers at the sight of so tragical a
history? See you not in this example what you should teach your daughters to
avoid, and that it is for unchaste and adulterous Parents, to permit their
daughters to dance, and not for them who are chaste and faithful to their
Bridegroom, who should teach their daughters to love virtue and not to affect
dancing. St. Chrysostom confirms this truth, Chrysostom. hom. 48. in Matthew.
when making reflection upon this History, he says, That this daughter of
Herodias was doubly criminal; first, in that she danced; secondly, in that she
pleased Herod, and so pleased him as that she received a Murder for the price
of her dance. And then after he had observed that the dance was the snare by
which the devil caused this unhappy Prince to fall into so horrid a crime, he
says, That it was also the devil who made this Girl dance with such a grace,
that Herod was charmed and blindely abandoned himself to his passion. For, adds
he, the devil is ever found wherever is dancing. God has not given us feet
for so shameful a use, but to march with modesty. He has not given them to us
that we should caper like those brute beasts which skip up and down, and which
it seems women desire to imitate in their dancing, but to have place in the
quire of Angels. Now if the Body is dishonored by these undecent gestures, how
much more is the soul thereby defiled? Dances are the sports of devils. His
ministers and his vassals make them their divertisement and their pleasure.

And that no one may fancy that those words cannot be applied to such dances as
are common among worldlings, because they have not always to our eyes such
dismal consequences as these; yet as this holy Doctor observes, There are at
this day many such Feasts, and Balls, and such murdering dances. They kill not
there the blessed Precursour, but the very Members of Christ Jesus and in a
manner which is yet more cruel; they present not there a head in a platter for
the price of a dance; but they render the major part of such as are there
present the slaves of brutish pleasures: and by engaging them in criminal
passions they kill them, not by cutting off the head of their Body, but by
separating their Soul from Christ Jesus.

Avoid therefore, my Sister, absolutely these Balls, these Dances, and these
miserable Meetings. Fly them as a Plague, the poison whereof is more mortal to
souls, than that contagion is to bodies. Let no consideration oblige you to
frequent them: Consider before God their inevitable danger; and practice in
favor of your Children that which St. Chrysostom notes we daily do for the
conservation of worldly goods. Surely, says this Father, when we see a servant
bearing about an alighted Torch, we seriously forbid him to carry it into
places where there is straw, hay, or such combustible matter, for fear lest
when they least dream of it, a spark should fall into it and fire the whole
house. Let Us use the same precaution toward our Children, and let us not carry
their eyes to such places where are found licentious Damosells, prattling Girls,
and shameless persons. But if there are such people at home with us, or
dwelling in our neighborhood, or wherever they be, let us expressly forbid
our Children to look upon them, or to have with them any commerce or
conversation; for fear lest some small spark falling into the Soul of these
young people should cause a general conflagration, and an irreparable damage.

5. Advice, Concerning Comedies, and Stage Plays.
IF the fear of causing dangerous passions to spring up in the heart of your
Children, obliges you to keep them from the Meetings and Assemblies whereof we
have now spoken; surely this same fear indispensably engages you never to
permit them to frequent Comedies.

There is no disorder which the Fathers of the Church have beaten down oftener
and with more zeal than the love of shows and spectacles. We find in infinite
places of their Writings, the marks of their extreme care against this
pernicious inclination, which began in their time to corrupt the Innocence and
the Chastity of the faithful.

They consider them as an invention of the Devil, who has caused Theaters to
be erected in the Towns, to effeminate the hearts of the Soldiers of Christ
Jesus, and to make them lose their strength and their generosity.

They deplore the blindness of such as believe there is no harm in assisting
with pleasure at representations, from which they can bring back nothing but
shameful imaginations and criminal designs.

They lay open the indispensable obligation one has to quit the near occasions
of incontinence: They call these Assemblies the Schools and the public sources
of impurity, and they decry them as the Feasts of the Devil: they oblige them
who have assisted thereat to purify themselves by repentance before they enter
into the Church: Finally, they make descriptions so sad and so horrible of the
state wherein the spectatours are found at their going forth from these
divertisements, that one cannot read them without trembling, and without being
astonished at the dreadful blindness of men, who abhor not the greatest crimes
but when they are not common, and who not only cease to contradict them, but
which often times they even make to pass for innocent actions.

For surely notwithstanding the endeavors of these great Saints, and of them
who have followed them to stifle this disorder; it is so much increased in
these last ages by a general corruption which is crept in among the faithful,
that it passes now for an honest divertisement, and that Comedies which are the
shame and the confusion of Christianism, are become the serious occupation of
the major part of Christians. That which more afflicts me, said elsewhere S.
Chrysostom, St. Christ. ser. 8. in Matthew.
speaing of this disorder, is, that this evil being so great, is not esteemed
an evil. And this is it which obliges you, my Sister, to take more care to
hinder your Children from setting their affection upon these wretched
spectacles.

I well know that it is pretended, that there is much difference between the
Comedies of these times and those which the holy Fathers thus highly condemned
in theirs; and that if those against which they showed so great zeal, deserved
the blame they laid upon them, these which are now adays represented upon the
stages, cannot be sufficiently praised, because they contain for the most part
nothing but examples of Innocence, of virtue and of Piety.

But with however specious a pretext the Authors of these Plays cover
themselves, and however pure and holy may be their intentions; there is
nevertheless such a mixture in their Works, and the Saints also whom they bring
upon the Theater testify there so much tenderness, touching love, which is the
predominant passion of Comedies, that it is very hard for the hearers not to be
transported, and that instead of sanctifying the stage by the actions of the
Martyrs there represented, they profane not the sanctity of their sufferings by
the amorous sictions which they there intermingle.

And in effect, if they there represent the Martyrdom of a Virgin-Saint,
Theodora.
must it not be some Intrigue of love which makes her die? And are they not
constrained to suppose that another Lady is desperately in love with the young
Prince who has a violent passion for the Saint, and that an enraged Mother
spares not the Blood of this Saint to fatisfy the passion of that poor wretch.

And even the Saint in the sequel of the Play comes lastly to discover the
secret passion she has for a young man: and although the Author makes her
beat it down, yet she ceases not to give place to the hearers to justify in
themselves by her example the passion they resent, and to entertain it under
pretext of not consenting thereto. They learn of her to look upon the motions
of an irregular Love as the impressions which in their birth form bravest
passions. And the young man whom she loves, (as Christian as he is, and ready
to endure death for the defense of the Faith and of the purity of this Saint,)
ceases not to persuade her to espouse this young Pagan-Prince who loves her: So
that if one sees in this Piece of Poetry in the person of a Virgin-Saint, Faith
triumphing over the most shameful punishments; one there sees at the same time
profane Love triumphing over many wretches which it has subjected to it self,
and pursuing even to death a holy Virgin, and a generous Martyr. One there
beholds the motion of Christian Charity, which obliges this illustrious Saint
to expose his life for the defense of the purity of that Virgin-Saint, so much
obscured by the feigned passion which the Author foists into his and into her
expressions, that the hearers know no more then the actors whom he introduces
on the Stage. --

Whether it is the zeal of a lover or the fury of the Christian.

And although the Saint declare himself in the sequel that he acted not in this
occasion but by a motive of Christian generosity, yet this appears mixed with
so many tender and passionate words, and with so many circumstances which tend
to turn away the spirit from consideration and to carry it on to profane Love,
that whatever remains in the mind of the Spectatours is a high idea of the
strong passion which this Lover had for the person he loved.

Behold what are these examples of Innocence, of Virtue, and of Piety, they so
much brag of: But rather behold how in the Comedies they make use of Christian
generosity and charity which the Saints made appear in their actions, to raise
up the luster of profane love, and to give it an esteem, and to excite its
flames in the heart of the Spectatours.

But, Sister, to make you see yet more clearly how merely imaginary the
difference is, which is pretended to be between the Comedies of these our times
and the Spectacles of the Ancient; and that it is neither Scruple nor
Capriciousness but a true zeal which moves them who blame them thus to decry
them; you must observe that the Fathers of the Church have scarcely said any
thing against the adhesion which people had in their days to spectacles, which
may not be applied with much justice to the Comedies of our time.

Tertullian, in the Book he made of Shows and Spectacles, undertakes to show
that these divertisements could not be accomodated to the spirit of Religion we
profess, and to the duties of a Christian: that the reason why they have so
many Defenders, is the fear man has of having the number of his pleasures
diminished: that it is in vain to fancy that Christians did not abstain from
them, but because they being resolved to suffer death for the Faith, renounced
all the pleasures of life, to the end they might less love it, and not be
retained by pleasures, which are as it were fetters that fasten us to it; but
that they abstained because although these divertisements are not forbidden in
express terms in the sacred Scripture, yet they cease not to be there
sufficiently condemned.

First, in the passages which forbid us to follow the irregular desires of
covetousness, and of satisfying our Passions. For it is certain (says this
learned man) that the seeking of pleasures is one of the most violent passions
of man, Tertul. l. de spectat. c. 4.
and that among pleasures that of spectacles is one of them which most
transport him.

Secondly, in the passages which oblige us to tend always to perfection, which
consists in the subjection of Passions to grace: which cannot be acquired but
by banishing from the spirit all that may serve to strengthen them and to
entertain them.

Whereas, says he, chap. 15.16. Spectacles on the contrary make the passions
revive in the hearts of the most mortified persons, they re animate them, they
fortify them, and after they have put them who behold them as it were out of
themselves, they excite in them motions of hatred, of love, of joy, of sadness,
which are by so much more irregular, by how much one oftentimes loves what they
should hate or which deserves no esteem, and one hates on the contrary that
which they are not permitted to hate. Thirdly, in the passages of sacred Writ,
which forbid us the least impurities, and the least dishonest or frivolous
words. For why, (says this great man,) chap. 17. should it be permitted to a
Christian to see represented on a Theater such things as he is not permitted so
much as to think of, and to hear that spoken of there which ought no where be
once named before him?

Finally, Tertullian shows, that spectacles may not be permitted to Christians:
First, by the judgment which men make of such as represent them, and who pass
in their opinion for infamous persons. chap. 21. Secondly, by the judgment
which God, himself gives of them, there being nothing in the spectacles which
he condemns not. chap. 23. Thirdly, because the said spectacles are of the
number of the pomps of the devil, which we have renounced by our Baptism. chap.
24. Fourthly, because the very Pagans judged that a man was become a Christian
when he absented himself from them, acknowledging that the instinct of
Christian Piety, removed from the Theater all such as professed it. chap. 25.
Fifthly, because it is impossible to conserve there the feelings of piety which
a Christian ought always to have in his heart. Sixthly, because all the objects
there represented are only proper to divert him from God and to link him to the
creature. Seventhly, because it is ridiculous to pretend that one may make good
use thereof, and to do it in reverence to God. chap. 27. Eighthly, because
supposing there were some of them honest, Christians ought always to consider
them no otherwise then as empoysoned honey, whereof they cannot taste without
danger of death. chap. 29. Finally, because the state of a Christian in this
life is to fly all sorts of pleasures, and to cause all his joy to consist in
the tears of repentance, in the pardon of his sins, in the knowledge of truth,
and in the contempt of pleasures even the most innocent and the most lawful.

What is there, my Sister, in all this, which this great man alleges against
the shows and spectacles of the ancient, which may not be said of the Comedies
of these days? Are the Christians of these times less obliged than they of the
time of Tertullian, to quit the passions of the world, and to mortify in
themselves the desires which provoke them to seek for pleasures and
divertisements?

Are they less bound then they of the first ages to labor for the attaining of
the Evangelical Perfection, to weaken and conquer the passions of the flesh,
and to shun the objects which excite them, which entertain them, and which
strengthen them?

Are they less obliged than those of former ages to fly all that may wound the
purity which God requires of them? And their Eyes and Ears must they be less
chaste than their Tongues, which are not suffered to speak any vain and
unbeseeming word, as St. Paul expressly pronounces?

Moreover, the Comedians of these times, are they of more consideration in the
world than those of former ages? What a corruption is it, says Tertullian,
Tertul. c. 22.
to love them whom the public laws condemn; to approve of them whom they
despise; to extol an art and an employment at the same time when they are
branded with infamy who did addict themselves unto it?

What is there in Comedies which can be pleasing to Gods eyes? Is it the pomp
and the magnificence of the clothes? Is it the dexterity of the Actors to
excite in themselves and in others criminal passions? Is it the industry
wherewith the musical Airs are accomodated to the subjects, and rendered proper
to strengthen the said passions? Is it the skill wherewith the Poet has
disguised the truth by mixing Fabulous fictions and imaginary accidents? the
Author of truth, says Tertullian, chap. 23. loves not lies: and whatever is
feigned, passes before him for a spice of Adultery.

They who renounce the world, and are truly touched with a desire to live to
God, do they not avoid Comedies as very dangerous rocks? And is it not
acknowledged that they have changed their life, and that they are (as may be
said) become Christians a second time, in that they refuse to be found in those
places, which they too well know have been unfortunate unto them?

Will a Christian conserve in a Comedy the feelings he ought to have always in
his heart; and will he have his spirit raised toward God in an Assembly,
where, says Tertullian, chap. 25. there is nothing of God, and at a time when
all the senses are embusied to feed upon the vain pleasure which is there
presented unto them, and where the thoughts are applied to the gestures, to the
Words, and to the motions of the Actors?

That which Tertullian esteemed to be the greatest scandal which was found in
the spectacles of Pagans, is it not met withal in Comedies? Men and Women,
young Gallants and young Girls, meet they not there together, and appear they
not there with all the gaity and pleasingness possible? Go they not thither (as
this great man says) with this sole design and disposition to see there and to
be there seen? And the approbation they give with common voice to the
Comedians, and the joy they feel to meet together in the same opinions, are
they not as so many sparks which increase the secret fire burning in their
hearts? Insomuch, as one may say, that each one of them after his manner acts
there his part, and that ofttimes the Actors do but represent what passes
secretly among the persons who behold them.

Tertullian therefore says nothing against the spectacles of the Ancient, which
may not be applied with justice to the Comedies of our times. And in this sort,
my Sister, if I feared not to extend my self too far, (having not undertaken to
write against Comedies but only to show you the obligation you have to withdraw
your Children from them), I could make it manifest unto you, that all which St.
Cyprian, or the Author of that Treatise of Spectacles, which is among his
Works; All that Salvian, and all that the other Fathers of the Church have said
against the shows and spectacles of the Ancient, fall naturally upon the
Comedies of our times.

I could make you see, that they do at this day no less profane the sacred
Mysteries, in going to a Comedy upon the days in which they have communicated,
and in carrying thither (as one may say) the Eucharist yet persent in their
bosom: that they ought at this day no less fear to learn to practice what they
are accustomed to see represented: The Author of the Treatise of Spectacles,
among the works of S. Cyprian.
and that if the Comedies of these times should contain nothing that is
criminal, yet they would not cease to carry along with them, a vanity and an
unprofitableness which is as incompatible with the duties of Christians of our
times, as with those of the Primitive Christians.

I well know that the Fathers insisted particularly upon that, That there was
then no spectacle which was not dedicated to some false Divinity, and which had
not in its origin or in its execution something of Idolatry.

But I also know, that if according to St. Paul, Gal. 5.2. the adhesion one
has to riches is a spice of Idolatry; that which one has to pleasure is by so
much more dangerous, by how much it engages the man to sacrifice himself to
pleasure which is the most infamous of all the Idols.

I know that St. Augustine said, Aug l. 1. Conf. c 17.
upon his being exercised in his youth to recite the Fables of Poets, That
there are many different ways of sacrificing to the rebel-Angels; and that if
the Comedies of our times are not represented in the honor of a Mars, of a
Jupiter, and of a Neptune, they are nevertheless consecrated to profane Love,
to the pleasure of the beholders, and to the avarice of those who represent
them.

Thus they who would render the Comedy Christian by interweaving therein the
actions of Saints, have proceeded somewhat like to Pompey, who (as Tertullian
relates) seeing that the Roman Censours had frequently caused the Theaters to
be pulled down, Tertull c. 10. de Spect
because they corrupted the manners of the people, and desiring to hinder the
demolishing of that which himself had caused to be erected in Rome, made
therein an Altar which he dedicated to Venus, and called the said building, not
the Theater, but the Temple of Venus. So that, says Tertullian, by giving this
specious title to that work, which deserved to be condemned, he eluded by that
superstition all the regulations which the Censours could make to cause it to
be thrown down.

But supposing that there is nothing in Comedies which can wound the Innocence
of young people, nor excite in them any dangerous passions: supposing that of
Thirty Plays there represented, there is not one which openly hurts purity and
innocence: supposing that there is nothing in the dressings, in the
nakednesses, and in the gestures of the Comedians which offends modesty; and
which corresponds not to the purity and to the piety of the Virgins whom they
represent: supposing that the persons who assist thereat cannot instill into
young people the spirit of the world and of the vanity which shows it self in
their manner of trimming, in there behavior, and in all their actions:
supposing all that which passes in those wretched representations induce to no
evil, that the words, the dress, the gate, the voice, the songs, the looks, the
motions of the body, the sound of instruments, the very subjects and plots of
the Comedies; finally, that all were not full of poison, and should breathe no
impurity: yet you ought to hinder your Children from frequenting them; because,
St. Chrysostom. ho. 6 in Matt.
says St. Chrysostom, it is not for us to pass the time in laughters, in
merriments, and in delights. It Is not proper for the spirit of them who are
called to a heavenly life, whose names are already written in that celestial
City, and who make profession of a warfare altogether spiritual: but it is for
the spirit of them who fight under the ensigns of the devil.

Yes, my Brethren, adds this Saint, it is the Devil who has made an art of
these divertisements and of these Plays, to draw to himself the Soldiers of
Christ Jesus, and to slacken all the vigor and as it were the sinews of their
Virtue. It Is for this end that he has caused Theaters to be set up in public
places, and that exercising and forming those Bouffons and Jeasters, he makes
use of them as of a Pestilence wherewith he infects the whole City. St. Paul
has forbidden us impertinent words, and such as aim only at a vain
divertisement; but the devil persuades us to love the one and the other.

That which is yet more dangerous is the subject for which they transport
themselves into these immoderate laughters. For as soon as the ridiculous
Bouffons have produced some blasphemy, or some dishonest word, one may see the
greatest fools ravished with joy, and transported into loud Laughters: They
applaud them for what they should stone them: and they draw thus upon
themselves, by this detestable pleasure, the punishment of an eternal fire. For
by praising them for such follies, they persuade them to do them, and they
render themselves yet more then them worthy of the condemnation which they have
deserved. If all the world would agree not to behold their fopperies, they
would quickly leave them off: but when they see you daily to abandon your
employs, your labors, and what money you can scrape up; in a word, to renounce
all to assist at these shows, they redouble their eagerness and apply
themselves much more to these fooleries.

You see, my Sister, that St. Chrysostom as well as Tertullian, does not only
condemn Comedies because of their dissolution and impurity; but moreover
because it is not permitted to Christians to pass the time in Laughters and
divertisements, and in such delights as are inseparable from these spectacles;
that they condemn them because one cannot choose but give an approbation and an
applause to things for which the faithful should conceive an extreme horror;
and because (as the same Saint adds) they who assist at these shows, entertain
the licentious life of those who represent them, animate them by their
admirations, by their applauses, and by their praises; thus laboring by all
means to beautify and exalt this work of the Devil.

This without doubt moved Salvian to say, Salvian. l. 6. de guber. Dei.
That it is as a kind of apostasy from the Faith, and a mortal prevarication
from the Sacraments thereof, to go to a Comedy. For what is, says he, the
first profession which Christians make in Baptism? Is it not to renounce the
devil, his Pomps, and his shows, and all his works? The spectacles then and the
pomps are according to our own confession the works of the devil. And how, O
Christian, can thou go to Pageants since thy Baptism, thou who confessest
that they are the work of the devil? Thou have once renounced the devil and his
spectacles; and by consequence, it is necessary, that when thou voluntarily
returnest to spectacles, thou must confess that thou returnest under the
obedience of the devil.

And it is so true, that one cannot go to Comedies without engaging ones self
voluntarily under the tyranny of the devil, Tertul. c. 16. de Spectaculis.
that Tertullian relates, how a Christian Woman having gone to the Theater, and
to a Comedy, came back possessed with the devil, and the Exorcists demanding
of him how he durst assault a Christian, he answered, that he had done it
without any fear, because he had found her in a place which appertained to him.

You must therefore, Sister, instill into your Children a horror of Comedies;
because it is a dangerous divertisement and unworthy of a Christian. Yes, you
must, because it is very hard for them to avoid there at the same time the
sullying of their eyes, their ears, and their souls. You must, because Pageants
and spectacles are of the number of the Pomps of the world, and of the works of
the devil, which they have solemnly renounced by their Baptism. You must,
because although there is nothing but feigned stuff in those representations,
yet one ceases not (as St. S. Aug. l. 1. Con. c. 2.
Augustine observes) to take part in the joy of those Lovers of the Stage, when
by their cunning they compass their unchaste desires, and to make themselves
criminals, by suffering themselves to be touched with a fond compassion for him
who afflicts himself at the loss of a pernicious pleasure and of a miserable
felicity. Finally, you must, because one takes no pleasure, as the same Saint
marks, in seeing Comedies, unless one is moved with those Poetical adventures
which are there represented, and wherewith nevertheless one is by so much more
moved, by how much one is less cured of his passions. So that by how much your
Children shall testify more ardour for Comedies, by so much the less you are to
permit them to go to them; because this their eagerness is an evident sign of
the inclination they have to excess, to pomp, and to sensuality, to wantonness,
to idleness, to effeminacy, to the arts and disguises which triumph upon the
Stages, and which you ought to endeavor to banish from their heart.

I do not doubt but that they have inclinations altogether contrary to these
practices. But it is for that very reason that you ought to be constant and not
swerve from this discipline and from this fear of our Lord, in which St. Paul
ordains you to educate them, lest they engaging themselves insensibly in these
disorders, should fall at last to affect and search after these criminal
divertisements. And I may say upon this occasion what St. S. Augustine.
Augustine said in regard of the Prayers which we present to God to obtain such
goods as he foresees would be the cause of our ruin, and which he for that
reason refuses to afford us: Let them weep their fill, let them lament all the
day long; you show your love to them if you do not listen to them, and you are
cruel to them if you hear them.

6. Advice. Against Gaming, and against the soft and idle life of Worldlings.
ST. Ambrose advertises the Faithful to take heed lest in desiring to relax
their spirit, they break not all the harmony and all the concert of their good
works. This advertisement is by so much more necessary in these our days, by
how much the major part of Christians live in a continual relaxation, and that
instead of diverting themselves only as much as is needful for them in order
to enable them afterward to follow their employments with more ease and
attention, they make their divertisements their whole business and occupation.
You ought therefore to forget nothing, my Sister, to fortify your children
against this disorder, and to hinder them from engaging themselves insensibly
in this soft and delicious way of living, which is so common among the people
of the world.

To see the manner of their life and conversation, it seems they were born only
for pleasure; and that the advantages they have above others, either by the
nobility of their descent, or by the great riches they possess, give them a
right to remain in an idleness altogether profane, and in a wretchlesness
altogether opposite to the life of true Christians, which ought to be all
vigilant and all laborious.

These persons upon pretext that they feel I know not what aversion from all
gross and shameful crimes, and that they propose to themselves only to pass
pleasantly each day, make no scruple to consume days and nights in vain
conversations, in walkings abroad, in banquets, and in gaming; without fearing
that the freedom they give to their senses and to their desires in all these
things, should afford them the occasions of being corrupted, wherewith it
cannot be but that they are incessantly accompanied.

I pretend not, Sister, to stay here in order to make you see the illusion of
this conduct, nor the obligation which all the faithful have to avoid it, I
have already showed it in the second Chapter of this Book: and I know that you
are, thanks be to God, fully convinced thereof. I desire only to encourage you
to beat down timely in your children the passions which cause these
irregularities, and particularly that of play and gaming, which exercises at
this day in the world so great a tyranny over men's spirits, and which causes
such dreadful evils.

I avouch unto you, my Sister, that I cannot comprehend how this passion could
get possession of so many persons, and how the effects it produces should not
make them abhor it, and should not have yet stopped its course. For what
excesses does not the love of gaming cause to them who abandon themselves unto
it? Does it not stifle in them by little and little all the feelings of piety
toward God, of charity toward their children, their Domestics and their
Neighbor, and of the love one owes to himself? This passion enchants them in
such sort by the pleasure they find in it, or by the hope of gain wherewith
they flatter themselves, that they forget all things, that they let slip the
hours which are even most necessary for repose, that they lose their drink and
meat, that they embusy their minds only upon that which they imagine to have
been the cause of their gain or of their loss.

They have no more gust for all other things of life: the exercises of piety
are irksom unto them. They apply themselves no longer to prayer, or if they do,
it is with a spirit full of perplexity, disquiet and despair, as they
themselves acknowledge, for the losses they have sustained, or with a false joy
for the gain which has befallen them. And if they pretend an indifferency to
win or lose, they cease not at least to show an extreme impatience to return to
their play and gaming.

Instead of sanctifying the Sundays and Holy Days, they profane them, as if
they had no sense of the Christian Religion. They know no more, what it is to
assist at the Divine Office, or to hear the Word of God; or if they go to the
great Solemnities, it is to make there new Matches, and to engage themselves
afterward in gaming with more eagerness and with less scruple: as if people of
quality and such as have means enough to play away, were therefore dispensed
withal in the duties of piety and in the keeping of Gods Commandments; or
that it were permitted them to make no distinction between Holy Days and
others, than by assisting at a low Mass, and that also in such a manner as that
they make so little piety appear, that it is sisible they seek rather to
discharge themselves of a burden, than to acquit themselves lawfully of a duty.

But what shall I say, Sister, of the power which gaming has to nourish, to
strengthen, and to entertain the most criminal passions? Does not vanity slide
ordinarily into gain? and do not they fancy that to be due to their own address
and good conduct, which they only owe for the most part to hap-hazard? Anger,
Envy, Spite, Rage and Fury, do they not flash out in losings and in bad
success? and all the other passions do they not follow one after another in
this manner? Do we not see them in less than an hours space to appear with all
their different motions in the gestures, in the words, and in all the actions
of these Gamesters? They are dejected and jolly, moderate and transported
almost in the same moment. And they who conserve outwardly a greater equality,
and who strive to keep more moderation, cease not whether they will or no to be
agitated interiourly with all these violent passions.

I let alone the Lies, the Injustices, and the Infidelities which are there
committed; the Blasphemies and the execrable Oaths wherewith they are
transported; the Quarrels, the Enmities and the Murders which happen, and all
the other accursed effects which the passion of Play ordinarily produces: The
inability into which they bring themselves to asist the poor in their need, and
the harshness they show towars them whilst they rob from their necessity the
money which they play away, is alone an evil great enough to persuade
Christians to an aversion from Gaming.

But the love of Play stays not here: It makes the persons who abandon
themselves unto it to violate other Duties, which are to them (as we may say)
much more essential and much more indispensable. The Women leave their houses
and leave the care of their family to such domestics who have oft-times only
an appearing piety and fidelity, and which dissipate under hand all their
substance. They neglect the Education of their children, and commit them to the
care of servants, or of Women who corrupt their spirit, and who frequently
engage them in such disorders, as stay with them all the rest of their life
time.

The men on their side expose themselves oftentimes to lose the means without
which they cannot make their Family to subsist as they are obliged, nor acquit
themselves of their Debts. They render themselves useless to the public, there
being neither Prince nor even particular person who will entrust his goods or
his affairs in the hands of a man who loves Play and Gaming. They expose their
honors, their offices, and their dignities; and there are but too many
illustrious Families which have been ruined by Play, or which yet resent the
losses of their Parents.

Finally, it is Gaming which causes Children so frequently to violate the
respect they owe to their Parents; which troubles the major part of Families;
which separates Husbands from their Wives; and which dividing them whom God
has united by an indissoluble tie, causes them oftentimes to fail in the
fidelity which they owe to each other. How many Wives are there, who having not
wherewithal to satisfy the love they bear to Play, or because they have a
Husband who leaves not to them the disposition of his money, or because they
have in effect already lost all, and much incommodated all their family, find
themselves easily disposed to satisfy the criminal passions of such as can
furnish them wherewithal to Play? Of what disorders is not a Woman capable who
has had a considerable loss at Play, and who sees her self ready to incur the
indignation and the fury of a Husband whom her Play has already driven several
times almost into despair? And how many men are there who suffer themselves to
be expressly overcome by the women with whom they play, upon design to corrupt
them, and who thus make a shameful and infamous traffic of that divertisement?

And here it is, my Sister, that I entreat you to make reflection upon the
blindness of the major part of Fathers and of Mothers who suffer their
Daughters to game with young men, and to receive from them considerable
presents: yea, some of them are so devoid of reason, as to rejoice at their
Daughters winnings in these occasions, and to take therein a vain and sottish
complacency; not perceiving that the jmaginary victory they get in their play
flattering their fancy, renders them sensible of the liberality of those young
Gallants, and induces them to give them some signs of their acknowledgement,
which turns in the end to the shame and to the confusion of a whole Family.

In effect, Gaming is one of the most dangerous snares which the Devil lays to
entrap young people, and which he ordinarily makes use of to make them fall
into criminal freindships. They play sometimes one to one; or if they are many,
they combine one with another. They take the game from her whom they will
oblige, they charge themselves with her loss, and thus they insinuate
themselves by little and little into her heart.

As they make profession in this age to play only for divertisement, they
affect in Play a certain frolickness and a kind of liberty to speak any thing,
which although it passes not absolutely the bounds of honesty and exterior
seemliness, yet fails not to leave malignant impressions. They turn all the
events of play into idle chatterings: and they take occasion of all that
presents it self, and of the good humor into which gain puts her with whom
they play, to make declarations which would be worse received at another time
when they are more serious.

They proceed with this disposition to walkings abroad and to collations, where
are made excessive expenses. There are not wanting indiscreet friends knowing
the intention which induces these young people to these foolish charges, and
knowing them for whose sake they are made, engage the Mothers to come with
their Daughters. Play mixes it self again in this divertisement, and begets a
new engagement to a new match and to another treat. And thus there is (as it
were) a concatenation of gaming, of walkings abroad, of collations, and of
divertisements, which do so link together the hearts of these young lovers,
that the Parents find themselves obliged at last against their wills, to cover
with the veil of Marriage the engagements they have made to each other, and to
which Play, which appeared at first innocent, gave the entrance.

Behold, Sister, how the love of Play insensibly destroys youthful persons,
and how this passion is no less prejudicial to Children then to their Parents,
making them fall into these horrible strayings which I have represented unto
you.

You ought therefore to employ all your care to prevent your Children against
so dangerous a passion, and to apply your self timely to instill into them such
Christian Maxims as may beat it down and destroy it.

You are to make them conceive what use they ought to make of their time and of
their means, when it is permitted them to take their divertisements; and with
what Plays they may laudably divert themselves.

You ought frequently to inclucate unto them, that one of the most dangerous
arts of the devil is to persuade people that the loss of time is innocent, or
at least not criminal: that nevertheless time is lent us by God to make good
use of it, and to employ it faithfully in his service and for his glory, to
conquer our passions, to expiate our sins, to establish us in good customs, to
sanctify us, and so to husband all the hours and all the moments thereof that
we may acquire a happy Eternity: and consequently that one cannot, Romans 2.4.
without sleighting the riches of Gods bounty, without contemning his tollerance
and his long patience, and without heaping up, (as St. Paul says,) a treasure
of anger for the day in which God will render to every one according to his
works, employ the time which ought to be to us so precious, in vain amusements,
and in barren and vicious occupations.

You ought to declare unto them, that the Holy Fathers agree in this, that men
are only the Depositairs and Guardians of the goods which they enjoy; that
after they have taken what is needful for their subsistence, the overplus
appertains not to them but to the poor to whom they ought to distribute it; and
that when they know their necessity they ought to cut off even from what is to
themselves necessary, to impart it to them. This moved St. S. Aug. ep. 54.
Augustine to say, That all they who know not how to use as they ought the goods
which they lawfully possess, are real Usurpers of the goods of other people.

You are to make them understand, that a Christian may not seek in his
divertisement any more than a simple untiring of his spirit and of his body in
order to render himself more capable to act Christianly; and that accordingly
all such divertisements as notably prejudice his health, or diminish the
fervor of his spirit, may not be permitted him; and that in general he has
right to no divertisement whatever, till after an innocent labor, and
conformable to the obligations of his estate and condition.

Finally, you ought to teach them, that there are Plays wherewith they may
innocently divert themselves, but that there are also others which they must
absolutely avoid: the Plays permitted, are such as serve to exercise the body
and the spirit, and in which Art and Industry have the principal part: the
Plays which are forbidden are such as consist purely in chance and hazard.

These sorts of Plays have been at all times condemned by the Churches, which
would in the first regulations she made upon this subject, have them who thus
played, to be suspended from the holy Communion. She has also ordained, that
the laity should be excommunicated, and the Churchmen degraded who should fall
into this sin. Finally, she has proceeded in the general Council of Latran, to
forbid Ecclesiastical persons to assist at them, which was renewed in the year,
1524. in the Synod of Sens: by which it appears, how the Church in all ages
has abhorred these divertisements, since she has forbidden the very sight
thereof to her Ministers, and that she suffered them not so much as to assist
at them.

And this is it undoubtedly which obliged an ancient Ecclesiastical Author, An
ancient Author among he works of St. Cyprian.
in a Treatise he composed against such as play at the Plays of hazard, and
which is among the Works of St. Cyprian, to rank these Plays in the number of
the strongest temptations which the Devil makes use of to destroy the faithful.
He says, That the Play of Chance and Hazard is a manifest snare of the Devil;
that it is a mortal and subtle Poison which penetrates even to the bottom of
the heart, and entirely corrupts it; that the wound it makes in the Soul cannot
be cured; that God is thereby mortally offended; that one sees there nothing
but transportations without reason; that truth has there no place; that lying
reigns there; that it is an obscurity and a clowd which the enemy spreads
before men to draw them into precipices; that the devil is present at this Play
to triumph and to make his profit of the loss of them who there expose
themselves with the ardour which is ordinary to such as love this criminal
divertisement: He calls this ardour a fury and a madness. He calls the hands
which there play, cruel, because they turn their weapons against themselves, in
bereaving themselves all at once of the goods which their Ancestors had got
together for them with much sweat and pains-taking. Finally, he says, that it
is a kind of Idolatry for a Christian to apply himself to it, and that the
Play of Chance and Hazard is one of the means the devil has invented to engage
man to sacrifice to him his goods and his own quiet.

Nor is it only the Church which has testified in her Councils, and in the
Writings of her principal Authors, a horror of these Plays of Hazard; Laws of
Kings and Emperors against Gaming.
but Kings and Emperors have also condemned them. They have prohibited them as
infamous and criminal occupations, and as a means of getting so unjust, that
the laws permit him who has lost at these sorts of Games, to force the Winner
or his Heirs after his death to restore the said gettings: Cod. de Aleatoribus.
And if he neglects to make this restitution, they ordain, that any one may
undertake to constrain him, and particularly Magistrates and persons
constituted in power and dignity, who are to employ this recovered money in
public reparations. Cid. de Aleat. and de Episcopis audient l. 25. and vet.
The laws also give power to Bishops to take cognisence of this crime, and they
ordain Magistrates to lend them their helping hand. So true it is that they who
made the Civil and the Ecclesiastical laws have equally judged the Games of
Hazard to be no less contrary to good manners and to the spirit of Religion
than to the common good of the State and of particular Families.

I know well that by condemning the games of Hazard in general, we must not (to
do justice to each one in particular) so severely condemn some of them as we do
others, because they are not all equally full of hazard; and that for example,
the Play at Dice is worse than certain Plays of Cards, where judgment and
industry have some share. But I also know that they all are equally forbidden
to Christians, although they are not all equally evil.

There needs no more (to convince them of this Truth who will call it into
doubt, than the testimony of Authors of this last age who have treated of
Cases of Conscience and who cannot be censured of overmuch severity.

Cardinal Tolet, Tolet. l. 1. Sum. c. 27.
after he had observed that there are some games which are permitted, to wit,
such where Art and Industry have a greater part than hazard, and which
contribute to the exercise of the body; and that there are others which are
forbidden, to wit, such where hazard has a greater share than Art and
Industry, and then the strength of the body, says, That although the games of
Hazard are in some sort more permitted to worldlings than to Churchmen, when
they seek thereby only to divert themselves, and that they play only for a
light sum, yet they cannot be excused from mortal sin when they play for a
considerable sum. He adds afterward, speaking of Play in general, that gaming
is most commonly a mortal sin, by reason of the circumstances which accompany
it, and that oftentimes one is obliged to restore back what they have gained,
as when he who is the loser had not power to dispose of that he played away, as
it falls out with Children or married Women.

Navar says, That all Plays and Games of hazard are forbidden, Navar. Manual.
c. 20.
and that even such where Art and Industry have a greater part than hazard,
become criminal, when they are clad with some criminal circumstances, or when
instead of seeking a simple divertisement the Gamesters propose gain for their
end. For then, (says he,) they make a shameful traffic contrary to the true
end of play, which is to ease and refresh the spirit: and this commerce toyls
them more than would a lawful occupation, by the disquiets which it causes in
them: He adds, that although he will not say positively, that Lay People are as
strictly obliged as Ecclesiastical persons to avoid these Games, yet he
entreats them all, and particularly such as are of great quality, to consider,
that if they sin only venially, yet their fault ceases not to be very great;
that they exercise a traffic no less shameful than the gain they make of it;
and that they are oftentimes bound to Restitution; and lastly, that they cannot
without drawing upon themselves a great confusion before God, and committing a
great indecency, receive the Sacred Eucharist, unless they are resolved to
abstain for the future from these sorts of Games.

Other Casuists, though more remiss, Sanches. Molina. Escobar.
yet still maintain, that whosoever gives Gamesters an entrance into his house, and
makes thereof an Academy for them to play at hazards, sins very grievously,
because one rarely plays at those games without mortal sin, and because every
one is obliged by the natural law not to furnish others with the matter and
occasion of sin. From whence one of them concludes, Escobar. Moral. Theo. p. 1.
Exam. 12. c. 2.
that they who expose their houses to these sorts of games, do not only sin
mortally, but that if they who have there won money do not restore it when they
are bound to it, they themselves are obliged in conscience to do it.

You need only, my Sister, apply all these Maxims to Gamesters, to be persuaded
that very few of them are innocent. The major part of them play only at such
games wherein chance has chief soverainty, and which by consequence are
forbidden. They play for considerable sums, and which by little and little
drain their purses or notably incommodate their Family. A Woman thinks her self
moderate when she exposes her self to lose but forty or fifty Pistols in an
afternoon, not only without the consent of her Husband, but even against his
will: and she considers not, that she really robs him of all that she plays
away, because he is master of the Community according to the civil law; and (as
says St. Augustine,) S. Aug. Ep. 99. ad Eccl.
because she cannot say, I may do what I please with my proper goods, since she
may not dispose of her own person as she pleases, and because she belongs
entirely to her Husband. Nor do the Husbands on their side render themselves
less criminal in exposing to hazard the goods of their Wives and Children, and
in exposing themselves, S Ambr. in Tobiam. c. 11.
as says St. Ambrose, to change their estate at each chance of their play;
there being no more stability in their estate, than is in the Dice and Cards
which they incessantly shake and shuffle.

As to the games which are permitted, how many are there of them which are not
accompanied with circumstances which render them criminal? Do they not spend
therein whole days and nights: and instead of using them to divert the spirit
and to fortify the body, do they not very frequently destroy the forces both of
the one and the other by the excesses therein committed? How small soever is
the sum they play for, do they not fall into passion? See we not there reigning
spite, envy, jealousy, wrangling? Do not Pride and desire to win and
overcome, regulate (as one may say) all their motions? So that it may be said,
that it is a very hard matter to play innocently at any game, and without
feeling I know not what alteration, which declares either that the Soul is not
yet cured of her spiritual infirmities, or that she is ready to relapse into
them unless she promptly quits this contagious exercise.

I know, Jonas. Bish. of Orleans.
(says the Illustrious Jonas Bishop of Orleans in the excellent work he made at
the entreaty of the Comte de Mathfred, to teach that Lord in what manner he
ought to live in the state of Marriage,) what they answer who love Play and
Gameing: What evil do we, (say they,) what sin do we commit in Play? But it
must be answered them that they offend God in several manners; Frst, in that it
is almost impossible to play without Lying, without forswearing, or without
being transported into choler and discord: and in the second place, because in
case one should commit none of these excesses, yet it is always a sin to be thus
in idleness, which is the enemy of the soul. Remember then whoever you are that
delight in gaming, that you must one day render an account to God of the days
and hours you have wasted.

I know moreover, (adds he,) that many will answer me with indignation; For
what then serves the world to a secular person, if it is not permitted him to
play when he pleases, and to take his divertisement? I will not answer them,
but in the very Words of our Savior: What will it avail a man to gain the
whole world, and to lose his Soul? Now it is very certain, that the soul reaps
no profit by all the plays: Furthermore, let them listen to the advice which
the Apostle St. John gives them in these Words: Love not the World, nor that
which is in the World: If any one loves the World, the love of the Father is
not in him: For all that which is in the world is but concupiscence of the
Flesh, or concupiscence of the Eyes, or Pride of life; which come not from the
Father, but from the world: Now the world passes, and the concapiscence of the
world passes away with it, but he who does the will of God remains eternally.
Let them hearken again to the Apostle St. James: Whoever will be a friend of
the World makes himself an enemy of God. Behold, Sister, how this Bishop, who
was in the beginning of the nineth age one of the greatest ornaments of the
Church of France, and all they who were instructed as he was in the science of
the Church, have answered the reasons which they make use of yet at this day to
justify the passion they have for Play. Now it is easy to judge from thence
that they believed it to be a sin to employ a considerable time in Play,
however innocent and otherwise permitted; there being no moment of our life,
since we arrived to the age of discretion, whereof God exacts not of us a
faithful employment, since we must render to him an account at the day of
Judgment of all the unprofitable words we have spoken: This appeared to that
learned Prelate to be worthy of so great consideration, that in the excellent
Treatise he writ for the instruction of Pepin King of Aquitania, the son of
Lewis le Debonnaire, this was the first thing he exhorted him daily to think
upon.

Endeavor therefore, my Sister, to educate your Children in an aversion from
all manner of gaming. And as a divertisement is the most ordinary pretext for
their engagement therein, regulate so their spirit and their heart as to this
matter, that they may know how to use it as Christianly as they do all other
solaces which necessity forces us to seek for.

Who would not blame a person, who, because he has need of meat and drink to
repair the ruins of his body and to sustain his life, would sit at table day
and night, and make that his whole occupation? they who consume almost all
their life in play, are no less faulty, although there were nothing vicious in
play considered in it self, nor in the circumstances which accompany it, and
that they sought nothing therein but a simple divertisement. For Christians are
not permitted to do that for divertisement which they ought not to do but only
for necessity: and they are no less obliged to fight against the pleasure they
meet with in such exercises as serve to refresh the mind and body, for fear of
being transported beyond the bounds of necessity, than against that which is
mixed with the most necessary actions of life. From whence it comes, that the
Holy Fathers compare divertisements to remedies, because in effect we are no
otherwise to seek and make use of them than as we desire and use Remedies.

If so it is, Sister, as no one can doubt of it who has never so little
knowledge of the Evangelical Maxims; and if St. Paul said speaking of Widows, 1 Timothy 6.5. That she who lives in delights is dead, however she seems living:
What are we to think of so many persons who pass all their life in Play and in
Pleasures, and who imitate those young Widows of whom the same Apostle speaks,
That the wantonness of their life inducing them to shake off the yoke of Christ
Jesus, they will not only by marrying again engage themselves in condemnation
by violating the faith they had formerly given him; but moreover they learn to
be idle, and use to wander about from house to house: nor are they only idle
but tatlers also and curious, discoursing of things which they ought not. For
does it not seem that the Apostle in these words has made a Portrait of the
major part of the Women of these days, who fancy that because they are nobly
born, or have wit or beauty, they have a dispensation from governing their
family, and from employing themselves profitably in working with their
domestics, and that they may pass all their life in an idleness which the
honester sort of Pagans would have been ashamed of; since Cicero, Cicero. l. 1.
Offic.
as very a Pagan as he was, acknowledged, that Nature did not cause us to be
born into the world for Play and Divertisement, but to lead a serious life,
and to employ our time in grave and solid accupations.

Resolve therefore, Sister, to beat down this disorder in your children, and
particularly in your Daughters, whose Sex is more inclined to this soft and
delicate life. Represent forcibly unto them that there is nothing more contrary
to the spirit of Christianism than continual divertisements: That Christ Jesus
did not descend from heaven to earth to teach us to pass our life in plays and
pleasures: That we find in the sacred Scripture, that he wept, and that his
life was a continual chain of labors and pains; but that we read not that he
ever divertised himself, or that he took any joy or pleasure: That we profess
to represent his life by ours, and that accordingly if we will divert our
selves, it must be in taking pleasure to be like him every day more and more in
humiliy, in Modesty, and in Patience, which are the Virtues he practiced: That
it is not by the way of Play and divertisements that the Saints came to eternal
delights: That the Gospel places the happiness of this life in weeping and in
tears, and on the contrary its unhappiness in joy and laughter: That this
present life is not lent us but to labor for Eternity; and consequently that
the least Moments thereof are too dear and too precious to lose in profane and
trifling amusements. Finally, St. Chrysostom. Ser. 6. in Matt.
inculcate frequently unto them (with Saint Chrysostom) that we were not called
into the Church as into an Assembly where nothing is thought on but mirth and
laughter; but on the contrary that we are come into it to sigh and lament, and
to get a Kingdom by our sobs and tears.

7. Advice. That in the Education of Children, Parents should particularly
propose to themselves, to induce them to consecrate themselves to God and to
serve him.
YOu will find little difficulty to withdraw your children from all these
Precipices which I have noted, into which the world strives to thrust them
headlong; if you remember that you ought not to love them but only in God and
for God. You cannot, Salvian. l. 1. Epist. ad totam Eccles.
says Salvian, better love those precious gages of Gods bounty which you have
in your hands, than in loving them in himself from whom you have received them.
And how has God commanded Fathers and Mothers to love their children? I my
self will not tell you, (says this great man,) the sacred Scripture must teach
it them, which addressing it self to all parents, ordains them to instruct
their children to place all their hope in God, Psalm. 77.
and never to forget the effects of his power and of his mercy, and to seek
always with care the knowledge of his holy will. Behold what riches God loves,
and which he will have parents leave to their children, to wit, Faith, the fear
of God, Modesty and Sanctity; and not earthly and perishable treasures. Employ
not therefore the love you owe to your children in heaping up for them temporal
riches. You can procure for them nothing greater or more precious than the
eternal good which they can never lose. Nothing will make them more rich, than
if you make them become the treasure of God himself.

This is the most important Advice which one can give to parents, since upon it
rowls all the rest, and since the principal end you are to propose to your self
in the Education of your children, is to render them Saints, and to induce them
as much as in you lies to consecrate themselves entirely to God and to renounce
the World.

The Apostle St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 7.36. That if a Father thinks it is a shame
to him to let his Daughter pass over the time of her youth without Marrying
her, and that he judges that he ought to do it, he sins not, if acting
according to his thought he gives her in Marriage. But he (adds this Apostle v.
37.) who being not engaged by any necessity, and who finding himself in a full
power to do what he pleases, takes a firm resolution in his heart, and judges
himself that he ought to conserve his Daughter a Virgin, does a good work. Thus
(concludes he v. 38.) he who marries his Daughter does well, but he who marries
her not, does yet better.

Where you see, Sister, that although St. Paul blames not parents who engage
their Children in the World by procuring for them some establishment by the
means of Marriage; yet he prefers the conduct of those who marry them not, and
who make a firm resolution in their hearts to move their Children to renounce
the world and those sorts of settlements and to embrace Virginity.

This great Apostle considered, Ib. v. 25. That although he had received no
command from our Lord which obliged to Virginity; yet it was advantageous to
man, because of the wretched necessities of this present life, not to marry, v.
26.

He considered, v. 29. That what time remains is short; and therefore that even
they who have wives, should be as if they had none; they who weep as if they
wept not; v. 30. they who rejoice as if they did not rejoice; they who buy as
possessing nothing, and they who use the world as not using it, v. 31.

He considered, v. 32. That he who is not married employs his care upon the
concerns of our Lord, and of what he ought to do to please him; v. 33. whereas
he who is married, employs his care upon the things of the world, and what he
is to do to please his wife, and so he finds himself thus parted and divided.
In like manner that a Woman who is unmarried and a Virgin, has her spirit
employed upon things of our Lord, v. 34. to the end she may be holy in body and
in spirit; whereas she who is married, has her spirit employed with solicitude
upon the things of the world, and casts about what she is to do to please her
Husband.

All these Considerations made St. Paul desire, Ib. v. 7. That all men were in
the state in which himself was, and that they were disengaged from cares and
disquiets; v. 32. having no design, as he declares, to enthrall them by his
words, nor to put upon them any necessity, but only to induce them to that
which is most pure, and which affords them a more easy means to tie themselves
to God without any distraction, v. 35.

And it is in this spirit that he praises the conduct of Fathers and of
Mothers, who take a firm resolution in their heart to conserve their Children
Virgins, and not to engage them in Marriage, forasmuch as by this means they
induce them to that which is most pure, and to that which gives them an easier
means to adhere to God without distraction.

It Is this, to which parents are particularly obliged, according to the
judicious observation of Gaudentius Bishop of Bresse. For this great man after
he had declared in one of his Sermons, that parents cannot force the will of
their children in what regards the choice of Marriage or the state of
continence, adds this prudent reflection: I will not, (says he,) that Fathers
and Mothers or the other kindred of Virgins, whether Boys or Girls, should
flatter themselves with that which I say, that they ought to leave their
children in the liberty of this choice, and that they cannot domineer over
their spirits upon this account, For it is true that they cannot command them a
perpetual continence, because that is a thing which ought to be altogether
voluntary; but they may, whilst they are yet young, educate, elevate, and
nourish their will in the love of that which is most perfect; they ought to
induce them by their advertisements and their exhortations to such a love, to
enkindle it in them, to entertain it in them, and to show much more eagerness
to engage them in the service of God than in following the world; and offering
some of their Sons to serve in the Clergy in the Ministry of the Altars, and
some of their Daughters in the Monasteries of Religious Women, to the end they
may there consecrate themselves to Chastity. It Is thus that by adorning the
Church with the fruits of a holy Education, they may attain to the happiness
which is promised in the sacred Scripture to him who has of his posterity in
Sion, and of his family in Jerusalem.

Would to God, Sister, that parents had these sentiments graved so deeply in
their heart, that one might re-establish them at this day in the possession,
wherein they were in the ancient Testament and in the first ages of the Church,
to offer up their children to God, and to consecrate them entirely to his
service, even in their most tender years.

This power of Fathers and Mothers over their children shone gloriously in the
Church at that time in particular when the Monasteries of Saint Benedict
flourished most in sanctity. Monasteries of S. Benedict.
For parents placed their children in these holy Schools and in these happy
Retraits to learn there the science of Christianism and to be there safely
sheltered from the malice and from the corruption of the world; and they did it
with such a fullness of their will, that they seemed to divest themselves, in
placing them there, of all the feelings of flesh and blood, and to renounce
entirely all the right they could pretend to them. From whence it was that they
had a custom, as it is expressed in the Rule of St. Benedict, to enwrap the
hands of the child in the cloth of the Altar, as it were to signify that this
innocent youth took God, who is represented by the Altar, for his inheritance.

And because Riches are one of the strongest temptations of the world, and one
of the most powerful means the world makes use of to make it self beloved; the
Children were made poor, and were destript of wealth for ever. The Fathers
could no longer make them partakers of their goods but by giving Alms to the
whole Monastery: and moreover, to the end they might remain happily engaged to
the service of Christ Jesus without hope of returning, they promised with an
Oath that they would never re-place them in possession of the goods they had
now quitted by abandoning the world.

This practice was yet in use in the Eleventh Age, where we find that the
child who was thus offered wore a Crown, as if he had been already a Religious
man, for a mark of the Victory he was going to obtain over the World: and as
another Isaac he carried in his hands not Wood and Fire, but Bread and Wine, to
signify that he was himself a thing consecrated to God, and a living and
spiritual Sacrifice.

As in Baptism, Parents promise for their children, that they renounce the
Devil and his Pomps; so here the Fathers promised before witnesses, that their
children should remain in the regular observance of the Monastery: they
protested that it was no longer in their power, after this Oblation, to cast
off the Yoke of the Rule to which they were now subjected; and they made use of
that form, which is somewhat near the same which is still used by the Religious
of St. Benedicts Order in their Profession: I promise before God and his Saints
for this my Son a perpetual stability in this Monastery, the conversion of his
manners, and an entire Obedience. I promise by him who lives eternally, that I
will give him no share in my goods; but that I wholly disinherit him for ever.

The Church believed these vows of Fathers and Mothers so advantageous to
children, that she obliged the said children to observe them all their life.
There was no difference put between the destroying of ones self and the going
forth of a Monastery, after they had made this manner of engagement; and the
children had scarcely need of any other Profession; than this solemn promise by
which they were consecrated to God. Whence it is, The 4. Council of Toledo.
that in the 4th Council of Toledo it is said, that whether a person is engaged
in a Monastery by the devotion of his Parents, or by his own choice, he is
always obliged to stay there, nor is it permitted him to return to the world:
And that according to St. Isidore, he who is placed in a Monastery by his
Father and his Mother, is to know that he is bound to remain there the rest of
his life.

There was nothing unjust nor over-rigorous in this proceeding: but on the
contrary, it was full of justice and highly advantageous to the children: For
if according to the rules of law, a Father may in case of extreme necessity
sell his son, and make him for ever a slave to men, in order to preserve a
temporal life: why shall it not be permitted by the rules of the Gospel to the
same Father to offer his children to God, and to procure for them a true
liberty by engaging them to his service, upon the design of procuring for
themselves as well as for them, an eternal life and happiness?

What is there in this action on the Fathers side, which is not holy and
conformable to his duty? This Sacrifice being made with a most sincere
intention and with a piety altogether disinteressed, was it not a convincing
proof, that he had changed the natural love which Parents have for their
children, into a Charity totally Divine: that he had surmounted that so common
a desire, which men have to conserve their Name and their Family, particularly
when they have but one only Child, and that they possess much Wealth: Finally,
that he had renounced those so sweet comforts which Parents feel in the
conversation of their own children?

On the childrens side, is this engagement to Religion to be dreaded? Is not
the yoke of Christ Jesus easy, and his burden light, especially to children who
have not yet been sullied with any vice, who have not yet been corrupted by any
evil customs, who from their cradle have been formed to Virtue, who have been
trained up in Piety, who have had nothing but good examples before their eyes,
who have sucked (as one may say) together with the Milk, the Rules of Christian
Sanctity, and who not knowing the world have had no share in its delights and
vanities?

But however holy and laudable this practice was, we must nevertheless grant,
my Sister, that the Church has with great wisdom limited the devotion of
Parents. She has considered, that what was formerly the effect of a great and
sincere devotion, was sometimes scarcely any more than an effect of avarice and
cupidity: that Parents oftentimes in these days sought not so much, in placing
their children in Monasteries, to give them to God, as to discharge themselves
of those children, to render the others richer and better provided for in the
world. And so she has stopped by her laws their authority and set bounds to
their power; because they on the one side made it serve their ambition, and on
the other side oppressed the liberty of their own Children.

Yet she has not bereaved them of the power to place them in their tender age
in Monasteries to have them there educated, and to put them in a state by this
happy retrait to march on, both more courageously, and more swiftly, and also
with less danger toward Heaven, supposing they have no other end in this
action, than his glory and the salvation of their children, and that they offer
them to Monastries in an indifference of their being Religious or returning to
the world, as it shall please God to dispose of them.

But in this last practice, there are two principal things to be observed in
order to follow therein the spirit of the Church. The first is, the choice of
the Monastery: For Parents would be so far from procuring their childrens
salvation, that they would endanger their destruction, if they took no care in
placing them in Religious Houses, to see whether those Houses are indeed
Religious, and whether they there will not engage their children to embrace
their institute by persuasions which are altogether humane, and by a spirit
which is totally opposite to that of God: Wherein it is so much more important,
that Parents suffer not themselves to be deceived, by how much the least
negligence would be very criminal before God in a matter of so great
consequence.

The Second thing which Parents ought to observe, is, That when their children
are in a house truly Religious and of a solid and disinteressed piety, they
draw them not forth of it to return to the World, lest by taking them for a
time from Christ Jesus, who demands them to sanctify them, they should give
them to the world, which demands them to corrupt them.

I know they want not specious pretexts for this: they say, that a true
vocation must be tried; that grace will triumph amidst the conflicts; that a
Resolution which is from God cannot be shaken, either by the life of the world,
or by the luster of Riches, and that the prudence of the Holy Ghost, when it is
in a soul, cannot be deceived by the cunnings of the spirit of darkness.

But I also know, Sister, that it is said in holy Scripture, That he who seeks
and loves danger shall perish in it: and that consequently one cannot without a
very great blindness bring back into the middle of the world such children as
have been holily separated from it, and fancy that they cannot be sanctified in
a Cloister, unless the world could not have force enough to corrupt them.

God will have us try our selves, but not put our selves into the hands of the
World and of the Devil to try our selves: He on the contrary commands us to fly
from the mortal Enemies of our salvation, for fear of falling into their
snares; to save our selves in the solitude, for fear to perish with Babylon;
and to hide the treasure which we have found for fear lest in showing it, the
Devil who seeks incessantly to take his advantages, should take it away from us.

The Prudence of Gods holy spirit cannot be deceived, but it leaves us and
abandons us, when we quit his house and the place where he cleared and
enlightened us, to enter into a place of darkness and of crimes. And if the
Charity which is in us could not be extinguished, the Apostle would not
advertise us not to suffer the spirit of God to be extinguished in our hearts.

If Adam had kept his Eyes always shut, he would not have had cupidity to fight
against, and he would have continued in perfect peace. Wherefore it is to
imitate the Devils malice thus to open the eyes of children, whom the grace of
the second Adam has rendered innocent, to make them see the vanities of the
World to engage them in new combats, and to bereave them of peace. It Is not to
try their Vocation, but to make them lose it: And it is so far from making the
grace of Religion triumph in them by this proceeding, that it renders it
useless, and extinguishes it in their hearts, because it is not given to
sanctify men in the middle of the World, but to make them abandon it.

In the times of Persecution, Christian Prudence taught the Faithful to fly
from the Executioners; and this just and humble Fear was the source of the
strength which the Saints obtained of God to suffer the most cruel torments,
when they fell against their will into the hands of their Enemies. Who doubts
but that the spiritual Persecutions of the World which corrupt Souls, are more
dangerous, and ought much more carefully to be avoided: and that the
allurements of pleasure, that the abundance of riches, that the pomps and the
excess of ambition are Tyrants which murder more Souls than the Nero's and the
Dioclesians murdered bodies?

How great then is their unhappiness who are exposed to this cruelty? and what
an indiscretion is it in Parents who thrust their children into this precipice?
they were happily hidden and covered in the Cloister from the surprises of
their enemies. The continual Prayers, the labor, and the charitable care of
the Religious persons who supported them both by their example and by their
prayers and by their advertisements, were as so many Bucklers wherewith they
were shielded, and which rendered them invincible against the Devil: Is it not
then to engage them in the combat, after they are bereft of their Weapons and
of their Forces, thus to withdraw them from these holy places and practices?

The Pleasures, the Flatteries of men, the spectacles of vanity encompass them.
They hear nothing but the voice of Ambition and of Wantonness. They see nothing
but what shows them the Angels of Satan, which cast them into blindeness, or
cousen them by false lights. They are in the midst of the mire, and yet you
would have them contract no filth. They are amidst fires and flames, and you
pretend they should be preserved by a Miracle, like that which preserved the
three young Hebrews amidst the Babilonian Furnace.

You well see, my Sister, that this pretention is altogether unreasonable, and
that it is in no sort conformable to the principles of Christianism. Observe
then inviolably in regard of your children whom you design to Gods service, the
two things I now propose unto you: place them in houses well regulated, and
force them not thence upon any pretext whatever.

Let the grace of Christ Jesus act in these young Hearts, according to the
extent of his bounty. Leave them to listen at leisure to the voice which calls
them. Give them all the time which is necessary to discern what he demands of
them: and unless you clearly perceive that he calls them not to Religion, and
that persons of knowledge and of piety do assure you thereof, do not withdraw
them; for fear lest by a false prudence, or by an overhasty precipitation, you
should pull out of the house of Christ Jesus one of his spouses to expose her
to the corruption of the world.

Finally, if they have not sufficient courage to sacrifice themselves to God,
and that they will return back into the world, receive them with that sweetness
and charity which you owe them; but suffer them not to become the sacrifices of
the Devil. If they could not follow Christ Jesus in the exercises of the
Religious life, do not suffer them so far to desert them as to follow the
Maxims of the world. And if they could not put themselves into an estate to
receive the abundant graces and favors which God communicates to such souls as
totally disentangle themselves to unite themselves more strictly unto him; do
your best to hinder them from engaging themselves in the disorders which reign
in the world, lest they should draw upon their heads the dreadful effects of
his anger and revenge.

CHAP. XI. At what age these Maxims and these Advices are to be applied.
AS to the time, my Sister, when you ought principally to reduce into practice
all these Maxims and all these advices, it is that time which commonly seems
least proper for the acquisition of virtue, and to know its excellence and its
beauty: I mean that of Infancy.

This is that which the holy Ghost himself insinuates unto us by the mouth of
Solomon, who says, Pro. 32.11, That one may easily judge of the Innocence and
of the virtue of a young man by the things to which he is affected in his
Infancy. He would signify hereby that Parents and they who are encharged with
the Education of children, will be unexcusable, if the children become not
virtuous under their conduct; since they might easily prevent their disorders
by applying wholesome remedies to the first accesses of their evils, and that
they might have weeded out in their tenderest years the seed of all those bad
productions, which then begin to bud forth and appear.

And it is this which Ecclesiasticus declares yet more smoothly, when he says:
Eccles. 7.25. You have children, instruct them and curb them from their
Infancy: Where you see Sister, that Gods holy spirit makes an allusion to
trees, and that he will give us to understand, that as we prune and bend trees
whilst they are yet young, lest by overlong delaying it, they may be apter to
be broken than bended: so children, who in the langage of the Royal Prophet,
Psalm., 107.4. are round about the table of their Parents as new Plants of the
Olive Tree. are to enter under the discipline of their Fathers and Mothers, as
soon as they leave the arms of their Nurses; and that they are no less to be
taught how to march toward Heaven, than they are instructed to go upon the
Earth. So that as they are informed to render to their Parents and to such
persons as present themselves before them, the little marks of respect and of
honor whereof they are then capable, although they know not the reasons why
they should prefer them before others; so they are to be accustomed to render
to God little testimonies of Piety, and to practice weak actions of virtue
although they cannot comprehend the obligations they have to his Divine
Majesty, nor the excellence of virtue.

We are not to expect, says St. John Chrysostom, till our children are great,
to imprint fear into them: but we are to regulate them, instruct them,
Chrystost. l. 3. cont. vituperatores vitae Monast.
and form them from their Infancy, and then they will never need our threats or
our severity. We carry our selves toward them in such sort as if a Physician
having said nothing to a sick person whom he saw fallen into a languishing
condition, and having prescribed him no remedies for his cure whilst they were
capable to have their effect, ordains him a great number after the noble parts
were corrupted by the disease, and that he was become incurable.

All the evil we see, (says he in another place, Chrysostom. ho. 46. in 1. epist.
ad Tim.
) proceeds from our own laziness and from our negligence, and because we strive
not to inform our children in piety in their most tender years: We take much
care and pains to have them instructed in the profane Arts and Sciences: we
procure for them with all our power advantageous employments in the Court and
in the Camp: We hourd up Wealth for them: We get them Friends: In brief, we do
all we can to render them considerable in the world, but we take no care to
acquire them the favor and love of the King of Angels, nor to make them obtain
one day an honorable rank in the Court of Heaven.

And surely did parents timely accustom their children to the yoke of a holy
discipline whilst they are yet young; did they take pains to bring them by
little and little to their duty, when they first begin to be froward and hard
to be ruled; if they strove to cure the diseases of their soul when they have
not yet taken root, and to pull up their passions before they are grown strong,
we should have nothing to do with laws, nor with judgments, nor with
punishments and chastisements: For the Law, (as St. Paul says) is not made for
the Just: but because we neglect their Education, we enwrap them in a world of
miseries, and oftentimes we our selves deliver them up to the Executioners, and
throw them headlong into hell.

In Christianism it is the Maxim of a wise and discreet conduct to do all and
to omit nothing which may strengthen us against the assault of vices. But the
means, Sister, to succeed in so holy an enterprise, is, in the lowest age of
your children to seize upon all the avenues of their spirit and of their heart,
and to render virtue the absolute Mistress there, by a prompt banishment of
every thing which may make there the least vicious impression.

True it is, that children are not capable to distinguish virtue and vice,
having not yet the use of reason. But yet, as a famous Divine observes, they
may contract according to the Idea's and the Fancies which they receive by
their parents education, a certain inclination which will much help them or
much hurt them, (when coming to the use of their liberty they must apply
themselves to vice or to virtue,) in making a good or bad choice; and (as St.
Basil says) that at the same time when reason shall dictate unto them the good
they ought to do, S. Basil. in his great. R. Rule. 10.
the habit and the custom will facilitate the execution.

And think not, Sister, that this is little considerable. For if in the
judgment of St. Thomas and several other Divines, Man is bound by a natural
precept and upon pain of Mortal sin to convert himself to God as soon as he
has the perfect use of reason; it cannot be but that which serves for a
disposition to so important an action, must be of highest consequence.

What Father is there, who knowing his son to be in danger of loosing his life,
or to fall into the hands of Enemies if he passes such a way, endeavors not to
put him in safety, and to secure him from the dangers which threaten him? And
what Mother is there, whose Daughter being laden with precious Jewels,
watches not with much care for fear lest Robbers should bereave her of them?

We cannot doubt but that the devil employs all his industry to make a child
lose the grace of his Baptism, and that he endeavors to determine him at first
to make choice of Vice. And since he has no stronger Weapons to conquer us
than our own inclinations, can it be doubted but that he will easily bring
about his design if he finds those of a child totally inclined to vanity and
to the love of Worldly pomps and pleasures?

This made St. Gregory the Great say, S. Greg. l. 4. Dial. c. 18.
That although we are piously to believe that the baptized children who dye in
their Infancy, enter into the Heavenly Kingdom, yet we ought not to imagine
that all they who can speak are saved, because there are some of them against
whom Parents shut Heaven gates by the bad Education they give them. The same
Saint after he had related the dreadful chastisement which God laid upon a
Father in the City of Rome for having suffered his Son of five years old to
blaspheme the name of God, thunders out these astonishing words: It Is thus that
God would make known to this unhappy Father how highly he was culpable, and
that he would make him understand how by neglecting the Soul of this little
Infant, he nourished a great sinner for Hells eternal flames. These are his own
expressions.

And this undoubtedly made Sara whom the Apostle St. Peter 1 Pet. 3.2. proposes
to all Christian Women for their pattern, resolve to urge Abraham to drive Agar
and her son out of his house; because she feared lest Isaac should be corrupted
by him, and lest they should contract bad customs together. And the resolution
of this prudent Woman was so just, Genesis 11.12. that God approved it, having
made known to Abraham, that he ought not to oppose a design which was so
discreet and so advantageous to Isaac.

And surely even as a small straying which was not perceived in the beginning
of a journey, carries one extremely astray from the place one intended to go,
and as a little breach in a Damm being neglected, causes in the sequel great
spoils and havocks: even so a small evil becomes mortal, if one applies not a
prompt remedy; and that which in Infancy was only a simple affection for things
indifferent, becomes in a more advanced age a violent love for things
prohibited.

The fair Language of Graccus's mother contributed much to his Eloquence, says
S. Jerome. Hortensius learned to speak well in his own house: St. Jerome. in
epist. ad Latam.
and Alexander the Great could not quit the Vices of a Governor who had taught
him in his Infancy, notwithstanding that he was otherwise very powerful, and
had conquered the major part of the World: which shows how hard it is to blot
out of the spirit of a young man the tinctures it has taken in his Infancy;
that it conserves almost always the first impressions it has received; and
that (as St. Ireneus says) what one learns in that age becomes as it were the
same thing with our Soul, St. Ireneus in ep. ad Florin.
and is changed (if we may say it) into its substance.

This made one of the most clearsighted among the Pagans to say, That one of
the things we should chiefly take care of in the Education of children whom we
intend to leave a long time Quintilian.
in their Nurses hands, is concerning the choosing of these Nurses. For, (says
he,) they must be very wise: and we ought as far forth as may be to take such
as have the best qualities, and whose manners are best regulated. But although
we ought principally to have regard to their good conduct, we must not omit to
examine their way of speaking: For they are the persons whom the children first
hear, and whose language they strive to imitate: and naturally we retain much
more firmly, what we learn in our tenderest years: just as a Vessel new-made
conserves almost ever after the odor of the first liquor powered into it. It
happens that even the bad qualities adhere much more strongly, and that Evil
makes a deeper impression than good: yea, the good it self easily changes into
evil, whereas it is very seldom that vicious habits and customs turn into good
ones.

This also made Plato ordain, that we should not only endeavor with much care
and watchfulness to educate children well when they are three years old: but
moreover he extremely recommends to Mothers that during the time of their being
with child they should keep themselves free from all sort of alterations; and
generally he exhorts Fathers and Mothers, to exempt themselves as much as may
be from all passions; for fear lest communicating to the bodies of their
children such affections as reign in them, they should pass even to their
souls; and lest their bodies being formed of a blood burning with choler, or
inflamed with an unchaste Fire, or that being conceived in a bosom filled with
Pride and Vanity, their Souls should contract inclinations of Fevenge, Impurity
and Ambition.

We also see, Sister, that God has bestowed very particular Benedictions upon
such Children as were consecrated to him in their Mothers womb. Sampson,
Samuel, and St. John Baptist in the Old Testament, St. Augustine, St. Bernard,
in the New, are authentic proofs of the advantages which are derived from this
holy practice. And it is most certain, S. Chry. l. 1. cont. vitupera. vitae
M^nast.
that God despises not so rational a devotion, and a so well regulated piety;
but that on the contrary he lends his all-powerful hand to assist Fathers and
Mothers who make such use of it, to make their children perfect Images of his
own Son, and that he causes all things to contribute to their sanctity.

But to speak ingeniously of things as I conceive and apprehend them, (and God
grant it may not be as it is commonly done,) there are many Fathers and Mothers
who would be loath their children should receive so signal a Grace: and the
most rational of them would willingly yield to follow these important Maxims in
regard of those children whom they design to the Church or to Religion; but not
in regard of those whom they look upon as the prop of their Family, and the
Heyrs of their Honors, Offices, and Riches. Wherefore one cannot too much
endeavor to undeceive the World of an illusion which is so criminal in its
Principles and so detestable in its effects and consequences.

CHAP. XII. That these Maxims and these Advices are principally to be followed
in the Education of such children as are designed for the World.
IF all Christians are obliged, as undoubtedly they are, to tend to the same
perfection; it is also an undoubted truth, that there ought to be no difference
in their Education: and I say not only, that there ought to be an equality
among them who are designed to lead a common life, and them who are
consecrated to a more particular profession of piety: but there is no doubt
that one ought to apply a greater care in the Education of the first than of
the second; and that if Parents are concerned fot the public interest, for the
glory of their children, and for the salvation of their souls: they are not to
neglect any of the Maxims, nor any of the Advices, which we have drawn from the
Scripture and from the Fathers, in the Education of them whom they design for
the World.

To make you comprehend how much the interest of Commonwealths and Kingdoms is
engaged in the perfect Education of such as are to fill up the Dignities, and
to possess the most eminent Employments; I need only conjure you, St. Chry. l.
3. cont. vituper. vitae Monas.
after a Father of the Church, to cast a view upon them who have introduced
into the World all the Disorders which now reign therein, and to consider who
they are that follow them: Whether they are such as have learned to live in a
repose and in a retrait; or such as invent new pleasures and new
divertisements: They who subsist honestly of their own patrimony, and are
satisfied with the conveniences which God has given them; or they who only
study to enrich themselves with the goods of the poor: They who are content
with a mean train and a moderate table, and with what serves only for
necessity; or they who will have a magnificent train, and a sumptuous table
open to all comers. And to speak more Christianly, whether they who live with
great meekness and great modesty, who think only of submitting themselves and
of suffering themselves to be directed, who esteem themselves the last of men,
and seek the least honorable places, who have always before their eyes the
Vanity of the world, and the nothing of creatures; or they who look to be
respected, and who render themselves terrible by their injustices and by their
violences; who will command every one, and omit nothing to usurp the
Magistracies, scarcely remembering any longer that they are men, so strangely
are they puffed up with pride, and so full are they of self-esteem and vanity.

Now if they are these later who overturn estates, who trouble families, who
cause the murders, the slaveries, and all the miseries which we see and lament;
and if they arrived not at this extremity of injustice, but because their
parents neglected their Education: is it not evident that it is the interest of
Kingdoms, that every Father of a Family should follow the Rules we have
proposed, that so by faithfully practicing them they may bring their children
to embrace the documents of the Fathers of the Church and of the Doctors of
the world; and as Saint Chrysostom says, That they may by their care render
them sparkling lights to shine amidst the darkness which Vices have spread
abroad in the World, and to show the way of Heaven to so many unhappy wretches
who go astray?

And this, Sister, is the second motive upon which the truth I have advanced is
established, and upon which is grounded the obligation of Parents, to educate,
according to the Maxims of the Church Fathers, those Children whom they design
for the World. For it is certain, that Virtue has this advantage, to make it
self esteemed by its own enemies, and that if it has not sufficient
allurements and charms strong enough to gain all men's hearts, yet it has power
and strength enough to draw their admiration.

See we not, that sweetness and humility in Artists contents more than their
adress and their industry? If there is a Judge who will not be corrupted, is he
not desired by all sorts of persons to be the arbitratour of their life and
fortune? And they who have the least Ambition and the least love for Offices
and Commands, are they not (says St. Chrysostom,) most welcome in the Courts of
Soverain Kings and Princes?

Do not fear that the modesty of your Daughters in their dress, that their
reservedness in company, that the little intercourse they have with young
Gallants, will render them less esteemed or less sought for in Marriage. Their
simplicity, their meekness, their affection for such things as concern the good
government of a Family, and their contempt of worldly ornaments, will make them
better known than strutting and vanity: And if men for their diversion seek
such as live according to the Maxims of the world, they will not have for wives
but such as follow the laws of the Gospel, such as love retiredness, and such
as have no inclination to the Modes and Pomps of the World.

This fidelity to follow the Maxims of the Holy Fathers in the Education of
those Children whom we design for the World, is it not advantageous to
purchase them the love and esteem of all people; but it is even more necessary
for the salvation of their souls, than for that of those Children whom they
design for Cloisters and for retrait. The sole comparison which St. Chrysostom
makes use of is sufficient to prove this. Even as, S Chry. ho. 21. in Ephesians.
(says this Father,) he who stays always in the Haven stands not in so much
need of a Pilot well experienced, of so great a number of Mariners, and of a
Vessel so well equipped, as he who is always at Sea, and who must provide to
resist the winds and the tempests: so he who is designed for the solitude
being to lead a quiet life and exempt from troubles and turmoils, has no need
of such great strength and so many lights, as he who is to sustain the most
powerful shocks of the Flesh, of the World, and of the Devil.

Now if these irreconcilable enemies of men's salvation raise their strongest
batteries against Children in their tenderest age: they who introduce them into
the World without having taught them in that tender age to contemn pleasures,
Riches, and Honors, do they not expose them naked and unarmed to the cruelty
of the said Enemies?

We must therefore train them up to the combat from their Infancy, discover to
them the crafts and cunning of their enemies, teach them the means to surprise
and to defeat them, make them know that it is almost impossible to conserve
perfect health amidst the contagion, and that living in the world they must
always conquer or always be conquered.

How can they defend themselves from Ambition, seeing all others greedy to make
themselves great, unless they are strongly persuaded of the small solidity
which is found in the establishment proposed by the world? Can they keep
themselves to an indifference amidst the affected complacencies and the
allurements of Women, who will strive to gain their freindship in order to get
possession of their persons and of their means, unless they are perfectly
convinced of the obligation they have to adhere to God alone, and to prefer him
before all things? Or rather being not solidly settled in Piety and in the fear
of God, will they not suffer themselves to be carried a way by Example and by
custom; and losing by the Vicious habits so contracted their eternal salvation,
will they not make an unhappy experience of the truth of these words of St.
Jerome: That it is very easy to become like the wicked, S. Jerome. ad Letam.
and to imitate in a short time the Vices of them to whose Virtue one cannot
attain?

CHAP. XIII. The means which facilitate the application of these Maxims and
these Advices in the Christian Education of Children.
ALL these means, Sister, may be reduced to the care which parents ought to
take to instruct their children themselves in their own persons. But because we
cannot receive Instruction but by the means of Speech, Reading, and actions;
and that he who plants and he who waters are nothing, but that it is God who
gives the increase, which he gives not ordinarily but to an humble Prayer: it
will be easy for you to bring up your children according to the Maxims of the
Fathers of the Church, if you entertain them with such things as you ought, if
you make them read such Books as will profit them, if you your self give them
examples which they may imitate, and if you take care to engage God by their
Prayers and by your own, to pour out his benediction upon your instructions,
upon their lectures, and upon your Examples.

The first Means. Speech, Words, or Discourse.
IT cannot be sufficiently deplored, that Parents now adays study so little to
render the Conversations, which they have with their children and with their
Domestics, truly Christian. It seems they dare not discover to them the
sentiments they have for God. They hide themselves from them to say their
Prayers, and to acquit themselves of their least Christian duties: And as if
God had not placed them in their houses to give light to such as enter into it
and dwell in it, they rob them of their lights, and contribute by a conduct so
dimply shining, to form the darkness which is spread over the whole World.

This unhappy proceeding is the cause that they ordinarily entertain themselves
with nothing but trifles and things altogether unprofitable; that to furnish
matter for conversation they examine the actions of their neighbor, they
censure them and they discover their secret and unknown crimes; that all their
talk is but a concatenation of detraction, of falsehood, of vanity, and of
pleasure; and that that which should be (as it were) the sensible Communion of
Saints in Christ Jesus, and the image and expression of the communion and
society which we have begun with God and with Christ Jesus by Baptism, 1 Joan.
13. becomes a source of malice, and is in effect nothing but a sequel of that
miserable conversation which our first Parents had with the Devil, Ephesians. 2.3.
which caused the ruin of all their posterity, and which rendered all their
children the children of anger and indignation.

Shall we then wonder that the major part of the Children of Christians live in
so great disorders? that they are so perfectly knowing in what is necessary to
frequent companies and to render themselves pleasing; and that they know so
little what is necessary to go to Heaven and to please Christ Jesus? that they
are ignorant of nothing that concerns the Modes which Vanity and Flattery have
introduced into the World, and that they are so ill instructed in the Rules of
the Gospel, and in the laws, customs, and ceremonies of the Church?

It Is long since, Sister, that God would have brought a Remedy to this Disorder.

In the law of Nature, he ordained, according to the Tradition we have from S.
Jerome, that the first born of the Family should be exalted to the Priesthood,
that they should be initiated therein by their own Parents, and that they
should have no other Doctors and Teachers but them concerning the truths they
were to believe and the functions they were to exercise. 'Twas for this, that
when he was ready to revenge the crimes of Sodom and Gomorra, Genesis 26.18. he
said that he could not conceal this his design from Abraham, because he knew he
would make use of this dreadful example to induce his children and all his
Domestics to walk after him in the way of his Divine Ordinances, and to live
holily; giving thereby all Fathers and Mothers to understand, that the means to
become his familiar friends, and to oblige him to discover unto them his
secrets, and to conceal nothing from them, was the care they should take to
instruct their Family.

In the Law of Moses, at the same time when God ordained the days of Feasts and
of Solemnities, he commanded Parents to instruct their children in the
Ceremonies which were there to be observed, and to teach them the reasons and
the motives of their Institution. Thus after he had prescribed to the
Israelites what they were to observe in eating the Pascall-Lamh, Exodus 13.8. he
commanded them to recite to their children on that day what he had done in
their favor to draw them out of Egypt and feee them from the tyranny of
Pharaoh. He would have the Feast of Tabernacles yearly celebrated, and that
they should remain seven whole days under Tents made of the branches of
Citron-trees, of Myrrhs, of Palms, and of Willows, to the end their children
might learn how God had conserved their Ancestors the space of Forty years in
the Desert under Tents and Pavillions. Finally, he ordained them to offer up
unto him all the first born of the Males, as well of Men as of Beasts, to the
end that their children being surprised at these so extraordinary and so
frequent presents, might enquire the cause and so come to be instructed of the
meaning of these Ceremonies, and as the sacred Scripture says, that the Parents
might have evermore in their mouths the recital of the benefits they had
received from Gods bounty, and that from thence they should take occasion to
teach their children his Law, and to make them have it in high esteem,
according to that more particular Commandment which he gave them in
Deuteronomy, where he ordains them to have his Law in their heart, Deuteronomy. 6.6.
to entertain their children therein, and to teach them to meditate upon it, and
to think on it in their house and in their journeys, during their rest and
during their labor, and finally in all their occupations, and at all the hours
of the day, Deuteronomy. 1.18.

In the Law of Grace, the Church which is animated with the same spirit renews
every year the Memory of the Mysteries which Christ Jesus wrought for us, and
she endeavors to place before our eyes by many ceremonies and sensible signs
the marvails which have been so long concealed from the eyes of Angels, and
whereof they were not informed but by the Ministry of this holy Spouse.

It Is true that she particularly destines her Pastors to explicate them to her
Children. But that also which St. Chrysostom. ho. 9. in 3. ad Colos.
John Chrysostom says is no less true: That the Heads of Families are not to
remit all entirely to them of the Church: That as for themselves they are
indeed to be instructed by the Preachers of the Gospel; but that after that,
they ought to instruct their children; and like those Birds, whereof the same
Doctor speaks, having heard something that is profitable for the nourishment
of their own souls, to bring it home upon the tip of their tongue, to
communicate it unto them.

This moved Venerable Beda to say in the Discourse he made upon the Shepherds
who watched when our Savior was born: S. Beda. hom. de Nativ.
Do not fancy to your selves that there are no other Pastors but the Bishops.
the Priests, the Deacons, and the Superiors of Monasteries? for all the
Faithful who have the government of their family are truly Pastors; since they
are established to command and to take care of all their domestics: and he
among you who has any authority over one or two of his Brethren, is assuredly
obliged to exercise in their behalf the Office of a Pastor, and to feed them
to the utmost of his power with the Word of God. And I say furthermore; Each
one of you, my Brethren, although you lead a private life, ceases not to be a
Pastor, since you feed a spiritual flock, and watch in the night to conserve
it, if you truly endeavor to heap up a great treasure of holy actions and good
thoughts, if you govern it with prudence if you employ all your care to nourish
and entertain it with the delicious pastures of holy Scriptures, and if you
watch continually over this holy flock, to defend it against the assaults of
the Enemy. St. St. Chry. Ser. 77. in Matt.
Chrysostom says the same in one of his Sermons, where, after he had related
the words of Christ Jesus to St. Peter; If you love me, feed my sheep, he says,
That one is not to take these words as spoken only to the Pastors of the
Church: They are, (adds he,) for every one of us, to whom Christ Jesus has
committed but a small flock; for although it is small, yet it is not to be
neglected, since Christ Jesus himself says, that his heavenly Father finds
there his pleasure and his delight. Each one of you has some sheep in his
Family; let him take care to govern them and to feed them. As soon as a Father
arises from his bed, let him not think of any other thing till night, but to do
and say what may contribute to the spiritual good and advancement of his
Family. Let a Mother have the same care: It Is good she should think of her
housewifry, but she is to apply her self yet more to the salvation of her whole
Family, and to take care that each one of it be saved, and be zealous to gain
Heaven.

You are not therefore to persuade your self, Sister, that you have satisfied
the obligation you have to instruct your Children, because you send them to
Catechisms, that they follow you to the Church, that they assist with you at
Sermons, and that they faithfully recite the abridgements of the Christian
Doctrine: You must furthermore, when you make them render an account of what
they have learned, examine them whether they comprehend what they say; and
because they are not capable of themselves to make good use of it, you are to
apply to the little occasions of their souls that which has best pleased them,
or that which has the nearest touched them. You are to make preservatives
against the vices you see them most inclined to, and remedies against the
imperfections which they most ordinarily fall into. You are with words full of
tenderness and sweetness to instill into them the love of the Virtues there
praised, the horror of the Vices there condemned, and to leave them always in
a sacred hunger of this celestial nourishment, I mean in the desire to hear the
Word of God, which you are to excite by little rewards and by an honest liberty
you will give them to recreate themselves when they have well remembered what
you told them or what they heard from others.

Prevent the Solemnities to instruct your children in the Mysteries, the memory
whereof are then celebrated; and accommodate your self to their age to make
them enter into the Spirit and into the practice of those Virtues which are
honored in the said Mysteries. Entertain them frequently with the life and
actions of Christ Jesus, and repeat often to them what Tradition and the Gospel
teach us of those of his holy Mother. And because children are strongly
inclined to hear the recital of such things as they can least imitate, and of
events accompanied with fear and horror: relate unto them the conflicts of the
Martyrs, the temptations of the Anchorets, the miracles of the Confessors: And
as there is almost no day wherein the Church proposes not to her children a
meditation upon the life of some Saint; let no Evening pass without proposing
to them some action of Virtue, and without prescribing to them some little
practice of piety for the Morrow. The Confessarius of the famous S. Lewis, who
wrote the Life of that great King, says, That each Evening he caused his
Children to come into his Chamber, where he always spoke to them some words of
edification before he sent them away.

As for example, in the time of the Birth of our blessed Savior, representing
to them the cold which little Jesus endured in the Crib, may you not excite
them to suffer for his sake the incommodity of the season, and the cold they
feel in the School or in the Church?

If they complain that they are denied the things they desire: Why may you not
say to them; Well, my children, consider how many other things you have: Alas!
our Savior Christ had not a little bed as you have to lie on, nor fine linen,
nor a good Coat to cloth him: He was almost naked in a manger and upon straw;
and yet all things belonged to him, although he would not make use of them, but
left them for our use and comfort: Is it not then very reasonable we should
want some small matter for the love of him? Go, he can and will reward you in
Heaven.

If they find it painful to follow you to the Church; tell them, that they are
far from doing as our Lord did, Luke 2.41. who stole himself away from his
Parents to remain in the Temple, and who made every year a long journey to go
thither with them.

If they show some Impatience in their small sufferings, say to them: Ah, my
children, how far are you from enduring the torments which so many Saints
suffered for Christ Jesus? How will you endure Martyrdom when you shall be men,
if you cannot now endure the pricking of a Pin? And if you cannot bear a little
blow from your Brother or from your Sister, when will you be so perfect and
patient as to turn your other Cheek to him who has struck one of them?

Instill into them a great love and a great esteem of their own littleness and
Infancy: Repeat frequently unto them that which is advantageous for Infants in
the Gospel: Tell them how our Lord reprehended his Apostles Matt. 18.19. for
hindering such Infants as they are, to come unto him; that he took one of them
and placed him in the middle of his Disciples; and that he said several times,
that one must become like them to enter into Heaven. And thus at the same time
they grow according to the Body, make them conserve in their Soul a great love
for the qualities and the dispositions of Infancy.

Bring them up in a great respect and in a great confidence for their Guardian
Angels. Let them know principally the life of that Saint whose name they bear;
and the obligation they have to imitate him or her. And as it is said of Christ
Jesus Matt. 2. that he grew in the house, and under the conduct of his holy
Mother, in Wisdom, in Age, and in Grace before God and before Men; let your
children advance by your care by little and little in the knowledge of the
sacred Mysteries, and in your colloquies and your instructions let all things
serve you, as St. Paul says, to make them increase in Christ Jesus Ephesians. 4.15.

Above all, teach them to prefer God and his Commandments before all other
things. Tell them often that they ought to have for him much more tenderness
and more respect than they have for your self. Imitate that excellent Mother of
whom mention is made in the Book of Maccabees, who to encourage her children to
endure constantly their torments for the defense of the Jewish Religion,
excited them to look upon God as their Father, and to esteem themselves happy
in sacrificing their lives for the glory of him of whom they received them, and
who had prepared lives much more glorious for them in Heaven. Imitate the
admirable art she made use of to strengthen the youngest of her seven children,
whom the Tyrant endeavored to withdraw from the resolution of dying; and do
you, as she did, make use of the consideration of such things as you have done
for your children, thereby to engage them to persevere in Virtue: Take
compassion my Son, (says she to him,) 2 Maccab. 7.17: upon a Mother who has
born you in her bosom, who has nourished you whole years with the Milk of her
Breasts, and who has educated you with tenderness even till this time: I
demand of you, my Son, by all these considerations, that you will lift your
heart and your eyes toward Heaven, and that in imitation of your Brothers you
will receive death with joy, that I may have the satisfaction to see you
partaker of their glory.

It Is thus, that you should make use of the power, which the gratitude and the
love your children have for you gives you over their spirit, to engage them to
raise up themselves to God, and to honor him to whom alone they are indebted
for the care you employed in their Education. And because there are occasions
in this life where the tenderness and the respect which children have for their
Parents may prove a scandal to them, and may hinder them from loving and
following truth; make them to know that there is none but God alone to whom we
owe an entire submission and without any condition; that there are no persons,
no estates, no dignity, no profession in this life, which we ought not to love
with limitation; and that thus they owe you neither Obedience nor Complacency
in such things as would be contrary to the Law of God. Repeat often and
explicate unto them these words of our Lord: If any one comes to me, and hates
not his Father and his Mother, and his Wife, and his Brothers, and his Sisters,
and moreover even his own life, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14.20.

Whereupon St. S. Hilary, upon the words of the 118. Psalm. Iniquos odio habui.
Hilary says these admirable words: This discourse of Christ Jesus appears
harsh, and it seems to be a rude and insupportable precept, to force and engage
one to a kind of impiety toward Fathers and Mothers, as to the highest degree
of Christian perfection yet God commands in this nothing that is harsh, nothing
that is not well beseeming his goodness, nothing that is contrary to his other
Commandments: And Fathers and Mothers cannot be offended that he thus ordains
us to hate them, although we owe to them in that quality much tenderness and
affection; since it is also enjoined us to hate our selves. Christ Jesus knew
that there are many Fathers and many Mothers who have such an inconsiderate
love for their children, that when they see them persevere in the glory of
Martyrdom, they conjure them to yield to the times, they entreat them to change
their opinions, and they employ (to weaken them) the motives of a Piety which
is altogether irregular. Thus the Hatred (says this great Saint) which Children
then conceive against their Fathers and Mothers, is honorable; and it is just
and advantageous to hate them, who strive to divert us from the love of Christ
Jesus,

Avoid therefore, my Sister, the fault which this Saint reprehends in Parents,
and from which they find much difficulty to defend themselves, unless they
have a zeal altogether sincere and disinteressed for their Children. Imitate
those Parents of the first ages of the Church, who never made show of greater
joy than when they saw their children ready to be sacrificed for the defense of
Truth and for the cause of Christ Jesus. Read I pray you the Lives of Saints
and the History of the Church, and you will see a great number of these
Examples of Constancy.

You shall there meet with a holy Mother, named Theodora, who after she had
encouraged her eldest Son to suffer constantly such miseries as they forced him
to undergo for the Faith, and had exhorted him with much ardour to consider
that he should purchase by these soon-passing torments an eternal happiness,
she her self was thrown into the Fire with this her dear Son and two other of
her Children.

You shall there see a holy Mother, who having a son called Meliton among the
Forty Martyrs of Sebaste, Meliton one of the 40. Mart.
who had been exposed starknaked in a frozen Pond in the greatest rigor of
Winter, and in a Country where cold was in extremity; and who beholding that
although they had broken his Legs, (as they had done them of his companions,
who expired in that last torment,) he was nevertheless yet alive, contented not
her self to exhort him to perseverance, but having observed how they hurried
away upon Carts the Bodies of the other Martyrs, to bring them to a prepared
Wood-Pile where they were to be burnt to ashes, and that they left her son
behind in hopes to induce him to adore the Idols and to make him renounce
Christ Jesus; she took him upon her shoulders to carry him her self all alive
as he was to his companions. But this blessed child dying in his dear Mothers
arms in the way thither, she nevertheless marched on with her now dead burden
till she came to the burning pile of wood, into which she cast the Body of this
Blessed Martyr, that he might have the glory to be consumed by the fire for the
interests of Christ Jesus, as were the Bodies of the other Martyrs which had
been before thrown into it.

You shall there see a Dame of quality named Dionysia, whose example,
(according to the relation of an Affrican Bishop called Victor who writ the
History of the Martyrs of the Church of Afric, Victor. Affric. l. 3. c. 1.
persecuted by the Wandales,) was the cause of the salvation of almost all her
Country, You shall there see that this generous Woman perceiving that her only
Son by name Majoricus, who was very delicate and very young, began to tremble
at the apprehension of the torments which she endured, darted upon him such
piercing looks, and employed so forcibly her maternal authority to reprehend
him, that she rendered him even more valiant than her self; insomuch as this
young Champion fought Faiths battle with joy, and remaining victorious over his
torments and over death, gathered the Palm of Martyrdom. After he had breathed
forth his blessed Soul, the noble Mother having embraced him as a holy
Sacrifice which she had offered to God, and to which she ardently wished to be
for evermore united, carried him home, caused him to be buried in her house,
and poured forth her Prayers almost continually over his Sepulcher.

How heroic, Sister, are these Actions, and how pure and disinteressed was the
charity which produced them? What zeal, courage, and constancy appeared
therein? And how well did these Mothers know what love they should bestow on
their children? since they used not the authority they had over them but only
to encourage them to confess Christ Jesus, and not to be ashamed of the Gospel.

But because (according to the observation of a holy Father) the Discourses one
makes use of to excite to Virtue, S. Chry. ho. 20. super Ephesians.
carry with them I know not what kind of repulse for them to whom they are
addressed; and with whatever sweetness one seasons them, they still cause a
sadness and a dejection in their spirits: therefore, Sister, you may make use
of another means than that of Words to instruct them, and you may handsomely
gain that of them by Lecture, which the fear of tiring them caused you to
smother in silence, and not to inculate unto them by Discourse.

The Second Means. Lecture or Reading.
CAuse your children to read the History of the holy Scripture, the New
Testament, the Acts and the Epistles of the Apostles.

St. Gregory of Nisse, Brother of St. Basil the Great, in a letter wherein he
describes the Life of St. Macrina his Sister, speaking of the manner how her
Mother educated her, says, That she took extreme care to have her instructed,
not, (adds he,) as they ordinarily instruct them of that age, by explicating
unto them the Fables of Poets; For she conceived that that was to act against
the shamefacedness and civility of Virgins, and the means to empoison those
well-born and yet tender souls by showing to them in Tragedies of Women
transported by love, and in Comedies, such shameful filthinesses as are unfit
to be heard by persons of their Sex, who are obliged not so much as to think of
them. But in lieu of these, she caused her to learn such passages of the sacred
Scripture, as were most easy to be understood and most proper for her age. Thus
she began by the Wisdom of Solomon, out of which she selected the sentences
which were most convenient to regulate her life and all the motions of her
spirit. She was also very skilful in the Psalms, and divided them into certain
hours.

St. Jerome in the Letter he wrote to a certain holy Widow, (whereof I have
already made frequent mention) to teach her in what manner she was to train up
her Daughter, will have this little girl to apply her self timely to the
reading of the holy Scripture; to learn in the Proverbs of Solomon the Rules
and the Maxims of good life; to accustom her self by the Lecture of
Ecclesiastes, to despise the World, and to trample under her feet all its
grandures and all its vanities; to furnish her self with examples of courage
and of patience by reading the Book of Job; that afterward she should read
the Gospels, and have them always in her hands; that she should read with
fervor the Acts of the Apostles, and their Epistles; and after she shall have
filled her self with the riches she has heaped up by these precious Lectures,
let her moreover read the rest of the Books of sacred Scripture. He will also
have her read the works of the holy Fathers, take delight therein and seek
there the nourishment and the establishment of her Faith.

St. Chrysostom acknowledges no other source of all the evils which are
committed in the World, S. Chry. ho. 9. Ep. ad Coloss.
but the ignorance of the holy Scriptures. Listen (says this Father) all you
who are engaged in the World and who have a Family and children to govern, S.
Chry. ho. 21. in ep. ad Ephesians. c. 5.
how St. Paul recommends particularly unto you the reading of the holy
Scripture with great diligence. Think not that the Lecture of holy Books is
unprofitable to your son. One of the first things he will there find will be
the obligation he has to honor you: and without doubt God has so permitted
it, that you might not say it is only for solitary and Religious persons to
read it. Say not that you have no design that your Son should be Religious,
and that therefore he needs not this reading; since you ought at least to make
him a good Christian, and that those children who are designed to live in the
World, are they to whom the science of the sacred Scripture is principally
necessary.

There is (says the same Saint) much weakness and a strong inclination to
wickedness in children: the weakness and this dangerous inclination increases
daily by the impression they receive from such things as they learn: What bad
effects then may it not have in a young man, to know that those Hero's of
antiquity whom they admire, were lovers of Wine and good cheer: that they were
slaves to their passions; and that the motives they had in all their
enterprises were Pride and Ambition? Let them therefore seek for a
Counter-poyson in the sacred Scripture and apply them from their tenderest
Infancy to this holy reading.

I well see that I shall seem to dally, (adds this Saint,) because I always
say over the same thing: yet I will never cease to do what is in me to render
your children perfect Christians. To this end teach them to sing the Psalms of
David; S. Chry. ho. 9. in ep. ad. Colos c. 3.
those Spiritual Canticles being full of that Divine Philosophy which Christ
Jesus came to teach men; instructing them by recreating them. Psalm. 1. v. 1.
and 14.
They will learn there in the beginning to fly the company of the wicked, and
to seek that of the good. And as there is scarcely any Mysteries and Verities
in Christianism, which are not contained in that sacred Poesy, they will there
see the small solidity that can be found in all creatures, the sweetness and
the advantage that is found in the practice of Virtues, and finally, they will
there find the knowledge of their duties toward God and toward their
Neighbor.

It Is thus that by accustoming them betimes to taste these things, you will
render them easily capable of higher truths. And like as Fruits of Trees retain
much of the quality of the earth where they are planted and of the waters which
moysten them, so the actions which your children shall do during their whole
life time, and which will be properly the fruits of their souls, will always
retain something of the sweetness and of the purity of those wholesome waters
which they drew in their Infancy from the holy Scriptures.

I believe, Sister, that nothing needs to be added to these Words, issuing out
of so holy and so eloquent a mouth, upon an occasion wherein the Holy Ghost
communicated to him not only the lights which he bestows on all them who preach
the Gospel; but wherein, according to the common opinion of Divines, he
assisted him more particularly than he did the other Doctors, to give him
entrance into the sentiments and feelings which he had inspired into St, Paul,
and which this great Patriark explicated to his people.

Now if you desire to know more fully the importance of this second means I
have proposed to you; S. Aug. Conf. l. 1.
take the pains to read in that excellent Translation which is published of
the Confessions of St. Augustine, four or five of the last Chapters of the first
Book. You shall see how that great Saint examining there all the actions of his
life, by the help of the lights of that Grace which he had received in Baptism,
and which ever after he had strengthened, makes it appear, that the study of
Poets and profane Authors, is in regard of children who are engaged therein,
as a Sea full of Monsters and of rocks, where the best provided suffer
shipwreck; and that the choicest and most eloquent Words of the Courtiers of
Augustus, are but Golden Vessels full of Poison, which are presented to us by
drunken Doctors and by men who have lost their right reason and their good
sense.

You will see how he there brands with Idolatry this manner of instructing
children, and that addressing himself to God as it were to complain to his
Divine goodness of the Tyranny which is exercised upon their spirits by
instilling Vice into them by these studies, he exclaims and utters these
admirable Words: What then, Lord, was there no other means to exercise my
spirit and my tongue? Without doubt, O Lord, had I discovered your praises in
your sacred Scriptures, and had they made me read them, they had settled my
heart and had tied it to your service: whereas it having wandered among the
Fables and the unprofitable inventions of the ancient, it is become the unhappy
and unfortunate Prey of those bloody Birds, whereof you speak in your Gospel;
and I have but too much experienced that there are many manners of sacrificing
to the Rebell-Angels.

And do not think that St, Jerome, St, Chrysostom, and St, Augustine, were the
first who reproved this disorder, and who recommended to children above all
things to learn the holy Scriptures, and to make them the subject of their
principal Lecture, and of their most serious occupations. St. 2 Epist. to Tim.
v. 5. chap. 2.
Paul himself praises the care which Lois the Grandmother of Timothy, and his
Mother Eunice took, to instruct him from his Infancy in the sacred learning:
and after he had put Timothy in remembrance, with great comfort of the sincere
Faith of these two holy Women, he excites him to remain constant in what he had
learned, Considering, (says he Ib. 3.15.) that you have been nourished from
your Infancy in the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, which are able to make
you wise unto Salvation, through Faith which it in Christ Jesus.

The sacred Scripture attributes to the care which the Parents of Susanna took
in educating her in the Law of Moses, and in instilling into her the fear of
God from her Infancy, all the Glory of that Virtue which she made appear in
resisting the strongest temptation wherewith a person of her quality could be
assaulted; choosing rather to expose her self to death and to confusion
wherewith she was threatened, than to offend God. Susanna, (says the Scripture,
Dan. 13.2.) was very beautiful, and one who feared God, for her Parents being
just, had brought her up according to the Law of Moses.

Josephus attributes the eminent Virtue of the Mother of the Machabees to the
excellent Instructions which her Father gave her in her youth; Tract. de.
Machabeis.
who frequently entertained his children with the examples of Virtue which are
found in the sacred Scripture.

And Eusebius observes that the Father of Origin did not only teach him humane
learning, but also the holy Scripture, some passages whereof he caused him
every day to learn and recite.

Yet, my Sister, notwithstanding all the care you can take to teach your
children the obligations of Christianism, and to forbid them the songs and the
verses which express the beauties of Women and the passion which men have for
them; although you permit them not to read Romances and to take no other Books
into their hands but the Holy Scripture, and the Works of the Fathers of the
Church: all this Prudence nevertheless will be vain, if you instruct them not
your self by your own good examples; and if what you do, sets not incessantly
before their eyes those Truths which you have had care to cause them to learn
in Books.

The Third Means. Example.
ACtions, S. Chrysostom. ho. 5. super. 2. ad. These. c. 2.
says St. Chrysostom, have altogether another force than Words over the spirits
of men to correct them. This moved St. Paul to recommend Virtue so earnestly to
servants: because it has so much power, that it makes it self esteemed in
persons of meanest degree, and makes them by its means to become very useful in
Families.

And as to what concerns children in particular, it is to them so natural to
become like their Parents in their manners, that our Savior in the Gospel
John. 8.39. makes use of no other argument to convince the Jews, that they were
not the children of Abraham, but because they performed not his actions; and
that on the contrary they were the children of the Devil, because like to him
they loved murder and lying. And St. Chrysostom proposes as an infallible Rule
to such as will marry, to consider the Life of the Father and of the Mother of
the person to whom they desire to join themselves, thereby to judge certainly
of their good or of their bad qualities.

The foundation of this truth is, that children having received from their
Parents the beginning and the bud of their own passions; if the Fathers and the
Mothers suffer themselves to be transported in their childrens presence, this
bud sprouts up and strengthens it self, and the passions take new and more deep
roots in their hearts: Besides that, the respect they are bound to have for
their Father and for their Mother permits them not to condemn their actions:
And as they are not capable to choose in them what they ought to honor, the
inclination which Nature has given them to love them and to esteem them,
induces them to love and to esteem their very Vices, and easily to embrace
their most dangerous conceptions and opinions: which gave St. S Greg. in
Pastorali. c. 2.
Gregory occasion to say, That a fault extends it self prodigiously by the
means of example, when he who commits it, is honored by reason of the eminence
of his rank and of his estate: And to St. Augustine, that all a child can do in
so weak and tender an age, S. Aug. in Psalm. 136.
is to consider his Parents, and blindely to perform what he sees them
practice. Let not your Daughter, says St. Jerome to a Lady of quality, S.
Jerem. in Ep. ad lotam.
ever see any thing in you or in her Father which may engage her in any fault
by imitating you; and remember that you must rather conduct and govern her by
good Example than by Words.

The very Pagans have acknowledged that all disorders in the World come from
the bad Example which Fathers and Mothers give to their children. Would to God,
(says Quintilian,) Quintil. l. 1. Instit. c. 3.
that we were not our selves the cause of the corruption which appears in the
manners of our children. We bring them up in delights from their tenderest
Infancy: and this soft education, which we call indulgence ruins insensibly
the forces of their Spirit and of their Body. What will not a child desire in
his more advanced age, who when he is yet scarcely able to go is wrapped in
Purple, and knowing not yet how to pronounce a plain word, knows scarlet, and
can gape after the most precious Stuffs? They are taught to taste the most
exquisite Dainties before they can express their desires. They grow up in
Coaches and in Litters, and if they must put their foot to the ground, there
are servants on each side to lean upon and to support them. We take pleasure to
hear them speak unseemly words, and oftentimes they are cherished and applauded
for uttering such profane and infamous things as one would be ashamed to hear
and endure in the most debauched persons. Nor do I wonder at it: We our selves
teach them: They hear us speak all these things: and they see what liberties
their Fathers take with Women, and their Mothers with Men: Almost all our
Feasts resound with unchaste Songs; and most shameful things pass in the
greater part of our Entertainments and Divertisements. Children accustom
themselves to behold and to imitate these disorders: this custom passes into
nature: and these unfortunate wretches learn to commit these irregularities
even before they are capable to comprehend their excess and their enormity.

I think, Sister, that Christians cannot hear a Pagan discourse thus, without
blushing that they should have less feeling of these disorders than he had; or
that they should not make it appear they had better apprehensions thereof by
their practice.

Will you then acquit your self well of your Duty, and bring up your children
(as St. Paul ordains) in the Fear and in the Discipline of our Lord; live you
your self in this Fear and in this Discipline. Practice meekness and humility,
that you may render them more docible and submissive: Let the respect you have
for all the proceedings of your Husband teach them to honor him and to fear
him: Let your modesty in your clothes and dresses instill into them an
aversion from all worldly vanities: Let the humanity wherewith you command your
domestics, teach them to treat them civilly. Finally, be you such toward God
as you would have your children be to him and to your self: and forget not
these words of our Savior: Luke 9.41. If any one is a cause of Scandal and of
falling to one of these ltttle ones who believe in me, it were better for him
to have a Millstone made fast to his neck, and that he were cast into the Sea.

The Fourth Means. Prayer.
IT would be a small matter for a Christian Mother to give holy Instructions to
her children, to cause them to read good Books, and to practice before their
eyes what she would have them to practice; if she applies not her self
seriously to Prayer, and if she endeavors not by little and little to render
them capable to entertain themselves with God, and to ruminate in his presence
what they have been told, what they have read, and what they have seen
practiced with edification, that so they may reap their profit by them.

I know that they have taken up in the world a certain Idea of Mental Prayer,
which makes them imagine that it is an exercise too hard and too high for many
people, and that it is only proper for such persons as have made already a
large progress and are greatly advanced in the spiritual life. They fancy it to
be as it were a humane Art, and as an effect of curiosity and of presumption:
and as soon as one mentions meditation, they represent to themselves Methods,
divisions, and a multitude of Discourses and thoughts, which require a great
contention of spirit. Yet surely this manner of prayer demands only the Heart:
It is the most natural occupation of Piety and of Faith, and the proper effect
of the feelings one ought to have on the one side of Gods greatness, and on the
other side of ones own weakness, necessity, and misery: so that the simplest
persons, and the very children are capable thereof, as soon as they begin to use
their reason, and to be sensible of their own wants.

For in how many different manners do they express themselves even in their
very Infancy, to make their Fathers and their Mothers and such other persons as
govern them, understand their wants and their pains? How ingenious are they to
explicate their joys, their sadnesses, their inclinations and their aversions?
Make they not use of diverse cries, of different accents of the voice, and of
various motions of the body to discover the thought and the desire of their
Hearts? And do they not render with a mavelous dexterity all these signs as
conformable as they can to their wills, to the end they may become
intelligible? Every thing speaks in their little Body; their Eyes, their
Gestures, their Laughter, and their Tears: Finally, know they not how by an
hundred different ways to get what they desire, and even to force them that
resist it to yield at last and to grant it them? Why then, as they increase in
age, and as their spirit opens it self, may one not endeavor to teach them to
ask of God what they stand in need of, and to ask it of him in that strong and
persuasive manner in which the heart knows how to explicate it self and how to
make known its affections and its motions?

St. Augustine relates, S. Aug. l. 1. Conf. c. 9. n. 2.3.
that among the exercises of his Infancy, having met with certain servants of
God, who invoked him in their Prayers, and having learned of them (as far forth
as he was capable to frame some Idea of God) that he was something very great
and sublime, and that although he was concealed from our senses, he could hear
our Prayers and help us in our needs; he began (very Child as he was) to
implore his assistance, and to address himself unto him as to his refuge and to
his place of security. I learned (says he, raising up himself to God) and
taught my stammering tongue to invoke you; although I was little, the affection
wherewith I prayed you to hinder that I might not be whipped in the School, was
not little. -- For it is true that I no less apprehended the chastisements and
the punishments which I received from my Masters, than Men apprehend the
greatest torments; and that they beg not with greater instance to be delivered
from them, than I conjured you to remove from me these torments of little
Children.

Behold, Sister, how advantageous this encounter with these men of Prayer, was
to this great Saint, and how children in their low age are capable to address
themselves to God, and to demand of him with eagerness what they desire, when
they are taught to conceive as far forth as they are able, that it is from him
alone they ought to expect it.

The same Saint speaking of a sickness he had in his Infancy, and which they
believed had brought to deaths door, attributes the fervor and the faith
wherewith he demanded to receive Baptism, Aug. l. 1. Conf. chap. 11.
to that which he had heard spoken of the eternal life which was promised to us
by the mystery of the Incarnation of Christ Jesus, and to the care his Mother
had as soon as she had brought him into the World, to cause him to be marked
with the sign of the Cross upon the forehead, and to put him afterward into
the number of the Cathecumens. So true it is, that Truth makes very strong
impressions in the hearts of children, when one knows how to accomodate it to
their capacity, and mildely and familiarly to engage them to employ themselves
before God, and to demand of him grace to love him.

Thus, Sister, when children find difficulty in learning their lessons, they
are to be made to comprehend as far as they are capable, that Wit and Knowledge
comes from God, and that it is to him they must address themselves in the
difficulties they have in their studies. When they show any violent Passion, as
a disorderly love for Play, or an Envy or criminal Jealousy against their
Brethren or their Companions, you are to endeavor, by making them see the
disorder of that passion, to induce them to demand of God to cure them, and to
desire of him to render them more prudent, more moderate, and more charitable.
When they ask of you a new Coat or Garment, or any thing of like nature, teach
them to demand it first of God, in making them rightly understand, that it is
from him you have the Money wherewith to buy it; and that if you refuse them,
it is because they have not yet prayed enough.

Finally, it is in this manner, that by causing them to make reflections upon
all the little arts they frequently employ, to obtain what they desire, or to
avoid the chastisement they have deserved, whether it be by protesting they
will be more obedient, or by making a thousand blandishments, you must strive
to make them conceive how they ought either to demand pardon of God for their
faults, or obtain of him what they desire.

It Is true that in order to this, it is necessary you should use toward
children a kind of sweet speech, and such words as are insinuating,
persuasive, affectionate, tender, and in brief full of a certain unction,
whereof very few persons are capable. You must not tell them these things in a
dry and harsh manner, nor with authority and command, but with love and by
making your self as it were a little one with them; and you must gain their
heart to render them capable of an exercise which is totally of the heart, and
whereof no one is capable, who has not his heart fixed on God, however clear
sighted and sufficient he may otherwise be. But how should the greatest part of
Mothers, employing themselves only in worldly affairs, and having their heart
divided between so many cares, be capable to instill into their children this
holy practice of Prayer; especially since they themselves most commonly can
only read in their Primmers what Prayers they find there, without ever having
applied themselves to join thereunto the Interior Prayer, which is the Soul
and the Essence of Prayer?

Yet it is this Interior prayer which is the most precious and most necessary
food of Piety. There Is nothing whereby more to establish ones self in the gust
of the things of God, and in the disgust of the things of the World: Without
this exercise, all other exercises of Piety and Vocal Prayer it self are but
dryness and languishments; and one acquits himself of Vocal prayer rather out
of custom and by a simple conviction of the spirit, than by love. This made a
famous Author say, that one ought never to divide prayer into Mental and
Vocal, as if one could with piety pray Vocally, Bellarm. de Orat. chapter 2.
separating it from the Mental prayer.

Not but that Vocal prayer is very profitable when it is well performed and
accompanied with attention. It excites us to recollect our selves, and to raise
our thoughts to God. It advertises us and instructs us what feelings we ought
to have in our hearts, and serves us (as St. S. Aug. Ep. 121. ad Probam.
Augustine notes,) to represent to our selves what we ought to ask of God. But
it must be an expression of the affections and of the dispositions of our soul,
and proceed from the abundance of our heart. My heart rejoiced, (says the
prophet,) and my tongue has expressed the feelings of my joy. Psalm. 25. My
heart and my flesh, (says he elsewhere,) have jointly testified to God the joy
which I take in him.

It is just, that we being bound to honor God, according to the Body, as well
as according to the spirit, we should adore him, and pray to him, by our words
and by our voice, at the same time we adore him by our thoughts and by the
application of our heart. But this heart must of necessity be pure; and to be
pure, it must be employed upon God, thereby to make the worship of the Body and
the exterior homage which we render him, to be reasonable and holy. Vocal
Prayer therefore ought not to be considered but as far forth as the Prayer of
the heart conducts, purifies, and sanctifies it, and as far forth as it is
joined to it to raise it up to the throne of God: But on the contrary, this
Prayer of the heart which is made in silence and in Recollection, is all alone
very profitable and very holy, and sometimes it is even more profitable to
particular persons than if there were joined to it the recital of Vocal
Prayers, or then if the noise and the elevation of the Voice were there
employed; because one testifies to God more Faith, and because we address our
selves to him in a manner more conformable to that which he is and to that
which he demands of us, by adoring him and entertaining him only with our
thought and with our heart, then if we make use of Words. God is a spirit (says
our Savior,) and he desires such Adorers as adore him in spirit. He
sufficiently understands our desires and our demands, although we express them
but by our sole thought: so that we sometimes make our selves better understood
of God by elevating our selves to him with all the fervor and with all the
extent of our heart, when we are fully recollected and when we employ nothing
that is exterior and sensible, than if we join together in our Prayer the
heart and the voice, because that may diminish our attention, which (generally
speaking) must be greater and more complete when one hears nothing without, and
when oue suspends all the use of sense and of speech.

Why, say St. Ambrose, S. Ambr. l. 6. de Sacrum. c. 4.
should we rather pray in Recollection and in secret than in making a noise
with our Voice? Hear the reason, which we will only draw from an example which
is ordinary among men: If you will present a Prayer to some person who has a
very quick hearing, you do not believe that you need to cry out aloud, but you
content your self to speak to him in the tone of an indifferent voice: and we
only raise our voice to make our selves understood by such as are hard of
hearing. It Is not therefore reasonable to think, that God hears none but such
as strive to speak very loud: Such a fancy is injurious to his Omnipotence: But
he who prays in silence, gives a singular proof of his Confidence and of his
Faith: He acknowledges, that God penetrates and sounds the heart, and he
testifies by praying to him in this sort, that he doubts not, but that he hears
his prayer before he has explicated it by Words.

One might wonder, S. Aug. ep. Prob.
(says St. Augustine in a letter he writ to a holy Dame touching Prayer,) that
God although he knows what is necessary for us before we ask it of him, will
nevertheless have us ask it; if we did not know that what he thus ordains us to
do, is not that he may know our will, since that cannot be concealed from him,
but to inflame our desires by the instance of our prayers, and to render us
capable to receive that which he is ready to grant us. For by how much his
Presents are great and magnificent, by so much our hearts are little and
limited to receive them. Therefore the Scripture says: Open your Hearts.

Now these so excellent and so sublime Goods which the Eye has not seen,
because they are not colors; which the Ear has not heard, because they are
not sounds; and which are not elevated in the heart of man, because the heart
of man ought on the contrary elevate it self toward them: these Goods, I say,
shall be communicated unto us with so much more abundance by how much we have
believed with more Faith, hoped with more Confidence, desired with more Ardour.

It Is therefore by a continual Desire, founded upon Faith, Hope, and Charity,
that we pray without intermission.

But if at certain hours and certain times we employ Words in prayer, it is only
to animate us by those exterior signs to conceive these holy affections, to
make us observe what progress they have made in our heart, and to excite us to
increase them. For the effect of our prayer is by so much greater by how much
the ardour of our desires has been greater. So that when the Apostle says;
Pray without ceasing; he intends only, that we should desire without ceasing to
obtain that happy life, which is no other than the eternal bliss of him who
alone can give it us. If then we demand this of God incessantly, we pray
incessantly.

But because the cares and Encumbrances of the World cool sometimes our
desires, we recall at certain hours of the day our spirit to prayer; and we
re-place before our Eyes by the Words which we address to God this last end
whether we ought to tend by our desires; for fear lest that which begins to
fall into Tepidity should pass into a Coldness, and proceed in the end to be
totally extinguished, if it be not re-inkindled by frequent prayers.

This being so, it cannot be bad or unprofitable to employ much time in prayer,
when our leisure permits it, that is, when it hinders us not from acquitting
our selves of other laudable and necessary things to which our duty obliges us;
although in these very occupations we ought always to pray by the activity of
our desires.

For it is to be observed, that it is not one and the same thing to pray along
time or to pray with many words, as some imagine; but that there is a
difference between a long and continual desire, since it is written, That our
Lord passed over the night in Prayer, and that he prayed very long. And there
is reason to believe that he would induce us thereby to imitate his example, he
who prayed so perfectly to his Father in the time of his mortal life, and who
hears us so mercifully with his Father in eternity.

They say, that our Brethren the Hermits of Egypt make frequent Prayers, but
very short, and that they only lift up their hearts to God from time to time by
lively and ardent prayers, without staying too long upon them, for fear lest
this application and this fervor of spirit so necessary in prayer, should
relent or be dissipated, if this prayer were too continual.

This also gives us to understand that as we ought not to weary and blunt our
spirit by forcing our selves to entertain it in this fervor when it begins to
slacken; so we ought not to hasten to interrupt it when we feel it continues:
Because, if on the one side one ought to bannish from prayer the superfluity of
Words, one ought on the other side to sustain it by continual desires and
demands, so long as the spirit perseveres in its application and in its
fervor. For to speak too much in prayer, is to employ superfluous Words to ask
a thing necessary; and to pray much, is by holy and continual motions of the
heart to press him to whom we pray to render himself favorable to our demands.
But oftentimes this passes more in sighing than in speaking; Discourses have
not so great a part as tears; and then it is, that he whose eternal word made
all things, makes it appear that they are not the temporal Words of men which
are pleasing to him, but their sighs and tears.

It Is then, Sister, this prayer of the heart and this entertainment with God
which is done in silence, in recollection, in the disengagement from all
exterior things, and by the interior sighs and affections of the soul, that
Christian Mothers ought to make their Children love and practice. It Is a Yoke
which is good for them to bear from their youth, and as soon as they begin to
make use of their understanding and their reason: It Is a Yoke which replenishes
the Soul with comfort and sweetness: It Is a Yoke which sustains and
strengthens, and renders them who bear it, capable to raise up themselves above
themselves, and above all earthly objects.

And do not allege to me, S. Chrysostom.
says St. John Chrysostom, that Children are not capable of this fervor, of
this recollection, and of this application which Prayer requires; since we have
in Scripture the examples of several children and of many young people, who
have by the means of Prayer drawn upon them very great blessings. Samuel was
but twelve years old when God called him in the Temple, Samuel.
and discovered to him the designs he had upon the house of Heli. Solomon was
very young when he made that admirable Prayer which moved God to render him the
wisest and the most powerful Prince that ever was. Finally, Solomon.
Daniel.
Daniel was no more than eight or nine years of age when by a feeling of piety
he refused to eat the Meats presented to him from the table of King
Nabuchodonosor: and by the means of Fasting and Prayer he merited those
extraordinary gifts which rendered him at the age of twelve years the deliverer
of the chaste Susanna, and afterward the Miracle of his age. Nor must Mothers
allege their domestic affairs and the cares of their family to dispense
themselves from following their Prayers; since we see (in that little
Collection of Piety now newly printed,) Recuil de piete.
that a Princess of our days prescribed to her self a method of praying three
times every day; Marg. de Portug. Duchess of Parma.
to wit, half an hour in the Morning, half an hour at mid day, and half an hour
in the Evening: For if persons of that condition, and so much engaged in the
world as Princes are, have the fidelity to apply themselves to this Exercise
and acknowledge the need and the fruit thereof: what a lesson should not this
Example give to all other persons who have more leisure and liberty? and with
what ardour should all Mothers endeavor to follow it? Mothers, I say, who
ought as much as they possibly can, to instill into their Children this holy
custom of frequent prayer; and to have always at hand these excellent Words of
St. Augustine to that holy Widow of whom we have formerly spoken: S. Aug. ep: ad
Probam.
The more you labor to govern holily your house, the more you ought to employ
your self diligently in prayer; without embusying your self in the affairs of
the World and in exterior things, but only as far forth as Charity engages you.

CHAP. XIV. What is most opposite to the Application of these Maxims and of
these Advices in the Christian Education of Children.
THere are two things particularly which hinder Fathers and Mothers from
following the Maxims of the Gospel and the Advices of the Fathers of the Church
in the Education of their Children, to wit, Custom and Ambition.

The First, although most commonly, it has no more lawful foundation than the
disorder of Inferiors and the remissness of Superiors, makes it self
nevertheless to be followed by all the world. It gains the heart and the spirit
of them who most resist it: and as S. S. Augustine.
Augustine excellently says, it choaks Christians, and stifles in them the most
tender feelings of piety by the very example of Christians.

The Second transports the spirits of men to seek after the goods of the World.
It serves it self of the natural desire we have of glory, to make us seek it in
the estate of a high fortune. And at the same time when Custom hinders parents
from following the Evangelical Maxims in the Education of their children, by
instilling contrary principles into them, Ambition withdraws them from them by
applying all their thoughts and all their affections to the temporal settlement
of their children.

Here it is that I pray you to observe the cunning of the Devil to deceive us,
and what art he makes use of to destroy us. Parents cannot choose but labor in
the Education of their children; and it is a feeling which is too natural to
them not to be inclined thereto even with some sort of violence. He will not
therefore fight openly against it and labor to destroy it; but he dexterously
turns this inclination toward an end which is altogether carnal and
terrestrial; and shutting their eyes against the lights of Reason and Faith,
he presents to them a false daylight, which causes them to make a thousand
false steps, I would say, which engages them by humane respects to follow in
the Education of their children the air of the World, and the Rules which
worldly corruption has introduced.

Resolve therefore, my Sister, to renounce all that the world approves, and to
enter upon thoughts opposite to them which the World inspires into its
bondslaves. You will find no difficulty to follow this counsel, if you read
the 15. and the 17. Chapter of St. John, John chapter 15. and c. 17.
where Christ Jesus instills into his Disciples so strong an aversion from the
world, that in good truth I think one cannot believe the Gospel, and live
without trembling in the esteem and approbation of the world.

Now when I tell you that you ought to dread nothing more than to live
according to the World; think not that I pretend you should (having children)
lead a solitary life, and break all the customs which Blood and Friendship
permit unto you whilst you live upon earth. It Is not that which Christ Jesus
demands of a person engaged, as you are, in Marriage. I desire only that you
keep in your discourses and in all your proceedings, so great a modesty, so
great a reservedness, and so perfect a sweetness, that your sole exterior may
condemn all the Vanities and all the pomps of the World.

I desire that entering into company, they who are so gorgeously clothed may
blush at your simplicity, and that your modest dress may give them a confusion
in their excesses.

I desire that your children may be cherished by all the world by reason of the
Innocence and the piety you have instilled into them; that all Fathers and all
Mothers should envy your happiness because of their obedience; and that they be
not sought for in Marriage but because of their Virtue and their Modesty.

Finally, I desire that your house should be so well regulated, and your
domestics so well instructed, that all things with you may breathe nothing but
Piety and Honesty: and (as St. S. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom says) that your house in particular may be as it were a little
draught and an image of the whole Church.

For this end, Sister, you must unfetter your self by little and little from
all creatures, not studying to scrape up wealth for your children; you must not
rob the poor of their due to content your covetousness and to bereave your
Children of the protection of God who is their true Father. If our Lord himself
builds not a House, in vain (says the prophet Psalm. 126.1.) they labor who
strive to raise it up. To raise it extremely high is to seek its ruin, Prove.
17.17. And he who governs himself by a spirit of Avarice troubles and
overthrows his house, Prove. 15.27. And if (according to St. Augustine) it is God
who makes the poor and who makes the rich; S. Aug. ho. 48
why should you so much disquiet your self for your Children? Why should you
not have a confidence in his providence? Why should you not employ all your
cares to render them grateful to him, and a part of your means to procure for
them Intercessours and Friends near his Divine Majesty, Luke 16.9.

For the rest, Sister, although God should give you grace to observe exactly in
the education of your Children all that we have here represented unto you, and
that you should apply your self totally to instill into them the Maxims of the
Gospel and of the Fathers of the Church, and to imprint in them a horror of
all that is contrary thereunto: You are nevertheless to leave the event
entirely to God, committing to his Wisdom and to his Goodness to make your
solicitudes profitable to your Children.

For as you ought to look only on his Glory in the pains you take to educate
them according to the Laws of the Gospel; if he suffers you to be frustrated in
some of them of the fruit of your labor, and that they should neglect all the
good feelings which you have endeavored to instill into them, to abandon
themselves to the passions and to the disorders which reign in the World: you
ought in this to submit your self to his holy Will, as in every thing else, and
to beware of suffering your self to be transported to any words of murmr, or
to believe that God had not accepted your cares and your pains; since nothing
will happen to you in this, which he has not permitted to befall many Saints.

Finally, I observe in the holy Scripture that the major part of them who have
been particularly favored of God, have all of them received displeasure in
some of their Children.

Adam had the grief to see his younger Son murdered by his elder Brother, Adam.
and to see that elder Son by a just judgment of God to be a Vagabond and
Fugitive upon the earth for the punishment of his crime.

Of the three Sons of Noah, Noah.
one of them discovered to his Brethren with contempt the undecent posture
wherein he had found his Father in his drunkenness, instead of hiding it from
himself, through respect, as did his Brethren; which drew upon his other
posterity the malediction of his Father and that of God.

What displeasure had Isaac for the dissension which was between Jacob and
Esau, Isaac.
and which obliged him to banish Jacob many years from him, and to send him
into Mesopotamia, till such time as Esau's anger was appeased? Did not Esau
marry strange Women against his will, against which he had so great an aversion
that he expressly recommended to Jacob not to imitate therein his Brother, and
never to take a Wife among the children of Canaan?

Jacob had the affliction to see four of his Children fall into a great crime,
Jacob.
of which Joseph who was his youngest, accused them before him. He had the
displeasure to hear, that Reuben who was hi^ ^^^est Son, had abused Bala one of
his Wives. The indiscretion of Dina his only Daughter, was the cause that she
was carried away and ravished by Sichem who was a young Lord of his
Neighborhood. Simeon and Levi, two of his Children, entered into a confederacy
without his leave and against his will to revenge this fact; and killing all
the subjects of that Prince, exposed their Father, as he himself complained, to
the hatred of all his Neighborhood. All the world knows the affliction which
the jealousy of his Children against Joseph caused him to undergo, and the
sorrow he had for the captivity of Benjamin whom he so tenderly loved.

Aaron saw two of his Sons who were consecrated to the service of the Altar,
Aaron.
punished with death for having committed a fault in the exercise of their
ministry; and he was so lively touched therewith that he could not eat that
day of the meats which had been offered in Sacrifice, nor apply himself as he
ought to the functions of his Priesthood; because (as himself says,) he had his
heart and his spirit overwhelmed with sorrow for this loss.

The great Priest Heli, Heli.
who was a very holy man, had two very wicked Sons, who after they had caused
him much displeasure by the disorder of their life, made him dye with grief
when he was informed in what manner they were slain, and the dreadful
chastisement they had drawn down from Heaven by their crimes upon the whole
people of Israel.

Samuel had but two Sons whom he had established Judges of the people. Samuel.
But they were no sooner raised to that dignity, but they suffered themselves
to be corrupted with presents, and appeared so self-interessed and so unjust,
that all the people rejected them and demanded a King of Samuel to place in
their stead.

What displeasures did not David receive from his children? David.
Ammon his eldest Son committed an Incest with his Sister Thamar: Absalon, his
second Son, slew Ammon at a banquet, to revenge the injury done to his Sister:
and this Wretch having recovered the friendship of his Father, studied secretly
to raise the people against him: then openly declaring himself and taking arms,
forced him to fly from Jerusalem, abused his Wives in the sight of all the
people, and had the insolence to pursue him with his weapons in his hand, and
to give him battle.

Now if you desire to know why God permitted that these great men, for whom he
had done so many wonders, and to whom he had testified so great love, received
notwithstanding such sensible displeasures from their children, and that these
children did so strangely degenerate from the Virtue and the piety of their
parents; it is easy to answer you, that it is to teach Fathers and Mothers who
have not the merit of these so illustrious men.

First, that they are indebted only to Gods grace, that their children cause
not to them the same displeasures; and that it would little avail them to have
applied themselves with much care to the education of their children if he did
not bless their endeavors.

Secondly, that the greatest trial which can befall a Christian Father, and
which God makes use of to prove his fidelity and his submission to the orders
of his providence, is to permit his children to fail in their duties and in
what they are bound to render to God; and that thus Fathers and Mothers ought
to dispose themselves to support these sorts of afflictions and trials, how
hard soever they be with Christian dispositions, when he shall please to send
them.

Thirdly, that as it is a matter of great difficulty not to commit some fault,
either in the manner of educating their children, or in overmuch indulging
them, or finally, in being too much tied to them in a humane way; God according
to the immutable order of his Wisdom, who punishes us by the same things
whereby we have offended him, makes use of children to chastise Fathers and
Mothers for the faults they have committed upon their consideration. Thus God
punished the incontinence of David by taking out of the world the Son he had by
Bathsheba; and revenged afterward the Adultery committed by him in secret with
this Woman, by the abuse which Absalon made of his wives in the open sight of
all his people.

Finally, God permits that parents should receive displeasure from their
children, not only to humble them, and to try their fidelity, and to punish the
faults they may have committed in their Education; but furthermore to purify
the rational affection they have for them, and to teach them to love them, not
because of the sweetness they find in the submission and the respect they
render them, but because they belong to God. For God will have them accustom
themselves to look upon him alone in all they do for their children, and to
surmount all the difficulties which occur in the design they have to bring
them to his service, even to suffer patiently the contempt they make of their
advertisements; and to pursue them by the example of St. Monioa, St. Monica.
in spite of all their resistance, till God has touched their heart, and till
they have obtained their conversion by their tears and by their perseverance,
as that Saint obtained it for St. Augustine.

You will perchance tell me that I exact great things of you; that I demand you
should do all your actions in a spirit of Piety and Zeal for the interests of
God; that you should be perpetually employed to procure his glory in the
children he shall please to give you; and that by consequence I engage you to a
continual Prayer, since I propose unto you a conduct, and Maxims which you
cannot keep without being powerfully supported by him whose help we obtain by
humble prayer.

All this is true, Sister, and I aver that to acquit your self worthily of the
obligation you have to give your Children an entirely Christian Education; you
are to follow in this Education the Maxims of the sacred Scripture, and the
Advices of the Fathers of the Church; to apply them from their tender Infancy
to them particularly whom you de sign to live in the World; to embrace the
means which may enable you in this generous enterprise; to overcome the
oppositions which you shall meet therein; and to imitate perfectly the
excellent Idea's of the holy Education I have here traced to you in the conduct
of God, and that of his Church; I avouch, I say, that to acquit your self
worthily of all these Duties, you stand in need of very powerful Graces, and
you ought to live in a continual search and in a profound adoration of the
designs of God upon your Children.

You are very instantly to crave of him the use of his Lights to enter into the
knowledge of their necessities; you are to abandon your self to his spirit for
the choice of such sentiments and feelings as you ought to instill into them,
and of the times when your chastisements and your instructions will be
profitable unto them; and you must pray unto him; that since he who plants and
he who waters is nothing, he himself will give virtue to your Words, that he
will engrave in their hearts his Fear and his Love; and that as he would make
use of you to give them the Life of Body, and to employ your cares to procure
that of their Soul by Baptism, he will also make use of you to: conserve and
strengthen in them his Spirit and his grace.

To conclude, you are to propose to your self the attaining of a very high
perfection, and the faithful practice of all the most Christian Virtues; and
to make it appear to the whole world by the Christian Education of your
Children, that you engaged not your self in Marriage upon humane
considerations, or upon any other score unworthy of Christianism; but (to make
use of the terms of St. lib. of the good of Marriage, c. 25.
Augustine), That you were not a Wife nor desire to be a Mother, but for the
love of Christ Jesus, and for the interests of his Church.

FINIS.

