THE Unsatisfied LOVERS.

A New ENGLISH NOVEL.

PART. I.

O Formose Puer, Nimium ne creed celori.

LONDON, Printed for James Partridge, at the Post Office, between Charing Cross
and White Hall, M DC LXXXIII.

TO THE EARL OF Ranelagh, etc.
My Lord,
I Have presumed to Publish this Novel under your Lordships Protection, knowing
that your Name (amongst the Judicious) renders Authentic whatsoever bears its
Stamp.

But besides This, there are other Motives, which have raised me to this
Confidence: Your Lordship has been pleased to Honor me with your continued
Favors. And, my Lord, I hope you will Accept this Acknowledgment, as a
Testimony how much I own your Kindness.

'Twou'd be impertinent to swell this Dedication with an Account of Your
Lordship's eminent Birth and Qualities; Those the World already knows, though
it cannot sufficiently admire: for which Reason, I shall be silent; only
adding, That I am, in all Respects,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, James
Partridge.

THE Unsatisfied LOVERS. PART I.
FRANCE was never in greater Splendour, than when the Illustrious Mary, Queen of
^cotland, made the fair Additions of her Crown and Person to it, by her
Marriage with Francis, Daulphine, and Heir to Henry the Second, the last King
that had Issue of the House of Valois: She was a Princess, that owed nothing to
her Dignity, but her Miseries; for had She been Born in the lowest State of
Life, her Virtues would have made her Eminent. She was Beautiful in her Person,
and as well by Nature, as Education so refindly great, She seemed only born to
support the Glory of the Greatest Court, that ever Europe knew: For what made
her Court the only Circle of Wit and Quality, was because the Queen was of so
dissembling, base, and politic a Nature, and the Princes Elizabeth (the King's
Sister, afterward Duchess of Savoy) so proud, that all those who sought only
to divert themselves, shunned them as much as Respect would give 'em leave.

Amongst the rest that often paid their Duty to the Daulphine-Queen, for so
they called the Queen of Scotland, being Married to the Daulphine, was Madame
de St. Maure, a Woman of a clear and piercing Wit; and so delightfully quick in
her Conversation, that every Body was pleased in her Company; and though at the
bottom she was really good, yet she had still the Fate of Wit; which hating to
move in the dull common Rode, becomes the Censure of the Ignorant, and
Illnatur'd. Before she was Fifteen, (e're Love had taught her to distinguish)
she was Married by her careful Parents to the Count de St. Maure, who was both
Handsome, and of a very considerable Fortune, and had certainly made a most
excellent Husband to any Woman, that had had less Wit.

As to her Person, she might justly boast of one of the best Shapes that ever
was seen; and though she had not in her Face those charming Strokes of perfect
Beauty, yet she had something so agreeable and pleasing, that all the World
admired her: The Quickness of her Wit, and the little pleasant Satyr, which
naturally fell in her Discourse, made all those, who were industrous in seeking
their Diversions, make her of their Party.

Though Love was Triumphant in almost every Breast, and Gallantry appeared the
greatest Business of the Court, yet Madam de St. Maure had still her Thoughts
unmoved with any Passion; her Mind was in a soft Repose, and being secure in
peaceful Innocence, she enjoyed all the Pleasures of Life, without the Pain;
till Monsieur de Chastillon, (a Cozen of the renowned Admirals) came to Paris,
a Man gallant to the last Degree; and though he was extremely quick, yet he was
not eloquent, which Nature supplied another way; for so judicious an Honesty
appeared in all his Words, that they persuaded above the Power of Eloquence. He
had not passed many Months there, ere he made a Friendship with the young Count
de St. Laurans, who was one of the nearest both in Service, and Favor, to the
Daulphine-Queen.

This Count was most Adroit in all his Exercises, as having been bred from his
Infancy in the best Academies of France; and what heightened yet more his
Education, was, that his Nearness to the Daulphine-Queen gave him the frequent
Conversation of all those, who were remarkable for Wit and Breeding; which
polished into a pleasing Luster, what the pains of his former Studies had
filled into a noble Form. But above all, he was a particular Admirer of Madame
de St. Maure, and by his often Visits to her, had entered into a strict
Friendship with her; and one may say, That two of different Sexes were never
purer Friends: It was a Stream of Friendship, full and flowing, without the
least Violence, or Rapidness of an unjust Desire; which gave him occasion to
carry his new Friend Chastillon, to visit her: She not being well, they made
the first Visit but short, though long enough to raise in Chastillon's Mind
Ideas, that he had never found before: Something appeared to him in her
Conversation, far above the rest of her Sex. In fine, he was so charmed with
her Wit, that His Soul seemed to be born upon her Flights, of Thoughts to
Heaven. She being not a little pleased with the Sincerity and and Freedom which
she found in him, desired the Count St. Laurans to bring him often thither;
which the Count performed every day, all the time of her Indisposition. These
frequent Visits raised Chastillon's Admiration into a violent Passion; he now
could find no Quiet when from her; Heaven seemed to appear, when he beheld her;
and Hell when he parted from her. But that severe Modesty, which governed all
her Actions, showed him no other Prospect but Despair; yet Love being too
strong to yield, his Soul was laboring under the weight of the two most
furious Passions, Despair and Love.

He never failed the Court of the Daulphin-Queen, where Madame de St. Maure was
constant, receiving continual Favors from that excellent Princes. He sought
all Opportunity, by which he might (unminded) speak to her; and she, who was
not a little pleased with his Discourse, (though as yet, not approaching any
thing of Love,) never denied him any. But he was as yet, Alas, so young a
Proficient in that Art, that his Despair so far overruled him, that it made
him in silence suffer as much, as if he had unsuccessfully revealed his
Passion. But Love is of so subtle a Nature, that every Motion, every Look
betrays it. When e're they spoke of Love, (the common Thearn of Courts) in
spite of himself, pressed by the abundance of his Mind, he would infer the
Pain of Secret Love; and least she should suspect, he would confirm what he had
said, by instancing some of the Court, that lay under that unhappy
Circumstance. But in vain he strove to hide it; for well she saw, his Words, in
spite of all his Art, bore still a Tincture of the distracted Mind, from
whence they sprung: At which, she was not at all uneasy; for there are few
Women, but Love a Conquest, when it tends not to the Ruin of their Honors; and
she believed, that he would never reveal his Passion, and so it would be no
great Detriment to here is: Besides, she liked him well enough, to think the
Victory well worth the Pains. But his Passion was grown too violent, to remain
unseen; for the whole Frame of his Nature was altered; his Conversation, which
before was steady and judicious, now was nothing but a rapsody of unchain'd
Words: He, who had loved a general Converse, and free Acquaintance, now passed
the greatest Part of his uneasy Hours alone, in his Closet.

Which wonderful Change the Count de St. Laurans soon perceived; and one Day,
finding him so alone, pressed Him by all the Power of Friendship, to tell him
from whence it proceeded: At first he answered him, That it only was an
Indisposition of the Body, and that the Spleen was really the reason of his
being so. But the Count, knowing the Spleen to be a Distemper incident to so
many People, thought that there needed not so much pain to tell it, if that had
been all: and from thence concluded, it was but a feigned Excuse, to conceal
some weighty Truth; which made him press him still more violently, till, at
length, Chastillon (leaning his Head upon the Count's Shoulder) said; Oh my
Friend! Sure thou did conspire against my Quiet, when thou carriedst me to
that inevitable Beauty, that no Man sees unmoved; to her, who is so Heavenly
Bright, none can behold and Live. Ah! press me no farther; but let me in
Silence and despair, end my unhappy Life.

The Count, who immediately knew at what his Words directed, was much surprised
to see his Passion (in so little a time) grown to that Prodigious Height; but
since it was so, he thought it best, with all Care, to endeavor to divert it.
You have been too blame, (said he) to yield so far to the false Insinuations of
Love, which had you taken sooner, like tender Plants, you might have torn up by
the Roots; but now it is grown so strong, that it requires Time, and Labor, to
hew it down; a long and painful Absence, with all the Force of Resolution. Talk
not of Absence, without Death (replied Chastillon) for I find, when I am but
one Day without seeing her, Nature moves weakly in me, and I decline like to
that Flower, which bends its feeble Head when the Sun sets, but is revived
again by his Morning Beams: Besides I have no Power to quit her; for all my
Faculties deny Obedience to my Reason, and bend toward Her their proper
Center. If I beheld (answered the Count) but the least Prospect of Satisfaction
for you, I should offer you all my Power to serve you; but since I do not,
pardon me, if I tell you, No Man (but you) e're ran upon so plain a Ruin:
Therefore, I do conjure you, for your own Quiet, reassume your Reason, to
overcome a Passion that will never let you rest. Think but how much it is below
the Free, and Noble Nature of a Man, to be subject to the Weakness of a Woman;
and then cast her from thee, as a Thing not worth so many Sighs. Ah! Friend,
(answered Chastillon) they talk but ill of Love, that never felt it; Do you
believe, I wear my Passion as I do my Clothes, that if I find it uneasy, I can
cast it off without Trouble. You much mistake; for as soon as Love enters into
a Heart, he becomes Absolute Monarch over the Mind, and sits in Triumph upon
every Thought. But to show you how kindly I receive your Advice, I promise you
to use all Means, that I think may help my Cure.

To show him, that he intended what he said, he went that Night abroad with him
to a Ball, that the Duke of Guise gave the King. Certainly, there never was a
more Magnificent Entertainment; the prodigious Number of Flambeaus set in every
Window of the Streets, through which the King passed, made them appear more
Bright, than in the clearest Day: Nor was it in any thing less great, within
the House; for besides the wonderful Quantity of the Richest Plate, and
Furniture, the Tables were filled with all the delicate Meats, that the most
industrious Epicure could prepare. And to add to this, there was all the Glory
of the Court, both Men and Women, dressed with all the Advantage, that Cost and
Pain could give them. The Count went Home, and dressed himself for the Ball;
but for Chastillon, his Mind was too much employed on other things, to regard
his Dressing. No sooner were they entered, and had paid their Duty to the
King, and Queen, and the Rest, to whom they owed it; but Chastillon began to
look impatiently about, to see if Madam de St. Maure was there; but hearing
that the Night before she had taken cold, and therefore durst not stir abroad,
he soon grew weary of the Place; and all that Pomp and Show, (which but some
few Weeks before, would have given him vast Delight) had now quite lost their
value; for she not being there, he beheld all the Glory of the Court, with such
a dull indifference, that he soon grew weary of it, and Stole away; and
immediately sent to seek out the best Music he could find, both of Voices and
Instruments, (for he was now resolved to give a Seranade to Madam de St. Maure)
so weak are Lover's Resolutions, and so soon he had forgot the promises he made
to the Count St. Laurans, and having Mustered up his Troop of Musicians, he
commanded them to play at the end of the Street, nigh her House. No sooner had
they began, but she immediately imagined to whom they were Addressed, and by
whom: But when she heard this Song, she thought her self confirmed beyond all
doubt.

SONG.
I.
NO more, fond Love, thy Torments I defy,
For it is better much to Dye,
Than to Reveal
A Passion, which I ought for to conceal.
II.
I rather to the Grave my Pain will bear,
Without one Sigh, than injure her;
So shall I prove
The truest Martyr, that e're Died for Love.
The Count de St. Maure (though no way suspecting his Wife, yet) was naturally
jealous; which gave him a Curiosity to see to whom this Seranade was directed;
which made him go down to inform himself. Now the Count St. Laurans, having
missed Chastillon at the Ball, pursued him, as being unwilling to have him
alone; when, passing through the Street, and hearing the Noise of Music, he
bad his Coach drive up toward it; where he found his Friend Chastillon at the
Head of the Consort. This Rashness vexed him to the Soul; for he was afraid,
lest it might make the Count de St. Maure (whom he knew suspicious) observe
Chastillon more narrowly hereafter, whose Passion he knew was grown to that
height, that a Thousand Things would betray it every moment to any curious Eye;
and he knew, if her Husband perceived the least Appearance of it, that the most
favorable Consequences would be Domestic Uneasinesses; which made him not
stay long in his Coach, but alighting, told them all to Chastillon; who, at the
Thought that his Indiscretion might be prejudicial to her he loved, stood like
a Stone unmoved, not knowing what to answer. Just in this Interim came down the
Count de St. Maure, and seeing the Count de St. Laurans in the midst of the
Seranade, asked him concerning it; who answered, That Monsieur Chastillon gave
it to a young Lady, his Neighbor, whom he had a Design to make his Addresses
to hereafter, in the Honorable way of Marriage. The Count smiled, and took for
a full Answer, and promised Chastillon all his power to serve him, if he would
make him his Confident: And then forced them into his House, almost whether
they would or no, and carried them up to his Wife, who not being well, kept her
Bed that day. He told her, as soon as ever he entered, all that the Count de
St. Laurans had told him concerning the Seranade. But when she heard him talk
of Marriage, she began to suspect, that she had been mistaken all this while,
and that what she took for Love to Her, had been directed to some Other; which
gave her a certain pain, that she knew not how to Name; for it was not
Jealousy, she thought, because (as yet) she had not found any Appearances of
Love.

It is (says she) a dangerous thing, that Monsieur de Chastillon is going to
undertake, and few consider it, as the most important Moment of their Lives;
but every one thinks he shall be Happy, never regarding the many miserable
Couples, that are as many Instances to the contrary. But this perhaps may
appear ungrateful in me, who have all that the most Happy can enjoy in Marriage.

Madame, (replied St. Laurans) our Holy Divines forewarn the World of Sin, by
the Vices of Others, if they are not guilty of any themselves.

Chastillon (who durst not absolutely deny it, and yet was loath to have her
think it true) said; Madame, as yet I have not fixed my Resolution; therefore,
it may be, it will only end in a Gallantry: But I am still obliged to you for
your kind Caution; which may make me avoid many unquiet Hours, that otherwise
might have fallen upon me.

He spoke this with such a confused Awkwardness, that the Count de St. Laurans
grew so uneasy, that he abruptly took his Leave, (pretending he was to go to
the Ball) lest the Count St. Maure should perceive it; but went straight home
to his own Lodgings, where he made Chastillon stay with him all Night.

This doubtful Speech made Madame de St. Maure in pain what to judge; but what
made her yet more, was the manner that it was spoken in. She began to wish,
that his Courtship was made to her self; but yet the Circumstances were too
strong, not to believe the contrary; and she found no other way, but to refer
to Time the expounding of the Mystery: and in the interim, resolve to be at
rest. But, Alas! Chastillon's Passion began to grow too violent, to be
smothered: He quickly cleared her Doubt by a Thousand (as she thought)
demonstrative Arguments; and from this little Opposition, she began to swell
into a greater Liking of him; insomuch, that she felta Change in her self every
time she only heard his Name, or any thing that concerned him; which daily grew
more and more upon her.

As the Court was never fuller of Illustrious Persons, so was there never more
Magnificent Diversions; as Tilts, Tournaments, Running at the Ring, etc. But
none was ever more remarkably Great, than that at the Marriage of the Duke
D'aumail, with the Daughter of the Duchess of Valentinois: This Duke D'aumail
was Third Brother to the Duke of Guise; whose Father Claudian, Younger Brother
to the Duke of Lorrain, coming into France to Possess himself of the Duchy of
Guise, had so far insinuated himself into the Favor of Francis the First, (the
King's Father) that he Established his Family so great in France, as to contend
even with the Princes of the Blood. He left Three Sons, Francis Duke of Guise,
Charles Cardinal of Lorrain, and this Duke D'aumail; all which became so
Eminent, that they still increased the mighty Fabric of Greatness, that their
Father had built.

This Family of Lorraine, growing in so small a Time to that vast height of
Power, had drawn the Envy of all the Nobility against it; for still, whosoever
increases Greatness, increases Enemies; and especially, Strangers: So they
thought to confirm themselves more in the King's Favor, by making this
Alliance with the Duchess of Valentinois, whom the King had passionately loved
for above Twenty Years; and even on his Deathbed, confessed he Loved her still.

The List was set in the great Court of the Louvre; the Galleries, which
surrounded it, were all hung with Cloth of Gold; and in the Middle of the
largest Square, was placed a Canopy of high Imbroidery; under which were set
the Queen, the Daulphine-Queen, and the Princess Elizabeth; and on each Hand,
sat the First of the Nobility.

Surely, never was there a Court that shined with a greater Number of Excellent
Beauties: For the Queen (Katherine de Medicis) as their own Historians report,
was so profoundly cunning, that she drew to Court the Fairest of the Kingdom;
over most of which she gained, by vast Temptations, so absolute a Power, as to
prostitute themselves to the Chief Ministers, to make her Mistress of all the
Secrets of State.

But amongst those, whose Eyes appeared this Day like so many influencing
Stars, to add new Strength and Vigor to the contending Gallantry of the Men,
none looked so fair as Mademoiselle de Poictiers, a Cozen (though at a distance)
of the Duchess of Valentinois. It was the first time she ever appeared at
Court, where she came to be Maid of Honor to the Daulphine-Queen. Whether it
were the Newness of her Beauty, or whether she really deserved it, I know not;
but certainly, never Woman had so many Admirers, in so short a time. Though she
was low of Stature, yet she had an Air that made her so unexpressibly
Beautiful, that nothing but to have seen her, can give a true Idea thereof:
Besides, a pleasant Fantastic Genius, right turned to please at Court, and to
ensnare Young Adoration.

The First that entered the List, was the King himself: His Colors were Black
and White, which he always wore in respect to Madame de Valentinois, who was a
Widow. He was mounted upon a large White Arabian Horse; so stately a Creature,
that he seemed too proud to carry any thing but a King. His Bit and Stirrups
were of Beaten Gold; the Bosses of the Bit, were large Rubies, set round with
Diamonds; and, on the Horses Front, was a large Jewel, of all sorts of the
Richest Stones; so big, that it almost covered all his Forehead. In the midst
of which, the King bore his Device; which was a Cupid sitting in the Middle of
a Circle, holding in his Hand a Flaming Heart; and over the Cupid's Head was
writ this Motto, Ma Flame durera jusque a L'eternite, My Flame will last to
Eternity; (of which a Circle is the Emblem.)

The Daulphine followed his Father. The Colors which he wore; were White. He
was mounted on a large Black Spanish Genet: His Bridle, and his Stirrups, were
of Silver. He gave for his Device the Kingdom of France; and on one side, a
Cupid laid down asleep, with his Bow and Arrows broken by him; with this Motto,
C'est toy qui me fait abandoner L'amour; It Is for Thee I abandon Love.

The next that entered, was the Duke of Guise, (for the King of Navarre, and
the Prince of Conde, his Brother, the only Princes of the Blood, were not then
in France.) His Colors were Green. He was mounted on a White Croation-Horse;
which, according to the Temper, which is particular to Horses of that Country,
had naturally Bled himself in many Places of his Body, that his Blood running
down, appeared like so many Streakes of Red, mixed with the White. He bore for
his Device the Sun; and for his Motto, Rien que la Gloire; Nothing but Glory.

After his Brother, entered the Bridegroom himself. He rode upon a Milk-white
Spanish-Genet: His Colors were Scarlet; which showed the Victory he had
obtained; as also, it best fitted him: for never was there Man known of a
fiercer Nature. His Device was a Love shooting Two Hearts with the same Arrow;
and the Motto, En sin nous somes heureux; At length, we are Happy.

There was many more of great Quality; but should I name them all, twould swell
too much my Narration: Therefore, I shall only tell you, That the Count St.
Laurans and Chastillon were both there. The Count rode upon a large
Turkish-Horse. His Colors were Blue. He bore for his Device, a Cupid with a
Vail over his Face, with this Motto, Je ne veux pas (...) connoitre; I will not
know thee.

Chastillon entered the List upon a Bay Courser of Naples. His Colors were
Grediline and Fevilemort; which extraordinary Mixture made all People wonder,
but Madame de St. Maure; who soon divined, that he meant by Grediline, Secret
Love; and by Fevilemort, his Despair. His Device was a Cupid shooting at a
Rock, and all his Arrows falling broken to the Ground; and the Motto, Trop dure
d'estre penetrer; Two hard to be pierced.

For the aforesaid Reason, I shall not give you an Account of each Particular
of the Day; but you may easily imagine, that there was never greater
Magnanimity shown; for besides their Adroitness, and known Valors, most of
them were before their Mistresses. But because it comes within the compass of
my Story, it will not be amiss to tell you, That Chastillon was so heightened
with the Sight of Madame de St. Maure, that he appeared far above himself. Just
in the List under her, he unhorsed the Duke of Guise, who was not a little
concerned to receive a Repulse from any Body, especially one of that Family.
The Count won two Prizes at the Ring; but, Alas! in this Days Adventure, he
lost a greater, his Heart; for no sooner had he seen Mademoiselle de Poictiers,
but there appeared something so pleasing to him in her, that he had never seen
in any Woman, but her self. He gazed upon her, and at every Look found
something Delightful steal about his Heart; which made his Eyes unwilling ever
to quit the Object.

The Morning being thus passed, they all retired Home, to prepare themselves
for a Ball at Night; for which there was great Preparations on all sides; every
one seeming to vye with each other, who should appear with the greatest Luster.

The Countess de St. Maur's liking to Chastillon, was grown daily more and more
upon her; and particularly, that Day he behaved himself so gallantly, that
something whispered in her Soul, what she would have given the World not to
have known: But, in spite of her self, it told her, That she loved. She wished
a thousand times, he would declare his Passion; but then considering she was
Married, a thousand contrary Wishes blotted the former out. At length, (being
alone in her Closet) she fell to Prayers, hopeing by Supernatural Means to
regain her Freedom. But, Alas! her Heart and Tongue too much disagreed, to gain
relief that way; for whilst her Mouth was offering Holy Prayers for Liberty,
her contradicting Heart was wishing still to be a Slave. So pleasant were the
Chains she wore. At length, almost distracted between Reason and Passion, from
the Anguish of her Mind, she burst out into these Words: Alas! If Love be not a
voluntary Motion, but far above our Reason to control, how can it be a Sin?
Come all ye Pious Physicians of the Mind, who with your grave Advice, pretend
to lead us to the Paths of Bliss, give me a Balm to cure this Wound; and then
I Will say, You are Masters of your Art. But, Oh! you only bid us to be well:
And, Alas! what Succor's that to her, who is raging in a Fever, unless you
provide her too the Means to be so?

Just as she was in the height of this Exclamation, one knocked at her Door,
and told her, That the Count St. Laurans was without. When having a little
composed her self, she went out to him. The first thing he said to her, he
asked her, with an unusual Impatience, Who that was that sat nigh her?
describing Mademoiselle de Poictiers. She immediately told him; and he frankly
revealed to her, That since he saw her, he found a Change in himself, and a
wonderful Desire to see her again; and that he was just going to Court, to try
if he could (by any means) ingratiate himself into the Happiness of her
Conversation; to see if her Soul was as rich in Perfections, as her Body; and
so he left her to her painful Thoughts.

Chastillon, who all this while was meditating what way to take, to put a
period to his Love, resolved at length to declare his Love; for his Disease was
now grown so desperate, that it was useless to apply moderate Remedies. He
found he could not suffer more by her Anger, than he did by his Silence; for
that Death would certainly be the Issue of One, and that he had a Chance to be
Happy in the Other.

Upon which Resolution he went straight to Court, to find out St. Laurans; with
an Intention to tell him his Design; where he found him entertaining
Mademoiselle de Poictiers; whom he had found in the Drawing Room, standing by
the Fire, with his Sister Mademoiselle D'aupre's, another of the Maids to the
Daulphine-Queen. Chastillon entered into the Conversation; and, in a small time,
Madam de St. Maure came in dressed for the Ball, with all the Advantages that
Clothes could give to one, who was on all Occasions allowed the best dressed
Woman of the Court. But, Alas! her Heart was heavy; she had a Weight of Grief
hung at it, without the Power to vent it: For had she staid at home, she would
have disappointed the King and Queen, who depended upon her for to dance that
Night. But though her Soul was all disquiet, her Face betrayed not the least
Show of it: For that Dissimulation, which (they say) is natural to her Sex,
only in this was kind to her, that she could command her Looks to be of a quite
different Complexion from her Thoughts: But still it mitigated not her inward
Pain. And it is one of the greatest Fines Heaven sets upon Greatness, that they
are often forced before the World almost to burst with Secret Grief in silence;
when the Vulgar may, unminded retire themselves, and by complaining, find some
Ease.

The Count had not much time with Mademoiselle de Poictiers; for every Body was
crowding to admire her. Neither was this first Encounter advantageous to him;
for of all the Men of the Court, she liked Chastillon much the best.

The Ball lasted till it was very late; but as soon as it was done, Chastillon
went home with the Count; to whom he told his Resolution to declare his Love.
The Count replied: My dearest Friend, and after that I need not say, I love
you. People are apt to judge according to the Event of Things, that there are
few, to whom we ought to give Advice; especially in what concerns them so
nearly, as (you say) this does you: But since it would appear unkind in me to
deny you, I must freely tell you, I still advise you to rally your scattered
Troops of conquered Reason, and once more try if you can overcome this Rebel
Passion. But if he be so far Master of the Field, that you find all your
Attempts are vain, then never make your Life a Misery; but tell her nobly of
it, and end it as she shall determine.

As for the First (replied Chastillon) my Reason is too far distracted, e're to
be reclaimed: Therefore, I will resolve upon the last, as soon as Fortune will
permit me a favorable Moment.

Big with this Resolution, he took his Leave of the Count; who all Night,
instead of sound and undisturbed Sleep, found nothing but Slumbers hang upon
his Eyes, full of fair Ideas proceeding from the bright Object he had seen that
day.

The next day he failed not to go see his Sister Mademoiselle D'aupre's, where
he found both Madame de St. Maure, and Mademoiselle de Poictiers; which happy
Adventure presently appeared to him, as a propitious Omen of his future
Success. He passed most part of that Afternoon with them; and one may imagine,
not a little to his Satisfaction. In which time he was industrious to make
Madame de St. Maure, and Mademoiselle de Poictiers have equally a good Opinion
of each other. And in this he was so far successful, that in a few days they
were seldom seen asunder.

That Evening, the Weather being extremely fair, they all four went out to walk
together: When Madame de St. Maure, being earnest in Discourse with
Mademoiselle D'aupre's, walked on a little before; and because they would not
be interrupted, they passed into a By-walk; the Count and Mademoiselle de
Poictiers following them at a distance. He being of a quite different Temper
from his Friend Chastillon, soon found his Flame was increased by her Company,
too high to be concealed, and the Opportunity too fair to be let slip; so
resolved to tell her his Passion: For now the Pleasantness of her Conversation,
as well as the Beauty of her Person, charmed him so, that he was no longer
Master of himself.

When she saw them, who went before, go out of the great Walk, she began to
complain, that going by themselves, they should lose the Company, which to her
was all the Pleasure of the Place.

Madam, (replied the Count) You perchance have reason to complain; but for my
self, I am too nigh Heaven, to think of any other Happiness. Pardon me, Madam,
that I dare tell you, That I Love you, since it is in vain to hide that Flame,
which in few Days would by my Death have been revealed, had I still smoother'd
it in a Painful Silence.

She knew not what to answer him, for she considered, how dangerous it was to
enter into so sudden an Engagement with a Man she knew so little; and, on the
other side, she was afraid, that if she should repulse him rudely, she should
lose a Lover. For as Nature had given her so large a Portion of Beauty, she had
given her no less a Share of Vanity; that she was even to that degree Coquette,
as to be pleased with the rude Commendations of Footmen, as she passed out and
in. So she only returned him this Answer: Sir, I confess, your Discourse came
most unexpected to me; and as I own my self not insensible of a Virtuous and
Noble Passion, I should be loath to place it on One, whose Ingratitude should
force me afterward to change it: And though you appear too Generous, to fall
within the compass of this Suspicion; yet you must pardon the useful Cautions
of One unpractised in the Art of Love. Therefore, I must return you no positive
Answer, till Time shall instruct me, if I ought to hear you talk of Love.

The Count, finding there was nothing, of a despair in what she said, was going
to make her a Thousand Protestations of the truest Love that Tongue ever
uttered, when Mademoiseble D'aupre's, seeing them behind at a distance, called
'em to come up; and walk with them. The Count perceiving, that his happy
Opportunity was now past, and having no more time, but whilst they overtook the
others; said, May I then Hope? I bad you not despair (said she) when I told
you, That Time would instruct me, if I ought to hear you talk of Love.

He waited upon them to their Lodgings; and afterward returned home more happy,
than the greatest Conqueror on the Night of some important Victory: For he
absolutely believed, having at first so favorable a Treaty, that the Beautiful
Fortress would not hold out long. Besides, he thought, few Women of so free and
open a Nature, as she was, had Power to with-stand the Assiduity of a violent
Passion.

This made him from time to time pursue her, where e're she went: He beheld no
Day, that he passed not away most part of its douny Hours in her dear Company.
In contradiction to his Nature, he often became Fantastically Childish to
please her; and if he could but succeed in that, he cared not what the World
said of him.

He went straight, and reported all that had passed to Madame de St. Maure: He
found her alone at home; for the Disquiet she was in, had made all People so
insupportable to her, that she denied seeing every Body but himself. No sooner
had he told her all that had happened in the Garden; but she, changing her Face,
according to the Dictates of her Mind, which was all Confusion and Disorder,
said to him; Though it be contrary to those severe Laws, that Powerful Custom
has imposed upon us, to tell our secret Passions, (especially where Loves
concerned) to any of another Sex; yet I dare so far confide in you, as to make
you the only Phisician of my troubled Thoughts, Oh! St. Laurans, within very
few Weeks you knew me placed in the First Degree of Happiness. What interposing
Fate, (replied the Count) hinders you from being so still? Pardon (said she)
these confused Blushes, which waits upon my Shame, when I tell you, That it is
Love which robs me of my Rest, and banishes from my Mind all thoughts of Quiet;
and pity her; who, from the Excess of an unguided Passion, throws the bottom
Secrets of her Soul before you, and owns to you, that, though she is Married to
St. Maure, she Loves your Friend Chastillon to distraction; and, but that I am
resolved to keep unstained the last Point of Duty, or dye a Victim to my
Passion, I had never let the mighty Secret fly from out my Breast. Therefore,
make not too severe a Comment, if I have drowned the Name of Modesty, in that
of Friend, in telling you with so little scruple of my Love. If you should, it
would be unkind, since it only shows a Confidence I have in you, above the rest
of the World; and few there are complain of Trust. Madame (answered the Count)
have you considered? Yes, till I am mad (said she); for, Alas! I see my Duty
placed above Me; and as I climb and climb to reach it, Love plucks me back
again.

Still, as she spoke, her words were interrupted by her Tears, and her Breast
torn betwixt the different thoughts of Love and Duty.

The Count, who perceived the Inconveniences, that must arrive to them both
from such an Amor, applied all his Power to break it; not by advising, nor
railing at her Passion; for he knew, that was only Infant Love, which could be
chid away; and their's was grown strong enough, to Laugh at all such Remedies:
Which made him think on a more violent, though a more dangerous way, and hazard
the Name of Friend to serve his Friends.

Madame, (said he) I believe, you thought I loved you well enough, to interest
my self in all your Concerns, when you confided in me so weighty a Secret.
Therefore, Madame, I must own my self doubly concerned in this; first, That you
love at all; next, That you love a Man, who to my knowledge loves elsewhere.

At which words, she fell backwards in her Chair; and, withal the violence of
a distracted Passion, cried out, Oh! ye cruel Stars, do you heap Mountains upon
Mountains of Misery, and all to over-whelm one weak Woman? Am I then deceived
too?

Then she told the Count, That she saw plainly by the Colors Chastillon wore
the Day of the Tilting, and by other Marks and Signs, that he was in Love with
some Woman, to whom he durst not declare it; and that she had been vain enough
to think it was her self.

Madame, (replied the Count) be assured, his Addresses proceed from his belief,
that you love him; and therefore, they are rather Effects of his Vanity than
Passion.

After this the Count took his Leave, and went to find Chastillon, in order to
the carrying on of his Design, leaving her in a more deplorable Condition,
than he found her.

He found him alone, pensive upon a Couch in his Closet, meditating upon the
Excellencies of Madame de St. Maure. The Count sitting himself down by him,
began to tell him, That he was sorry to bring him such unpleasing News, which
he knew would so much disturb him; but being his Friend, he could not but tell
him, That he was just then come from Madame de St. Maure; and that he had tried
her always, to see if she had any Inclination for him: But he found all to the
contrary.

To which Chastillon answered, That no Man could be surprised at an expected
Stroke; but that, that should not at all divert him from the Resolution he had
taken, of revealing his Passion to her.

They sat together, till it was Court-time; and then went thither, where they
found Madame de St. Maure. Chastillon, failed not watching his Opportunity; and
Fortune was quickly so kind, as to give him One. For Madame de St. Maure,
leaving the Circle, went into the Balcony, pretending to cool her self; for the
vast Company, which was at Court that Night, made the Heat almost
insupportable. But the real Reason was, That the sight of Chastillon had put
her into such a Confusion, concerning what the Count had told her, that she was
afraid, lest some Body should perceive it. Chastillon soon followed her, to see
if this would prove a favorable Minute to his Intentions; for his Love was now
grown too impati^nt, to endure delay in any thing, that he thought might
advance it. He found her alone, looking over the Balcony; but hearing some Body
behind her, she turned about, and seeing who it was, her Disorder increased so
much at the sight of him, that, had not the Darkness of the Night covered her,
he had soon perceived her Frailty in her Face, inspight of all her Power to
hide it. She was confounded, even beyond the Power of Wit to recover; for, lest
he should suspect something extraordinary from her not speaking at all, or in
the disordered manner, if she did, she catched at the foolish Occasion of a
Light she saw in a distant Street, (which was only Straw, that playing Children
set on Flame) to pretend to be afrightned, apprehending 'twas a House on Fire:
But he, (after he had told her, what he thought it was, and that if it had been
what she imagined, there would have been more noise in the Streets) said to
her; Ah, Madame, since you are so much concerned in the Apprehension of a Fire,
in which you have no particular Intrest, but only because the poor afflicted
Sufferers move your gentle Nature; I hope, your Pity will extend to me, who
bears about me a real Flame, of which your Beauty is the only Cause.

She returned him no Answer; but turning short about, passed through the Crowd
down to her Coach; and so went Home, in a strange Perplexity.

She left Chastillon in a deep Despair: He knew not which way next to move; for
he concluded by her Carriage, that he had absolutely cast himself, without the
utmost Verge of Hope. And now he believed, he should never see her more, but
with Frowns upon her Face, which would be to him as so many Darts of Death: But
still he resolved not to desist, till he had her Answer.

The Count, who all this while lived in a doubtful Happiness, being she he
loved had so little certainty in her Humor; for though by all Marks, and
Appearances, he had the first place in her Affections; yet still she was so
Prodigal of lesser Favors to others, that he knew not whither his Felicity was
sure or no: And Love is of so ambitions a nature, that it is never satisfied
with possessing the greatest Part, if it sees any Unconquered behind.

Chastillon, who was thinking what way to take next, thought of going to visit
Madam de St. Maure's Gentlewoman, (with whom by his frequent Visits to her
Lady, he became particularly well acquainted) and see if he could find any
thing from her, that could direct him which way to take. After much discourse,
she confessed, that of late, she found her Lady much disturbed; and that often
she has overheard her sigh, and name his Name. But she did believe her too
good a Wife, to entertain a kind Opinion of any Man, but her Husband.

From this he took new Fire, and resolved to try once more his Fortune,
believing that his last Repulse might only be an Effect of her Modesty.
Besides, the next time he saw her, when he expected to meet her full of Anger,
she received him (having forced her Nature to obey) just as she used to do;
thinking by that to make him believe, she did not hear what he said to her in
the Balcony. But he construed this a quite different way from what she
intended; for it only confirmed what he had heard before; which he believed,
the Count had not been quick-sighted enough, to discern.

He sought now all Opportutunities, to tell her once more of his Love; which
she perceiving, cunningly cluded: He seeing of it, and also the strange
indiff'rence with which she spoke to him upon all Occasions, (scarce ever seen
in those who love, for she never treated him above common Civility) made him
begin to suspect, that he might be in a Mistake: But yet, however, he resolved
to speak to her once more: And with much Pain and Diligence, having found her
alone at Home; Ah, Madam! (said he) Will you permit me to die, and not cast one
Favorable Look upon my Misery, which only proceeds from an Excess of Love for
you?

Sir, (replied she, interrupting him) I little thought to have heard this sort
of Discourse from you; the only hearing whereof is so much contrary to Duty in
me. But since I believe, your Error only proceeds from a Custom, that you
Young Men have got amongst pou, of paying a Gallantry to some particular Woman.
I will pardon you this first Rudeness; but swear, that if ever you use again
the like Discourse, never to speak to you more. Believe me what I say; for the
Texts of Holy Writ are not more true.

All which she spoke with such a Calmness, that Chastillon was now confirmed of
his Mistake; and she, to prevent what might follow, sent immediately for her
Coach to go abroad, keeping still some of her Servants in the Room, till it was
made ready.

Now, none but those, who know the Force of Love, can judge with how much
Torment she performed this mighty work; which we may well call so, since few
besides her self could be able to have done it: And certainly, had she kept her
Word, (considering the Violence of her Love) her Character might have been writ
in the chief Records of Virtue.

Chastillon now began to consider himself, as in a most desperate Disease;
which made him think of as desperate Cure, and what would in a little time
either bring him Death, or certain Health. Which was, That he would make his
Addresses to some other Woman; and that if Madame de St. Maure had but the
least Spark of Love for him, this would blow it up into a violent Flame: And
none he thought so fit for this, as Mademoiselle de Poictiers.

The Count having been so severe with Chastillon about his Love, was ashamed to
tell him of his own: Which made him (by Error) run into a Breach of
Friendship. He chose her to make his False Courtship to, first, because she was
Beautiful, and for that reason every Body would be the apter to believe his
pretended Flame to be true; next, because he found her Coquette enough, to
receive his Court: And withal, she having so many Admirers, he might slip
himself out of the Crowd when he would, and no body take notice of it.

He lost no time, but went immediately into the Circle, where she was; and
having singled her out, he approached her with the highest Flights of
Gallantry; but never would declare a formal Passion, lest his Honor might
suffer, when he should retreat. He took all occasions to be always in her
Company; he followed her, and sought her from place to place: And she her self
was so vain, that she never failed making his Addresses public by all possible
means.

This came quickly to the Ears of the Count, and Madame de St. Maure: As for
him, whom Mademoiselle de Poictiers had beheld with a quite different Mine,
since the Approaches of Chastillon, (for, as was said before, she liked
Chastillon better than any body) he resolved not to make a Breach of Friendship
for so light a Mistress, till he had tried all the Remedies that Reason should
instruct him, to cure his Love.

Madame de St. Maure conceived now, that all was true, which the Count had told
her; and so looked upon her self, as the most Miserable of Women: For now the
Shock appeared too great to be withstood; and she feared the Violence of her
Mind would not only expose her to her Husband, but to all the World besides.
She had a Thousand different Thoughts, which way to take; and, at length, she
concluded, that if the Count (her Husband) came to perceive any thing of it,
she would freely confess it all to him; and, as the last Proof of her Duty,
offer him to leave the Court, and retire with him, and never see Chastillon
more: To show him, that though she could not command her Affections, yet she
could her Actions.

But Fortune was kind to her, and sent a favorable War to her Relief: For
Philip the Second, King of Spain, having raised a great Army in Flanders, with
an intent to enter France, the Count de St. Maure was forced to retire himself
to a Government he had in Picardy, where (they said) would be the Seat of the
War. She took the Advantage of this lucky Event, and made her Trouble pass to
the World under the false color of his Departing; where she might reasonably
believe, he might be in danger. Besides, she took this Pretense to retire her
self from Court for some time, in hopes that Absence, like cooling Lenitives,
might allay the raging of her Fever.

She went to a Country House she had, about two Leagues distant from Paris,
upon the same Hill of St. Cloud, and about a League from it: It was Master of
all the Prospect of that lovely Plain, where the Silver Scene so often spreads
its wanton Arms in pleasing Meanders, to embrace the Earth. In the Middle of
which is placed the Renowned City of Paris. At the Foot of the Hill, on which
the House was seated, the River glided gently by, and the Descent from the
House to it, was only spacious, and beautiful Gardens. Thither she went, and
staid some time; and found her Mind grew much more easy upon the Account of
Chastillon: But, Alas! the Fire was only smothered, and not quenched.

The Count St. Laurans, who began now to be convinced, that Mademoiselle de
Poctiers had never had the least spark of Affection for him; but that her
Beauty, like an Ignis Fatuus, had led him upon the very Brink of Ruin; now
resolved wisely to shut his Eyes, and be no more seduced by that fair,
deceitful Leader: But, like a wounded Tiger, he set a Resolution first to
summon up all his Force, and spend his dying Fury on those, from whom he
received the Wound. Therefore he went straight to her, with an intent to vent
the overflowing of his Breast to her; and after that, to determine Love, or
Life.

But as soon as he saw her, Love grew Triumphant, and his Anger melted away,
like Wax before the Fire, that he had only Power to say; Ah, Madame! Sure 'twas
some angry Power, that placed your Beauty on the Earth; so infinitely Fair, and
yet so Cruel, never was Woman seen before!

You have no reason to accuse me of Cruelty, (said she) but you Men never fail
laying the Fault on us, when you have a mind to break off Loving.

By all that is Good, (replied the Count) I love you still so well, that the
least kind Word you give particularly to me, comes more welcome, than a
Reprieve to him that only waits the Stroke of Death. But, Madam, now you shed
your Favors upon Others, while I lie covered with Despair.

When Love (said she) becomes a Burden, throw it down; I consent; for I know,
it is that you would be at: Else, why should you suspect me?

It Is beyond Suspicion, that it is Day, when we see the Sun, (replied the Count)
and your receiving Chastillon 's Love, is as Public.

No Woman (answers she) lives without malicious Reports; and if you are so apt
to believe them now, I shall have a happy time with you, if I Marry you. It Is
true, I allowed your Love; but in that I did not tell you, That I would become
your Slave. And this I tell you still; If you like me, I will permit you to
Love on; but never pretend to govern my Actions.

And, without hearing him reply, away she went; though he pressed her very hard,
that she would but stay, and hear him speak.

He knew not now what to conclude on; he found his Love was too great a Master
on him, to be cast off; for it rather increased, than diminished: And now there
was no way left, but to leave it to Time.

He went to visit Madame de St. Maure, who he heard was come to Paris, to pay
her Duty at the Court; and was to return back again the next day in the
Morning. She invited the Count to go and dine with her; for there would be none
of the Court left in Town: For the King had invited the Queen, and the rest of
the Court, to go, and hunt down a Stag, that was grown Famous for his Age; and
afterward, to dine at Madrid, a House of the King's, about a League and half
distant from Paris; which his Father, Francis the First, had built, to evade
(by Equivocation) an Oath, that Necessity had obliged him to take. For Charles
the Fifth, Emperor, and King of Spain, having taken him Prisoner, set him at
Liberty, with this Condition, (besides some Ransom he paid) That he should
visit Madrid (which is the Chief Town in Spain) once every Year. But when he
was returned into his own Country again, he had this House built, and called it
Madrid; and never failed going to it once a Year; fancying by this, that he
satisfied the Duty of his Oath.

As the Count St. Laurans, and Madame de St. Maure were passing through the A
Wood, that is called so.
Bois de Bologne, they perceived at a distance a Man, and a Woman, walking
together in a fine Path all alone, leading their Horses in their Hands. They
saw by their Dresses, that they were People of Quality; and he appeared by the
Posture of his Body, to be saying to her something above common Discourse: But
when, drawing nearer, they perceived it was Chastillon, and Mademoiselle de
Poictiers, it pierced them like Daggers to their Hearts.

The King, and all the Court were rode on before, in pursuit of the Stagg,
which had led them a most toilsome Chase; insomuch that those Ladies, who not
being used to Hunt, could not endure the Fatigue of the Day, were forced to
stay, till the Coaches that were behind came up: Amongst which was Mademoiselle
de Poictiers, who was so weary she could sit no longer on Horseback; and
Chastillon, to carry on his Design, failed not to stay behind to wait upon her.

As soon as the Count, and Madame de St. Maure overtook them, Mademoiselle de
Poictiers thought to have excused her being found so alone with Chastillon, by
telling the Reason of it; which the others took only for an Excuse. As for
Madame de St. Maure, she kept her Countenance firm: But for the Count, (who had
not the power to hide the least thing, that troubled him; but it appeared as
lively in his Face, as if he told it) he looked with all the Marks of Anger and
Despair; and immediately the Coaches coming up, Mademoiselle de Poictiers got
in, and Chastillon upon his Horse; so, taking their Leaves, followed the Court.

The Count de St. Laurans, and Madame de St. Maure, kept on their way; but with
so strange an increase of Torment, that it even bordered upon Distraction.

Chastillon now began to suspect, that he was still in the wrong; and that the
Course he was taking, was but making his Condition worse, by the Evenness that
he perceived in Madame de St. Maure's Countenance. Besides, he considered, he
had to do with a Woman, that had Pride enough to cure her Love, if she had any.
Therefore, now he resolved to rest all his Hopes upon one Adventure; and, if it
fall'd, to leave the World, and breath the remaining part of his unhappy Life
in some unknown Retreat.

The Expedient that pleased him best, was once more to seek an Opportunity to
speak to her; and to desire her, to tell him, as a Woman of Honor, If she had
the least Thought for him, that could tend to his Satisfaction.

He lost no time; but that very Night went to Madame de St. Maure; and having
appointed a Boat to meet him at the foot of the Garden, he passed over the
River into it, knowing her Husband was from Home, and that by this time the
Count would have left her, and that she her self would perhaps be come down
into the Garden; and so he thought to have an Opportunity to speak to her. But
when one considers the Extravagancy of the Undertaking, one may justly judge,
he knew not what he thought. But however, Fortune so far helped him, that it
became the most lucky of all his Designs; and this last rash Stroke finished
his Work: Like to that excellent Painter, who when by all his Art and Pains he
could not bring a Picture to his wonted Perfection, by rashly throwing of his
Pencil at it, made it the rarest Piece he ever wrought.

He was scarcely entered the Garden, but he heard a Voice, toward which he
went; and peeping through a sweet smelling Hedge, being set all round with
Woodbine and Jessamine, saw the unfortunate Countess (sat in an Arbor)
leaning upon her Arm: There hung over her Head a Canopy of Blossomed Woodbines,
held up by unseen Supports; and the Place was all set round with Orange Trees
in Flowers: and just by her, on a small Ascent, was placed a large A Water-Work.
Cascade, which not being allowed to show its Waters but just above the Pipes,
they fell gently murmuring down again upon the Stones.

He forbore approaching of her, till he had stood, and observed her, to see if
he could perceive any thing, on which he might ground his Hope, or might
absolutely confirm his Despair. He scarce had stood a moment, but he heard her
give a Sigh, as if she had yielded up her Soul; and with a torrent of Tears,
cried out: Oh, cruel Love! all Powers but Thee reward their Votaries, and
shower a thousand Blessings upon those, who with most Zeal obey their Laws: But
Thou, with cruelty beyond the Lion, or the Tygre, only for the sake of
Slaughter, destroyest even those who best do serve Thee. With blind Devotion at
thy Altars I have daily offered up a thousand Sighs, a thousand Tears, a
thousand tender Thoughts, to please Thee: and in return, go seek through thy
unhappy Empire, and tell me, if there be one so Wretched as my self. Oh,
Chastillon! Little do thou think the Pains I bear: But, Alas! how can
thou, when thou do not know I love thee, nor never shall; or if thou did,
what would it avail, when thou art near thy dear de Poictiers?

Chastillon was too much fired with what he had heard, to remain unobserved any
longer: But with all the Eagerness of a Man, that was drawn from the lowest Ebb
of Despair, to the Top of all his Hopes, threw himself at her Feet. Ah, Madame!
(said he) be milder in your Opinion of one, that more than dies for love of
you: And don't believe, that he can dote on Trash, when there is so much
Excellence as your self, for to attract his Love.

She started up, and with a Face full of Confusion, and as much of Anger, as
Love would give her leave, replied:

Though you have, by a base Intrusion, heard me confess I Love; yet you shall
have no other Advantage from it, but that it shall prove my Cure; for from this
time, I will never speak to you more.

Chastillon, who only desired her to hear him, kneeled down in the most
submissive manner that could be: To which (insensibly overcome) she consented;
which was the first Ground her Love got upon her Honor; and in those Fights he
seldom gets the least Advantage, but he quickly beats the Other quite out of
the Field.

Madame, (said he) that I have loved you ever since I saw you, Heaven, and St.
Laurans can bear me witness; and with a Flame so tender of your Honor, that I
never told it to any but him, in whom I knew I might confide; and, not intending
to have revealed it even to your self, I kept the swelling Passion laboring in
my Bosom, till it quite destroyed my Reason: Then having lost that chief
Director of my Actions, I presumed to tell you of my Love, when cruelly you
turned away, denying (as I thought) my Words the least Accession to your Soul,
as if they came to violate that Beauteous Shrine. Then again to your Ears I
offered my Unhappy Love, when you doomed me to name it no more, or for ever
lose the Blessing of your Conversation.

Then (distracted in my Thoughts) I went, and feigned a Passion for Mademoiselle
de Poictiers; which I thought, if you had the least tender Remembrance of me,
would kindle it into Love: But when I saw, that all this was no Advantage to my
Flame, by the Indifference that I read in your Looks the other day; I then,
thrown down from all that I could call Happiness, resolved (like a losing
Gamester, just upon his Ruin) to set all my Stock of Hope upon this last Cast;
which, if I lose, I swear by that unmeasured Love I bear you, never to converse
with Mankind more; but retire my self from that tedious Creature, and die alone.

As soon as he had spoke, she threw her self back in her Chair; where she lay
for a little while, without speaking: At length, she cried out:

Oh Honor! Oh Love! How do ye divide my Soul!

There she lay for some time weeping, and sighing; by which she showed the
Combat of her Mind.

Then afterward getting up, with a Voice more calm, she said:

Be witness, this Flood of Tears, how strongly my Honor argues in the Right of
Duty: But Love does plead so powerfully for Thee, Chastillon, that I must own
it to Thee; which thou should never have known, had thou not thus pressed
into my secret Thoughts.

He leapt up; and kissing her Hand, replied:

Those who are Mighty in Possessions, and are Masters of all their Wishes, are
poor in Happiness, compared to me. When I hear you say, You Love, I am so
Transported, methinks I have already left my Natural Dust behind me, and am in
Heaven.

She seeing him in such an Ecstasy of Joy, said:

Moderate your self, Chastillon, and keep your Passion within the Rules of
Virtue, and I will still permit it; for know, that I am Married; and I will
rather die, than entrench one step farther on my Duty.

Ah, Madame! (said he) pardon the Extravagance of my Love; which as yet having
known no Dwelling, but the dark Recesses of Despair, at the Approach of
Glorious Happiness, is dazzled, and knows not what it does. But, Madame, fear
not; for I will be more careful of your Honor, than I am of my own Life.

Then after a thousand Marks of Love, and Joy, she said to him:

St. Laurans, who knew of both our Loves, (for I also told him mine)
discreetly, as I suppose, to break off what he perceived moved so fast to both
our Disadvantages, was unfaithful in this, though otherwise the best of
Friends: For he told me, You to his Knowledge loved another.

Oh Heavens! (said he) and he told me, That you to his certain knowledge Loved
not me.

The Countess replied: He thought by a little Pain to have cured us both: But,
Alas! he finds, by sad Experience, that Jealousy will not cure Love; for he
parted just now from hence the most unhappy of Men: For seeing you to day alone
with Mademoiselle de Poictiers, --

Does he then admire her, said he?

Yes (replied the Countess); but he told me, He durst not tell his Love to you;
for he was too much ashamed.

I wondered (said he) what made him so kind, to be so often at his Sisters? But
now I find the Reason.

Dear Chastillon, (said she, interrupting him) though it be pain in me to
desire it, yet I must beg of you to leave me, and let not our Indiscretion make
us again Unhappy.

Madame, (said he) I obey you, and return so blessed above my Expectation, that
as yet it seems but a Vision to me. Let me wait upon you to morrow, to confirm
me it is true.

You may come, and dine with me, (said she) and bring St. Laurans with you; and
I will contrive to have Mademoiselle de Poictiers.

Then, Madame, (said he) I will freely own to her, that all my Passion was but
feigned; and so we will leave St. Laurans, and Her, to agree it together.

Then after many Expressions of Love, much fuller of distracted Passion, than
of Sense, they parted: She went into her Chamber, where we will leave her,
though not without many Conflicts in her Mind; unsatisfied with what she had
done, and yet pleased that she had done it.

He returned back to Paris; and the first thing he did, he went to find out St.
Laurans, who received him with an unwonted Coldness: He knew well enough the
Reason; however he pressed him to tell him, what it was that sat so heavy upon
his Mind, and seemed to direct at him?

The Count answered him: You will not wonder at it, when I shall tell you, That
I am not only so unhappy, as to be fallen into the Snares of Love; but that you
(my Friend) are, fince you changed your Love, become my Rival.

Chastillon smiled, and said to him: Think but how much it is below the free
and noble Nature of a Man, to be subject to the Weakness of a Woman; and then
cast her from thee.

The Count, remembering this was the Advice that he had given him before, said:
It Is true, I knew not Love, when I gave thee this Advice.

Chastillon would not keep him any longer in suspense, but unfolded all the
Mystery to him; and withal, told him of his Success with Madame de St. Maure;
and accused him severely of his false Dealing: Which he excused by the same
Reasons, that Madame de St. Maure had alleged before; and promised to go with
him to Morrow, to excuse himself also to her.

So Chastillon left him, and went home to Bed. But the Count was not in the
least more satisfied; for the Disturbance of his Mind did not so much arise
from Chastillon's Loving her, as the belief he had, that she Loved him; which
was not at all removed by what had been told him. But his Love being so far
from cured, that it still increased, he resolved (in spite of her Unkindness)
to try his Fate once more; believing, that Chastillon's leaving of her, might
turn the Current of her Love on him.

Therefore he resolved to take the first Opportunity to renew his Addresses to
her; which he unexpectedly found the next Day, (for Chastillon had told him
nothing of her being there) while Chastillon, and the Countess were minding
their own Affairs. Mademoiselle de Poictiers, who now found how things stood
between Chastillon, and her, (for he had freely confessed the Cheat he had put
upon her) and finding that now there was no more hopes of him, received St.
Laurans's Love; and was entrusted with the Secret of the Love there was between
Chastillon, and the Countess of St. Maure.

From this time, though she was Coquette to the last Degree, and even Inconstant
beyond her Sex; yet for a great while, she loved the Count St. Laurans with a
violent Flame.

Thus they became each others Confidents, and as kind Instruments to promote
each others Love. But, Alas! there wanted something yet to make this Union
firm; for Mademoiselle de Poictiers retained still too much of her Old Humor,
to enter into the Bonds of perfect Love: She still received the Courtship of
all those who would make it to her; and would be pleased with the Admiration of
all the contemned Fops of the Court; the pert, insipid, talking, dancing,
dressing Fools, who doated upon any thing would give them leave, were all
welcome to her, and always about her: Which made the Count St. Laurans so
uneasy, that he began to think, that unless she would change her self in this,
it would be the best for him to try once more, if he could desist from loving
of her; for still he thought, that Love and Hate were in his Power, when he was
absent from her. But her sight soon convinced him of his Error: Besides, he
had now greater Hopes than ever; it growing so insupportable to him, to hear
every where those Creatures boasting of her Favors. So one time he came to
her, and freely told her, how prodigal she had been of her Graces; insomuch,
that it grew a great torment to him, to hear so many bragging of her kind
Returns to their Services. At which she grew into a violent Anger; and told
him, That she had declared to him before, that though she permitted him to Love
her, yet she would never make him Master of her Actions.

That Reply raised the Count's Anger so much above his Love, that he swore,
Unless she would quit that Humor, he would never speak to her more: And she,
flinging away with a contemning Laugh, bad him keep his Word, if he could.

This Carriage of hers had raised him into such a Fury, that he took so strong
a Resolution, that for five Weeks he kept his Word. In all which time, when ere
they met, they saluted each other with such a sad Formality, as if they were
passing by to go contrary ways to Execution. By this time she began to soften,
and would have submitted to any thing, but Speaking to him first. And to pass
over that, she had no way but to pretend to Madame de St. Maure, (who she knew,
would tell the Count again) that he, since their falling out, had ungenerously
spoken basely of her. This she believed would bring the Count to vindicate
himself; and so they might make up all again. Which Design took to her Wish;
for in few days, the Court going to St. Cloud, where the Count and Mademoiselle
de Poictiers went too with the Daulphine-Queen, he went one day to Paris, to
visit some Friends of his; and returning in the Evening back again, he walked
very thoughtfully along those Walks, that borders upon the River, where he
found Mademoiselle de Poictiers all alone, having slipped away from the other
Maids that were walking above. As soon as she perceived he saw her, she
pretended to shun him; but he seeing it, went straight up to her: Madame, (said
he) I did not think you would have held so injurious an Opinion of me, as to
think, that I can rail at you, whom I love above my Life.

She turned about hastily, and darting from her Eyes Rage (instead of Love) at
him, brake out into these words: Traitor, base, inhuman Man, shame of thy Sex,
and Curse to me, who love thee! Think, how you drew me to it by a thousand
Oaths and Promises, which (in a moment) for one rash Word, you have broke! By
your delusive Arts, you led me to a high and slippery Precipice, then left me
alone to fall headlong into my Grave. Now consider thy own Ingratitude, then
blush to look upon me.

Madame, (said he) it is only for those who are Guilty, to blush; but for me,
who protest my self innocent of any thing either spoken, or thought against
you: I can only tell you, That your Informations have been all most notoriously
false: And to show, that what I say is true, here I swear and vow, never to
love any but your self, if you will only condescend to my last Request: Which
she (after much railing at his Ingratitude) yielded to; and withal, gave him
much greater marks of her Love, than she had ever done before.

She went straight that night, and supped with Madam de St. Maure, to whom she
told all that had passed; at which she extremely rejoiced; for she had been in
great pain, lest the Breach between them, might be a means to publish her Love
to Chastillon.

They lived thus, and enjoyed (for a great while undisturbed) the Sweets of
Love; and, as they thought, unobserved: But the continual fantastical Quarrels,
that happened between the Count de St. Laurans, and Mademoiselle de Poictiers,
were causes of much Unhappiness to them all afterward; for they gave occasion
to the World to search deeper into their Actions; and so to perceive the
Kindness, that there was between Chastillon, and the Countess de St. Maure. For
many People had been endeavoring to plumb the bottom of both the Count St.
Lauran's, and Mademoiselle de Poictier's five Weeks sadness; and especially
those, who were concerned on either side: Which was the Beginning of their
ensuing Troubles.

End of the First Part.

