MERCIES MEMORIAL: OR, Israel's thankful Remembrance of God in their high
estate, for his merciful remembering of them in their low estate.

In a Sermon before the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR, the Right Worshipful
the ALDERMEN, and the COMPANIES of the City LONDON, on the 5th. of November,
1656.

BY RALPH VENNING.

Psalm. 107.8. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness; and for his
wonderful works to the children of men.

LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell, at the Fountain in Goldsmiths-row in
Cheapside. 1657.

TICHBORN Mayor. Tuesday, the 11th. of November, 1656.
IT is ordered that Mr. Venning be desired from this Court to Print his late
Sermon at Paul's.

Sadler.

To the Right Honorable Sir ROBERT TICHBORN LORD MAYOR, And the Right
Worshipful The ALDERMEN of the City of LONDON.
Honorable and Honored,
WHen I had received your Order for the Printing of this Sermon, I procured the
best Copy I could, by which and the best memory I had of what I delivered, I
have endeavored to present it to your view; not without a little addition to
some heads, which then I could not enlarge.

The rest of this address My Lord and Gentlemen, is not to complement and
flatter you, but earnestly yet humbly to beseech you that you would (as
Mordecai said to Hester) seriously and studiously consider, wherefore God has
brought you to this high estate, hear the place and (as the Prophet said of the
rod) him that has appointed it; Be pleased to Know and account that the doing
your duty in your Place is the greatest honor of your place; whereas else it
will be said that your Places honored you, but you honored not your Places.

Indeed 't is the fashion of this World to seek great things for themselves,
it is their devotion to sacrifice to their own nets, it is their ambition to Lord
it; they are passionately enamoured with the Delights and Delicacies of this
life, which the heavenly St. John calls the lust of the eye, the lust of the
flesh and the pride of life; It Is all but lust, and the lust of the World,
which World and which lust (says he) passes away: and which the Wise Solomon
on sad and dear bought experience, calls vanity of vanities and vexation of
spirit; yet after all these things do the Gentiles seek. But says our blessed
Lord and Savior, it shall not be so with you, you are not your own, and
therefore shall not seek your own, but are Christ's; and therefore seek the
things of Christ, and endeavor to do great things for God: Oh be not led away
with the error and example of this World's admirers, to be fond of a poor and
miserable because but temporary and perishing greatness. It Is a mere Pageant
which is but a show, and a show that passes away, as you know.

'Twas David's praise, and 'twill be yours if you tread in his steps, that he
served not only his generation, but the will of God in his generation, or his
generation according to the will of God: Consider then what is the good and
perfect and acceptable will of God, that you may be in readiness to every good
word and work, walking worthy of God to all wellpleasing.

Indeed (to speak as the thing is) you have none to please, none to serve but
God; you may not be the servants of Men, and you must not be the servants of
Sin; only sanctify the Lord in your hearts, love him, serve him, let him be
your fear, and your dread; Fear to displease the God you love, and love to
please the God you fear; lest you be found (which God forbid) among them that
had a name to live, but were dead; that had been professors of Christ, but
practitioners for self, and for the World.

If the World frown and accuse you for nonconformity, let it be to you a small
thing (as it was to the good as well as great Apostle) to be judged by man's
day, seeing your judgment is with the Lord; and give me leave to tell you, let
the World look as big and as sour as it can, you may safely and honorably
avow it; that the best way to please all, or displease any with least danger,
is to please him who is all in all.

Remember with all that you must one day give an account of your Stewardship,
to the great God of Heaven and Earth, who will not judge according to
appearance, but he (searching hearts) will judge righteous judgment, and give
to every man according to his works: Now I wish with my soul, that you may do
so well in this your day, as that in that great and terrible day of the Lord,
you may hear the joyful sound, of Well done good and faithful servants, enter
ye into your masters joy.

I shall add no more but my desire to God for a blessing on this Sermon, that
as your ears by what you heard, so your eyes by what you see, may affect your
heart to live, for that is, to give thanks to God in your high estate, who
remembered us in our low estate.

So prays, Right Honorable And Right Worshipful, Your humble Servant in the
service of Christ Jesus RALPH VENNING.
December. 1656.
MERCIES MEMORIAL: OR, Isreal's thankful remembrance of God in their high
estate; for his merciful remembering of them in their low estate;
From PSALM. 136.23. Who remembered us in our low estate; for his mercy endures
for ever.
FOr the completing of the sense, you are to read it thus, O give thanks unto
the Lord, who remembered us in our low estate; for his mercy endures for ever.

I presume it cannot (I am sure it ought not to) be said of us this day, as it
was said of them in Acts 19. ver. 32. Some therefore cried one thing, and some
another; for the assembly was confused, and the more part knew not wherefore
they were come together. Who is such a stranger in this our English Israel, as
not to have heard of the Gunpowder Treason? is there either Popish enemy, or
Protestant friend, that knows not what a just Right and lawful Title the fifth
of November has to this Observation and Solemnity? If David would not have his
soul forget all, that is, not any of all the benefits of God: much less such as
have a remark upon them for being signal and transcendent. If Personal
mercies deserve their memorial, surely National mercies deserve a memorable
celebration.

Of this then I may say as in the twelfth of Exodus ver. 42. only turning night
into day, and Israel into England, It is a day much to be observed unto the
Lord, for bringing them out of the Land of Egypt; this is that day of the Lord
to be observed of all the children of England in their generations. But not to
Preface away any more of your time in a case so clear as this is; not only
known by us, but acknowledged by our enemies; we need not ask, Is there any
cause? for they themselves have confessed the cause.

This Psalm may be entitled as the 38 Psalm is, A Psalm to call to remembrance,
only with this difference, that that Psalm calls misery, and this Psalm calls
mercy to remembrance; which is so much the sweeter to be remembered.

It was penned on an occasion, and to an end like this, for which we are met
this day to make a thankful acknowledgment, and a pious commemoration of the
mercies of God to the States of the Commonwealth, the Vessel in which all our
Interests were imbarqued. Let us then give thanks to the Lord, who remembered us
in our low estate, for his mercy endures for ever.

In the words (which may have for Title, Mercies Memorial) you have these
three general parts:

First, Here is their remembering, and an ackcowledgment of Gods remembering
them, who remembered us in our low estate. Wherein you may observe,

1. The Mercy it self in this word, remembered.

2. The Author of this mercy, in this word, who; who is this who? the Lord in
the first Verse, the God of Gods in the second Verse, the Lord of Lords in the
third Verse, who remembered us.

3. You have the Objects of this Act, or the Receivers of this mercy, in this
word us; who remembered us.

4. You have the Season of this mercy, or the time when this God thus remembered
this People; and that was, in their low estate; who remembered us in our low
estate.

Secondly, You have an account here of the true Reason and Original of this
Mercy; and that is in these words, for his mercy endures for ever. There is no
reason to be given for Grace, but Grace; there is no reason to be given for
Mercy, but Mercy; who remembered us, for his mercy endures for ever.

Thirdly, You have a Duty inferred hereupon; and that is that which (as I told
you before) is to run in common to every Verse, O give thanks unto the Lord,
who remembered us in our low estate; for his mercy endures for ever.

From this Analysis, or Resolution of the words, you have these four observable
Propositions:

1. That Gods Israel, Gods own People, a People that are nearest and dearest to
him, may yet be in a low estate; us in our low estate.

2. God remembers his People in their low estate ( quoties premebamur, as one
words it) as often as ever we were low; God remembered us when ever our estate
was low, or whatever our low estate was; God remembered us in our low estate;
who remembered us in our low estate.

3. The Reason why God remembers his People in their low estate, is, because
his mercy endures for ever; he remembered us in our low estate, for his mercy
endures for ever.

4. Gods remembering his People in their low estate, lays an obligation upon
them to give thanks to the Lord; O give thanks unto the Lord, who remembered us
in our low estate; for his mercy endures for ever.

The two first of these will take up the Doctrinall Discourse; the third of
these will be the Demonstration of the Discourse; and the last, the Application
of the whole. Then we shall say, O give thanks unto the Lord, when we have
proved that he remembers us in our low estate, and that because his mercy
endures for ever.

This then is the Method which I shall observe:

First, I shall open and explain the terms, that we may understand this Truth.

Secondly, Prove the truth of the Proposition, that we may believe it. And

Thirdly, Apply it, that we may improve it, which is the mercy of all our
mercies.

For the explanation of the Contents here, I shall propound only two Questions.

1. When may a People be said to be in a low estate?

2. What it is for God to remember his People in their low estate?

First, When may a People be said to be in a low estate? Some read it, when we
were dejected and cast down; as if he had said, when we were faithless through
fear; when we were so overwhelmed, that we knew not what to do; when we were
hopeless, and least of all looked for help, then God remembered us, and the
things we feared came not upon us; God being merciful to us above all that we
could ask or think. But I did not (nor shall) handle it in this sense; only let
me say, that Gods People are sometimes in this low estate, low in faith, low in
hope, and yet God remembers them; so great is his goodness; and our
thankfulness should be the more.

But a People may be said to be in a low estate, either 1. Actually; or 2.
Potentially. First, Actually; and that more generally when they are in
affliction and misery; when they taste the wormwood and the gall, as Jeremiah
pathetically expresses it in his Lamentations; when they are in want, when they
are low in estate; or when, as it is said in Psalm. 107.39. they are diminished
and (from an high degree, from a wealthy estate, they are) brought low, through
oppression, affliction and sorrow; when a People are under all, or either of
these, oppression, affliction, or sorrow, they may be said to be in a low
estate.

But more especially they are said to be low (with reference to the Text) when
they are in the Enemies hand; that is, when they are in the Enemies power; as
we may gather from the following Verse, who has redeemed us from our enemies.

And you shall find that this is reckoned to be their low estate in 2 Chronicles.
28.18.19. The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the low country, and
of the south of Judah, and had taken Bethshemesh, and Ajalon, and Gederoth, and
Shocho, with the villages thereof, and Timnah with the villages thereof, Gimzo
also with the villages thereof, and they dwelt there; for the Lord brought
Judah low, because of Ahaz King of Israel. The Lord brought Judah low, and this
was the lowness of their condition, that they were in the Enemies hands; their
Enemies had dominion over them, and took possession of their Possessions. Thus
you have it also in Psalm. 79.7, 8. For they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste
his dwelling places; O remember not against us former iniquities; let thy
tender mercies speedily prevent us, for we are brought very low. This was the
lowness of their condition, that their Enemies had devoured Jacob, and laid
waste his dwelling places. But this was not our case through mercy, this was
not our low estate. Yet again therefore

Secondly, A People are said to be low potentially, when they are in the way to
be low; when they are designed and destinated to a low condition, by the craft
and cunning malice of wicked men, who (woe unto them) dig deep to hide their
counsel from the Lord, and whose works are in the dark, saying, who sees us?
and who knows us? who sit in the lurking places, secretly to murder the
innocent; whose eyes are privily set against the poor, who lie in wait secretly
as a Lion in his den to catch the poor; as if there were no help in their God,
and he were not able to deliver them out of their hand; thus they plot and
design a people to an estate as low as death; and upon this account we are said
to be slain, though but appointed to be slain. In Romans 8.36. as it is written,
for thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter. In this we are low, when we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter; so that though a People are not actually in their Enemies power,
though they are not actually in misery, affliction, and sorrow, yet they are
said to be low when they might have been so, had not God prevented; to be
killed all the day long, when they are appointed to it; for thy sake are we
killed all the day long, being appointed as sheep for the slaughter; and this
was our low estate out of which God delivered us, as we remember this day, we
were accounted as sheep for the slaughter, we were killed all the day long in
our Enemies account. And this shall briefly suffice for the state wherein they
were, and we were; he remembered us in our low estate.

Secondly, What is implied in this, that God remembered them in their low
estate; the word is a pregnant word, it bears twins thrice told, its big, of a
sixth fold sense, as so many degrees of mercy in it.

1. To remember, signifies to think upon, in opposition to forgetfulness; thus
the word is rendered, Genesis 40.14. says Joseph to the Butler, think on me; in
the Hebrew it is remember me; yet ver. 23 the Butler did not remember Joseph,
but forgot him; that is, did not think on him. So it is used also in Genesis 8.1.
And God remembered Noah, and every living thing. It might have been thought,
that when the Ark lay floating on the face of the waters, and ran a drift for
an hundred and fifty days, that God had forgotten Noah and every living thing:
but says the Text, God remembered Noah, God did not forget Noah, God thought on
Noah; and in this sense God remembered us in our low estate, God had us in his
thoughts, he had not forgot us, which is no small mercy not to be forgotten of
God; we may dwell in man's thoughts and not be the better for it, but we cannot
be in Gods remembering thoughts but we shall be the better for it. Therefore

2. To remember (as the second degree of the mercy) signifies to take notice of
a thing, in opposition to neglect; so it is used in Exodus 20. ver. 8. Remember
to keep holy the Sabbath day, take notice, that is, neglect it not, remember to
keep holy the Sabbath day; so God remembered us in our low estate; how? why he
did not barely think upon us, but he did observe and take notice of us, and
considered what our case was. But

3. It signifies (as the third degree of mercy) to lay to heart, to pity and
compassionate persons in such a case; what am I the better for any bodies
thinking of me, if he do not take notice of me, so as to pity me in my low
estate? so God does, as in Jer. 31.20. Is Ephraim my dear son, is he a pleasant
child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still; or,
as the Hebrew reads it, remembering I will remember him; therefore my bowels are
troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord; this
earnest remembrance was the earnest of the mercy. But again,

4. To remember, signifies yet more (as the fourth degree of mercy) to be well
pleased with a person in such a case, to accept of a person in such a case; so
the word is used in Psalm. 20.3. The Lord remember all thy Offerings, and accept
thy burnt Sacrifice; remember, that is, accept; why now thus God remembered us
in our low estate; we were acceptable to him, and well pleasing in his eye at
that time, when by our Enemies we were appointed as sheep for the slaughter; so
you may see it in Acts 10. ver. 4. And when Cornelius looked on the Angel, he
was afraid, and said, What is it Lord? and he said unto him, Thy prayers and
thine alms are come up for a memorial before God; that is, they are as a sweet
smelling savor, as a sacrifice well pleasing to God. Thus did the Lord
remember us; that is, he accepted of us, he took pleasure in us, in our low
estate. But again,

5. To remember, signifies (as the fifth degree of mercy) to hear, and to grant
a request; so it is used 1 Samuel 1.19, 20. And they rose up in the morning
early, and worshipped before the Lord, and returned, and came to their house,
to Ramah, and Elkanah knew Hannah his wife, and the Lord remembered her;
wherefore it came to pass, when the time was come about, after Hannah had
conceived, that she bare a son, and called his name Samuel, saying, Because I
have asked him of the Lord, God remembered Hannah; and the next word is, he gave
her what she asked. So here God remembered us; how? what only think of us, or
take notice of us? or did he lay it to heart, and pity and compassionate us,
and was well pleased with us? no, not only so; but God did hear and grant the
desires and prayers of his people; thus God remembered us. But again,

6. To remember, signifies (as the sixth degree of mercy) to help and succor,
or to redeem and deliver from that which we were appointed to, from the low
estate; and so it is in Gal. 2.10. Only they would that we should remember the
poor, the same which I also was forward to do; remembering of the poor is not
barely a thought, but a relieving thought; therefore says he in the following
verse, who has redeemed us from our enemies; this was the remembrance of God,
redemption from enemies. When Paul was, if not forgotten, yet forsaken of all,
then God remembered him, and stood by him; so that though sentence of death were
passed, yet God delivered from so great a death. Now then you see what it is
for God to remember a people in their low estate; it is to think upon them, in
opposition to forgetfulness; it is to take notice of them, in opposition to
neglect; it is to lay their case and estate to heart, to pity and compassionate
them, and to be well pleased with them, to hear and to grant their requests, to
help and succor, to redeem and deliver them from the hand of their Enemies.

But now for the proof of this point, that this is a truth, That God remembers,
and thus remembers his people in their low estate; there are some truths so
clear, that the naming of them is sufficient evidence for them; as they say of
some errors, they are so palpable and gross, that to repeat them, is to refute
them: so some truths are so clear, that but to name them, is to clear them,
especially when it is such a truth as experience must speak to, as here it is;
who remembered us in our low estate.

And indeed to which of the Saints shall we turn? who can say of all the Sons
of Jacob, that God has forgotten them? did not God remember Joseph in his low
estate? did not God remember Israel in their low estate? and did not God
remember David in his low estate? Nay, to speak of all at once, did not God
remember Christ in his low estate? and this day speaks for us, that God has
remembered us in our low estate.

And indeed my beloved, we may take up that Song, and sing it, in the 124
Psalm, If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, now may England say,
If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side when men rose up against us,
then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us,
then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our Soul, then the
proud waters had gone over our soul; Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us
as a prey to their teeth; our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the
fowlers; the snare is broken and we are escaped; our help is in the Name of the
Lord, who made heaven and earth.

This may we say, thus may we sing, Is it not so? is there a contradiction to
be made against this truth? Nay, my beloved, the case was this, that if God had
not been on our side, we had been swallowed up quick; and our not being so,
shows God on our side, that God remembered us in our low estate.

I shall therefore proceed to the third thing, which is, the reason why God
remembers his people in their low estate; that is, as in the Text, for his
mercy endures for ever; he harps only on this string, he reckons up a long
Catalogue of many mercies; and the reason of all these is mercy, only mercy;
the reason of one is the reason of all, as I told you before, there is no
reason for mercy, but mercy; no reason for grace, but grace; who is gracious;
why? because he will, and to whom he will be gracious; so that you see that
mercy in God, is all the reason of mercy from God to man in his low estate; it
is not man's merit, but Gods mercy, it is not man's due, but Gods gift; it is not
man's demand (nor was it in this case man's desire) but Gods grant; who many
times answers before they call, and when they are yet speaking, he is hearing;
it was not man's measure, but Gods allowance; it was not after the manner of
men, who use to go over where the style is low; this was not because man could
make God a requital, but because God would act like himself; it was not Gods
profit, but man's necessity; it was not that God needed man, but man needed God;
therefore grace still is as free after it is received, as it was before it was
given; it was not deserved, and cannot be requited; God therefore gave, as
looking for nothing again; that is, nothing that can requite it; and you shall
have for this a double witness, God speaks it, and Saints speak it, that God
shows not mercy to man because man pleases him, but because mercy pleases
him; indeed one end that God has in showing mercy, is, that man should please
him; but that is not the main motive; for in truth to put man's will before
Gods, is such an hysteron proteron, that (if I may use so homely an expression
in so solemn a case) I say it is to put the cart before the horse. You shall
find God speaking, Ezekiel. 36.21, 22, 23. But I had pity for my holy Name, which
the house of Israel had profaned among the Heathen, whither they went.
Therefore say unto the House of Israel, Thus says the Lord God, I do not this
for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy names sake, which ye have
profaned among the Heathen, whither ye went; And I will sanctify my great
Name, which was profaned among the Heathen, which ye have profaned in the midst
of them, and the Heathen shall know that I am the Lord, says the Lord God,
when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes. It is a fulsom Doctrine to
flesh and blood, to think it must be beholding for all to grace; shame and
confusion belongs to man, mercy belongs to God; man makes work for shame and
for sorrow; God works mercy as never obliged to it, but for his holy Names
sake; and Jeremiah in his Lamentations makes this acknowledgement, and so
confirms the witness of God in Lam. 3.21, 22. This I recall to my mind,
therefore have I hope; it is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed,
because his compassions fail not. If it be of the Lords mercies that we are not
consumed and brought to utter desolation, surely then that we are remembered and
delivered is for no other reason, but because his compassions fail not, but his
mercy endures for ever. Thus I have given you the Doctrinall part, with what
brevity I could; I come now to the Application.

First then, it will afford us an information.

Secondly, Some exhortations.

The Information is this:

Does God remember his people in their low estate? O happy ( how happy) are
they then that are the People of this God! that have the Lord for their God; it
is not every man in general that is thus remembered: no, God has his
peculiars, for whom he has his peculiar favors; indeed his mercy is over all
his works; he is good, and does good to all, but there is a specialty to the
household of faith; and God that does command us to do good to all, but
especially to the household of faith, he does but command us that which he
patterns us; therefore David makes his Prayer in Psalm. 106.4, 5. Remember me, O
Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy people; O visit me with thy
salvation, that I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the
gladness of thy Nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance; O Lord favor
me with the favors, etc. The good of Gods chosen is a choice good; and so he
goes on, O remember me with the favors wherewith thou remembrest thy people.
It is an expression in Psalm. 146.5. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for
his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God. Why the God of Jacob? because God,
though he be every bodies God, and God of the whole Earth, yet he is Jacobs God
in a more peculiar manner; he is the God of all the World, by the opening of
his hands, and filling them with such blessings; and he is Jacobs God by
opening his heart, and filling him with those blessings; and so far as heart is
above hand, so far are heartmercies above hand-mercies, and so far are Gods
people more happy then other people. David has a saying in Psalm. 144. ver.
ult. Happy are the people that are in such a case; yea, happy is that people
whose God is the Lord. Happy is that people whose God is the Lord; there were
persons named before, who were so vain as to say, happy were the people that
were in such a case, viz. that had their Barns full, and their Tables full, and
their Purses full in the World: I but says David, Happy is the people that
has the Lord for their God; if a man had all the World, and had not the Lord
for his God, he is less happy then he that has the Lord for his God, and not
at all of the World. God always remembers his, either to deliver them from
evil, or to turn their evil into good; either to supply them with the things
they want, or to let them know that it is good for them that they should want
it. My beloved, methinks this should engage all of you to look after having God
for your God; it is a commendation that passes among you, when: you see young
men entering on the stage of the World, you say he is like to do well, for he
minds the main chance, he takes care to look after his Shop and his Trade, and
you say such a one is like to thrive. If ever you mean to thrive, to go from a
low to an high estate, from a poor to a rich estate, from a miserable to an
happy condition, look after this, the having God for your God; what is God to
you if he be not your God? Toll meum and toll Deum, as he said; it is cold
comfort to me while I live, and when I die, that there is a God, but (alas!)
not my God. You see then that nothing concerns you so much as this; nay indeed,
to speak as properly as positively, nothing but this, this is your only
interest, and this only. O what an engagement should this be to every person
living, to go to the Father by the Son? for this is the main chance, the one
thing necessary, that ye might have a portion with the Son and the Father.
Beloved, who would not live in Gods thoughts? who would not have God to take
notice of them? who would not have God to lay their cause to heart, to pity and
compassionate them? who would not have God to be well pleased with them? who
would not have God to hear and grant their requests? who would not have God to
help and succor them, to redeem and deliver them? O who would not be the Lords
people? it is the sum of all the Covenant, I will make with them a new
Covenant, I will be their God, and they shall be my people; O what a sad case
are they in, that come not under the new Covenant! whatever good we have from
communion, it flows from union; all that comes savingly to us, it all comes
from this, that God is our God; therefore I beseech you to mind this more,
look after an interest in God. O what will you do in your low estate else? in
your evil days else? when death and sickness shall bring you low, what will
you do if God be not your God? if you have not a God to think of you, a God to
take notice of you, a God to lay to heart, and to pity and compassionate you,
and a God to grant your requests, and to deliver and redeem you, what will you
do? O therefore I beseech you to look after this, to have God for your God; for
they, they only are happy, and they are thrice happy, yea terque quaterque
beati, altogether and always, in all estates happy, who have the Lord for
their God: But for the exhortations, and that thus.

First, Does God remember his people in their low estate? let us trust God
then, when we meet with future straits; our God is a God that we shall need for
ever; and why do not we record the years of the right- hand of the most high?
and the wonderful things that God has wrought for us, in ages past? that the
God that has been our help, may be our hope. Are any of you in a low
condition? do any of you that are the Lords people fear, you may be brought
low, in any condition whatsoever? O remember this, God remembers his People in
their low estate, and heretofore-mercies are grounds to look for
hereafter-mercies; mercies past are grounds to look for mercies to come, as the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 1.10. who delivered us from so great a death, and does
deliver, in whom we trust, that he will yet delive rus. O my beloved, read over
your experiences, look over Gods dealings with you, and remember how God dealt
with you in such and such and the other low estate; and then raise up your
hopes, surely that God that did, the same God will remember me in my low
estate. Why? for his mercy endures for ever. Gods stock is not spent, his
riches are unsearchable, there is no fathoming of his goodness. If David
thought the experience of others a good ground to build his hope and
expectation upon, as he pleads it, Psalm. 22.4, 5. Our fathers trusted in thee,
they trusted and thou did deliver them; they cried unto thee and were
delivered, they trusted in thee and were not confounded. Much more his own
experience, as he urges it, v. 9, 10, 11. thou art he that took me out of the
womb, thou did make me hope when I hung on my mothers breasts; I was cast upon
thee from the womb, thou were my God from my mothers belly; and he adds as if
he had said, therefore, be not far from me now trouble ( new trouble) is near:
and this was so successeful, that before the Psalm is ended he praises and
calls on others to praise God; for says he v. 24. God has not despised nor
abhor red the affliction of the afflicted, but when he cried unto him he heard.

Secondly, Be like God; does God remember his people in their low estate? be
like God then, and remember them that are in a low estate. Godliness what is
it, but godlikeness; what is it to be godly, but to be like a God? the life of
godliness is called in the Scripture, the life of God, not in this respect
only, that we have this life from God, or in this, that we live this life to
God, but in this, that it is such a life as God lives. God lives the life of
love, and God lives the life of mercy; and shall not we now be like God, to
live a life of love, and a life of mercy, and good works? you may please to
observe, that we cannot be in any thing said to be more like God, then in this
of mercy; his Name when it is proclaimed, what is it, but the Lord gracious and
merciful; now when are we like God? but when gracious, and merciful. When we
are exhorted to be perfect, as our heavenly father is perfect, it is as another
Evangelist has it, to be merciful as our heavenly father is merciful. And so
when Moses Exodus 33.16. asked God to show him his glory, says God, I will
cause all my goodness, that is my glory, that is my Name wherein I glory, to
pass before thee.

You have been honorable, and why should I not hope you will be honorable
still in good works? there are poor Children here before your eyes, that call
upon you saying, Remember us in our low estate; there are many Hospitals that
call for this, remember us in our low estate. And mark I beseech you what has
the name of pure Religion (and what has the name, has the nature of it) Jam.
1.27. Pure Religion, and undefiled before God, and the Father, is this, to
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the World; this is the great spot of the World, that it is a
cruel World, a World without bowels of pity and compassion; a World that
remembers not them that are in a low estate: Mercy is the Churches Grace, and
the Churches Glory; and therefore I beseech you that you will remember as
occasion offers, and when you are going out of these doors, forget not these
words, Remember the poor. There is nothing more unbecomming a people that have
received mercy, then to be hard hearted; not to have bowels of mercy, it is to
put a blot on our own enjoyments, and to be wanting to that which we proclaim
with joy and triumph this day. Oh love and pity them that are in a low estate,
remembering that you your selves were sometimes low, such were some of you. Thou
shall says God, Deuteronomy. 10.19. Love the stranger, for you were strangers in the
house of Egypt, and ye know the heart of a stranger, Exodus 23.9. You have had
experience what a sad and disconsolate heart attends a low estate; let
therefore the brother of a low degree rejoice that he is exalted, Jam. 1.9. yet
so as to condescend to men of low estate, Romans 12.16. we seldom forget God or
man in our high estate, but it may be said, as Ezekiel. 16.22. in all thine
abominations thou have not remembered the days of thy youth, when thou wast
naked and bare, in a low estate. It was the brand that Gallio lay under when
the Saints were persecuted, that he cared not for these things. O it is a sad
brand a very black character when it may be said of men that they do not care
for these things. But again,

Thirdly, Does God remember his people in their low estate? O then let his
People remember him in their high estate; he has set you on high, O now
remember him in your high estate: it is but equal, that if God remember us when
we are low, that we should remember God when we are high; To sin against the
deliverances of God, and a God of deliverance too, is double iniquity; and yet
it is man's great vanity and unhappiness, that he is seldom more apt to forget
God at any time then then when he has most cause to remember him; when he has
mercy before his eye, yet then to forget a God; see this, Deuteronomy. 32.15. Of the
rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and have forgotten God that formed
thee. This was the sin of Jesurum, he grew fat, how? why God fed him not with
course fare, not with brown bread and water, but with dainties, he fed him with
Butter of Kine, and Milk of Sheep, with fat of Lambs and Rams of the breed of
Bashan, with Goats, and with the fat of the Kidneys of Wheat, and for his drink
he had the pure blood of the grape; and what then? why then he kicked, and
forsook the God that made him. God fed him, and then he forsook him. O strange!
One would think that then he should have rememberd him; I but he then forsook
God, and lightly esteemed the rock of his Salvation; and so you shall see Hos.
13.6. It is there laid to the charge of Ephraim, says he, they were filled,
and as they were filled, their hearts were exalted; therefore they have
forgotten me; alas! therefore they forgot; what because God filled them? no,
but yet then they were exalted, and therefore they forgot God who filled their
hand with good and their bellies with his hid treasure. My beloved you see,
Times of enjoyment, though most desirable to us, are most dangerous to us;
times of fullness, though most pleasing to us, are too too often made by us most
displeasing to God; that that should be the day of all days, is strange;
therefore we have an exhortation given us, Deuteronomy. 6.10, 11, 12. And it shall be
when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the Land, which he swear
unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee great and
goodly Cities, which thou buildedst not, and houses full of all things, which
thou filledst not, and wells dug, which thou diggedst not, vineyards, and
Olive trees, which thou plantedst not; when thou shall have eaten, and be full,
then beware lest thou forget the Lord, which brought thee forth out of the Land
of Egypt, from the house of bondage; there is not such another time of danger
as the full time. Hence it was that holy Job was jealous of his children lest
they were evil in a good day, lest at the time of feasting they should curse
God. Man seldom turns his back more upon God then when he has the greatest
obligations even before his eyes to keep him close to God; O therefore remember
this that mercies are not given only for us to use to our comfort, but they
are given for us to improve for Gods glory. The Greaks have two expressions to
set out riches by, the one (...), things had, or things in possession, the
other (...), things used; or things improved: now (...) they account the best,
which is things used, it is the improvement of mercy, that makes mercy a mercy
indeed. Has God delivered us out of the hands of our enemies, that we should
commit abomination? no, but that we should serve him with holiness all the
days of our lives; if not, what can we expect, but that he should take away
our mercies from us, and remember us no more. O therefore take heed that you do
not (while you are eating, and drinking in remembrance of God) that you do not
forget God. It is but too common, that eating and drinking takes away men's
stomachs as to spiritual things. It Is very sad that mercies which are given us
to indear God to us, that we might love him the more, and serve him the better,
should be so abused by us as to love him the less and serve him the worse; that
we should take the corn and the wine and the oil, the silver and gold which
God gives us, and prepare them for Baal, as they did Hos. 2.8. and they Ezekiel.
16, 17-21. But now what will you have us to do? you will say. Why

First, Take notice not only of the mercies of God, but of God in the mercies;
not only of the deliverance, but of God in the deliverance; for a deliverance
is nothing so sweet as when the soul tastes God in it; mercies are never so
savory as when they savor of a Savior; study then not only the mercy, but the
God of mercy. This did Jacob when his brother Esau asked him Whose are all
these? why says he, the Children that the Lord has graciously given thy
servant, Genesis 33.5. mark it, not only children, or children which God has
given, but children which God has graciously given. And so Samuel you find
him, 1 Samuel 7.12. not only taking notice of the mercy, but of God in the mercy,
hitherto the Lord has helped; to have the help without God, is to have help
without a blessing; and they that do not see God in it, they have but
half-mercy, they have but the body of mercy; to taste God in it, and to enjoy
God in it, that is the mercy of the mercy. So that in Number. 23. v. 23. Surely
there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against
Israel; according to this time, it shall be said of Jacob, and of Israel, what
has God wrought? Jacob and Israel shall not say, lo what is wrought, but what
has God wrought; it is the Lords doing and therefore mavelous in our eyes:
we shall not look upon mercy as mavelous sweet and precious, unless we see it
is the Lords doing. God remembered us says David. But again,

Secondly, Do not only take notice of God in mercy, but as David does here,
keep catalogues of the mercies of God; Gods mercies are not to be forgotten;
you will remember the kindnesses of your friend, all his favors and tokens;
you will keep your Books of account wherein all your debts shall be entered,
that they may be remembered, and shall God be forgotten? Memory is a slippery
thing, and many times lets go quickly; therefore did God command Israel to
write down their deliverances; they had not only a table for Commands, but a
table for Salvations also; for that that is written will abide, littera scripta
manet; and records brings that to mind which else would not be thought upon by
us, as Mordecai was remembered by Ahasuerus. God has a Book of remembrance
written for what you do, and will not you have a Book of remembrance written
for what he does? God has it upon record, you have not a good thought, but God
writes it down; you shed not a tear, but God bottles it up; you make not a
prayer, but God puts it in his Book of remembrance; now shall God do so for you
(not that God has a weak memory, but it is for your consolation) and will not
you write down his mercies? You know you dare not trust your memories for your
debtors, or your debts; O my beloved, will you commit every thing to Book but
Gods dealings? you can by your Book tell how much such a one owes you, and that
such a one is so much in your debt, such a time so much, and such a time so
much; but can you do so by Gods dealings to you, that such a time, such a
deliverance, and such a time, such a remarkable mercy? Oh let a Book of
remembrance be written. But again,

Thirdly, Lay to heart the mercy of God. If it be written in a book, and not in
the heart, it will have but little impression; and therefore it is commanded in
the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 4.9. Take heed to thy self and keep thy soul diligently,
least thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen; and (mark this) least
they depart from thine heart; as if he had said, let not thine heart forget; as
if the best memory lay in the heart; therefore says he, let not thy heart
forget; the sense of mercy is the best memory. I and beloved let me tell you
this, mercy then works sweetly, when it works inwardly; when it does not only
affect the eye and the ear, but the heart. Moreover, you will not be able to
give glory to God, if you lay not mercies to heart, Mal. 2. v. 2. If ye will
not hear, and ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my Name, says
the Lord of Hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and I will curse your
blessings; yea, I have cursed them already, because you do not lay it to heart;
all else will be nothing, if you do not lay it to heart; you cannot give glory
to God. But again,

Fourthly, Give thanks unto the Lord, who remembered us in our low estate, this
the very Text calls upon us for; and let the redeemed of the Lord say and do
so, whom he has redeemed from the hand of the enemy, Psalm. 107.2. You may
please to observe that in Scripture God has these three Titles, the Hope of
Israel, the Savior of Israel, and the Glory of Israel: pray who was your Hope?
was not God? who was your Savior? was not God? pray then who shall be your
Glory? shall not God? If we have had our mercies from God, shall not God have
our thanks? The streams in this World, the rivers of Water do all pay their
tribute to the Fountain; they come from the Sea, and thither they go again: All
the world teaches us to be true tributaries to God; does not all come from
God? by the same reason all ought to go to him; for says the Text, of whom,
and to whom are all things; de facto, all is of him, and de jure, all ought to
be to him.

First then, Let me beseech you to give him the the calves of your lips; let
your glory awake, and give glory to God; the tongue of man is called his glory;
my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices, says David, Psalm. 16.9. And says
the Apostle Acts 2.26. my heart is glad, and my tongue rejoices; that which
David calls glory, Peter (from the Septuagint.) calls tongue. So in many
places, the tongue of man is called his glory, and wherein? in nothing but in
glorifying God; in any thing else, it is his shame, but in this that it speaks
to the praise of God, it is the glory of man, if man at any time say to God,
open my lips, my mouth shall show forth thy praise; and this is required from
us in Heb. 13.15. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God
continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name; God
does not think the fruits of our lips small things. Why have thou a tongue, but
to speak to the praise of God? why have thou lips, but to give fruit to God?
And then,

Secondly, Give thanks to God by the fruit of you lives; the calves of your
lips if they go alone, are poor perishing calves; thanks living is the best
thanksgiving that can be; therefore you shall find in Heb. 13.15, 16. By him
therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the
fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name; and is that all? is that enough?
Oh no, But to do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased; as much as to say, the fruit of the lips,
without the fruit of the hand, and of the life, it is nothing. Pray remember it
this day, and for ever; herein says Christ is my father glorified, when you
bring forth much fruit; a little fruit serves not to give glory to God; herein
is my father glorified, when you bring forth much fruit; a little is as none,
my father is glorified when you bring forth much. And so Phil. 1.11. Be ye
filled with the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ unto the
glory and praise of God; observe it, not only righteousness, and fruit of
righteousness; but fruits of righteousness, and filled with them too; so that
you see it is not a little that will do it.

Pray remember this, that your good works may so shine before men, that you
that do them, may glorify God also; by your lips he has but single, but by
your works he has double glory; for you that do them glorify God, and they
that see them done will glorify God; O therefore give a glorious example. But
let me add a few things more, I beseech you, that your obedience may be
qualified toward God, as your mercy has been qualified from God toward you;
how that is, I will tell you presently; only this of the present mercy.

It was a preventing mercy; to be prevented with the blessing of good, is the
greatest kind of mercy: deliverance from evil, is good; but to be delivered so,
as not to be in evil, is much more good. Who will not reckon it a greater mercy
always to be in health, then to be delivered from sickness? though both are
mercies, in this mercy we know not a mystery, in others we have; this is not
like peace, the joyful daughter of a sorrowful mother; this is not like health
after a Pestilence; but this prevents all these; so much the greater mercy: it
took away no good from us, it brought no evil upon us; and how great was this
mercy? If this mercy had not been, for ought that I know, many of us had not
had a being; or else which is worse, a being not worth the having.

But now to the qualifications of your obedience. The first qualification of
your mercy was this, it was free mercy, it came not upon constraint, it was not
forced, nor wrested out of the hands of God; freely you have received, freely
give; God loves to give cheerfully, and the same God loves a cheerful giver.

Secondly, Your mercy was according to your own heart, every way grateful and
acceptable to you: let your obedience be so to God; be like David men after
Gods own heart.

Thirdly, It was seasonable mercy, it was in our low estate, it was when you
knew not what to do; for you knew not the danger you were in: So let your
obedience be seasonable, then it is beautiful.

Fourthly, It was a signal mercy; digitus Dethic, the finger of God was here,
the enemy being judge; signal mercies call for signal obedience; therefore be
you sure to do some singular and signal things for God, to return to the Lord
according to the benefits received. Oh say, What? What answerable thing shall I
return the Lord for all his benefits? But again,

Fifthly, It is a continued mercy; we enjoy our mercies from that mercy to this
day; it is not one mercy, and not more, but a chain of mercy; not the mercy of
a day, or a year, but the mercy of Ages: well then, let us be continual in
obedience, let us be Christians, not for a day, or for a fit, but Christians
throughout every day in the year; not only Christians here at Church, but at
home in the Closet, and in the shop. And then again Lastly,

Sixthly, We have superadded to this multitudes of other mercies, heap upon
heap, he loadeth us with his benefits every day; yea many a time, many a time
we may now say, has he saved us, he is the God of all our Salvations and his
mercy endures for ever; Let us then multiply obedience, and be always
abounding in the work of the Lord; Shall mercies increase, and obedience
decrease? God forbid.

Take a few provoking considerations, and I have done. I might draw
considerations from the Author of the mercy, God; a God that was offended by
us, a God that needed us not, and a God that gains nothing by us; and yet this
God remembered us in our low estate; that should engage us. I might also draw
obligations from the Objects, and that is us that were not only an undeserving,
but an ill-deserving, and are not a suitable returning People. I might draw
Arguments from the mercy, that God remembered us in all the senses spoken of
before; and I might draw arguments from the season, in our low estate, and from
the excellency of the duty of thanksgiving, it is a comely thing; it makes us
like the Angels whose whole employment and liturgy is to give and live praise
to God. And from this also I might enlarge the discoveries of the obligation,
that his mercy endures for ever. But only take these four Arguments.

1. It is dangerous sinning after mercy received; and the greater the mercy,
the more danger in the sinning; the greater the mercy has been, the greater
the danger of sinning will be: God was angry with Solomon that he turned his
heart from the Lord God of Israel; I but what was it that heightened this? why
it was this, that God had appeared to him twice. So says Ezra, shall we again
sin after such a mercy as this? such a deliverance as this? What could we then
expect but that God should be angry with us till he had consumed us, and there
should be no remnant nor escaping? Ezra. 9.14. O sin no more, least a worse
thing come unto us, God knows how to fetch all his pennyworths out of us; he
has Plagues yet seven times more in store; if he give them vent, Woe to us.
See Judges 10.11, 14. And the Lord said unto the Children of Israel, did not I
deliver you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, from the Children of
Ammon, and from the Philistines? yet ye have forsaken me, and served other Gods;
Wherefore I will deliver you no more: go and cry unto the gods which you have
chosen, let them save you in the time of your tribulation; O this, this is a
sad case, I will deliver you no more. If we forsake God, and forget God after
such remarkable Salvation, let me tell you that we incur this, that God should
say, I will deliver you no more.

2. Our Mercies, unless we make this answerable return to God, our mercies are
not complete; our mercies are long a completing: a mercy is never complete to
us till we have returned the glory of it to God; mercies are not perfect
mercies, till praises are perfect praises: See that in the 40 Psalm and the
beginning. Mark the steps of the mercy. (1) He inclined, (2) He heard my cry.
(3) He brought me up out of an horrible pit out of the miery clay. (4) Set my
feet on a rock. (5) Established my going; and 6. As the crown of all, He put a
new song into my mouth, Praise unto our God. The mercy was not complete, though
he was set on a Rock, one would think past danger; no, that is not enough that
he was set upon a Rock, or that he was brought up out of an horrible pit, and
out of the Miercy clay, and had his goings established; but there is this to
make it up complete, he has put a new song into my mouth, even Praise to our
God. O my beloved, may it not be feared that you and I have many imperfect
mercies? Why? because our returns are so imperfect, we do not sing the new
Song, with such life and vigor as we ought to do. O let us then look about
us; our mercies are not perfect or complete till we make an answerable return
to God for mercies received.

3. Remember this, this is all you can do for God, and this is less then God
has done for you: you are not less then the least of mercies only before you
have them as to matter of merit, but less then the least of mercies after you
have received them in respect of returns; you can never give God enough, your
best is too bad, and your All is too little; when you have done all, you are
unprofitable servants, because you have done but what was your duty to do; for
man is bound to serve God with the utmost of his Soul and strength; his all is
Gods due; Man must therefore be an unprofitable servant; but O then how
unprofitable is man that does not do his duty at all! O my beloved let us do
all that we can; for when we haoe done all, it is no more but what we ought, we
give God but his own: Yet again,

4. Remember this, if this be not done, this day is in vain, and this day is
lost; shall we beloved reward evil to our own souls, and turn our holy days
and holy duties into iniquity, the day is lost, it is gone. Says God
concerning the Fasts, is this the fast that I have chosen, for a man to hang
down his head for a day? No, no, this is not it. So may God say, is this the
Feast which I have chosen? What only to make a pompous show, and have a Sermon
to serve for State, is this it? Do you think beloved, that God cares for man's
Complements? What is it to give God a parcel of good words, and a parcel of bad
works? What is it in words to confess him, and in works to deny him? What is
this? Is this the way of Pra se? No, it is Hypocrifie, and the way to undo all
that we do. I will but borrow the expression of the Psalmist, and so conclude,
Psalm. 50.16. But unto the Wicked says God, what have thou to do to decare
mine Ordinances, that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth? what
Wicked? and yet declare my Statutes! What wicked? and take my Covenant! What
have thou to do? ah what have thou to do? Consider this ye that forget God,
lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.

But now if ye offer praise by a right ordered Conversaion, What then? why then
says God, Know assuredly, that he who offers praise honors me, and to him
that orders his Conversation aright will I show the Salvation of God. Oh then
I beseech you in the bowels of Christ Jesus, as you tender the honor of God
and your own Salvation, that you thus give thanks to the Lord who remembered us
in our low estate, for his mercy endures for ever.

FINIS.

