THE PICTVRE OF INDEPENDENCY Lively (yet Lovingly) Delineated.

By JOHN VICARS.

PRO. 27.6. Faithful are the wounds of a Friend; but the Kisses of an Enemy
are deceitful: therefore, PRO. 9.8. Rebuke a wise man and he will love thee;
but reprove a Scorner, and he will hate thee. LONDON, Printed by JOHN MACOCK at
Adling-hill, and are to be sold by MICHAEL SPARK junior in Green Arbor. 1645.

The Picture of INDEPENDENCY, Lively (yet lovingly) Delineated.
THe most unhappy jars and intestine divisions between our most unkind and
unadvised Independent Brethren and the Presbyterian party, especially in
matters of Church Government, having proved such a sad and fore Remora and
retardation to the most blessed and glorious work of Reformation, at this time,
in the Church of God, so long and so longingly desired by us all, and (at the
first) so smoothly and sweetly begun among us, have filled my soul (and many
thousands more) with many and most various both sad and serious thoughts and
conjectures, both concerning the rice and root thereof, the present growth and
increase of them, and the future fear and danger thereof; even no less then a
miserable and confused Anarchy, if not seriously seen into, and seasonably
prevented, either by a holy and humble reconciliation in them, or by a just
necessitated restriction by authority. Now, I considered with my self, that
for me to perplex my thoughts about the Dogmaticall discussion of the
Controversy it self, would be as endless as it has been fruitless, in
respect of its proper end, yet I know much good and satisfactory settlement in
the Truth has come by the labors that way taken: But, I conceived it, a yet
more near and as sure a way of satisfaction, seriously and sincerely to look
into the practicall-manner of managing the matter in controversy on our
Dissenting-Brethrens part. And truly, me thought (and that, upon apparent and
indubitable grounds, as, by and by, I shall, I hope, make manifest) that that
of divinely inspired and most wise King Solomon, Prove. 13.10. seasonably and
suitably offered it self unto me, as a main, if not sole and certain rice and
ground of all the unchristianly and unbrotherly broils and breaches, in this
kind among us, viz. that, Only by Pride comes Contention. This being, then,
the undoubted spurious Spring of our sad and bad divisions, I could not, but
instantly and easily apprehend Self to be one most strong stream and turbulent
torrent issuing out of that foul fountain. Which, that it most clearly appears
so in general, we have here a sure word of Truth for it: And that it is so in
this particular, and present special case, what man, though but merely
rational, can deny, that rightly and impartially discerns any thing at all in
the mannaging of the matter by our Independent or Dissenting Brethren against
their Presbyterian Brethren? For if it be not Spirituall-pride, and
Selfe-seeking, that lead them on in their strange New-way (but, that they, with
us, clearly intend, as they seem seriously to pretend, the glory of God in his
own pure worship, and that King Jesus alone may rule his Church and childrens
consciences according to his written Word) why, then, strive they so
strenuously for such a way of worship and government, which they are not able
to demonstrate and make clear from the written Word unto their
Presbyterian-Brethren? Now, if they are not able (as they have often and
earnestly been moved and mildely entreated thereunto) positively and plainly to
set down unto us such an exact way of worship and Gubernation of Gods Church as
may not, without sin, be altered in the least circumstantiall particle
thereof, to the end of the world; why rest they not content (with us) with so
much materiality of worship and government as is set forth plainly and clearly
in the Word, and with godly moderation, piety, and prudence, humbly refer the
rest (in mere circumstantials) to Christian godly Governors and Magistrates,
assisted with an Assembly of most learned and pious Pastors and Teachers (no
whit inferior, for parts and piety to the best of theirs) and both these
regulated and directed by the right rule of Gods Word, as near as possibly (in
the integrity of their souls) they are able; herein, also, seeking assistance
from Gods holy and un-erring Spirit, by much fasting and prayer, which, I
think, they dare not deny to be Gods way. Why, I say, must this most
considerable and most Noble Body of Bereans be rather regulated and
circumscribed to the unwritten New-lights and strange Enthusiasmes of our
Dissenting Brethren, they being also a most inconsiderable and inferior part
(therefore) of the Body? Is there any reason, much less religion for it? And
if not, what then, means all this most unkind and unbrotherly writing and
wrangling against your Presbyterian Brethren, whom it highly concerns to
contend earnestly to maintain the faith, and those truths of God ( Jude, v.
3.) delivered to them, and (as consonant to Gods Word and Scripturall Truth)
practiced by all the Saints in all the Reformed Churches of Christendom, yea
and honored by the special blessing of God himself on their way of godly
Church Government, as has been all along (for these many years) most visible
in those many thousands of most precious Christians and venerable Saints,
brought forth and bred up in the Presbyterian-way, as Gods way, and, so highly
honored by himself, as is aforesaid. These, I say, are those that are most
fit, yea, that are most deeply bound in conscience, earnestly to contend for
their so sound and ancient doctrine and discipline; not you of the
Independent-way, for your mere imaginary opinions and barely conceited
new-notions, who have been desired again and again to manifest unto us out of
Gods Word, or from the constant practice of any settled Church in all Europe,
what it is ye would have, and what it is ye hold, as a certain, fixed, and
unalterable rule of Gods worship and Church Govern-ment, but to this very day
have not ingenuously declared it, or dealt plainly with us therein; witness
even that so highly cried up Apologeticall Narration attested by five of your
most Eminent Pillars of Independency, made-up, mainly, of many, indeed, fair
pretenses; as, of a strange and almost ridiculous voluntary-banishment;
self-praisings of your own parts and piety; complainings, (but, most untruly)
how ye have been flighted and contemned among us; whereas, ye have been equally
embraced and honored diverse ways, both by the Parliament, Assembly, and City
of London, with the best of our Presbyterians; boasting how ye have been
approved and entertained in your Church Way, in Holland, etc. Whereas both the
Reformed Church in Holland and France also have assured us by the testimony of
diverse of their most pious and eminent Divines, the clean contrary, and that
they have rejected your way, as very dangerous and destructive to the Church of
God, and vilifying and undervaluing all the Reformed Churches, in comparison of
yours: and (to come to the point) pleading a mental reservation in the main
matter of our desire until it come to a dead-lift, or a hard pinch: you laying
down this irreligious Paradox for a principle (which ye make open and constant
profession of, and wish to be enacted, as the most sacred law of all others, in
the midst of all other Ecclesiastical Laws and Canons in Christian states
throughout the world) Not to make your present judgment and practice, a
binding law unto your selves for the future; out of a jealousy of your own
frailty, keeping this Reserve, to alter and retract what ever should be
discovered to be taken up by you out of a misunderstanding of the rule. This
being the avowed profession of your five grand-Apologists, to the whole world,
in print: yet, a principle so inconsistent with found faith and truth of
Religion (of which, you so much vannt) as that it suits with none but such an
one whom the Apostle ( James 1.6, 7, 8.) long since, ye know reprehended and
characterized, (the true character, indeed, me thinks, of our Independent
Brethren) viz. A double minded man, unstable in all his ways, wavering, like a
wave of the sea, driven about with the wind, and tossed. Which, he closes up
with this dreadful determination. Let not that man think he shall receive any
thing of the Lord. And if such Scepticks (as you profess your selves by this
Apostles determination) cannot so much as think to receive any thing of the
Lord; with what faces and consciences can ye think to obtrude your
Independent-wayes and fancies upon us, as the infallable Oracles, nay, Scepter,
and Government of God and Christ, which your selves, infallibly believe not to
be such, and take up only for the present, with a Reserve of altering, and not
binding your very selves thereto, for the future? For Gods sake, my Brethren,
take heed what ye do herein: For does not the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2.)
prophecy, That in the last days, perilous times shall come; for men shall be
lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, heady, high-minded, having a
form of godliness, but denying the power thereof. Ever learning, but never
able to come to the knowledge of the Truth. Yea such as will not endure sound
doctrine, but after their own lusts will heap to themselves teachers, having
itching ears, turning away their ears from the truth, and will be turned unto
fables and fictions, new-lights and revelations. And are not your thus
pretended New-lights, the very persons, thus, delineated, by your own
confessions and practices too, even Murmurers, Complainers, desirous to walk
after your own lusts, and having men's persons in admiration for advantage. Yea,
take heed (I say) ye be not found to be those Clouds without water carried
about with winds, and those Wandring-Stars which the Apostle Jude speaks of,
which know not when or where, immutably, to fix your faith and judgments?
Whereas, our Presbyterians, and all other true Believers are always (1 Cor.
15.58. Phil. 1.27. and Chap. 4.1, etc.) Steadfast, unmovable, standing fast in
the Lord, in one spirit and in one mind, striving together for the faith of
the Gospel, and not tossed to and fro, like children, carried about with every
wind of doctrine, by the slight of men, as too too many
Scepticall-Independents are, to the great obloquie and scandal of Religion. O
my Brethren, I have therefore great cause to fear you will hardly prove Martyrs
for that Church Way or Discipline, for the future, to which you will not
peremptorily so much as bind your judgment; no, though but only for the
present.

Now, if all this aforesaid, arise not (as wise King Solomon says) from
Spiritual Pride and self-seeking, what means (I say) all this fruitless
writing and wrangling (if not faithless shuffling with, and) against the
unquestionable heaven-honoured Truths of the Presbyterian-way, never to be
refuted (though much quarrelled at) by all the New-Speculations of our most
unkind Dissenting brethren. As namely, your most unjust and injurious
quarrellings, and (I fear) malicious prejudicacies against reverend Master
Edwards his pious, painful, and learned Preaching and Writing against your
Novell-wayes, especially your quarrelling against his most learned Antapologia,
not hitherto answered (as, indeed, unanswerable) by the best of you all. How
also have the elaborate labors of Reverend Master Herl, learned Doctor Stuart,
religious and learned Master Rutterford, and diverse other Eminent Divines, been
slighted, traduced, and abused by you, who have most copiously and
conscienciously confirmed (by invincible arguments, Scripture, and reason)
their Presbyteriall, and most abundantly and clearly confuted your
Independent-way? And (though in the last, yet not in the least place) how have
ye most ungodlily, and ungratefully traduced and palpably abused pious and most
precious Master Prynne, who (as I had a late former occasion to make
like-worthy and honorable mention of him, in my Letter to Mr J. Goodwin) for
his most famous and faithful Sufferings, his most elaborate, learned, and
divine writings, and for his indefatigable and most fruitful Services,
many-fold ways, both for this Church and State too, can never be sufficiently
honored, embraced, and beloved by all true-hearted Christians over this whole
kingdom; yet (I say) how has this most incomparable and precious Gentleman,
this most Eminent Saint and Servant of the Lord and famous Patriot of his
Country, been lately and liberally traduced, and most grossly abused by,
almost, all our most unkind and ungrateful Dissenting brethren of the
Congregationall Church Way; But most especially (and more lately, since my
foresaid Letter was published) by the forementioned Master John Goodwin (as in
all his former insulting and usavory pieces; so above all) in that last and
worst most scandalous Pamphlet of his, Entitled Calumny arraigned and Cast, a
most flashy and false work (as I can easily prove) and a most undiscreet,
unjust, and unreasonable task undertaken by him, in taking upon him to be both
Judge and Party, in his own cause. For, who can expect any other but a total
conviction and tyrannical censure from a professed Adversary against his
Antagonist? But, if any impartial and judicious Reader will but enquire for,
and read over, seriously this Mr. John Goodwins Letter to Mr. Thomas Goodwin,
then in Holland (not long since printed and published by Mr. Bellamy in
Cornhill, in London) he shall then see to his deep admiration what a fit man
Mr. John Goodwin (so tainted with Socinianisme (if not Arminianisme) with most
dangerous Errors in Saving-faith; sometime a Presbyterian, and sometime an
Independent) is to sit a Judge, to arraigne, cast, and condemn, such a most
constantly, orthodox, pious, and painful servant to God and his country, as
Mr. Prynne? And then, certainly, the Reader must needs also break forth (with
me) into an ecstasy of astonishment and admiration at the strange boldness and
unblushing audacity of Mr. John Goodwin, so to censure others, considering his
own guilt, levity, and instability of mind, and gross errors in judgment;
his said vanity and unconstancy of mind and promptitude to error, being lately
further informed to me by very reverend and credible testimony; thus, That even
when he was a Sudent in the Vniversty of Cambridge, his Contemporaries there
with him, have reported and witnessed of him, that he ever loved to maintain
and defend strange Opinions among them: Whereby it seems the man (
Salamander-like) cannot live out of the fire of contention and offensive
opinions; notwithstanding that one of his bewitched pert (if not, malepert)
Proselytes, most absurdly, superciliously, and falsely called him, A great
Master in Israel, and the best of men. How, also, has that foresaid Noble
Berean, I mean Mr. Prynne, been yet more lately and more boldly abused, by a
most scurrillous, proud, and illitterate poor Pamphlet, under the notion or
title of Mr. John Lilborne Letter to Mr. William Prynne? Wherein, how frothily,
fondly, and falsely, has he abused, not only precious Mr. Prynne, whose Books
(in point of a Disputant) he is most unworthy to bear after Mr. Prynne;
wilfully mis-reciting and mis-reporting his Positions point blank against his
words and writings, which, surely, he either read not or understood not; as if
Mr. Prynne concurred with the Jesuits in a point wherein he is most opposite
unto them; complaining against the Parliaments just restraint against libellous
printing, even in his libellous Letter, in print, before ever it came to Mr.
Prynne in writing: But also reviling the whole Reverend Assembly of most
learned and pious Divines, terming them (most rudely and unmannerly) at least
three or four times, no better then Black-Cotes, and, The professed enemies of
Christ himself: yea, and most audaciously daring to censure the most honorable
Parliament it self, both Lords and Commons, with dishonorable breach of their
Covenant? But it has pleased the most righteous Judge of all men, in some
measure, to meet with the evil of both these most ungrateful Sons of their
Mother, the Church of God, in way of punishment (as I, for my part, cannot but
give God the glory, and so account it the one) by just shame, in being
deservedly thrust out of his Living, in London, by the Parliament; the other by
smart, receiving a most dangerous wound in one of his eyes, by a Pike,
immediately after his publishing of that most shallow and silly Letter. God
give them both hearts to lay these things to heart, lest a worse thing follow.

Again, if Pride, (give me leave I pray you, without offense, still to use the
language of Canaan, to speak in the dialect of Gods own Holy Spirit, which ye
seem to delight in) if Pride, I say, and Self-seeking, or Self-engagements be
not the Spring of al these your most unhappy and unholy contentions with us:
what then, means your most unjust and causeless Schism and separation from
us? and disdaining to join and communicate in holy Ordinances and Assemblies
with us, putting your selves into an unwarrantable way of gathering peculiar
Churches, out of Churches, to your selves, falling, point blank, upon that
complaint and crimination of palpable Schism (which, I admire ye see not, and
ingenuously acknowledge not, even to this day; but most obstinately and
wilfully, I fear, run on in) which the Apostle Paul himself so complains of,
viz. That one is of Paul, another of Apollo, and another of Cephas: So ye, one
is of Dr. Holmeses, another of Mr. Goodwins, and another of Mr. Lockyers
Congregation; the very same thing, ye see, that the holy Apostle Paul himself,
there complains of, even thus (as much as in you is) to divide and rend Christ
himself a sunder. By this means also making and esteeming every particular
Congregation, yea, every particular Saint of yours (as ye eal them) a true and
entire Church, as Mr. D. one of your Independent Brethren holds, and publicly
teaches; to every of whom equally, ye say, the Keys belong, (and I think, by
this rule, to the Women-Saints, as well as to the Men-Saints) not being subject
to any appeal or coercive-power, other then your own; no, nor to admit of any
counsel or advice from other Congregations, further then ye please to ask and
entertain it your selves. Now, if such an uncough Chaos, and strange Church Way
(as ye call it) as this is, should be admitted over this whole Kingdom: O, I
tremble to think and conceive, what a Humano capiti cervicem jungere equinam,
etc. as the Poet Horace; or what a Monstrum horrendum, inform, ingens, etc. as
Virgil; this would prove in short time! And yet you our most improvident
Dissenting Brethren call and count this only, Christ's way, and your Selves only
(that run in it) of Christ's Kingdom, excluding all other Christians (very many
of whom, every way else as godly and gracious as your selves, and by some of
your own learned and more moderate Independents (even your five Apologists
themselves) held to be a true Church of Christ, and to have a true Ministry,
yet shutting out, I say, all these Christians from Christ's kingdom, even as
the professed enemies thereof, and accounting them and their innocent bubes and
children, no better then Ethnicks and Pleatheus whom ye will by no means admit
into your Assemblies or Congregations, to partake of the precious Ordinances of
life and salvation ( Baptism and the Lords Supper) if they will not join with
you in your Church Way, and take your unwarrantable and unscripturall
formall-Covenant, invented by your selves: or, if they be poor, and cannot help
to support (with their purses) your Congregationall-way: I speak but what I
know herein, and can produce my testimonies. Tell me, I beseech you, where (in
all the whole Book of God, from Genesis to the Revelations) Separation from
Christian Brethren, every way as good and godly as your selves, is either
commended or communded? And, if ye are not able (as, to this day, ye never
were, nor ever can) to make this clear unto us: Then, how dare ye thus
obstinately and causelessely separate from us into Corners and Chambers, and I
know not what private and unwarrantable Assemblies. Whereas, we can most
plentifully prove (yea, your own consciences cannot but check and chide you
for) the contrary; namely, how clearly it is the will of God that Christian
Unity and Society be maintained. Witness, that especially (among many other
full Texts of Scripture for it) of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. I
therefore Paul the prisoner of the Lord, beseech yet that you walk worthy of
the vocation, wherewith ye are called. With all lowliness and meekness, with
long-suffering, forbearing one another in love. Endeavoring to keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace. For, there is one body, and one Spirit,
even as ye are called in one hope of your calling. One Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God, one Father of all, who is above all, and through you all,
and in you all. Together, I say, with very many other most pregnant Scriptures
to this purpose. How then O my Brethren dare ye do these things (except it be
by that most destructive and pernicious plea for Liberty of Conscience, which
ye so urge, and cry up, and cry out for, to do what ye list, in pretended
matters of conscience; vehemently urging, that the Civill-magistrate has no
power to rule over any Christians conscience; which, though we easily grant in
point of private believing, yet, we say and will justify, he has power to
regulate Christians consciences, in point of public, pious, and peaceable
practicall-eariage, both in life and doctrine, as is most clear from that
pregnant and impregnable Scripture, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3. Where the
Civill-magistrate is acknowledged by the Apostle Paul himself, to be the
principal instrument of God to regulate men's outward consciences (as I may
call them) as well in all godliness as honesty, for the preservation of
public peace, unity and community one with another. Unless ye dare avouch
that Christ did purchase a liberty of conscience for men to sin, in any sort,
which were most blasphemous so to say or think. How dare ye then I say (if ye
will show your selves the Sons and Daughters of Christian love, peace, and
humility) do these things, even thus separate your selves from holy communion
with us, and thus censortously judge and think of us, who do seven at this
time) enjoy (ever blessed be the Lords free mercy for it, and the Lord grant
that this unholy-ingratitude and wanton-contention of yours, cut us not short
of the farther and freer enjoyment of) the Word, most orthodoxly, plentifully,
and profoundly preached, the Sacraments, in sweet measure (for the time) purely
administered; and both Sacraments and Church Discipline in a most hopeful way
(had we but thankful hearts, godly wisdom, and pious patience to wait the
Lords leisure (as it is our Christian duty) for the perfecting and co^pleting
thereof; and not, being poor-beggars, to be our own proud-carvers) even ever
since we most happily shook off the Antichristian yoke of our tyrannical
Prelates, to be blessedly reduced and settled in a holy and unblended way, free
from beggarly-ceremonies and humans inventions, as much as by Christian
prudence and piety, (backed and strengthened by Gods rightest-rule, the
Scriptures,) is possible to be attained unto, both for the present and future
too.

Church Government or Discipline as we fear and are informed by our learned and
pious Pastors, is as Antitichristian and as tyrannical (if not more) than the
Prelaticall was: and, which Mr. John Goodwin says, in his Theomachia, is a
bloody, unpeaceable, and persecuting way, a way much damping and deading the
flourishing improvements of the gifts and graces of the Saints.

Presbyterian-way; witness, as I said before, the many thousands of most
eminent Saints and rare Christians, famous in their several generations, in
Geneva, Germany, Sweden, Hungary, Bohemia, Holland, France, Scotland and now in
England, both for most excellent and enlarged parts of learning and piety.
Secondly, witness the most transcendent testimony of one of your own (now)
prime Independent Brethren Mr. Lockyer by name, who (being at my house, upon
just occasion thereunto afforded him by my self) professed most seriously unto
me, that he having been in Scotland, and seen with his eyes, and taken special
notice of the most exact practical managing of their Church Government (and we
all know that one eyewitness is better then ten eare-witnesses, or then a
hundred speculative-conceits or imaginary New-lights) in all the particulars
thereof; he, I say, professed most seriously unto me, that he was in conscience
convinced and clearly persuaded that their Presbyterian-way was most
Apostolical and Evangelicall, even in these very terms; and what higher
Encomium could he possibly have given, in this behalf? Thirdly, and lastly, in
further answer hereunto; I desire to ask any ingenuous Dissenting Brother or
Sister, and if their conscience will but speak-out the plain truth herein, let
them freely say, O, what would they and I have given, or done, less then ten
years ago, and so, upward, to have had the Presbyterian Government, as it then
was, and now is, in Scotland, to have been established and set up among us,
which, now, like fools and most ungrateful wantons, ye so contemn, condemn,
and vilify, to your great shame be it spoken?

Independent-way, very eminent Saints and Christians, both for their learning
and most holy lives and unspotted conversation, and therefore to be, as justly,
credited, and believed in what they have delivered to us, by word or writing,
as any of yours to the contrary?

parts, nor piety of men (though ever so outwardly pure and holy) are a right
rule for truly wise Christians to walk by; but, contrary wise, very dangerous
and deceivable: For (though from my heart, I here profess, as in the presence
of God, the Searcher of all hearts, that I love and honor very many of the
Independent or Dissenting Brethren, both for their learning and holy lives; yet
give me leave, as ingenuously to confess, with all, that I much fear them for
their judgment and opinions sake, which I hold dangerous and destructive:)
For, I say, as the Apostle Paul says, Gal. 1.8. Though any of you, yea or an
Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel or Word, then that which Christ and
his Apostles, in the written Word has delivered to us, let him be accursed.
And my Brethren, it is not an unknown thing to Scholars, and any others, verst
in Ecclesiastical histories, that the most dangerous Heretics and first
broachers of Heretical and Schismatic errors and opinions, as Pelagius,
Arminius, etc. Were men of marvelous strict life, and outward holiness. This
rule, therefore I say, is no solid, safe or right rule for pious and prudent
Christians to walk by, but the written Word of God only, and clear and
demonstrative deductions and necessary consequences drawn thence, by comparing
Scripture with Scripture, and thus trying the spirits whether they are of God
or not, 1 John 4.1. As the noble Bereans did. Now, all these premises seriously
considered, wherein remains I pray, the mighty distance and difference between
our most unkind Dissenting Brethren and us, if not in the Self-flation of
their spirits, and in their Self-seeking, and private engagements, as hence we
have great cause, more then to fear? For, they say, they desire but what we
desire in the main, viz. Pure Ordinances, Holy Assemblies, and Christ upon his
Throne, only they dissent and differ from us in some poor punctilios, some mere
surmises, and bare pretense of what is not, or not yet proved to us from Gods
Word, without which, they must pardon us, if we cannot believe them or be led
by them; and herein, indeed, I confess, they outrun us, and run before us,
yea (and I fear and believe too) before God calls them. What then, means this
Daggers-drawing at one another for poor circumstantials, things not absolutely
necessary to salvation, and not justifiable by you from the Word? What, I
wonder should be the reason of this unreasonable and irreligious contending to
divide Christ's seamlesse-Coat (wherein, indeed, our Dissenting Brethren show
themselves far worse then the Christ-crucifying Soldiers) for the pretended
fringe sake thereof? What Is the cause hereof, I say, if it be not too much of
that knowledge which puffs up, and too little of that love which edifieth? Do
ye think, my Brethren, that Men and Women given to strife, contentions,
envyings, malitiousnesse, hypocrisy, lying, pride, covetousness, and such
like, being fruits of the flesh, and sins exceeding sinful in Gods sight, (
Col. 3.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Tit. 3.2, 3.) shall not be shut out of Heaven, as
certainly, as those given to swearing, drunkenness, murder, whoredom, and
such like more open enormities? For shame then, my Brethren, forbear any longer
to bear-up your mere opininions with such an unfriendly feud and
irreconcilable rancour, strife, and contention. What, had ye rather that three
famous and (lately) flourishing Kingdoms nay ( Christ's Kingdom it self, as
much as in you is) should be ruinated and destroyed (for, a Kingdom or Church,
divided within it self, says our blessed Savior, cannot stand) than that your
hitherto unproved opinions should by you be left and laid down? What, must ye
be Caesar's or nothing? Had ye rather lose Peace and Truth too, then Victory?
May not the mocking and revyling Royalists at Oxford, and the Malignant
scoffers at London, yea, the Atheists and Papists too every where else, justly
jeer us both, and in derision tell us, the King and his party know not what to
grant us; since we, thus agree not among our selves, and know not what should
be granted unto us? Nay, may not the King of Heaven, the Lord our God himself,
deny us the mercies, which we hitherto have had great hopes he intends to
bestow upon us; when we his children, like unthankful (as I touched before) and
wrangling wantons, fall out among our selves about a too-bold choice, fitted
only to our own fancies, and will have this or that, or none at all? Must
Beggars, I say, be their own carvers, both for the time and thing, or else they
will frampally fly in their Brothers faces? O where is that pious pull-back of
holy Abraham to Lot, Let not us fall out together, for, We are Brethren?

Gospel, came not to send peace on the earth, but a sword, and to set men at
variance, one against another; the father against his child, and the daughter
against her mother, etc. Mat. 10.34.

sword was this, which this blessed Prince of Peace brought into the world, in
the times of the Gospel? was it a sword of strife and contention, of variance,
and vicious discord of one godly and Christian Brother against another? of the
godly father against his pious child, of the truly religious daughter against
her godly mother. No certainly, no such matter: but, of the godly father
against the ungodly son, of truly virtuous children against obstinately
irreligious and carnal parents: only in this sense (as I take it) that those
of a man's own house should be his utter enemies. But, in the other sense, and
to the other sort of godly Brethren, and truly pious Christians among
themselves, even his Disciples and Saints, it is, I believe, and ought to be far
otherwise: O, here, says our Savior, Peace, I leave you, my peace I give unto
you, John 14.27. This, indeed, was the great and everlasting Legacy, which
Christ before his death bequeathed to his children, and set the mark of Love
upon them to be known to be his Disciples. And therefore in this respect, let
me advise you, my Brethren, to take great heed, lest by your unjust jarres, ye
come too near the number and nature of those to whom our Savior prenounces a
Woe, for offending any of his innocent and peaceable Little-ones of the
Presbyterian-party, his undoubted beloved ones; for though (as Christ fayes)
offenses may, and must, or will come, Matthew. 10.7. yet take heed ye be not
those (as, I fear, ye are) by whom these offenses do come. For, believe it, my
Brethren, ye give us too great cause to set a mark upon you ( Romans 6.17.) for
raising and causing such unjust divisions and offenses among us, and to wish ye
had all kept in New England and Holland still, then thus to come among us, to
molest our (at first) so hopeful and happy peace and reformation, as ye have
done, ever since ye came over to us. Only, herein, we may and must see the hand
of God sorely upon us, in thus raising you up, who we hoped would and should
have been a mighty help unto us) to help to whip us for our former unworthy
walking, and to be no small means to keep off the enjoyment of powerful and
pure ordinances, longer then we expected. But though thus ye will so
inconsiderately, and indeed, so unchristianly still retain your ungrounded
opinions in your selves; yet will ye not (at least) endeavor with us, to
maintain the grounds of public peace and Christian-unity and unanimity of
spirit against the Common Adversary; but thus discover your impatient
nakedness for the scoffing Chams of the Kingdom to deride and detest us both,
and all, I say, by your unkind and causeless quarrels with us? truly, my
Brethren, if thus, ye will unbendingly persist to prefer your own wills before
Gods will and way; which is, godly love and communion, not unwarrantable
wrangling and confusion; then take heed I beseech you, lest ye too justly fall
into the compass and capacity of the generation of those men; who (as Solomon
says, Prove. 30.12.) are pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed from
their filthiness. And who (as the Lord himself says by the Prophet, Esaias
2.5.) walk in a way that is not good, even after their own thoughts, who say
(unto their Brethren) stand by your selves, come not near unto us, for we are
bolier than ye. Truly, my Brethren, if these Scriptures be not exceeding
nearly, yea, most punctually and properly applyable to you; to what end is your
so wilful and obstinate separation from us, to your own so pretended pure
Congregationall ways and Church Assemblies, not admitting any other of your
Christian Brethren to join with you, (nor you, by any means, willing to join or
continue with them) but, as I said before, counting them [mark this] and their
children, as unholy Heathens, hereby, saying thus much, in effect, Stand by
your selves, for we are holier than ye? Be not, I pray, displeased at the
words, for they are Gods own words, not mine; nor with the comparison or
resemblance, for ye easily see how peculiarly appliable it is to you, not unto
us; for, we desire most cordially your incorporation and communion with us, and
it behooves you (as I touched before, who have first made the breach, and most
unkindly, and, as we conceive, most unjustly, separated and departed from us)
with all Christian humility, and godly self-denial, to return unto us, and so
to repair and make-up the sad and bad breach ye have made between us. Which
that it may be so, (that so we may with holy David in a heavenly harmony of
hearts and voices, sing out a loud and lovingly, Behold how good and joyful a
thing it is, Brethren to dwell together in Unity! It is and shall be the
sincere and incessant prayer of

Your Christian Brother, J. V.

Imprimatur,

Ja. Cranford.

FINIS.

