A TRVE RELATION OF THE MOST WISE AND WORTHY SPEECH Made by Captain VEN, one
of the Burgesses of the PARLIAMENT to the Apprentises of London; who rose in
Cheapside upon the Combustion at Westminster on Wednesday last at night,
December the 29. 1641.

AS ALSO The Randevowes they had that night at the Counter in Wood-streete.

WITH A Description of the estate of Jreland at this present time.

LONDON: Printed for R. H. 1641.

CAPTAIN VEN HIS SPEECH TO THE APPRENTISES OF LONDON.
THE Apprentises waiting three days at the Parliament House, without giving
affront or ill Language to any; they did only with a full Consent, Cry down
Bishops and Popish Lords.

But coming scattering home by slender Companies, were set upon by diverse
Caviliers, who did cut many, and misused most with base Language, not only
Apprentises but men of good rank and quality (calling them Ram-headed Rogues)
to the great disparaging and dishartning of them in their Trades and Callings;
for by this means many Tradesmen have shut up Shops, and given over their
Trades, because they are so abused: And the adverse party, Papists and their
Adherents, greatly countenanced and encouraged; which makes them so bold and
insolent, that they care not what outrages they commit against honest men of
good report, and the Kings loyal and good Subjects, and without some speedy
redress, and suppressing of them by the good Laws of the Land against such as
do so insolently fall upon the Kings Majesty's Subjects without cause, there
is like to be many thousand lives spilt and taken away.

The Apprentises being many of them committed, and the other countenanced, made
the Apprentises to swell in blood, to the adventure of the loss of their
lives, met on Wednesday night last, to the number of two thousand with Clubs,
Swords, Halberts, and were resolved to go to the White Lion; and others cried
out, to my Lord Majors: but by the providence of God, and the grave wisdom of
Captain Ven, they were prevented by the grave Speech that follows.

Gent. Let me entreat you to be at peace and quietness, and return every one
to his own habitation, and you shall find we will be as ready to do any favor
for you, and relieve you in any of your just grievances, as you can or shall
yourselves, and as you show your willingness to us, so shall we with our lives
be willing and ready to help you: therefore pray depart every man to his own
home in peace, that it may not be said of you, they are rude and tumultuous,
but that you may show your selves to be discreet in all your affairs, to the
advancing of the cause you have in hand; and refer the cause to us which will
be ready to support you to our powers in all that shall be just. Then some
cried out, But what should they do for the Brethren that were committed by my
L. Mayor, and at Westminster, before they shall suffer we will spend all our
lives. The Captain made answer, That for those that were committed at
Westminster, he and another was appointed by the House to release them all, and
we did so the same night before we came from Westminster. And if my L. Mayor
has committed any, I will warrant you, if you will be quiet, and take my word,
they shall be released evercie one. And as soon as I have refreshed my self, I
will go to my L. Mayor, and have them discharged; but do you by no means go,
but return home: So they all cried, Home, home, home, with a mighty noise.
Then the mayor part went away, but some of them remained there which would not
be satisfied, but went down to the Counter in Woodstreet, where they were
withstood by the Officers thereto belonging, with swords and half pikes, but
some rusht in upon them, and got away one of the half pikes from one of them,
and then went up into Cheap side again, but could not rest satisfied, but down
they went again, and the door being shut against them, they broke it, and
brake the windows. After this, the Keeper of the Counter let some of them come
in, and search for them in every Ward, and questioned the prisoners whether
there was any or no, but they found none there, And therefore went away.

There are many Volenteers agoing out, but it is to be feared, that there are
many of them Papists, who will be more ready to help the Papists against the
King, then the King against the Papists. But I hope the Lord will defeat their
designs, and bring their evil ways upon their own heads, if there be any
that seeks the destruction of this Land.

Ireland is in a very bad estate, and in much fear and trouble of the loss of
Dublin, but there is yet hopes if there be but present help and aid against the
Rebels, which is the desire of all true Subjects, the going forward of the
happy design.

Thus Courteous Reader, you have had the full occurrant of the passages, and in
what a miserable estate we are brought unto by Papists and Atheists, who swarm
like the frogs of Egypt over the whole Land, and not likely to be swept away,
till the Lord in mercy to his people, sweep them into the Red sea of their own
blood, into the depth of which the Lord bring all the enemies of his Gospel.

And so I salute you with kind farewell.
FINIS.

