A very short and Brief ACCOUNT OF THE ^ree Justification of God's Elect, From
The Condemning Power of the Law, by that ^aw Change of Persons, (flowing from
an Eternal Act of Grace; by way of Covenant Transaction between the Father and
the Son;) which brought Christ as Mediator, under the Curse and Condemnation of
the broken Law, in the very room and (...) of elect Sinners.

^^ereunto are added, some Questions concerning this Point; proposed to be
answer^d by those that do so confidently affirm, that the elect of God are
equally with others, under the same Condemning power of the Law, before Faith.

(...) a Member of a Church of Christ, in the County of Essex.

(...) 8.32, 33, 34. He tha^ ^^pared not his own Son, ^ut delivered him up for
us all, how shall he not with (...) also freely give us all things? Who shall
lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect: it is God that Justifies, Who is
he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea (...) is risen again, etc.

London, Printed in the Year, 1699.

TO THE READER.
THat which has occasioned the publishing this short Treatise (about
Justification) to the World, is this. A ^oor Member of a Church of Christ in
the Country, having affirmed, that God's ^ect were never under the condemning
^ower of the Law; (being chosen in Christ ^s the Elect Head, and Mediator of a
^^ee and absolute Covenant of Grace to them.) Thereupon some Arguments ari^ng,
this being by some condemned as ^ot agreeable to Scripture, these following
^ines were offered, to clear up the point, ^esiring an answer again in Writing;
that (...) the Truth might appear, by an Ingeni^s and Loving answer to some
objections. which being refused, made it seem (at least to me,) as though the
Refusers of so re^sonable a proposition, were conscious themselves, that
affirming the contra^^ was more Grounded upon Authors, the upon any clear
Scripture Proof. Whi^^ made them so shy of coming to the light God's Word, to
clear up their so often affirmed assertions, that the very Person of God's chosen
ones were under Curse a^^ Wrath, and the condemning Power the Law. Before
believing equally wi^^ the non-elect, the refusing to vouchs^^^ clear Scripture
Proof for this opini^^ has occasioned the publishing these f^^ following
Lines, humbly desiring that might please Almighty God, to vindic^^ and defend
his own Truth, on which (...) soever it be found, and plainly discover (...)
bring to light all mistakes of this Nat^^^ Therefore read and try every
sentence, the unerring Word of God, and the L^^ the Spirit, vouchsafe to give
out his lig^^ and special teachings, in the diligent sea^^ of the Holy
Scriptures.

To our Brethren in Christ.
TO our loving Brethren in the Lord, Grace and Truth be with you. As I doubt
not but that we shall meet another day, with exceed^ng Joy at the right Hand of
Christ, so I desire we may contend as Brethren, in a Holy and Reverential ^ear
of God our Father, and for his Truth only: therefore I only desire you to prove
your assertion, That Justification, in the sight of God's satis^ed Justice
before Faith, is not according to Scripture. And in order thereto, shall
propose some Questions, to be ^^swered distinctly, that so we may ^ome to a
right understanding of each ^ther, and see wherein we do really ^gree, or
disagree; and not continue (...) contend about Words to no purose, if we do
mean the same thing, but if not let it come to Light, withwithout any
underhand dealing. And I pray God Almighty confound what is not of God, let it
lie on which side it is; and I hope I shall trample under foot with abhorrance,
whatever I could be convinced of to be contrary to the mind of God; and do
sincerely desire to use all the means I can, to attain the clearest discoveries
thereof Therefore I shall first explain my meaning, concerning God's eternal
Justifiing Act in his own Breast, Acting in a way of Justice and Grace Jointly
in God, yet pure Grace with respect to elect Sinners; preventing them in a way
of Grace, from the dreadful effects, that otherways would most necessarily
attend their fall in Adam And that he might clear them from the Curse of the
Law in a way of Justice Grace puts the Law into a Mediator Hand; and though
Grace intended no to prevent the elect from falling i^ Adam into Sin equally
with others yet that Grace might super-abound where Sin abounded; there was a
Lamb provided, who by divine appointment, should bear the whole Curse due to
Sin, with all the dreadful effects thereof. This I shall explain in as few, but
in as plain words as I can express my self, my meaning is this, there was from
all Eternity a fixed immutable Will in God, never to punnish Sin, nor to
inflict the penalty of the Law up his Elect; his Will was not, to prosecute his
right against them in a way of Justice. (1 Thessalonians. 5.9.) but to deal with them
as Righteous, in a Mediator, (a pure act of Grace) by free Imputation (2 Cor.
5.21. Romans 5.21. Ephesians. 1.4.) God from all Eternity, did Immutably Will and
bequeath eternal Life to his chosen in Christ, through the Blood of the
everlasting Testament, ( Mat. 26.28. Heb. 10.10.) It plainly appears in this
10th Chapter to the Hebrews, that it was the Will of God, that Christ should be
offered up a Sacrifice to Justice, by the which Will of God, them that he died
for were set apart to Life, which I take to be meant by sanctified, because the
Apostle is treating of Justification, and Pardon of Sin, by Christ's own
offering, as our high Priest; besides it would look strange, to say the Will or
Decree of God, that Christ should die for Sinners, should sanctify us
Inherently; when it can hardly be granted, that the Decree should make that
Law, Change of persons, that Frees the Elect from Curse and Condemnation, and
sets Christ under it in their room; but I think, Sanctified by God's Will or
Decree, is set apart to Life, and through Christ's own offering, as it respects
the thing Willed, the Purging away Sin, with respect to its Guilt, and
Condemning Power in the sight of Justice: Now God's Will, as a Testament of
Grace to Elect Sinners, was an eternal going forth ( Micah 5.2.) by way of
Covenant Transaction, between the Father and the Son, as distinct parties
(though one in essence) and eternal Grace; as it respected the fall and breach
of the Law, so likewise it acted from Eternity, in a way of Justice by a
Mediator, to stand in the Sinners Law place; so that Justice, as well as Grace,
was eternally pleased, that elect Sinners should go unpunished, and hereby
stand complete, in the unchangeable favor of God; that when the Law was broken
by Adam, as a Covenant Head, it should be completely answered by a second Man,
or Adam, as Mediator, as the elect Head, and surety of a free Testament by
Grace; this Decree or imminent Act of God's Will, made that Law change of
persons, which set Christ as Mediator under the Curse, and Condemning power of
the Law; (which other ways could hot have touched him) and turns the Curse of
the Law from the Law-breaking Sinner (which otherways would take hold on all
Sinners, as such) and so sets him under the sentence of Life, in the Court of
Grace, by absolute promise, ( Titus 1.2.) which free and absolute sentence of
Life, takes hold on the Persons of God's chosen, as early as the law sentence
can take hold on the persons of those that have no Mediator ( Romans 9. 11, 13.)
This is the immediate effects of Christ's Mediatorship for the Elect, and the
pronounced or declared sentence of God's eternal Will; thus with Respect to
this eternal Transaction in a Covenant way, we may understand these following
Scriptures,( Prove. 8.23. Micah 5.2. Zac. 6.13 Ephesians. 3.11. 2 Timothy 1.9. 1 Pet.
1.20.) Now whither you will please to call this Imminent and Internal Act of
God's Will, Justification or not, yet let the thing it self be granted, and so
far we shall agree, I desire not to differ about Words, if we mean the same
thing; I suppose, you take only the pronounced sentence into Justification;
that I own, as it declares the fundamental Act, according to which they stand
Just, (if we differ not about the sentence it self,) for I reckon, that all
sentences of Court, that are according to Justice, are grounded upon some
preceding Act, which makes the sentence Just. Therefore I shall take in both,
because the Righteous Judge of the whole Earth, will never pronounce any
Law-breaking Sinner Just; but those which he makes Righteous in a Mediator,
according to this Sovereign Act of his Grace; but I take it for granted, that
our difference (I mean amongst those that are sound and Orthodox) is not about
the matter of our Justifying Righteous, nor whither it is God only that
Justifies through Christ; nor whether it be by Grace, excluding all manner of
Works of the Law wrought in us, or performed by us; even, the Act of believing
it self as it is a Work of the Law, (though I could wish that were something
better cleared, as well as owned in words.) Therefore I shall pass these
things, and come to the very point, and that is, what Act of God it is, that
makes over the Righteousness of Christ, as Mediator to an elect Person; or
gives him a Right to that Righteousness in the sight of God. This I take to be
fundamentally, in the Sovereign Will of God; in that Covenant Transaction,
between the Father and the Son, there was a Grant unto our great Covenant-Head,
the Lord Jesus; though he were purely God, and had not then assumed our Nature,
yet he did personally exist, and was a distinct Person from the Father, from
Eternity (though of the same Nature and Essence.) And by Virtue of Eternal
Covenant Transaction, he was under an Obligation, from all Eternity, to take
our Nature upon him, as Abraham's Seed, with a Special Eye to the Elect, for he
passed by the Nature of Angels; and though it is true, that he took Flesh,
Humane Nature; yet he passed by the non-elect, and on the Seed of Abraham he
took hold, that is, of all Abraham's Spiritual Seed, as he says, I and the
Children thou have given me. The Apostle in that Second Chapter to the Hebrews,
Quotes that out of Isaiah, and brings it to prove the Covenant Relation that
was between Christ and the Elect; and forasmuch as the Children were partakers
of Flesh and Blood, he likewise himself took part of the same; by this Covenant
Relation we became Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh; as there is one
Body, as well as one Spirit; by virtue of this Covenant Relation, the elect
only receive Life and quickenings from Christ, as Head of the Covenant of
Grace; as the Father gave him to be Head to the Catholic or Universal Church,
the whole Body of election, ( Ephesians. 1.22, 23.) and then it follows, and you has
he quickened, (chap. 2. v. 1.) Thus I have spoke in a few words, something of
that Union, from whence flows Communion, which does not only precede Faith in
order of Nature, but in order of time also; and by virtue of which, we have the
Spirit that works Faith (in God's time) from Christ as our anointed Head, but
to return, by virtue of this Covenant Transaction, he was likewise under an
Obligation to bare all the Sins (by way of charge and Imputation) of all the
elect, in his own Body on, the Tree as their Covenant Head and Mediator, so he
stood Engaged, by Covenant Contract, from Eternity, to answer for them, to all
the demands of Law and Justice. ( John 10.18.) This Command have I received of
my Father, and ( John 12.50.) I know that his Command is Life everlasting. The
same Act of God's Grace, that made our Sins to meet on Christ, ( to Death as
the wages of Sin,) brought his Mediatorial Righteousness upon the Elect to Life
everlasting ( Romans 5.21. chap. 6 23.) By virtue of this Covenant Transaction,
it is made over to God's chosen, by a free Testament of Grace, in the Blood of
the New Testament, and comes upon them as a free gift of Righteousness ( Romans
5.18.) and we have Right to that Justifying Righteousness, as held forth in the
free and absolute promise, as elect Persons, being chosen in Christ, as the
elect head of this his free Testament; and the Testament it self gives Right,
and the elect are heirs of promise, as soon as they have a being, (not Natural
Heirs by descent, but Heirs by Grace, for what is freer than Gift?) God made
his Will in Eternity, and bequeathed Eternal Life to his adopted Children, that
were predestined to Sonship, acccording to the good pleasure of his Will, (
Ephesians. 1.5.) now this Testament of Grace in the Blood of Christ, made known and
Revealed by an absolute promise of Life ( Titus 1.2. taken from Genesis 3.15.)
this gives them right, and makes them Heirs of the promise of Life; and though
the Blessings given in this Testament be in the Sureties Hand, till the time
appointed of the Father, to be giving out successively, at the several times
appointed, first the Spirit of Faith, and then Sanctification gradually carried
on; and at last consummated in Glory; therefore to make one Blessing thereof to
be either Cause or Condition of the Rest, would be very improper, when all are
but parts of the same free gift; and that which gave them Right to one, gave
them Right to all; that which gave them a Right to Faith, before they did
receive it, gave them Right to Justifying* Righteousness before they had Faith;
and that was thefree Testament it self, in the Blood of Christ; then here lies
the Right of elect Persons, as such, to Justifying Righteousness in the Will it
self, as being by that absolutely settled upon all the Heirs of promise, by two
Immutable things, God's Promise and Oath; and add to this the Testator's Blood,
and shows all is firm, the elect have an Indefeasable Right, and are Heirs by
Grace, though Children of Wrath by Nature, as coming from fallen Adam's Loins.
So considered, their State is a State of Wrath, and liable and obnoxious to
God's eternal Wrath and Displeasure. That State strictly considered, but the
Persons of the elect, in this sinful fallen Estate; (...) are not objects of
God's Wrath, but objects of his great Immense God like-Love, even when they are
dead in sins, ( Ephesians. 2.4.) Faith makes not their Persons excepted, though it
does their Services; the exceptation of their Persons in the beloved, is a pure
Act of God's Sovereign Will, that will because he will, and will on whom he
will. Thus it appears, that the Elect are Heirs by Grace; and the Testament it
self, gives them Right to Eternal Life, as the free gift of God by absolute
promise, and to have Right to Eternal Life: and all the Blessings of the
Testament of Grace, by Blood, and to be under the condemning Power of the Law,
are plain contradictions, as being opposite one to the other. But if any say,
they have nothing in present possession; I answer, if they have Right to
Justifying Righteousness, that is enough to free them from Curse, and Wrath, in
the sight of God's satisfied Justice. For there can be no Right, except God
counts it so; and if he counts it so, that is enough to Justify us in his
sight; for this Righteousness is without us, and is not communicated, but
imputed; and Christ as Mediator is the subject of this Righteousness: but
however, the Elect have a proper Right to Sanctification, and Glorification
before Faith. For there was a Grant to Christ, in the Eternal compact, he
performing all old Covenant Conditions, as head and Mediator; which when he had
performed, he entered into Heaven by his own Blood, having obtained Eternal
Redemption, ( Heb. 9.12.) what he obtained as our great Executor, and surety of
the Testament, was before granted: and he obtained it on the behalf of them for
whom it was granted. It pleased the Father to entrust him with all fullness of
Grace for the Elect, as their Covenant Head, that so it might be sure to all
the Heirs of Promise. The Father has made it as sure in Christ, the surety of
this Testament, as the Eternal God could make it, to speak with Reverence. Thus
I have been showing which way Sinners are made Righteous in a Mediator; and
though the Decree produced no immediate effect, yet it produced its timely
effects at that moment of time; the Law was broken, a Mediator stood Ready, as
foreordained to step in, and stand in the breach to keep off the flood of
Wrath from breaking out upon the Elect; always remember, the Law was put in the
Mediators hand, or else we make strange Work, and set the Law and Promise
together by the Ears: when the Law could not give life, it must march off as a
Covenant of Life or Death to God's chosen. Christ takes it in his own hand, and
makes it give way to the Promise. Now I shall come to speak something of the
Justifying Sentence, which pronounces the Elect Righteous in their Covenant
Head and Mediator, as grounded upon this preceding Act of Grace, by way of
Covenant Transaction between the Father and the Son, which brought our Sins
upon Christ, and his Mediatorial Righteousness upon us; and we are wholly
passive, both in our being made Righteous by Imputation, (which is an Act of
pure Grace in God to Sinners,) and likewise in our being pronounced Just, in
that Imputed Righteousness, which is a sentence of Grace, and passes in the
Court of Grace, Life by the free promise. Now in pronouncing the Sentence of
Life upon ungodly Law-breaking Sinners, God sits Judge of his own Law, as well
as the Elect Sinners Cause; and instead of pronouncing the Sentence of the Law
upon the Poor Sinner to Condemnation, God sits Inthroned upon a Mercy Seat, in
the Court of Grace reconciled in a Mediator; in whom Grace and Justice most
sweetly agree to pass the sentence of Eternal Life up on the Elect Sinner by
absolute promise ( Genesis 3.15. Titus 1.2. 1 John 2.25. This Sentence declares
God's Eternal Will, that Christ as Mediator was t^ die in elect Sinners Place;
and they t^ live by an Act of Sovereign Grace. Thus God, as a righteous Judge,
Justifies the Righteous only; that is, pronounces none but such Just, as are
so, ( Deuteronomy. 25.1.) and yet he Justifies the ungodly, not by dispensing with his
Holy Law, or making that void; but in a way of Justice, Magnifying and
Honoring his Law, declares an act of Eternal Grace; by virtue of which Act his
Elect did stand Righteous in his sight, by Imputation of one Man's Obedience,
to answer the Law in their place, as a Covenant Head, opposed to Adam's one
Disobedience, who was a figure of this second Adam, which was immediately to
take the first Adam's place (with Respect to God's chosen in him,) upon his
failoure. And it is Remarkable, that with respect to Christ's Mediatorship, God
comes in the cool of the Day, reconciled in him, and sounds the Jubilee Trumpet
from Heaven; and pronounced the sentence of Life, in the free promise, upon
Adam and all the Woman's Seed, (in a better Covenant Head than poor A dam was)
when he was recking hot in Rebellion, and had no Faith. For till the sentence
was past, there was no Grace, no Christ, no promise Revealed for fallen Man to
lay hold on; and the case must be the same still, for the object must precede
the Act: that is conversant about that object; and if Life were not revealed in
an absolute promise, there were no footing for Faith; for a conditional promise
is most properly a Law, He that does the thing required shall live. Thus Faith
is made void, and the free promise of none effect; for the first thing looked
to, must be the condition annexed to the promise, and then the promise claimed
upon that condition. Now suppose Faith be annexed to the Justifying sentence of
Life; then Justifying Righteousness, and eternal Life in the free promise, is
not the object of Faith; but Faith it self must first be looked to, and then the
promise pleaded upon Faith, as the condition of Life; but this is not the
Nature of Abraham's Faith, that took God upon his word, and staggered not at
the promise, nor considered not the unlikeliness, or seeming Impossibilities,
but believed God upon his Word, and the object of his Faith was counted to him
for Righteousness. Thus it is by Faith, as an empty Hand, or passive
Instrument, that receives all in the free promise, as pure Grace, and in no
sense, upon Faith, as a condition annexed to the sentence of Life. Yet I own,
that this or that Individual Person, is not declared to be a Justified Person,
and free from condemnation; but upon believing as no Individual Person is
declared to be elected, nor Redeemed, by the Death of Christ, but upon
believing. Yet the Scriptures do plainly declare, that some are elected, and
them are Redeemed, and what are the ill consequences that follow? if I say,
that Justice, does not charge these Redeemed ones, (but God is completely
reconciled to them by the Death of Christ) any more than the former. Will it
not amount to the same, to say some are ordained to Eternal Life, and Redeemed
with the Blood of Christ, as to say, God does not charge these Redeemed ones;
seeing we likewise affirm, that none know, that they are not under
Condemnation, before Believing, and that whoever dies an unbeliever, shall be
Damned; except any suppose, that Terrifying Soul with Curse and Condemnation,
be the most effectual way to bring them to Faith in Christ; and if so, I am not
in their Mind; and I am sure the Gospel ought to be Preached, and Grace
proclaimed. And I think it is the most effectual to propose the Truth, as the
object of Faith, which the Gospel does Reveal for Salvation; God's pardoning
Grace, in the Blood of Christ, and so Invite Sinners to come to God, as
reconciled in the bleeding Sacrifice of his Son Jesus. This it is that offends
some that have made the greatest Noise, (and have enfluenced others, which in
other words say the same things,) about words; and because they cannot so
directly strike at this free Invitation to Sinners, to come directly to Christ,
without their Previous Qualifications, (which strikes so directly at their Idol
self Righteousness) therefore they are pleased to brand the Doctrine of God's
free Justifying Grace with Nicknames at their pleasure. And I wish that some,
which see otherways, be not frightened from owning the Truths they believed, and
received in the light of God's Holy Spirit, for fear of being laden with
Calumnies, and Reproaches; for it is a trying time, and I do be-believe, that
those that are kept close to Christ, in owning the simplicity of the Gospel,
shall meet with as great Trials as those that have gone before us; for Christ
will shake the Earth and the Heavens, and remove those things that are made,
and Burn up the Hay, Wood and Stubble. Therefore let every Man take heed what
he builds, though upon the foundation of Christ, ((...) Cor. 3.12.) But to
return to the Point in Hand, there be various sentences, and in various Courts,
where and by which God declares the non-Imputation of Sin to his Elect; and all
sentences of Court whatsoever, do but declare God's Act of Grace in that Court
where the sentence is pronounced; and the last add final sentence will be at
the great Assizes, when Christ will publicly, before Men and Angels, pronounce
them blessed. Yet to conclude with some, that they were not completely
Justified till then, would be great darkness; so though God in his Word, does
pronounce Believers Justified, yet it will no more follow, that they were not
Justified before, than the former; if things be rightly weighed; for this makes
Faith a moral Condition of Justification, as has been shown already, and also
denies Justification, to be by the new Covenant, or makes the Covenant of Grace
conditional, (and that in a strict sense, denies Faith to be a part of the
Covenant Blessings,) but that Justification is by the Covenant of Grace. Few do
directly deny, and I am as certain, as I am certain that the Scriptures are
true, that the first pronounced sentence of Life to Sinners, is by that
Covenant ( Gen 3.15.) And it is according to the Tenor of that Covenant, for
there are but two Covenants (or Courts) where the pronounced sentence of Life
can be supposed to pass; but by the works of the Law, No Flesh shall be
Justified, ( Romans 3.20.) then is must be according to the Tenor of the
Covenant of Grace; if that be an absolute promise of Life, then the sentence is
an absolute sentence, but that is an absolute promise of Life; ( Genesis 3.15.
Titus 1.2. 1 John 2.25.) Therefore the sentence is an absolute sentence, past
in the Court of Grace, upon all the Woman's Seed in their Covenant Head, (in
direct opposition to the Serpents seed, upon the Serpent and his Seed the Curse
takes place, having no Mediator to make up the breach,) and the promise in,
Christ takes hold of the Elect as soon as they have a being ( Romans 9.13.) Then
except it can be proved, that the sentence that passes upon believing, be
according to the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace; it will be in vain for to
contend, for that to be the first sentence of Life that is past upon an elect
Person. But I deny, That believe in the Lord Jesus and thou shall have Life, or
be Saved, is the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace; it is a part of the New
Testament Ministry, but not the Tenor of the New Covenant. Then seeing there
is no Law given that can give Life, ( Gal. 3.21.) then prove that the Covenant
of Grace i^ conditional, or grant that the ^^otence of Life is absolute; or
deny that the Justifying Sentence of Life, passes according to the Tenor of
that Covenant; and then it will lie upon you to prove, by what Covenant we are
Justified. But leaving this, that which I desire your answer to, is these
following Questions, which I desire you would answer to each particular
distinctly, as you tender the Truth, and the Glory of Christ; and respect my
good, and the good of others, by clearing up the Truth, that the simplicity of
the Gospel may be preserved by God's Special help and protection.

Question I.
DID the Chosen of God, which were loved with an everlasting and unchangable
Love, when they fell in Adam into Sin, by the breach of the Law; equally with
others; Did they then come under the same condemning Power of the Law, and
under the same Curse and Wrath of God, equally with the non-elect whilst on
Earth? If not the very same, show where it differs, and then, it may be, we
agree in the main, though differ in expressions. But if the very same, Then,

Question II.
HOW can they be under the Curse and Wrath of God, and suffer here on Earth, in
that state, (as the effects of Sin, and consequently of the Curse, whilst under
it) and not penal, as part of the punishment due to Sin? Though not Hell it
self, yet something of the same Nature, (though not the same degree;) because
not under the Justifying sentence of Life, past in the New Covenant. Therefore
the Curse of Afflictions, not taken away, they are no corrections in a Covenant
way; but properly punishment, in Wrath, as taken in a strict Sense. Then,

Question III.
HOW can this stand with that perfect atonement made by our high Priest's own
Oblation? or does it not exceedingly derogate from that perfect satisfaction he
made to Justice, and his complete filling up the Law, by Mediatorial Obedience,
( Heb. 10. v. 10, 12, 14. and chap 9, v. 12.26.) Again,

Question IV.
DOES not this imply a change in God, for there is a mighty change some where,
that one that stands condemned in God's sight, and under his Curse and Wrath,
having all his Sins charged upon and Imputed to him by God himself, should be
the very next moment, upon believing, not charged with one Sin, but received
into the Favor of God, as perfectly and completely Righteous in God's sight?
Now the change is not in the voice of the Law, for that neirespects believers
nor unbelievers, Elect or Non-elect, but equally Curses all that continue not
in all things, that are written to perfection, ( Deuteronomy. ^^.26) then it is not
that imperfect ^^ange, wrought in believers, that can ^^n the sentence of the
Law, that it ^ould not Curse and Condemn them, ^^at are in themselves sinful
and imper^^ct. Therefore I see not, but that ^^ou must make the change to be in
^^od, that counts the Mediatorial Obe^^ience of Christ, answered the Law (...)
our place, now and not before; ^^cept you can find a milder Law, that
^^onounceth the sentence of Life, upon this imperfect change wrought in ^s, as
the condition annexed to the ^entence of Life. And if so, Then,

Question V.
HOW will you deny, that conditionality of the Covenant of Grace, and that
Faith is the Condition hereof; for if Justification be by the New Covenant,
then the sentence (...) Life must be according to the Teno^^ of the Covenant.
Then if that be a^ absolute promise of Life (as Titus 1.^ compared with 1 John
2.25.) the (...) the Justifying sentence of Life, must b^ absolute, as past
upon all God's chose^ in Christ their Covenant-Head, ( Ge^^ 3.15. chap. 22 18,
compared wit^ Gal. 3.16, 17, 18.) otherwise the Covenant must be Conditional,
an^ Faith must be the Condition thereof (...) and consequently no part of the
Covenant Grace, because not promised there in. For if the first Grace be
promised then the promise must be absolute t^ Sinners, as such, as the price of
the Blood of the great Testator. Again*

Question VI.
WHY do you set the Seal of the Covenant of Grace upon the infinite seed of
Believers, seeing before ^aith, they are in no fence under the ^entence of
Life, past in that Covenant promise (though I grant that God is ^t liberty to
show his Sovereignty, (...) in Abraham's Family) if the promise ^e not Real and
absolute, (at least to ^ome) as to the Internal part thereof, that God is their
God by Covenant ^tomise? Then the Seal of the Covenant is vain, (or only holds
forth external privileges) and consequently believing Parents have no grounds
for their Faith, that God is the God of their seed by Covenant promise. Again,

Question VII.
Does God pronounce any Just, but such as are so in his sight, by Imputation?
If not, then making over a Righteousness to elect Sinners in a Mediator, must
be taken in to God's Justifying Act, as well as the pronounced sentence, which
is grounded upon this Act of Grace, in a way of Justice; because God, as
Righteous Judge, Justifies ungodly Law-breaking Sinners, as clears them from
the voice of the Law, as to the condemning power thereof, by a righteousness
without us, by Imputation. Then that Act of God's Grace, that turns the
sentence of the Law upon Christ, the spotless Lamb, by imputing our Sins to
him; and turns the sentence of Law, as to its Condemning power, from Guilty
Law-breaking Sinners, by imputing his Mediatorial obedience to them; comes into
Justification, as well as the pronounced sentence, that declares this Act of
Grace, by which the Sinner stands clear in a way of Justice. For all sentences
of Court, according to Justice, are grounded upon some preceding Act; according
to which Act the sentence is Just, and the sentence Justifies, as it declares
the Act by which they stand clear. Again,

Question VIII.
WHat is God's Act of Imputation, by which he makes that Law Change of Persons,
which sets Christ, as Mediator, under the Curse and Condemning power of the
Law, ( Gal. 4. verse 4. chap. 3. verse 13. compared) though in himself
spotless? and sets elect Sinners under the Blessings of the New Covenant ( Gal.
3. v. 14. as the immediate effects of his Mediatorial obedience, though in
themselves, and with respect to the Law, ungodly Sinners? The Apostle speaking
of this Sovereign Act of God ( Romans 4.5.) says, God Justifies the ungodly:
Then brings in David, describing it, by imputing Righteousness without works
(which is the Grounds Grounds of his not imputing Sin; and consequently the
Grounds of his pronouncing them Just,) This he brings in, as the Quintessence
of God's Justifying Act; now if this Sovereign Act, that makes this Law change
of Persons, and turns the Condemning sentence of the Law, from the guilty
Lawbreaking Sinner, to the spotless Lamb, be not an Act of God's Sovereign
Will, as Imminent and Internal, then I desire you would undeceive me, and show
plainly, what manner of Act it is; for I take God's Will to be the Rule of all
Justice, and things are therefore Just, because he Wills them; and as it was
his Will, that the breach of his Law should be punished with Eternal Death (and
he would by no means clear the guilty, ( Exo. 34.7.) so it was his Will, that
this spotless Lamb should stand Guilty, as Mediator, by way of Imputation, and
should mediate between a broken Law and his Chosen ones; and stand between all
Harms and them. And I humbly conceive, that in this Act of imputing our Sins to
Christ, and his obedience (as Mediator) to us, God respects no manner of
inherent change in us. Again,

Question IX.
WHen does the Mediatory undertakement of Christ, first take place for an Elect
Person? If when we believe, and not before, then Christ Intercedes not for the
Elect uncalled, which is contrary to the Scripture ( Jo. 17.20.) Christ's
Mediatorship is figured out in the Type ( Deuteronomy. 5.5.) I stood between the Lord
and you, says Moses, when the Law was given upon Mount Sinai. And ( Deuteronomy.
10.5.) I came down from the Mount, and put the Tables in the Ark, and there
they be, as the Lord Commanded me. Compare this with ( Gal. 3.19, 20, 21.)
there he shows that the Law, in the Mediator's Hand, made the promise take
place upon the seed of Abraham, Jews, and Gentiles; Which was the Gospel God
preached to Abraham, and to Adam too; as Law and promise meet in Christ, they
sweetly agree, Christ being delivered up to Justice, for all the Elect, in
their Law-place. Who can charge them? says Paul, God Justifies them, Christ
died and is Risen again, and received to God's Right Hand, and there pleads (
Romans 8.33, 34.) his plea, as an Advocate, is mighty and prevailing; as he
pleads his propitiatory Sacrifice, as the propiciation of the Elect World, Jew
and Gentle, (1 Jo. 2.2.) Thus he pleads out all Bills of Indictment whatsoever
out of Court; and his atoneing Blood was Efficacious from the very moment Adam
fell. He is called a Lamb slain from the foundation of the World, ( Rev. 13.8.)
he was not actually slain, neither do I understand it in the Decree only, but
by virtue of the Decree, his Blood was Efficacious, from the first moment Adam
fell: Had it not been for this, fallen Man had never had a free promise of
Life, nor yet of Faith; but had been under the Curse, and there must have lain;
which were the case now, if Christ did not mediate by Blood, for those that
were unconverted; which makes the promise absolute. For if the Elect uncalled,
be not under the promise in Christ, as Mediator of this better Covenant to
them; then they must be strictly under the Law, (as some affirm) as a Covenant
of Works, and have no promise, but what that Covenant affords them, till Faith;
and where they shall have that, if not under the absolute promise in Christ as
Mediator, I see not but they are under the Curse, and there must lie. Again,

Question X.
WHAT is the Gospel tender to Sinners, if all Sinners are under God's Curse and
Wrath whilst unconverted? Who dare then to proclaim Peace, in the King's Name,
to a Company of Law-breaking Sinners, and Rebels? Who dare then to proclaim
Liberty to Captives, and the opening the Prison to them that are bound, or
cause the Jubilee Trumpet to sound, if the atonement be not completely made by
our High Priests atoning Blood? see ( Lev. 25.9.) in the Day of atonement, you
shall cause the Trumpet of the Jubilee to sound, and proclaim Liberty. This
argues that the Blood of Christ was Efficacious from the fall of Adam, when the
Law was broken; this Blood pleaded in the Eye of Justice, in the sight of God
there was an atonement by virtue of the Covenant Contract; and God himself
sounded the Jubilee Trumpet from Heaven, and Preached Peace and Pardon in the
free promise by a Mediator; who by ^od's appointment, was to stand in the Gap,
and make up the breach of a broken Covenant, which was all along held forth in
the Sacrifices. Now if the atonement be not completely made by our
High-Priest's own offering; then the Tipe held forth more than was in the
Antitipe. ( Lev. 16.30.) If Wrath be not appeased, and God Reconciled, in a
bleeding Sacrifice to Sinners, as such, How then can the Gospel be a Message of
Peace, by Jesus Christ, to Jews and Gentiles? ( Acts 10.36.) If God be not
Reconciled in the atoning Blood of Jesus to elect Sinners, as such; then they
are under no absolute promise of Faith, and a new Heart, and the Spirit,
Sanctification and Glorification, as the price of his Blood, to confirm this
free Testament, whereof he is the surety, ( Heb. 7.22.) If not, then Christ
^^th only purchased a remote Reconcilibility in God, and God will be Reconciled
to Sinners, when they believe, (which I suppose would be never if the case were
so.) Then it follows, that Sinners are called to believe in Christ, that so
God's Curse and Wrath might be done a way, and God become Reconciled, and at
Peace with them, and Pardon their Sins, and except their Persons. This looks
like a new Law, but I think no milder than the old Law, for who will believe in
an Angry God, or can, for Pardon, if God Reconciled in the Blood of Christ, be
not that which Faith takes hold on, then I mistake; but I am well satisfied,
that those that are Orthodox and sound in the main, say the same in other
words, which amounts to this, That the Elect are under the absolute promise of
a new Heart, of the Spirit, Sanctification, and the like, as the purcha^^ of
Christ's Blood, And why not Justification? for you will own, that Go^^
pardoning Grace, and the Justifying Righteousness of Christ, is the object of
Faith, and not Wrath and Condemnation directly.

FINIS.

