A FEW THINGS OF Great Weight, OFFERED To the Consideration of all Sober
People, and to Friends of Truth more Particularly: With Relation to their Early
Care and Christian Endeavor to Season the Minds of their Children whilst they
are Young; with the Sense and Savor of the Spirit of Truth.

O Lord, I know that the Way of Man is not in himself, it is not in Man that
walks to direct his Steps, Jer. 10.23. By Richard Vickris.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street, and at the Bible in Leaden Hall-Street,
1697.

A few Things of great Weight, etc.
THis Way of Man is the Way that God has appointed him to Walk in, and it is a
High Way of Holiness and Happiness in God, that is, in his Divine Nature, Will
and Spirit, and is Opposed to the Low Way of Sin and Imperfection that is in
Man's self, Respecting his Corrupt Fleshly Will, Mind and Spirit: In each of
these VVays there is a Law or Power, the one of Spirit and Life, the other of
Sin and Death; under this Law of Sin and Death all Men have been Concluded, for
as much as all have Sinned and fallen short of the Glory of God; that is, they
have chosen their own Way, and followed the Thoughts and Devices of their own
Hearts, which has proved to be a Way of Folly and Misery, and still continues
so to be, whatever otherwise Man may think in his Earthly Sensual Wisdom,
being in Captivity under the Law and Power of Sin and Death that Rules in him;
in this State many are whole and at ease in a Self-security, having given up
themselves to be Subjects to that Kingdom, seeks not, nor desires any other.
But there are others, who, having heard the Call of God, are awakened to a
sight and sense of their Condition, and oftentimes Laments themselves, and cries
and seeks for a Deliverer; and of these there is some hopes, because a
Deliverer is come out of Zion to turn away Ungodliness from Jacob; that is,
from him that wrestleth for a Blessing: This Deliverer is Christ the Lord, of
whose coming all the Holy Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles bore-witness, who
said, The whole needs no Physician, but those that are Sick; I am not come to
Call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance.

Now this Deliverer (to wit) Christ, is that Way of Man spoken of by the
Prophet Jeremiah (viz.) That High Way of Holiness and Happiness in God, Isa.
35.8.
which leads from the Earthly to the Heavenly, from the Kingdom of Satan to his
own Blessed Kingdom with his Father; and this Way is his Divine Nature
Manifested as a Law and Power of Spirit and Life in us.

Now though we are awakened to a sense of our Condition, and groans and longs
for Deliverance, we cannot obtain it in our own Way and Will, for the Way of
Man is not in himself, it is not in Man that walks to direct his Steps, we
must wait to feel our Deliverer to work in us, and for us, of his own good
Will and Pleasure, Directing us by his Law, and Inabling us by the Power of
his Spirit, to work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling; so that it is
not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows Mercy; we
are Exhorted so to run, that we may obtain according to the Apostles saying,
Though all run, but one Receives the Price, 1 Cor. 9.24. This one is the True
Believer (Personated in one, viz. Christ his Head) whose Hope, Trust and
Confidence is in his Helper and Deliverer; it is written in Isaiah 28.16. Thus
says the Lord, Behold I lay in Zion for a Foundation, a Stone, a Tried Stone,
a Precious Corner Stone, a sure Foundation; he that Believes shall not make
haste. This sure Foundation, precious Corner Stone, is our Blessed Lord Christ;
happy are all they that come to him, build upon him, and abide with him that
never fails.

Thus we may observe two ways known by their differing Powers and Natures, the
One Christ, the Kingdom of God in our Minds; the other, Satan in our Fleshly
Wills or Members; the one Light, the other Darkness, the one High and Holy,
the other Low and Sensual.

Now all that have heard the Call of God, and have believed therein, and are
awakened unto Righteousness, that is, have a Spiritual Sense and Feeling of
God, must come out of this low sensual Way of Self and Self-working; and
instead of being led and acted by their own Natural Powers of Fleshly Will and
Wisdom in which Satan Builds, they must come down to this sure Foundation,
viz. Christ in them, and feel the Power of his Life to Lead and Act them; that
is, they must incline their Minds Inwardly unto his Divine Word of Faith and
Law of Spirit and Life in them, which is Quick and Powerful, etc. and is a
Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart, whereby their Souls were
first quickened and made alive, and Faith wrought in them, by which Faith the
Spiritual Senses of the Soul are Exercised toward God, whereby they see him
that is Invisible, by which the Holy Ancients endured, and did all those mighty
things made mention of in the Author to the Hebrews, Having an Eye to the
Recompense of Reward; and this Faith being thus wrought in them, by the
Operation of God, must be daily kept to, and in, that they may know and witness
a dividing betwixt Soul and Spirit, betwixt the Soul and its old Natural and
Sensual Power of working in its Fleshly Will and Wisdom in which the Devil
Rules; and its New and Heavenly Power; which it receives by Faith through the
Impression of the Divine Nature of Christ therein; which as the Soul comes to
behold, it will be Affected with its Beauty; and keeping in the Love thereof,
will witness a being changed into its likeness from one Degree of Glory to
another; and so the old comes to be put off, and the new Man put on, which is
Created after the Image of God in Righteousness and true Holiness; these things
are of great Weight and Concern to all that are true Travelers toward God's
Heavenly Kingdom of Rest and Peace, to Experience in themselves; for want
whereof many have been held in sore Bondage and Captivity, under hard Labor
and Servitude many Years, and have not been able to attain to what their Souls
have long Desired and Traveled for (viz.) Spiritual Freedom and Deliverance
from Sin and Death, because they have not been Rightly Exercised in striving,
whilst out of the Faith, which alone can give the Victory, and without which
it is impossible to please God; such instead of attaining to the divine
Knowledge of the Truth, have attained only to a Notion and Comprehension
thereof in their Earthly Minds, who have not waited to Receive it by Faith into
a Spiritual renewed Mind and Heart; which Faith is the Gift of God, and is
wrought by him through the Quickening of the Soul to an Exercise of Spiritual
Sense and Feeling of the Power and Virtue of his Truth, by which alone the Soul
is made Capable of receiving the true Knowledge thereof, and a fit Vessel to
retain it. So here is a difference between a Living and Spiritual Knowledge,
and a Dead, Natural, Fleshly Knowledge: The one gives Victory, the other leads
into, and leaves in Bondage; the one is attained by Faith into a New and
Spiritual Life, the other is gathered by a Fleshly Sense and Comprehension into
the old corrupt Nature, which is not the proper Organ of Reception of the True
and Saving Knowledge of God, and the things that appertain to his Heavenly
Kingdom, It Is the old Bottle that is not fit for the New Wine of the Kingdom;
Make the Tree Good, said Christ, and his Fruit Good; or else make the Tree
Corrupt, and its Fruits Corrupt. Of one of these all are, and accordingly must
be Denominated, and the Tree is known by its Fruits; we were all by Nature of
the Corrupt Tree, or Wild Olive, and cannot be made good, but by being cut off
and Grafted anew, contrary to Nature, into the good Olive Tree, which is Christ
Jesus, the Root and Offspring of David, the Bright and Morning Star, the Alpha
and Omega, the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles: Who, being thus
inwardly Experienced and Acknowledged to be laid by God in Zion, a Sure, Elect
and Precious Corner Stone, the Way, the Truth and Life, according to his own
Blessed Testimony of himself in John 14.6. and that no Man comes to the Father
but by him: The Completing of all our Happiness consists in coming unto him,
abiding with him, or building upon him; for as Christ said, Without me ye can
do nothing, John 15.5. It is not in Man that Walks to direct his Steps, Jer.
10.23. And if a Man cannot direct his own Steps aright, how shall he direct the
Steps of others, which leads me to Express something that Lives and Rests upon
my Spirit to Friends of Truth, Concerning the Discharge of our Christian Care
and Duty toward others, more particularly our Tender Offspring, from a true
Sense of the strict Relation that Exercise necessarily has to a Spiritual
Ability from God, to a right Performance thereof.

And therefore, Friends, more particularly you who are Parents of Children, a
few things has opened in my Mind, to Recommend to your Consideration, touching
this great Duty of Educating our Children in the Love and Fear of God, by the
Power and Influence of his Blessed Truth: We know God has so Manifested his
Light and Truth in us, that the Devil has not been able to Extinguish it, or
Obliterate the Certain Sense and Experimental Knowledge of its Testimony in our
selves: And therefore he has, and does use his utmost Endeavor to do it in
our Offspring, and deprive them of the Benefit of our Faith, by lessening our
Zeal for the Truth; and thereby our Spiritual Love and Care for them, and by
this means he hopes to obtain his end in the succeeding Generations, viz. to
lay waste the Blessed Testimony thereof in the Earth; but our God beholds his
secret Workings, and does, and will open the Eyes of his Children and People,
to see and escape his Snares, and enable them to Resist and Disappoint all his
Wicked Purposes against his Flock and Heritage, who has all Power and
Sufficiency to do whatsoever pleases him, and will Accomplish his Will in all
those that Love and Fear him, now henceforth and for ever. Such is the Power
and Prevalency of the Truth, that as in the Days of Christ's Appearance in the
Flesh, the Devils were subject, and made to confess to him; so has it been in
our Day: But the Righteous then were Exhorted, not to Rejoice therein, but
rather that their Names were written in the Lamb's Book of Life; and so it is
now: And this is the Souls only Happiness, Fortress, and Security from Danger
for ever.

Now hereinto we must all come and abide for our selves, and hereby (as we
ought) we shall be enabled to be helpful to others, especially our tender Off
spring that God has Blessed us with, whom he Loves and Delights to do good
unto; and for that end has bestowed them upon us, and given us the Knowledge
of his Truth, that we may Minister it to them, and present them to God thereby;
that is, by the Power and Virtue of his Truth, to season their Hearts and Minds
with the Love and Fear of God, as is said before, in their tender Years, that
as they grow up they may be fitted and prepared to meet the Lord, and to know
him in themselves, by the sweet Influences of him through us their dear
Parents, and so shall we be Instrumental to bring them unto Christ, who said,
Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mar. 10.14.

Now this is a Spiritual Work, and therefore requires a Spiritual Capacity and
Ability, Rightly to perform it, and this Capacity is not of Man, nor in the
Will and Time of Man, but of God; and therefore to be sought for, and waited
for from him, from whom every Good and Perfect Gift comes, and in whose Hand
are the Times and Seasons: And unless we are thus Exercised and Qualified,
whatever other Abilities of Wisdom and Knowledge we have attained to, and are
exercised in, we shall fall short of a right Performance of this great Duty
toward our Children, of begetting them to God; it was a right Conclusion in
Solomon, Expressed in his Prayer to God for Wisdom; viz. Though a Man be never so
Perfect amongst the Children of Men, yet if thy Wisdom be not with him, he
shall be nothing Regarded, Book of Wis. 9.6. All our Power and Sufficiency to
act and do for God, is of him, and from him, how then can we do the Work of the
Spirit without the Spirit of God? It is the Spirit of God that begets to him,
and if we are not begotten thereby, or do not continue therein, how can we
perform the Works thereof which are Spiritual, surely none can? Flesh and
Spirit are contrary each to other, and have differing Powers as well as Fruits
and Effects; and the Tree is known by its Fruits, if the Tree be Corrupt, the
Fruits will be Evil; and though the Cry should be Lord, Lord, it will not give
an entrance into Christ's Kingdom, if the Will of his Father be not done, which
is in Heaven, no more will the Doctrine of Truth, Truth beget to God, unless it
spring from the Life and Power of Truth in our selves; that is, unless we so
Live as to obtain entrance into God's Kingdom for our selves; how shall we help
to bring our Children thereinto: No, on the contrary, if our Fruits be Evil,
our Tree is Corrupt and hinders them, For he that is not of me, said Christ, is
against me, and he that gathers not with me, scatters abroad: And of such
it may be truly said, they suffer not their Children to come unto Christ that
he might Bless them, and though not in Words, yet by their Deeds they forbid
them; and so are unlike the Blessed Example of Abraham, the Father of the
Faithful, of whom it was said, Genesis 18.19. I know him that he will Command his
Children and his Household after him, and they shall keep the Way of the Lord,
etc. Whereby we may observe, that Abraham's Care, in this Respect, was attended
with the Word of Faith, which was a Word of Power and Command, which had a
Blessed Effect, and was the Reward of his Faithfulness to God; and if we be
like-minded, and follow his Example, the Lord will be with us to Abilitate and
Furnish us for the Effecting the same good Work by us, which Spiritual Ability
from God, is my Earnest Desire we may all wait upon him for, who has Promised
to give his good Spirit to them that ask him.

And now as the State of little Children, it may be the Opinion of some, that
they are not Capable of receiving the Help and Benefit of their Parents Faith,
by Reason of their Infancy, or small Age and Time; and hence may be the more
Indifferent, as to an Early Care for their coming to Christ, not considering
them as fit Members of his Kingdom: But seeing our Lord Christ, in the Days of
his Flesh, has taught us otherwise by his own Blessed Example, in the Case of
the little Children; which according to Luke 18. were Infants that was brought
unto him, when he came into the Coasts of Judea beyond Jordan, Mat. 19.13. and
Mar. 10.13. That he might lay his Hands upon them, or touch them; we Read not
that it was for any outward Infirmity they had; wherefore Christ's Disciples
(not seeing into the Mystery of the Lord's Ways and Doings) Rebuked them that
brought them; which, had they been Diseased, we may suppose they would not have
done, because we find not that they did it in such Cases to those of Riper
Years. But when Jesus saw it, it is said in Mark 10. he was much displeased,
and said unto them, Suffer the little Children to come unto me, and forbid them
not, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven: Verily I say unto you, whosoever
shall not receive the Kingdom of Heaven as a little Child, he shall not enter
therein: Which Saying of Christ is of great Weight, and carries deep
Instruction to us, if duly Considered. It plainly Teaches, not only that
Children are Capable of Receiving the Kingdom, and that their Way of Receiving
is Right; but that there may be a wrong Way of Receiving of it by those of
Riper Years, which shuts out of the Kingdom. It therefore greatly Concerns us
all, Rightly to Consider how little Children Receives the Kingdom, that we may
prove and try our selves thereby: We all know that little Children are not very
Capable of Exercising the Rational Faculty of their Souls; consequently are not
so Capable, after that manner, to receive the Kingdom, whence we may infer,
they had another, better, and more excellent Way of Receiving it, seeing their
Way is Commended to us for an Example; for though it be granted, that the
Knowledge we attained to, by the right Exercise of our Senses and Reason, as we
grow in Years, is as a Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ; yet the Right
Receiving of him, is by, and into a New and Spiritual Life, that is begotten
and quickened in the Soul by him.

Now as the Souls of Men and Women are Capable of this New Life, so are the
Souls even of little Children, being of the same Excellent Frame, according to
Measure, and are endured with a more Divine Capacity of Knowledge, than what
is, or may be attained to, by the Rational Faculties only, and that is the
Capacity of its New Life it Receives from Christ, as in a Seed which gives us
Spiritual Sensation of the Visits and Touches of the Spirit, which Influences
and Opens the Spiritual Eye and Ear, to See and Hear a Beauty and Harmony in
the Divine Nature, and Original Good, which is God; whereto they, viz. Little
Children, may be Excited by the Communication of Spirit, in the Reaches forth
of the Love and Life of Truth Ministerially and Instrumentally to them, before
they are either Capable of receiving Instruction by Word or Doctrine, or giving
an Account of that Beautiful Image of Light, and Life, and Truth, they see and
feel in their Minds; and this is in a good Measure to be seen and observed in
some very little Children, and is the Work of God upon them, and the Way they
Receive his Heavenly Kingdom, by Participation of the Blessing of the Divine
Nature and Spirit of Christ for it is said Mark 10.16. That Christ took the
little Children up in his Arms, put his Hands upon them, and Blessed them. Here
it may be observed, that we Read not that Christ spoke any Words unto them; it
is Probable they were not Capable of Receiving much Instruction that Way, and
yet were Capable of Receiving the Blessing of his Spirit, and the Kingdom
therein: And if this was, is, and may be so with little Children, how much more
Sensibly ought it to be Witnessed and Experienced by those of Riper Years. But
if we who are attained to the fullness of Years, and extent of the Exercise of
the Rational Powers and Faculties of our Souls, shall content our selves with
what we can gather in, of the Convictions of Truth upon our Understandings, and
not Receive the Kingdom thus as little Children, by the Visits and Touches of
Jesus, which quickens our Souls to God, whereby we come to be Regenerated and
Born again of his Spirit, and made Partakers of his Divine Nature, we can in no
wise enter into the Kingdom God; and if we enter not the Kingdom our selves,
how shall we be helpful to bring our Children thereinto? No, we cannot; but, as
I said before, are hinderers of them.

Great has been, and is, the Disadvantage, that the Children of many Friends
have and do ly under, for want of the Spiritual Help of their Parents Faith and
Exercise therein toward God for them, especially for the first Times and Years
of their Life, wherein they are Capable of Receiving early Impressions of Good;
and for want thereof, the Evil many times takes place, and fills their Minds,
and Renders them more Unfit and Incapable for a Right Receiving of the Kingdom
of God; for as they grow in Years, they grow and increase in Natural
Understanding, and Exercises of their Rational Powers and Faculties, and get
into a Comprehension or Notion of the Truth, which if it be not accompanied
with a Divine and Spiritual Sense and Feeling of the Love and Life of God in
the Innermost part of the Soul, and a Real Conformity thereunto; though they
may Receive the outward Knowledge of the Truth in the First Birth, and grow
Rich and Wise in Profession, they do, and will fall short of entering into
God's Kingdom: And this is the Case of too many of Friends Children Professing
the Truth; who, perhaps, make an outward Show of Conformity thereto, but do not
Receive it into the Right Ground, the Good and Honest Heart; so bring not forth
Fruit to God's Glory, by which alone the Entrance is obtained into the Kingdom.

Having Premised these things concerning Children, and the necessity of a Right
and Spiritual Frame in their Parents, for their Profitable Education, I
tenderly Recommend it to all Friends that have Families of Servants and
Children, that they seek the Lord, and wait upon him for Wisdom and Spiritual
Ability in themselves, that they may be enabled to reach to that Degree of Soul
in their Servants and Children, wherein God is felt and witnessed to Appear and
Work for their Redemption and Salvation; I have already showed what that is,
viz. The Souls New and Spiritual Life in God.

That which I have further to Communicate and Recommend, and has been long
upon my Mind, for a Remedy to help forward the Work of the Lord in the Souls of
all both Parents and Children, has a strict Relation to Practice, and that is,

For as much as our Children are Capable of being Members of Christ's Kingdom
by coming unto him; let us use all our Endeavor to bring them to him, that he
may lay his Holy Hand upon them, and Bless them, and that whilst they are
little.

And for as much as the right doing of this Requires a Spiritual Frame, and
Heavenly Capacity in us, who are Parents, as is before observed, and this
cannot be otherwise attained, unless God give it: Let us set apart some time to
wait upon him in our Families, and amongst our Children for this End, and the
Lord will Bless our Endeavors, if we be true and sincere to him therein, and
to Excite us the more to such Family-Meetings, Let us Consider who have great
Families of Servants and small Children (especially in the Country, where
Public Meetings of the Lord's People and Servants are frequently at great
Distances) that such small Children can rarely, if at any time, be present; by
which means the Opportunity and Benefit they should Reap by Meeting with their
Dear Parents, in the Assemblies of God's People, is for the first Years of
their Life lost, which, if duly Considered, is a great Disadvantage, with
Respect to its Consequence, both to Parents and Children; for as Iron sharpens
Iron, so does the Countenance of a Man his Friend; and if this be true in the
General, as is most certain, Must not the Heavenly Desire and Influences of
good Parents, in the Love of God, for and toward their tender Offspring, at
such Times and Seasons, be greatly Prevailing with him for a Blessing, and with
them to a Sense and Love of Truth (which Includes all that is Good) in their
tender Years, before the Impressions of Evil fill their Minds, as is before
observed, seeing they are and must be allowed to be Capable very Early of Good,
as well as of Evil Impressions? It is therefore tenderly Recommended, as a
Supplement to the afore-mentiond Defect, that such Parents do set apart some
time, as they shall see meet in the Wisdom of God, to meet with their Children
and Servants in their own Families, to wait upon him for the Blessing of his
Sweet and Comfortable Presence, to be with, and amongst them, which will Enable
them to give Instruction in Meekness and Wisdom, and Govern in Righteousness
and Truth, to the Quickening and Nourishing the tender Seed of God in their
Children, and Edification of all therein, to the Praise of his Name, that has
Called us; and to the Peace, Joy and Happiness of our Souls for ever.

And now, as to you little Children, the Offspring of Believing Parents, who
have but little Natural Knowledge, you are nevertheless Beloved of God, not
only because he Made and Created you, but for the sake of his only Beloved Son
Chirst Jesus, whom he sent into the World to save and deliver you from Sin and
Death, and thereby make you his Children; who also himself Loves you, in that
he gave himself to Dye for you, that he might Redeem you to God, whereby you
are beheld Innocent and Lovely in his sight, who delights to Bless you, and
knows how to Communicate to you Spiritual Knowledge, and make you fit for his
Kingdom, who said, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not,
for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Thus whilst you are Innocent, you are
Beloved of God and of Christ, and are also Beloved of his People, and are
Accounted and Esteemed of them good little Friends, if you continue in your
Innocence, and love God in your Minds, who have thus Manifested his Love to
you, though you can Speak but little of him, you may have a Sense and Feeling of
him by his Visits and Touches of you, by his Spirit, Life and Love in your
Souls, and you may see and behold him in his Appearance in your Parents and
others, whose Souls Loves God, and whose Minds are Inward and Spiritual to him,
they will have a Sweet and Heavenly Influence upon you, to a Love of
Spiritual-mindedness, Innocence, Meekness and Sobriety, with other Heavenly
Virtues, whereby you may come to know God, by these Fruits of his Spirit, and
Love him and his Appearance, and Manifestation of his Son Christ Jesus in you,
in Holiness, Righteousness and Truth, to the Sanctifying your Hearts and Minds,
that as you grow in Years, and increase in Natural Knowledge, you may grow and
increase in Divine and Spiritual Knowledge, by being made Partakers of the
Blessing of Christ that Quickens your Souls to God; so will your Parents take
Delight in you* as they find you thus to Delight in Go^ which will Incline you
to love all Opportunities to be with the Lord's People, to meet with them to
wait upon him, for the Visits and Touches of his Spirit, that you may know
Christ to come to you, and you to come to him, and to be taken up into his
Arms, and Receive the Blessing from him, who will delight to fill your Souls
with his Goodness, whereby your Love will be renewed to him, and you fitted for
his Heavenly Kingdom, and enter thereinto; that this may be the Care and
Portion of all God's People and Children; Is the Hearty Desire of your Friend
that Loves you, and Wishes the Welfare of all, both Parents and Children.

R. V.

ERRATA
Pag^ (...) Read Rules.

FINI^

