A VINDICATION of the Army, under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, with an
answer to several Objections made against them, etc.
INasmuch as God did sharply reprove and correct his, for keeping diverse
Statute, and Commandments, yea of kings, as appears Mica. 6. 16. 15. Hos. 5.
11. we learn that unlawful Commands are not to be obeyed, and that they who
are to obey them are to judge of the lawfulnes of them: So that if the
Magistrates Law or Command be contrary to God, or against the safety and
welfare of the people, the command is unreasonable, and ought not to be obeyed:
but the command of disbanding the Army at that time, was against the walfare
and safety of the kingdom appears by these Reasons. 1. Because it was not for
the safety of the Kingdom (it being divided into 3. parts) and unsatisfied and
ready to fall one upon another to preserve themselves. 2. The burdens and
oppressions of the kingdom were not removed. 3. Many well-affected in several
Counties have Petitioned them not to di^band. 4. The great expense of men, time
and treasuer, yea al their Victories should have come to nothing if they had
disbanded. 5. Their Commission required them to protect his Majesty's subjects
from violence and oppression. 6. The Parl. could not, or would not preserve the
Army from ruin and destruction (although they had preserved their lives) nor
secure them their Arrears: nature teaches to preserve it self, (especially
when none else will. 7. The whole Army were slighted, although they were the
means of saving the Kingdom from ruin and destruction: (yet they were judged
enemies.) 8. They suffered some of them to be hanged for obeying their
Commands: may they not expect the same when disbanded? 9. There was no safety
in trusting to the Parliaments words and votes, seeing they so differ from the
laws (of the Medes and Persians) if they would they could not keep them,
because they have lost the love of the people. 10. The well-affected were put
out of place; of trust, and il-affected put in, (which is a bad presage.) 11.
Al means with patience have been used, and nothing prevails, we have petitioned
for our rights and liberties, and they are so far from granting them: that they
condemn them to be burnt by the Hangman: some of us they imprison, by which
they fully declare, that they intend not the welfare and prosperity of this
nation, but to rule and overruled the people according to their wills and
pleasures, (which they call the Prerogative power, or privilege of Parliament.
12. Their principles are destructive, they say they may do what they please,
their wills are Laws, none may call them to account. 13. They are not wise
enough to preserve themselves, much less the Kingdom. 14. They have betrayed
their trust, and turned thieves and robbers. 15. They act contrary to the end
and intent of a Parl: they consider not the sighings of the prisoners; they
refuse to hear the complaints of the oppressed, and cries of the poor. 16. Their
votes hasten our destruction, by one Vote they would free us from all we have,
and make us absolute slaves: Iniquity runs down like a mighty stream, and they
judge them rebels and traitors that would stop it. 17. They redress not our
grievances, instead of removing them they increase them. 18. If the army had
disbanded the Parl. might have given them the same mercy they did the Kings
party, having them at advantage, stripped them of their estates, and imprisoned
them, leaving many who were rich, not enough to procure them horse bread and
water, (a practice most inhumane, and to be abhorred of Heathens) the mercies
of the wicked are cruel. 19. Although they have sat this 6. years, we are not
the better in respect of our oppression. 20. They abuse the whole kingdom, what
great sums have been raised by Pole-mony, Len^ing, Lone, diverse kind of
cesments, the twentieth and fifth part, Fortification money, Weekly meal, Free
quarter, Plundering, Composition, Customs, Excise, Bishops lands, Kings
revennues; some say half of the Land rents and revennues of the Kingdom have
been sequestered, and yet the Soldiers are not paid, nor the public debts;
Maimed Soldiers, Widows and Fatherless by war are not taken care for and
Recompensed: It Is conceived the State is cheated of more then 200000. l. yea,
and 100. times as much: the money there is so much of it gone beyond the seas,
that they want money, and must think of new ways for more, yet give no account
of that they have had; I condemn not all in the House, there are some good men
in the Parl. who are to be prised. Obj. The Armies demands are unreasonable.
Ans. None judge them so but ignorant and corrupt men. Obj. Their demands are
contrary to Law, and are a breach of the privilege of Parl. Ans. They seek to
remove our oppressions, and for justice against evil Members, and which nature
and Religion requires: and if there be any Statute that is against the welfare
and safety of the people, its better broke then kept: is it a privilege of
Parl. to protect evil men, that so they may be preserved to do us more
mischief, and destroy us, we know not how the Parl. came to have a privilege
to destroy us: are ye sure that these be the Parl.-men, that when the Parl.
began, did speak for the privilege of the people, and now are all for
privilege of Parl? Is it their privilege to preserve in authority and places
of trust tyrants, thieves and oppressors; if the Parl. and people differ
concerning their privileges; it is pity the sword should deside it; let it
rather be put to vote, and let the biggest vote carry it, the Parliaments vote
you know, people speak, what say you? Answ. We will not allow it, for we judge
it unreasonable to allow them to have a privilege to destroy us: corrupt men
will shelter themselves from trial, and under the notion of privilege of Parl.
Gentlemen, ye see its concluded by the major votes, that its no privilege Obj.
The Army and the rest of the Independents can turn for their own ends, they
were against the King and his party and the Bishops, and now they are for them
all. Answ. We were not against him, but against his proceedings (we hate
tyranny and oppression in all men) the late act of the King, in refusing, his
liberty, yea Crown, rather then to act contrary to his Conscience, has got him
much credit and love; it appears he dislike; oppression for matter of
Conscience, he showed more wisdom and Conscience in it, then all they did who
knew his judgment and yet would urge him: this his act makes us think he was
not so bad as the priests etc. reported, or else he is better then he was: and
as for his party, its apparent they are wronged, and are not like to be righted
by them (who have abused them) they have suffered enough for their mistake, for
my part (though I am none of them, yet) I think they ought to be let out of
prison, and to have their estates again, and enjoy as much liberty as others:
as for the Beshops our mind is not changed concerning their calling and
persecution, and had they not troubled us, we had not petitioned against them:
you know the Independents principle is, that Bishops and Presbyters should have
as much liberty as themselves: let each take his way, and be content to be
quiet, and let others alone, and do as we would be done to; al men cannot be of
one mind, and until men who differ in opinion may enjoy their estates and live
quietly, this Kingdom can have no peace. Obj. The Army speak well but they are
not to be believed. Answ. Then we may not believe any, they are Englands tried
friends, who have long endured the hardship and extremities of war, and often
hazarded their lives for the safety of this nation, such as condemn and
distrust them do ill require them. Obj. Many (yea the Priests) say, they will
kill and plunder us. Answ. they are full of delusions and lies; have the Army
ever done so? have they not been at Cambridge, Berry, Ipswich, etc. where there
is much treasure? yet did they not kill nor plunder any. Obj. Its not
reasonable to resist authority, and that with their Arms. Answ. They resist
not authority, but tyranny; the Arms are not theirs, but the Kingdoms who
paid for them. Obj. If the Army be friends to England, why do they not what
they intend quickly? Answ. I am credibly informed the Army cannot hasten more
then they do, they do more then you are aware on: do you judge them idle
because you do not see what they do? they are not ignorant that our oppessions
are great, and that the Kingdom is almost undone, and that our necessities will
admit of no delay: Rest satisfied, they prefer the Kingdoms safety and welfare
before their own lives; so that Gods command, Reason, Religion, Conscience,
their friends welfare and happiness, their own honor and safety, all calls upon
them to be harmless and active; they have caused the Parl. to reform something
already, we trust God will preserve them, and effect great things by them, and
cause them to be (as they have been) a blessing and comfort to this Nation.
Obj. But the Country is oppressed with them, etc. Answ. Then let the Country
help, and put the work to an end, and if the common soldiers will not be
ruled, the Country must help the Commanders to do it, who I hope, as they have
cause, so they will have a great care to see that none be oppressed and abused:
Let not the Army be all blamed for the fault; of a few, and perhaps
un-avoidable: if any of this Army commit a fault, the Kingdom is like to ring
of it, which will be a great grief to good men.

O England, England! what art thou? asleep or willing to be undone and inslaved
with your wives and children and posterity? can ye sit still and see that ye
are deluded, betrayed, oppressed, burdened and killed, do you not consider how
many of you suffer and languish in misery? is not the kingdom almost undone?
and yet the Scots are sent for, and the priests endeavor a new war against the
Army, that have been a means to preserve you: have you not had war enough? that
cost deer enough: would you have England like Germany? if we have more wars
this Kingdom will be quite undone: if you must fight, fight against them who
are your enemies, and not against your good friends: I trust you will not nor
cannot in reason nor conscience justice and honor, fight against them who have
sacrificed their lives for you, and endeavor the Kingdoms good: do you not
see the Parl. ref^se to remove your grievances (how long will thou suffer thy
self to be charmed (cheated) with fair words and promises of treacherous and
deceitful men: why then do you not remove them your selves: ye may be free if
ye will, be free now and ever, now or never, this is the seventh year, the year
of Jubilee, such as refuse freedom now deserve to have their ears bored, and to
be slaves for ever, Rise quickly (and it will be quickly done) or else your
liberties are quite gone, and iron chains locked on: will ye suffer your selves
to be so abused as ye are: the next time ye choose Parliament Men in many
places, they had need choose men more wise and faithful, and not as some have
done, choose fools and knaves, because they are great ones: they are not aware
of the wrong they do to themselves and the Kingdom by it.

Quest. Resolved, That the Parl. did secretly by their proceedings bid the army
not disband: that the Parl. has slighted more of their votes then the Army,
and that when necessity requires the soldiers ought to keep their ranks, and
follow their leaders; that the Parl. practices contradict their pretenses: that
they keep not their oaths, vows, protestations and promises, and therefore are
not to be regarded, much less trusted unto, that many of them deserve to be
thrust out of the house with contempt, as unworthy for ever to sit there more,
for their theft, treachery and perjury and betraying their trust: is it not
better for the Kingdom to have a Parl. every year, and that may sit but 6
months? So much for this time: Farewell.

It is desired that this be Set up, in Parish Churches, and Public places,
throughout this Kingdom and dominion of Wales, for their Information, etc.

The second Edition, corrected and enlarged. 1647.


