Vicissitudes Progress, WITH Its Convoy through the COUNTIES OF Essex, Kent,
Surrey, Sussex, AND Middlesex, To Westminster and to London.

By way of Premonstration.

1 Pet. 2.17. Fear God, Honor the King. Deuteronomy. 17.15. Thou shall in any wise set
a King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose.

Verse 16. But he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to
return to Egypt.

Verse 17. Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not
away: Neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.

Verse 18 And it shall be when he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that
he shall write him a copy of this Law in a book.

Verse 19. And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of
his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God.

LONDON: Printed for Laurence Chapman, and are to be sold at his shop, next
door to the Fountain Tavern in the Strand, near the Savoy. 1648.

Vicissitudes Progress: WITH Its Convoy through the Counties of Essex, Kent,
Surrey, Sussex, and Middlesex, to Westminster and to London.
THe mutation of things cause oblivion; yet Vicissitude seems to bring new
things into the world: But there is no new thing under the Sun, That which has
been, is, and that which is, will be hereafter; only by reason of the
mutability of men's minds, we think those things to be new which we have
forgotten to be before: All things descend, and mount again by changes, so as
in revolution of time, we receive that for new and good, which was a little
before thrust out as evil, and unsufferable: Such mutations cause Divisions,
Factions, Alteration in Religion, change of Government, and strange
Transmutations in States, Cities, Kingdoms and Empires. Men naturally seek
after Novelties, and so they desire Ease and Liberty; any tie of Obedience is
burthensom, therefore are not long content in any condition, neither with a
King, nor without a King; will be sick for a Parliament, and sick of a
Parliament; complain of defects in Governors, yet cast off all Government: The
desires of men are violent, whirled about, and hurryed after Change without
consideration; and their Concupiscence restless, not restrained by Conscience,
Law nor Punishment: though Conscience check within, and the Magistrate curb
without, Conscience is smothered, and Magistracy trampled in the dust; God is
rejected in his own Ordinance.

Magistracy is Gods Ordinance; the Office and Authority of the Magistrate is of
Divine Right under the Law, and under the Gospel; a stamp of Divine power is
put upon it, Magistrates are styled by Gods own Name, I have said ye are gods:
they are furnished with Authority from God, and bear his person, are in his
stead, ordained to be a terror to the evil, and a praise to them that do well:
Romans 13.1, 3.
The Magistrate is the minister of God, to execute wrath upon him that does
evil; to this end God has given Authority to the Magistrate to make penal
Laws, and to execute the penalties against the offenders, according to the
offense; and to such Laws Christ requires men to be obedient, Romans 13 5. 1 Pet.
2.15.
Submit to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake (ye^, for conscience sake)
whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors or Rulers sent by him,
etc. For so is the will of God: But the Magistrate must not command any thing
contrary to Gods Word; for then we must rather suffer then obey: Nor is the
Magistrate to bring clear Texts of Scripture for every particular Command.
Where no clear Text forbids, we are bound to submit in all things tending to
Government, Civil and Ecclesiastical.

There is diversity in Magistracy, The King as Supreme, and Governors sent by
him, etc. a Kings Authority is derivative, Emperors or Kings have sole Rule:
where there is absolute Monarchy, there Will is a Law; as it was in Caldea,
Persia, etc. but Kings and Parliaments govern together, where there is mixed
Monarchy, and a free People, as once it was in France, and is still in England
and Scotland (by Gods blessing) and in these Kingdoms Parliaments (as to
Governments) have the chief place of Magistracy, yet still the King is Supreme,
as King; but Kings Act by their Counsel: Now Parliaments are not ordained only
to be the Kings great Council, but are the full Representative Body of the
People, entrusted with all their Rights, and is part of the Regal Power; for
the King is vertually in Parliament, though he be personally absent; it is the
highest Court of Justice, a mean between the King and People, to judge or
ballass between Incroaching Prerogative, and Insulting Liberty: Parliament
only is Judge, consisting of King, Lords and Commons; not the King, nor the
People, Parliaments being invested in all Rights belonging to the Subject, are
bound to uphold them, they cannot without perjury, and Traitors to Posterities,
give away the Peoples Interest, Nor may the People, without extreme ingratitude
and baseness, but maintain Parliaments therein, with hazard of Life and Estate:
Men in City and Country, Trade, Traffic, moyl and toil, as Moles in the
earth; Why? to leave Estates to their Children: and will you sell their Freedom
by deserting a Parliament, and so leave your Children Bondslaves, not able to
say this or that is mine, but the Kings, or his to whom He shall give it?

Parliaments (as I said) are entrusted with all the Rights of the Subjects, so
they have part of the Regal power stamped upon their Authority; therefore they
must give to Caesar his due, and to the People their dues: Kings are nursing
fathers, Protectors of their People, Defendors of their Lives, Rights and
Liberties, therefore Kings: What Kings are above the People, is originally from
the People, they being instituted and chosen by the People for defense,
security and commodity: The people are also for such protection, to yield to
Kings, willing, loyal and cheerful obedience and subjection. That which makes
is greater then that which is made, but the People make Kings, no King can make
a People; therefore the safety of the People, and a Kingdom, is to be preferred
before the Honor of a King.

It is true, there is Honor, Supremacy and Prerogative belongs as Right to a
King, to some more, and to some less, while he is a King; but if he be a
Tyrant, and seek to destroy what he ought to preserve, What Honor is due, and
by whom? I expect an Answer: In the mean time, I dare boldly say, That the
Parliament of England at this day are willing to give to their King, and to
His, as to any of his Progenitors, all His Just Rights and Honor; provided His
Majesty endeavor the Right of Patronage, Defense and Security of the Peoples
Rights: The Parliament must not give the Peoples Interest to the King, Nor may
the People sell the Rights of their Posterities for a morsel of meat, except
they will be as profane Esau, who sold his Birthright for a meass of pottage,
cursed to posterities.

But the great Question is, What is Right? The Law will decide that
Controversy; the People ask but what their Forefathers enjoyed, and what they
bought with the greatest price: If Law may take place, the Controversy is
quickly ended: Law is the Rule of Justice, and Justice is the end of the Law;
take away the Authority of the Law, and Justice has no foundation: but if
Will, not Law, must be Judge on either party, England is in a sad and
despicable condition, it is a symptom of inevitable ruin to King and People.
The King and the People have both one Law to be their Rule, one God to fear and
serve, one Judge, and one Throne of Judgment where both must appear, and there
will be no respect of person^: It were wisdom to consider what answer must be
given, Who shall then give account of the wrong done? and for the blood of the
slain, which cries, and cries loud from the earth to heaven, in all parts of
His Majesty's three Kingdoms?

And who but His Majesty (next under God) can stop those sanguine showers, and
bind up the bleeding veins of his people? It can no way be done but by the
establishing of our Laws, securing Religion, privileges of Parliament, and
liberties of the People; by this means the King, his Successors and the people
(by Gods blessing) shall be Cemented together inseparable, secured from future
breakings out; His Majesty being to them, as the heart in the Body, and the
blood in the Veins, which uncorrupted is the fountain of Life and Health, but
corrupted, is the cause of all distempers, and must be purged, else the whole
Body will perish.

The distempers from the Head or Heart are defusive, and each Member feels its
part: Hence comes the general complaint, all cry for ease, but few or none seek
the right means of ease, but as sick men desire change, weary of every place,
loath every wholesome thing, shift from pillow to pillow, from bed to bed, from
one place to an other, still the distemper grows: Then the Physicians are
blamed, railed on, and reviled, because they were deemed petty gods, able to
cure all, but finding them but men, we'll not be advised by them, what they
prescribe for cure, the people reject, and what they tell us cherishes the
disease, the people desire; this (as to a person, so) to a body Politic, not
only prolongeth the cure, but increases the distempers, all this comes by
the mutability in men.

To speak plain, the cause of the distempers in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
is either in the King or People, or in King and People: The Essex men in their
commanding Petition, implyedly lay the fault in the Kings absence from His two
Houses of Parliament, ye all know His Majesty withdrew Himself from them; yet
those Petitioners would vent their spleen against the Parliament, because they
do not Treat with His Majesty Personally; as if a Treaty would change the Kings
heart: but they forget their former complaints, and cries under Royal burdens,
arbitrary pressure, that lay upon them before this Parliament began, because
(as I told you) mutation causes oblivion; the other Countries, Kent, Surry,
Sussex, etc. in their sedicious way seem to Petition for a Personal Treaty, or
rather command it to he had, and fix Peace as the aim, to fool other Counties,
as themselves were fooled by the Enemy: but while Peace is in their mouths,
War was in their hearts and hands; their Petitions spoke Peace, but their
association with arch Incendiaries and Delinquents, proclaimed War; this is
evident, as their folly to be so fooled, to act their own ruin by their own
hands.

For my part, I blame not any modest way of Petitioning, for it is the Peoples
Interest, nor do I blame any of these Counties for Petitioning for a Treaty, I
really believe a Treaty is the best way to settle the Kingdom; but I justly
blame the uncivil way of Petitioning, and abhor the practice of taking Arms
against a Parliament: It is possible a Treaty may conclude all differences, but
not very certain, yet it would be more advantageous to the Parliament then to
the King; my Reason is, because the People conceive the King will consent to
any thing that is right, and that He is now another man, will confirm Law, and
secure the Subjects Liberty, etc. it is the desire of my heart that it may be
so, for I truly honor the King: But if His Majesty upon trial shall refuse to
do what the people say he will do, and has offered, or what shall be
sufficient to secure their Rights, it will then plainly appear to them, and to
all the world where the fault is, and the hearts of the people will and must
cleave to the Parliament for safety.

But before there can be a Treaty, there must be some Security, else the
Parliament (and with it) all good Subjects may be destroyed together; for if
they that have been the Original of these bloody Wars, drew his Majesty from
his Parliament, and endeavored an Arbitrary Government, and Innovation of
Religion, and procured this War, stand still in power (as we see they are able
to raise a new War) be not brought to Just punishment, or some restraint laid
on them, they will be encouraged to take advantage of a Treaty to do the same
again and worse: for except security be first given, they may change the Scene,
from a Treaty to a Tragedy, but a Treaty is now resolved on, as soon as it may
be with convenience and safety: no time nor endeavor is omitted, the people see
it, and know it: Besides, the King having formerly published several
Declarations, and Proclamations, rendering the Parliament, and all that have
adhered to them, to be Traitors, and Rebels; Those Declarations and
Proclamations must first be recalled, else how shall the Parliament be in a fit
capacity to Treat; but the Petitioners say not a word of this, nor so much as
once mention their Solemn Covenant, which shows what kind of Spirits they are
of, and what is their design, nor are any to judge of this but only the
Parliament, what is safe, and what not. It is true, there have been
obstructions to Treaties and to Peace, but that was never the Parliament, but
particular men that seek their own ends; to some such we know War is Peace, and
Peace will be their loss: But we know great bodies move slow, and great
businesses cause long debates, and the Parliament have had a Brother Kingdom to
join in all Treaties and Peace; a business once well done, is done for ever,
but done to halfs, is worse then undone, and will prove unrepairable prejudice
to the public; time, endeavor and patience will help all.

Object. The Parliament have had time enough, sat many years, done nothing as
to Settlement, either in Church or Commonweal, but all things grow worse,
except to some that have sought themselves, and gotten estates out of others
loss; they intend to have no King at all, Voted no more Addresses to be made to
Him, but have kept up an Army to over rule the Kingdom, etc.

To this I answer, They have sat long, and with great difficulty they have
endured much, taken great pains, yet cannot effect that which we desire; the
Reason is, because there are some joined with them in the work, like Sheba,
sons of Bichri, 2 Samuel 20.1.
that would not have a King nor Peace; others like the revolted promiscuous
Samaritans, of Sanballats confederacy, adversaries to Reformation, who under
pretense of building Gods house, pull down what others endeavor to build; as in
Ezra and Nehemiahs time, besides the people of the Land (the great complainers)
have (as then they did) Weakened their hands troubled them, yea, Ezr. 4.
hired Counselors against them to frustrate their purpose; so that this
Parliament have been forced to tread unknown paths, and met with unheard of
oppositions, as no Parliament of England ever did before them; then no marvel
if the work be long: But to say, that things are worse then they were, is a
scandal: It is true, things are very ill, and much the worse by the complainers
calumnies, and seditious Petitions, thwarting one another: And whereas you say
they have sought themselves, you must distinguish between the Parliament and
particular men; that some men in Parliament have been mere self-seekers, I with
sorrow of heart acknowledge, but the people sent them thither, therefore the
people that make no better choice are in fault, not the Parliament; But why are
the good despised? one man's fault does not make another to be guilty, no more
then Peter and the rest of the eleven Apostles, were to be condemned because
Judas was also an Apostle, yet a Thief, a Traitor and a Devil: You say they
intend to have no King, that's clearly false and injurious; Why then did the
Parliament offer Proposals to the King so often from time to time? and really
promise to make His Majesty greater then His Progenitors, if they intended not
to establish their King? Let but His Majesty yet secure the Kingdom, and I
shall not need to say this Objection is false: That a Vote past the House to
make no more Addresses to the King is true, because He might see (He refusing
their Proposals) they intended to settle the Kingdom without Him; but that Vote
was only restrictive, No more Addresses without consent of Parliament, yet as
Parliament should see cause, they might notwithstanding that Vote, make as many
Addresses as they would, but not perpetually, there must be an end of offering:
In a word, whatever failing have been in actions or success, it is not to be
laid upon Parliament, but particular men and faction, private designs and
self-interest. There have been factions and factious men, and that has added
to the Kingdoms misery; Is it not so in all Societies? What City, Town or
County in this Kingdom is free? and is the thing that threatens desolation,
pride and covetousness is the cause of it; besides Romanists, Episcopalists and
Libertines have broached strange Opinions and old Heresies, such as have been
condemned by the purest Primative Churches, and are contrary to Scripture,
sound Doctrine, and the power of godliness: these have strengthened factions;
and factions have bred quarrels and sidings, by which we have weakened our
selves, and strengthened the Enemy, and acted their design all along, so as we
may truly say, if God give us to destruction, our destruction is of our selves,
and all this is Gods just judgment upon the Nation, Because we received not
the love of the truth, 2 The. 2. Isa. 19.14.
but had pleasure in unrighteousness, therefore God sent us strong delusions,
that we might believe a lie, And mixed a perverse Spirit in the midst of us,
causing us to err.

And for your Objection, as to the keeping up the Army, I say, it is Gods great
mercy that there is such an Army on foot in the Kingdom at this day, they are
the means under God by which we or any thing that is ours are preserved, yet I
will not justify any thing not just in any; evil must not be done that good
may come of it, yet God in his wise providence turns evil to good; as the
selling of Joseph into Egypt was a wicked act in his brethren, but was the
means (by Gods providence) of preserving them and their old father from death:
Surely no Army in all the Christian world have been more prosperous, sucessful
and faithful, as to an Army, they have prevailed in all their attempts against
the Enemy like Joshua and Caleb, and deserve honor and reward above ordinary
Soldiers, notwithstanding they be men of infirmities as other men, In many
things we offend all; How shall we look to be forgiven, if we will not forgive?
or how can we forgive an Enemy, if we will not forgive a friend one trespass?
especially such a friend as has delivered us, and does deliver us from the
wrath of a cruel Enemy.

I have a word or two (by your patience) to whisper to the famous City, London:
I say famous City, for so ye once were, for your zeal to God, bounty to your
friends, and gallantry against your Enemies; you were a terror to the Enemy, a
comforter to your friends, a supporter to the Kingdom, and a refuge to the
distressed that fled to you for shelter, your selves like Zebulun and
Nepthtali, Were a people that jeoparded their lives in the high places of the
field, To the help of the Lord against the mighty: Judge. 5
Give me leave by way of complaint to ask you, How comes it to pass that you
are fallen back, revolted, lost your first love, violated your Covenant, I
speak not to the Magistratical part of the City (who still hold to their first
principles) but to the generality of the inhabitants (especially to the younger
sort) who of friends are become Enemies: I have observed (but few take notice)
that of late very many Delinquents have put their Sons Apprentice in this City;
you may see their end by their practice. Consider, I pray, Luke 9.62.
the saying of our Savior Christ, No man having put his hand to the plough, and
looking back is fit for the Kingbom of God: Do not ye lightly esteem the Rock
of your Salvation; ye began well, why suffer you your selves to be seduced by
the Enemy? ye did believe the Cause to be just (and so indeed it was, as ever
any war, as to the defensive part) Errors in the managing, alters not the
cause, nor can warrant your falling off: The quarrel is the same, the Enemy is
the same, and your Interests are the same that they were at the first; How
comes it then that ye are changed? Surely this is an evil change; you now make
Leagues with the same Enemy against whom ye so lately were engaged,
notwithstanding the Enemy still hates you, and seeks to destroy you: Nay, ye
know the Enemy is Gods Enemy, and an Enemy to the Truth, and to your Religion
and Liberties: Will you pull down what with so great difficulty you have built
up? Why do ye suffer Horse to be at this day listed in your City by that Enemy,
and do not apprehend them that do it? You do not only evil your selves, but
you cause and encourage others to do like you: The eyes of the Kingdom are upon
you, as formerly by your good example, many were forward to the help of the
Lord against the mighty: so now by your evil example many draw back, and are
seditious, yea, strengthen the hands of the enemy, that they may be mighty
again, and then they will destroy you: Was Meroz cursed because they came not
out to help the Lord against the mighty? and can London be blessed if they help
the mighty against the Lord; yet Meroz was not engaged by any Covenant, Isa.
30.1.
nor by so great an interest as London is: Woe unto the rebellious City, says
the Lord, that take counsel, but not of me, that cover with a covering, but not
of my Spirit, that they may add sin unto sin. Isa. 1.21.
May it not be said of London, as once of Jerusalem, How is the faithful City
become an Harlot? It was full of Judgment, Righteousness lodged in it, but now
murderers; thy silver is become dross, etc. You that could not have endured to
hear reproach in private against the Authority of Parliament, now are
reproachers your selves, and joy to see and read base and scurrilous Pamphlets,
and encourage them that vent them in your streets, to all parts of the Kingdom.
It cannot be but you must be brought into the refining furnace; shall God visit
the corrupted streams, and not visit the fountain that corrupts? the sword
has gone round through all Counties and Towns, and shall it escape London? it
is not to be hoped, without there be a general Reformation, and a Humiliation
to divert it: If London drink the dregs of Gods wrath, it will be bitter, look
to it, and look for it, ye that are secure in your sins, and wish the Enemy may
enter your streets, you shall not escape when that day comes, for God will
find you out, and make them that you account your friends to be your
destroyers; remember therefore from whence ye are fallen, and to what you are
changed, and do your first works.

Objection, We are the same we were, we are not changed, but the cause is not
that it was; our first Engagement was for Defense of our Laws, our Religion,
Privileges of Parliament, and Liberty of the Subject, and withal, to preserve
the Person and Honor of the King in the preservation of these; but our Laws are
changed, our Religion lost, Parliament forced to do and undo, our Liberties
infringed, Trade discouraged and decayed, the King contemned, the Peace of the
Kingdom retarded, and we who have born the heat of the day, spent our blood and
wasted our Estates, are now rejected as Malignants, because an Army may not
govern over our City, to force a change in our Religion and Government, etc.
all which is contrary to our first engagement, but is the design of the Army.

For answer, you are not the same you were, though grant you (or many of you)
have had discouragement; but the truth is, you are poisoned in judgment by
your frequent converse with Delinquents, who works upon your discontents and
jealousies, and breed jealousies to that end between you and the Army, between
the Presbyterian and the Independent, so as you dare not trust one another, no
not so much as a Christian dare trust a Turk; but upon mere jealousy they have
put you upon designs against the Army, and the Army upon revenge against you,
neither justifiable among Christians: Is this the way of God? or can men that
are godly do such things? these are fruits of ungodliness from City and Army:
In a word, your Laws are not changed nor changing, but they are broken in
pieces by both your disobedience; your Religion is not lost, but it is thrust
out of your Churches, as out of your houses and affections, by your neglect of
Duties, your profanation of Sabbaths, contempt of Holiness, and your ordinary
practice of execrable Impieties, which is grown bold and audacious, impious in
the sight of God and men; so as to swear, to be drunk, to whore, to break the
Sabbath, scoff at holy Fasts, revile Magistracy, to deride the Ministers, and
the very Gospel is to be secure; but to be observed, not to be one of them that
do thus, or to reprove any their wicked practices is death, or threatening of
ruin at the least, is this to be as ye were? when ye durst not be profane,
but filled your Churches on Sabbath days and Fasts days (not the Fields and
Brothel houses as now) You say the Parliament is forced, God forbid, though
it is too true it has been so, but by whom? I wish the City as well as the Army
were not guilty of some forcings: Your Liberties are not infringed, except you
count that infringment, that you are restrained from destroying your selves and
your posterities: Nor is your Trading discouraged, but furthered by the
Parliament; it is true, by your own divisions you have caused Foreign Merchants
to be jealous to trust or trade with you at present: You know a little before
this Parliament begun, your Trade was discouraged and lost, Who did that? (the
Parliament redeemed it) when all Trading was cut off by Monopolies, so as you
all cried out you were undone without remedy, when that projecting old Lord
Goring was a more smoking Monopolizer then ere he was a Soldier, yet now you
fly to aid him, is not this a change? do you think to mend Trading by bringing
in old Monopolizers; be sure as you live they cannot live without their old
trade, you do well to love them that hate you, but you shall find they will
grow rich, and make London poor; the eye of envy has been upon you long, you
have been thought too great to be ruled, now they will rule you if ye provide
not against it, and make you as little as your younger brethren: It may be the
revolting of our Ships may prejudice your Trade a little, but that is your own
faults, who have given ill examples, and discouragement to Land and Sea, it is
the fruit of your own devices: That the Peace of the Kingdom has been
retarded, I deny not; I blame not the City, nor Parliament more then the Army,
who were thought very faulty in that particular, I believe they have repented
of it, and I hope God has forgiven it, therefore I accuse none; it is sure we
mist time, it were well it were redeemed: But to your Objection, that you have
born the heat of the day, and are now rejected, etc. I say little, but wish
those that desire peace to the Kingdom, to be at peace one with another; I know
the Army were too high, and so were the City too: but let us be friends, it was
bad in both, let us forget it: As to your Allegations against the Army, I must
say, (and do so esteem it) it is a very great mercy that God preserved this
Army against such a time as this, when Men and Devils had combined to swallow
us up at once, the design has been Two years hatching, the solicitous
Petitions for speedy Disbanding of the Army, was one branch of it: The Enemy
was confident of success, nothing but the Lord Fairfax Army obstructed: Let
England bless God, that the Lord Fairfax had now an Army ready; and that the
Army, notwithstanding so much discouragement, so freely and gallantly
adventured their dearest lives to defend us: Be grateful to the Army, they are
our defense, let them be still owned for our Army, willingly, till the Enemy be
secured; fear them not, they will not disturb the Parliament, nor the City, but
defend both, nor will they change Laws, nor tolerate Heresy, nor awe the City,
I (have feared it as others, but) now believe the contrary: possibly they may
desire a lawful moderation, between rigid penalty (to such as are truly
conscientious) and loose Liberty in such as hold unsound Doctrines, what they
have done amiss theyl do no more; Once have I spoken (says holy Job) but will
not answer, yea twice, but will not proceed any farther; This I say for the
Army really. 1 Samuel 15.22, Verse 23.


Now give me leave, a word to the Army: To obey is better then the fat of
Lambs; Obedience is to be preferred before Sacrifice, and Rebellion is as the
sin of witchcraft: Soldiers (though noble) are but Servants to them that employ
them, they are to defend them, and offend the Enemy; not to rule the
Commonweal, nor settle the Government of Christ's Church, Christ has appointed
others for that office; nor will Jesus Christ own such a Government as shall be
set up by Policy, juggling and carnal devices: God needs not man's lie, nor will
he prosper that thing to a good man (though the thing be good in it self) that
is gotten by deceit. I pray tell me, if I should tell you I am journeying into
the North from London to Barwick, and you see me go forward in a way to the
South, would you not be jealous that I meant not as I said? Actions speak
better truths then protestations.

I have also a word to say to my neighbor-counties, Kent, Essex, Sussex, Surrey
and Middlesex: I have seen your Names to a Declaration, and several Letters
written to several Towns, Cities, and particular men in the North and
Northwest, persuading upon your strength and example, to Insurrection,
Treachery, and horrid Disobedience: But I hope it was not your own hands, nor
with your hearts, but theirs, that have seduced you, fooled you, and in the
nick of time, by your examples, would have seduced the whole Kingdom: I mean,
old Courtiers, Monopolizers, Tobacco-men, and Cavaliers, who at this day by all
kind of fraud and force seek to make up an Army to destroy the kingdom,
notwithstanding they know a Treaty is resolved on, and preparing with all
speed, both Honorable and Safe: But the kingdom, by Gods providence, have been
wiser then to destroy themselves, as you have done; yet if any had been as bad
as you, they might have had better plea for it then you; for, all parts of the
kingdom have suffered much, you nothing; they have been plundered of all, driven
from their habitations, lain wallowing in their bloods, while you were in
safety under the Parliaments wing, enjoyed your Trade, your rich crops, your
lands fully stockt, you bought cheap and sold dear, that ye grew rich, and were
waxen fat, then like Jeshurun, you kicked, against God, and your friends that
fed you, associated with your Enemies that would destroy you, and brought the
Sword to your own doors, yea into your bowels: I pity your folly, and pray God
you may be sensible of it, and be warned for after time.

Now I would conclude my whole Message to all honest English men, whether upon
the Land or in Ships: Let not jealousy grow among you, forget what is past,
let not friends become Enemies, labor to be all of one mind and love one
another, be gentle, courteous, peaceable, do good to all, do injury to none,
join as one against the common Enemy; pray to God earnestly to change the Kings
heart, and make the Parliament to agree in one mind, that God may accept both,
and that there may be a happy composure of things between the King and his
people, that he may inherit his throne with all Honor, and the people every one
sit under their own vine, in peace and content.

In the mean time let none be so foolish, as to think by destroying the
Parliament, they can have the least ease of any burden, task, or other
pressure; for, if the King come upon such terms, as to be brought in by an army
of Cavaliers, your burdens will be greatly increased, for they will exact all
sums of money borrowed by the King, or by any for him, in any other Kingdoms;
or what loss any of their friends (so called) have sustained, or what arrears
are due to any of their Soldiers; and all that the Queen has borrowed in
France, Holland, Denmark, etc. must be made good out of your Estates: Besides,
your Freedoms and Liberties will be lost for ever, and a toleration of Popery
must be of necessity granted, His Majesty cannot deny that, they will have it;
for therefore the papists in all parts engaged in this War, and lent great sums
of money, and owe vasts sums to the Catholics beyond the Seas, all which you
must pay: Nor shall you be able to help your selves, a continued army will be
kept to awe you, the Subject must be disarmed, and no ammunition to be had but
by Ticket: Then will the people mourn, curse themselves, and tear their hair,
when too late, without remedy; cry out of their misery, and bewail their
eternal Slavery brought upon themselves, their children, and childrens children
to lasting ages.

I only inminde you of these things, as Samuel did the people, when they
impatiently asked a King, before Gods time was to give a King to them, he told
them what they should suffer; I do the same to you, not to dissuade you from
the King, but to persuade you for your good, and the Kings honor, to stay Gods
time; and in the interim beg a new heart of God for the King, such as David
had; God has promised to give it. Supplicate the Parliament with all humility,
speak plainly (as to your Grievances) as free men, but honor and maintain the
Privileges of Parliament as your Freehold, your Estate, your Lives, for it is
more to you then all; enthral not your selves, and God will not enthral you: He
that has been with you, will not forsake you, except you forsake him. Do not
tempt God.

God is doubtless working a wonderful work at this time in the world, greater
then that of bringing Israel out of Egypt: God does not shake the very
foundations of Empires, Kingdoms, Cities and People for nothing, nor for any
small change in the world: Antichrist is falling, he must fall, and will fall
suddenly; The scattered Jews, now like vagabonds in all Nations, must be
gathered together, and shall believe Jesus Christ to be the true Messiah; There
shall be but one Shepherd, and one Sheepfold; Some Kingdoms and Nations must be
consumed to dust, some must be purged in the fire of Afflictions; as fire
tries silver, so variety of afflictions must try the Saints; but there must be
a falling away first, and there must be Errors and Heresies, that they that be
approved may be made manifest; and that is in these days, and at this time:
then God will put his Law into our hearts, and we shall all know God, and be of
one mind, one heart, and one way; and in the end all opposers of Christ, and
Reformation, all Papists, Atheists and Heretics, all profane Cavaliers, and
loose licencious men, that now rebel against God, the Magistrate, Law,
Religion, etc. shall all come to confusion, nothing more sure; they make Lies
their Refuge, and make a Covenant with Death, are at agreement with Hell, and
say no hurt shall come to them; but the overflowing scourge shall sweep away
that Refuge, and they shall perish suddenly; they for a time are Gods rods to
afflict his people, though they exercise their own malice, rage and fury
against Gods truth, and think to bury Reformation in the womb; They all
combine, take counsel together, hold confederacies, and are associated in
power, yet they shall be broken in pieces; all their counsel shall be
frustrate, their confederacy blasted, Isa. 8.9.
and their designs come to naught.

If ye believe the Prophets, ye shall prosper; if ye will not believe the
Prophets, 2 Chr. 20.20. Isa. 7.9.
ye shall not be established. Suppose you should see many thousand dried straws
march furiously against a burning coal, and compass it about, thinking to
overwhelm it, and smother it, Whether will prevail, think you, at the last?
Those multitudes of straws may for a time eclipse the light of the fire, but
the heat will increase, till at length it break forth into a flame, and will in
a moment consume them every one. Thus all wicked men, now combined-against God
and Reformation in Doctrine and life (for that's the inward cause of all this
hurly burly) though God may for a time suffer them, and himself by them,
afflict men for their self-seeking, and self-ascribing, and miscarriages of
businesses, so as these men may eclipse the light of truth, yet it shall
surely break out as a devouring flame, and consume them all; It is hard to kick
against pricks: These are trying times, times for exercise of every grace in
men, Faith, Hope, Patience, Humility, etc. Hab. 2.4.
Graces would not be seen, nor known, nor should be rewarded, but by the
exercise of every one, The just shall live by his faith.

There is a twofold life which men live by, There is the life of Sense, and the
life of Faith; The life of Sense is mere Natural, such was the lives of the
best of Heathen men, and such is the life of most in the world (called
Christians) that live but as heathen and publicans, as without God in the
world; They look only upon outward means and events, trust to the arm of
flesh, when that fails they sink, as men without hope: But the life of Faith
is, Heb. 11.6.
To believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him; Faith sees things that are not, and beholds things that are promised, as
if they were; when all outward means fail by which they hoped for
accomplishment of the thing hoped for, they still are the same; If the Figiree
blossom not, nor fruit be in the Vine, the Olive fail, and the field yield no
meat, though the flock be cut off from the fold, and there be no herd in the
stall, yet they rejoice in the Lord, and will trust in the God of their
Salvation; Faith makes not haste, but stays Gods time, seeks no indirect means,
resists no workings of God, but traceth God in his footsteps, and observes the
several turnings and windings of Providence, is constant in duty, and leaves
the Success to God: If we would do thus, and lay aside all by-ends, carnal
policy, and hurtful jealousies, it would be well with us quickly.

I wish I could persuade men to their own good, to be patient, and to wait upon
God, suffer God to work his own work in his own way, by his own means, in his
own time, though he seem long, he will come suddenly, and none can hinder; for
it is the work of God that is now in men's handling, not man's work: and when all
outward means and hopes fail; and things seem to drive contrary to the thing we
hoped, then is it nearest to be done, that no flesh may boast; all men shall
clearly see and acknowledge God alone has done it, although the horrid
profaneness of these times may bring sweeping Judgments upon men, Sword,
Fire, Famine, Pestilence, all which are threatened at this day, and effects of
Gods anger for sin; yet all the sins of the times shall not hinder Gods work of
Reformation, for he does it not for man's righteousness, but for his own Names
sake; and he delivers a people that they may be righteous, not beeause they
are righteous.

Now in the last place, it is the earnest request and desire of my heart, That
all good men will join with me, to make our humble and frequent supplications
to God, and our earnest Petitions to the Parliament for these ensuing
particulars, which granted will amend all:

First, That God will make our hearts clean, and to trust in God, seek his
face, be obedient to Parliaments, submit to all just commands, defend their
Privileges, and uphold them to all posterity.

Secondly, That all Members of Parliament may deny themselves, seek Gods glory,
bonor the King, study the Peoples Peace, and the happiness of the Kingdom,
repent of their own sins, covetousness, oppression, pride, excess, and the
like, and become examples of piety by their own practice (because example is
more prevalent to teach then precept) Then, that they will freely and cordially
pass by all unkindenesses, and sailing among themselves, forget all, and
forgive one another, abandon all jealousies, be all of one mind, love as dear
brethren, endeavor to keep a constant full House, maintain free Elections, free
Debates, carried on by strength of Reason, sound judgment, and argued without
prejudice, upon public grounds, waying all self-interest and by-ends. This
shall ever be my Supplication, as many as will join with me shall partake of
the blessing by it: But if all shall refuse me, thus He live, and thus He dye,
and pray for the King and Parliament.

FINIS.

