A Salutation OF LOVE Unto all who have known the Call of GOD, And have in
Measure believed therein, so far as to make open Confession to his Name and
Truth, and yet sit down short of the Heavenly Possession, through want of
Faithfulness thereunto; so come not to Witness a being Gathered into God's
Vineyard, to Labor therein, which alone obtains the Reward, and fits for his
Heavenly Kingdom.

By Richard Vickris.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street, and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street,
1697.

A Salutation OF LOVE, etc.
Friends,
AN unusual Concern is fallen upon me, in the Motion of Life, and Living Sense
of the great Work of God in the Souls of Men and Women; and what hinders the
Progress of it; in tender Love and Desire for the Prosperity of that Work in
you all, to Visit you with these Lines; more especially you of the Northern
Division of this County of Somerset, who are, or may be Concerned, and who
profess your selves to be of the number of God's People, belongs to, and
sometimes comes to their Meetings, and sit as they sit; hereby signifying to
you, that my Heart is Sorrowful, and my Spirit Afflicted in the Sense and
Consideration of the present Unhappy, and future Woeful State (if you Repent
not) of some of you; who, through the Love and Cares of this World, forget God,
and decay in your Love to him, who first Loved, Visited and Called you by his
Grace, into his Mavelous Light; which Love of the World, and Worldly things,
with the Cares of this Life, has so deeply entered into, and taken the
Possession of many of your Hearts and Minds, that it has Choked the good
Seed, and left little or no place for Heavenly things, as is too abundantly
Manifested by the great Carelessness and Neglect that many of the Professors of
the Truth, in this our Day and Time, are found in; not only in declining, in a
great Measure, their Meeting together with the Lord's People, to wait upon him,
and Worship him in Spirit and Truth, especially on Weekdays (concerning which
it has frequently moved upon the Hearts of some of the Lord's Servants, to
warn you, to be diligent in) but when you have found leisure from other
Business, to present your Bodies sometimes at your First Day Meetings. It is to
be feared you have not presented your Souls and Spirits, as a Living Sacrifice
unto God; so your Bodily Presence has not profitted you, as to the Worship of
God, being Dead and Unacceptable unto him; And the Reason of this is, because
your Souls are in the Hand and Power of the Enemy of all our Peace and
Happiness, who holds you in Captivity, and will not let you go to serve the
Lord in the Land of the Living, so long as you give your Strength to him,
through the Love of Earthly things; For where the Treasure is, there will the
Heart be also.

Now that which opens upon my Spirit, to Communicate to you in much Love, is,
not only to exhort you to Diligence in Frequenting the Meetings of the Lord's
People, but in waiting upon him therein, that you may witness a stronger than
your Souls Enemy to come, and bind him, and cast him forth, and destroy his
Goods; and so deliver your Souls out of this Woeful Captivity and Bondage; and
this is a Spiritual Work, and Profitable Labor and Travel, which God has
called you unto, that you may come in, and Work in his Vineyard: Therefore sit
no longer Idle, but come to the Help of the Lord, and you shall find strength
from him to Resist and Subdue the Enemy; for he is both able and willing to do
it. The Reason why some are so Careless and Negligent of meeting with the
Lord's People, to wait upon, and worship him, is, because they Experience so
little of the true Benefit of that Exercise, when they are amongst them, which
is occasioned for want of coming in a right Mind and pure Intention toward
God; and also for want of the Preparation of the Heart, through an inward
diligent waiting upon God whilst there, who only can do it; Insomuch that when
such come to Meeting, they fall into dullness and heaviness of Spirit, and some
into downright Sleeping; others the Enemy prevails over to busy their Minds
with confused Musing and Thoughtfulness, sometimes about their worldly
Concerns, and sometimes what they can Pump up of other things, with their
earthly Minds, which cannot serve God aright, or bring forth any Fruit or
Sacrifice Acceptable unto him, or Edifying to themselves, so that their time of
Meeting, being for the most part thus spent in Captivity and Bondage to the
Enemy, their Meetings, instead of being Comfortable and Profitable, becomes
tedious and burdensome to them, and then in time such grow weary, and comes but
now and then to keep up a Name amongst Men, perhaps when they hear of a
stranger and Minister that is like to be at the Meeting, such may be forward to
come, and give their Ears to the Sound of their Words, and entertain their
Minds with the Variety of the Heavenly and Undeniable Truths that may be
delivered, and be pleased therewith, and Speak well of it, For it may be to
them as a Lovely Song, or as one that Plays well upon an Instrument: Yea,
farther perhaps the Power of Truth may so far reach them, and touch their
Hearts, as to bring them into a good Degree of Sense and Tenderness for the
time, and the Scales begin to fall from their Eyes, and they have some sight of
their Condition; But like the Natural Man, that beholds his Natural Face in a
Glass, goes away, and forgets what manner of Man he was: So it falls out
with these, for want of giving their Ears to God's Word in their own Hearts,
and the Eye of their Minds to the Blessed Light of his Spirit and Truth
therein, they Hear and See, but as the Natural Man; And though such may heap up
great Treasures of Knowledge here, in their Airy Minds, and may think
themselves Rich, and Full, it will not avail them in God's Account, who look to
the Heart, and regards Truth in the inward Parts; and all that is short of
this, will but turn in the end to their greater Condemnation.

Thus whilst Men are held in Bondage and Captivity to their Soul's Enemy,
through Earthly and Sensual-mindedness, Disobedience and Unfaithfulness to God,
they are void of a right Exercise at Meetings, with relation to the true
Worship of God; and the longer they live, and continue in this state, the
darker and harder they grow; until they become unsensible of their Condition;
then sits down in Dryness and Barrenness, not knowing when Good comes, until at
last they become wholly dead to God; and this is a Lamentable State and
Condition; and of this sort some return with the Dog to the Vomit, into the
Common Enormities and Pollutions of the World: But many there are who have not
run to this Excess, nor thus sinned out their Days, but are yet living, though
in much Weakness, and Feebleness, sorely Bruised and Oppressed by the Enemy; for
whom there is tender Compassion in our God; and for whose Restoration, the
Lord's Servants are greatly concerned; such are ready to say at times, Who so
Poor and Miserable as we? Lord help us; How shall we come to the help of the
Lord? The Enemy holds us fast* we are glewed to Earthly Things; to will is
present with us, but how to perform we know not; Lord we believe, help thou our
unbelief: To such a one I would say, Thou believe that the Lord is, (for he
that comes to God must so believe, and that he is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him) viz. That he is what he is; God is Light, in him is no
Darkness at all; God is Gracious, and Merciful, Long-suffering, abundant in
Goodness and Truth; God is all Powerful; and present every where, consequently,
that he is present in thy Soul; the Seal of this Belief, is that degree of
Sense and Experience thou find of his Nature, and Gift, and Spirit in thee,
which is a Measure and Manifestation of himself unto thee, in Opposition to the
Nature, Spirit, and Power of Darkness in thee; hereby thou distinguishest
between Good and Evil, knows the Voice of God that calls thee out of Darkness
into Light, out of Error into Truth, out of Evil into Good; and not only so,
but begets a Will and Desire in thee, to eschew the Evil, and cleave to the
Good; thus far thou believe well; Love God, of whose Life and Nature, that
Light, that Truth, that Good is, which thou discernest in thy Soul; and it will
change thee into its Likeness; thus thou will find the good Effects of thy
Faith, which works by Love; and here thou will know the Holy Fear that keeps
thy Heart clean; and as thou perseverest in this Faith, Love, and Fear of God,
He will instruct thee in all Righteousness, and Truth, and manifold Heavenly
Virtues thou will learn of him, as he is pleased to show himself therein unto
thee, who will be with thee, to help thee to perform what he requires of thee;
Come unto me, says Christ, all ye that labor, and are heavy laden; learn of
me, for I am meek, and low in Heart, and ye shall find rest to your Souls. I
have already showed the Necessity of believing that God is, where he is to be
found, and how thou may know him, viz. by his Image, Nature and Spirit in
thee, which shows it self forth in all heavenly Virtues: And here it is to be
observed, that Christ, who is the Express Image of his Father, begins with his
Meekness and Lowliness in the Heart, to declare, and show himself to thee; and
the Way to come unto him, is to learn of him; that is, so to wait for his
Appearance, as to have a sensible feeling of his Meekness and Humility in thee,
and to wait upon him to be made conformable thereunto: I need not go about to
Convince thee, who thus believes, (that God is) That it is the Indispensible
Duty, as well as True Interest of all Mankind, to Serve, Worship and Adore him,
to whom we all, as depending Creatures, Owe our Being, and Well-being; whence
it inevitably follows, that we Owe all Reverence, Homage, and Obedience to him.
And the way to obtain the Happiness that is in him, is to come unto him, and
wait upon him, from whom every good and perfect Gift comes.

Now that which principally Rests with me to Recommend to all, to whom this
may come, is a true and right performance of this great Exercise and weighty
Work of coming to Christ, and waiting upon him; because it is a Duty and Means
appointed of God for all to attain Eternal Happiness and Peace with him: For as
Man lost his happy State, by being betrayed and going from that Image of God,
in which he was Created; so there is no other way to recover it, but by coming
back to Christ, to be Restored into his Image again. No Man comes unto the
Father but by me, says Christ, and none comes to me, except my Father that
has sent me draw him. Well then, we must wait for the drawings of the Father,
and follow his Leadings; for as Christ said, The Father himself Loves you; how
know we that, but by the Sense he gives us of his Love in our Souls, and how
come we by this Sense, but by the opening of his Life and Love therein?

This Manifestation of himself to us, and in us, is through the Gift and Spirit
of his Son Christ Jesus in us, whom we are to believe; Ye believe in God,
believe also in me, says Christ; that is, Confide in him and follow him, as he
is the Way to the Father; Love, Fear and Obey him, according as he Manifests
himself, and Reveals the Father, who are One: For so have we Experienced, and
Learned of Christ. Therefore when he Exhorts us to come unto him; it is, that
we Inwardly Retire unto him in our Minds, and settle our Intention purely upon
him, and diligently wait to feel his Life and Love (which is his Divine Nature)
to spring up and show it self in our Souls, and then join with it, cleave to
it, and love it, and it will leven us into its own Nature and Image; and so we
come to a right Knowledge of God, and Christ, by Participation and Union; and
in and by this divine Nature, and Spirit of Christ, we are enabled to Pray to
the Father, to Resist the Enemy and overcome him; for it is able to do all
things, and greatly prevails with God for a Blessing.

Now here is a sound Bottom and sure Foundation to build upon; Namely, Christ
Jesus, as he is thus manifested by his Divine Nature and Spirit in us: And as
we are built up hereupon, we are built up to God a Spiritual House of Living
Stones Elect and Precious: Therefore in all our Spiritual Exercises, and
Drawings near to God, we must come down to this Foundation and Cornerstone,
and keep upon it; and this is through great Labor, deep and inward Silence,
and Spiritual Death unto Self, and Self-strivings, in Patience, and
Long-suffering obtained, and kept to; for the Enemy of our Souls Peace watches
all Opportunities, to draw our Minds away, and keep us therefrom, knowing that
all our Labor and Exercise, upon a Spiritual Account, becomes unprofitable
unto us without this Foundation; because as Christ said, Without me ye can do
nothing; that is, nothing available to our Souls Everlasting Rest and Peace.

Thus we see how greatly it Concerns us, in order to the right Performance of
Worship to God, and obtaining our Souls Salvation, to Meet together, to waith
upon God, to Feel the Drawings of the Father, to come unto Christ, to present
our Souls and Bodies, as a Living Sacrifice unto him; that is, in his Presence;
where we Behold him, and Love him, in his Appearance, which is most Beautiful
and Excellent: And as we thus diligently wait upon him, and abide with him, in
the Meekness, in the Lowliness, in the Long suffering, and in the Patience that
he brings with him, and gives unto such, with all the rest of his Heavenly
Virtues, which spring and flow from him, as from a Living Fountain, we shall be
Adorned therewith, and Changed into his Likeness.

And here much might be added, by way of Encouragement, on the foot of our true
Interest, as well as Obligation and Duty, to the right performance of this
Exercise, both with respect to the high and holy Call thereto, the Beauty and
Excellency that is in him, beyond all Comparison, whom we are thus to wait for,
and upon, as well as the Wonderful, Blessed and Comfortable Effects it produces
in the Souls of all those that so does: But these things cannot be sufficiently
declared, nor known to any, as they are felt and experienced, through the Work
of God in their own Souls; for as it is written, Eye has not seen, Ear has
not heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man, to conceive, the
things that God has in store for them that love him.

So, Friends, I earnestly beseech you, for your Souls sake, be wise in Heart,
diligent in the Work of the Lord, both in coming to Meetings, and waiting upon,
and worshipping of God therein, and you will find your Reward: Let your Eye be
single, and your Intention pure to God: Consider the end of your coming, and
what you are about, the Presence you are in; and how you behave your selves in
the presence of the great God you Profess to Worship, that your Hearts may be
rightly fitted and prepared for it; gird up the Loins of your Minds, keep out
of the Musings, Self-Workings and Strivings, for that brings forth nothing to
Perfection, wait the Lord's time, trust in him, and hope to the end; and he
that is Faithful and True, and is not Slack concerning his Promise, as some Men
count Slackness, when he has proved you, will Visit you, and Reward your Faith
and Patience, and Administer things suitable to your Necessities, and make you
in Love with all Opportunities of waiting upon him; and if you continue
Faithful, will Crown you with Life, and in the end receive you into his
Heavenly Kingdom of Joy and Peace for evermore; which, that he may do for us
all, is the Hearty Desire of

Your Friend and Well-wisher, and one of Zion's Travelers toward his
Everlasting Kingdom. Richard Vickris.
Chew the 27th of the First Month, 1697. Given forth to be Read amongst
Friends.
FINIS.

