HIS MAJESTY'S Concessions TO THE BILL of ABOLITION OF Archbishops and
Bishops, etc. STATED and CONSIDERED.

By Richard Vines, one of the Divines that attended the Commissioners of
Parliament.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1660.

SIR,
The Law of friendship oblidgeth me to answer your desire, by affording to you
my sense touching his Majesty his Concessions toward the removal of Episcopal
Government, or the Bil of Abolition.

His Majesty's Concessions to the Bill of Abolition of Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. Stated and Considered.

HIS Majesty has fully and expressly consented to the Bill of Abolition and
removal of the whole Hierarchy contained in the Bill, excepting that part
thereof which relates to Bishops; whose Jurisdictive power (as he calls it) he
has also abrogated finally and for ever, except the two Houses shall otherwise
determine, and has reserved to them some power in Ordination only, wherein he
would have them to be (as we use to say,) of the Quorum, by the use or power of
a negative voice in that action, but withal does actually suspend them from the
exercise of all manner of power of Ordination for three years; during which
time he has obliged himself to make no other, no more Bishops, but refers
himself to further debate and consultation of Divines, what shall obtain in the
Church of England after the expiration of that term, according as himself, and
the two Houses shall determine upon their advice; which may probably upon his
Majesty's information more thoroughly in the point, issue to a total abolition
of both the name, and all power of Bishops. But if then his Majesty and the
Houses shall not agree, the Bishop shall have power of Ordination with the
council and consent of the Presbyters, or the major part of them conjoined or
cooperating with him. Which Presbyters are not to be nominated or appointed by
his Majesty alone, much less arbitrarily associated by the Bishop himself, but
appointed and authorized by his Majesty and the two Houses, and not otherwise.

This being the clear state (as far as I understand) of his Majesty his
concession, except I be mistaken in the length of that word Cooperate, which is
not his Majesty's expression. I shall offer to you these two considerations
upon it.

CONSID. I.
First, Whether the Bishops of England (and to whom only the bill extends) be
not hereby in effect abolished, not only as to their posse, but also as to
their esse; for,

1. There remains no visible way of making any Bishop hereafter, because the
Deans and Chapters, who were by the laws and usage of this Kingdom to elect
the Bishop recommended to them by the Kings Conge de liere, are utterly taken
away, so as there can be no proceeding to an Ordination of them, and if the
book or form of consecration be together with the Book of Common Prayer also
abolisht, I cannot see but that the Bishops are abolisht also, and cannot be
made without some new way of constitution which rests in the power of the
Parliament.

2. The Bishops that now are, cannot after three years ordain, except the
Houses agree to appoint Presbyters to join with them in that action, which if
the Houses shall not do, the Bishops power is still under suspension; and if
the Presbyterial Government and Ordination were but granted indefinitely, as it
is for three years, I do not see but it would rest in the power of the Houses,
whether the Bishop should ever ordain or no, and so in effect be vacated, being
limited to a concurrence of Presbyters which are not found.

3. His Majesty in this Concession seems to me, (which I speak under his
Majesty's favor) to have gone quite beside his own level; for in his Papers
given to the Divines at Newport, He cuts out the Episcopal office by the
pattern of the Apostles, and of Timothy and Titus, whose Episcopal office (as
he calls it) did not consist only in a concurrence with a major part of
Presbyters in Ordination, or a negative voice to such a major part; nor do the
Scriptures by his Majesty alleged, prove them to have bin Bishops in this
sense and latitude only, but the primitive Bishops of the second, and happily
some of the first century after Christ, were rather of this model, being of the
Quorum in Ordination; which primitive Bishops, (as the Divines say in their
answer) might possibly be, and yet the Bishops of England be abolisht: and so
it appears, that the Bishops in the Bill presented to his Majesty, are by this
Concession of his quite altered and cast in a new mould; which if his Majesty
would please to make as a new tendry to his Houses of Parliament, and expressly
remove the old, the rub would be in a manner quite taken out of the way, which
remains in the opinion of many, because his Majesty does under the name of the
present Bishop capitulate beforehand for a new Episcopacy, which present
Bishop, if you shall not concur with me in opinion that he is in effect
abolisht by his Majesty's Concession, yet certainly he is reduced to so small a
hair as cannot be divided any more; for if the King should go but one step
further, and take off that negative voice, which this Bishop that is offered is
to have in Ordination, he would be then no more then one Presbyter, as he is
very little more by this Concession, in the affirmative part of acting, though
he be more in the negative part of not acting, which negative voice of the
Bishop would very seldom be used, or if it were, all reason is, that the
Expectant or Candidate of the Ministry, should have some relief of his
gravamen, by appeal to the Provincial meetings, or some other assembly which
should have power to determine the case; and then I cannot see but that even
this negative voice is rendered in effect nothing, and so the Bishops in effect
abolished; and if I was in a capacity to supplicate his Majesty, I should
beseech him to consider that there is some difference between gravamen Spiritus
and ligamen conscientiae. For the affection he bears to that Government of
Episcopacy, and the long usage of it in the Church, may be heavy on his Spirit,
and make the Abolition unpleasing, which yet do not bind the conscience, or
make the doing it unlawful to him.

CONSID. II.
Secondly, It may be considered if the Bishops be not in effect abolisht in
regard of this being,

1. Whether it be any inconvenience, to set up in every County or Province a
Presbytery for Ordination, (the jurisdictive part to go as is already
established in Elderships, Classes and Synods) of the gravest and most judicious
Ministers, both to give reputation to the ordination, and to prevent the
mis-administration thereof in the Classes, most of which in England may happily
not consist of a competent number of men so fit to exercise it; for I am of
opinion, that Ordination by Presbyters is good and lawful, and that one of the
Quorum concurring with them in Ordination, renders not the same evil or
unlawful; for if it did so, I see not how the Presbyters now in being, can
well justify their own.

2. This way propounded by his Majesty might happily reduce all the Divines of
England into a liking or acceptance of the Government, and so take off that
odium or prejudice which it lies under with them and others.

3. The way of Ordination by Presbyters in every Province or County selected by
Parliament prima vice, might prevent a great deal of influence which the now
sequestered Divines being restored to a capacity of Pastoral charges, will have
in the several Classes where they shall be seated.

4. That the Presbyterians ought to take heed that the cause of the continuance
of the War and all the miseries of it be not laid at their door, and that for
opposing a thing in it self lawful, but not at present to be gotten quite off,
by reason of the Kings present unsatisfaction, and his desire of time and means
of better information.

5. That such Presbyterians as cannot find a Jus Divinum for Ruling Elders
acting in Ordination, do judge it as great a disconformity to allow the Ruling
Elder a power of cooperation and authority in ordaining Ministers, as to allow
one to be of the Quorum, who is thereby no more then a Presbyter, nor has the
Keys any more in his hand for that, then a Moderatour for the present time may
have, for orders sake.

6. That the Covenant binding to extirpate Bishops, if it be understood in
sensu diviso in that Article, and not (as many conceive) in sensu composito
only, does not oblge us to break the peace of all, if every thing be not to be
had at first; and if the great and ancient Tree be to be felled down by
agreement, shall the parties fight with one another, because the one will fell
it down chip by chipe; the other will tear it up at once by the roots? And
therefore I humbly pray the honorable Members of Parliament, the warned
Presbyterians, and (as they are called) Independents, to consider of this
Punctillio, as it is laid in the balance against the loss of all his Majesty
his other Concessions, and the fruits and consequences of new distractions and
sadder times; for (I speak only in case that the King can be got no further) it
ought to be well weighed, whether this negative vote in Ordination, be such a
thing as may justly imbitter all our peace besides. And if any should say that
out of this old root the old Episcopacy will grow again; I do not conceive that
it is possible, being hoop'd about by the iron hoop of Laws; for the Primitive
Episcopacy grew so fast, because the Pagan Princes looked not after that
Government, which was but exercised over such Voluntaries as put their necks
under it, and Christain Princes thought they should allow it as much as it had
under Heathens. But as for the resurrection of it after it is dead, it cannot
be, but by Parliament, and against an Act of Parliament, there is no
fortification to be made; In fine, if I cannot prevail with you to accept less
then you ask, I humbly beseech the King to grant more then he yet offers, for
the common peace sake, which is to be purchased at any rate next the price of
truth, and even some truths are to be abated, or sorborn to be exercised for
the present, for the common and public peace.

Vale November. 8.
FINIS.

