The only DELIVERER FROM Wrath to Come: OR, The Way to escape the horrible and
Eternal Burnings of HELL. By Thomas Vincent, Sometime Minister of Maudlins
Milk-street, London.

LONDON, Printed for George Calvert, and Samuel Sprint, and are to be Sold at
the Golden Ball in Duck-lane. 1671.

1 These. 1. Part of the 10th. Verse. Even Jesus which delivered us from the
Wrath to Come.
PAst pains may easily be forgotten, future pains are not easily believed,
present pains in extremity are so grievous and afflictive, that all the Wealth
and Honor in the World cannot countervail them; and O how welcome is such a
Physician, who can give ease and remove them! But did people believingly
apprehend what horrible pains and torments the wicked must endure, in the
unquenchable Flames of Hellfire, where they can have no ease, and their misery
shall have no end; did they apprehend how fearful a thing it is to fall into
the hands of the Living God, and to be swallowed up by his Wrath, which has
all such, who are out of Christ, in the pursuit; and which will certainly come,
and may quickly seize upon them, surely they would use their uttermost
diligence now to escape, surely they would with the greatest inquisitiveness
seek out now for a place of refuge, from the fiery Tempest of Gods Vengeance;
and this Text which makes a discovery of the only Deliverer from the Wrath to
Come, would found with most transcendent sweetness in their ears, and the glad
tidings thereof, concerning what Jesus has done for his People, would above
all things be most welcome unto their Hearts. Even Jesus who delivered us from
the Wrath to Come.

In the former Verse, the Apostle tells the Thessalonians what manner of
entrance he had at first amongst them, and what the great effect of his
Ministry was upon them; namely, that they were converted thereby; which
conversion of their's he sets forth:

First, By the nature of it, they were turned from dead Idols, the lying
Vanities which they worshipped and served before, unto the Living and true God
to worship and serve him.

Secondly, By the consequent of it, which was their waiting for the second
coming of the Lord Jesus Christ from Heaven; and he shows

1. The evidence of this second coming, that it will certainly be namely Gods
raising him from the dead, and receiving him to Heaven.

2. The ground of their Hope and comfortable expectation, and waiting for this
coming in the Text, because this Jesus had delivered them from the Wrath to
come. The wicked (if awakened) do look for Christ's second coming with dread
and fearful expectation, because of the wrath which he will bring with him,
because he will come in flaming fire to take vengeance upon them; the righteous
(if assured of their interst in Christ) do look for Christ's second coming with
gladness and joyful expectation, because he has delivered them from the wrath
to come. Even Jesus who has delivered us from the wrath to come. This Doctrine
then is plain in the words.

Doct. That it is Jesus who does deliver from the Wrath to come.

In handling of which point I shall show,

First, What this wrath is which is to come. Secondly, That this wrath is to
come. Thirdly, Upon whom this wrath is to come. Fourthly, When this wrath will
come. Fifthly, Who this Jesus is that does deliver from wrath to come. Sixthly,
How Jesus does deliver from wrath to come. Seventhly, How any do or may have a
share in this deliverance by Jesus from wrath to come. Eighthly, Make some use
and application.
First; What this Wrath is which is to come; It is not the finite wrath of the
most furious and feirce Creatures, not the wrath of Lions, or Bears, or Tigers,
or evening Wolves, or wild Bulls; nor the wrath of the most Potent and
Tyrannical men, who may exceed all these in feirceness and cruelty; neither is
it the wrath of the Devil, whose wrath is great here on Earth, when let loose
to tempt and deceive, but most furiously will it express it self hereafter in
Hell, when he is let loose as Gods Executioner to torment the wicked: But by
the wrath to come, we are to understand the Infinite wrath of the Sin-revenging
God, in comparison with which the wrath of all other Creatures in the World is
mildness, and not in the least to be regarded.

We read in the Scripture of the Wine of God's wrath, Rev. 14. 10, That this
Wine is Red, Psalm. 75. 8. We read of the Viols of Gods wrath, Rev. 16. 1. Of
the Cup of Gods wrath, Rev. 14. 10. Of the Wine Press of Gods wrath, Rev. 14.
19. We read of the Treasures of God's wrath, Romans 2. 5. Of the Vesels of Gods
wrath, Romans 9. 22. By the Wine of God's wrath, we are to understand those
plagues and punishments which God does and will inflict upon the wicked for
their sins: By the Redness of the Wine is meant the dreadfulness of those
plagues; By the viols of Gods wrath, some smaller plagues and temporal
punishment on Earth; By the the Cup of Gods wrath, especially the dregs and
bottom of it, the greater plagues and eternal punishment of Hell; By the
Wine Press of Gods wrath, we are to understand the place where the wicked shall
be punished; By the Treasures of Gods wrath the abundance of Plagues; By the
Vessels of wrath, the damned who are appointed to undergo these plagues and
torments; these Vessels God will fill with the Treasures of his wrath, he will
fill them to the Brim in Hell with most exquisite torments; And this is the
wrath which is to come, which will be most bitter beyond any gall or Wormwood
unto the taste; which will be most pure without any allay or mixture of any
comfortable ingredients; which will be most plentiful, the Treasures of which
will be opened in Hell, and all the damned be filled with it abundantly; which
will be most weighty beyond any Mountain of Lead, to sink Sinners down into the
bottemless pit; which will be most feirce, and withal so powerful, that all the
powers of Men and Devils shall not be able to make the least resistance; which
will be intolerable and yet must be bourn; which will be unplacable, so as
never to be appeased, and which will be eternal, so as never to be ended.

Plainly the wrath to come, is of the same signification as the punishment of
Hell, the great effect of the wrath of God; which punishment has two parts,
the Paena damni, and the Paena sensus, the punishment of loss, and the
punishment of sense.

1. The punishment of loss, this will consist in the loss of the Crown and
Glory, and happiness of Heaven, where the righteous shall be admitted to the
immediate Vision, and full fruition of God the chief good, which will fill
them with Soul-ravishing unconceivable and eternal joy; but from whence all the
wicked shall be eternally shut out, and wholly be denied any share in the least
of that happiness, which when they come to understand the worth and excellency
of, will above all things be most vexatious unto them.

2. The punishment of sense, this will consist in the horrible pains and
tortures, which shall in extremity be inflicted upon every part of the bodies
of all the wicked, by the most dreadful and unquenchable Fire, which they shall
be thrown into; and the more horrible anguish, which through the immediate
imimpressions of Gods wrath, shall be inflicted upon every faculty of their
souls in Hell, where they shall have no ease nor release for ever, Matthew. 25.
41. Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels, Rev. 14. 10, 11. The same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of
God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his indignation, and
shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the presence of the Holy Angels,
and in the presence of the Lamb: And the smoke of their torment ascends up
for ever and ever, and they have no rest Day nor Night, etc. See more of this
in my Book of Christ's certain and sudden Appearance to Judgment, and in my
Book of Fire and Brimstone, etc.

Secondly, That this Wrath of God is to come, this implyseth two things:

1. That this Wrath is not yet come 2. That it will certainly come.
1. This wrath of God is not yet come; were it come, who could stand before it?
who could deliver from it? where it seiseth it crusheth, it burns, and that
worse than any fire; where it seiseth it holds, and never lets go it is hold
for ever; but as yet this is not come, some sparks of this fire may be let fall
in temporal judgments upon sinners in this life, but what are temporal
judgments in comparison with eternal? In this world God does exercise his
patience toward the wicked, he is angry with them, and his anger does smoke
against them, but he withholds his wrath from breaking forth into a flame,
which would quickly devour all the wicked of the Earth together, should he give
way to it, and let it loose upon them: Indeed we read John 3. 36. That the
wrath of God abides upon unbelievers, that is, it shall abide upon them, who
at last are found in a state of unbelief, as surely as if it did already abide
upon them; or the wrath of God abides upon unbelievers, that is the sentence
of condemnation unto this wrath does abide upon them, as John 3. 18. He that
believes not is condemned already. Indeed it is said of the persecuting Jews,
who had killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and forbidden the
Apostles to Preach unto the Gentiles, that the wrath was come upon them to the
uttermost, 1 These. 2. 15, 16. But this we are thus to understand: that the
wrath of God was come upon them to the uttermost, not in regard of eternal
judgments, but in regard of spiritual judgments, it being the uttermost
expression of God's Wrath, here to give sinners up unto a persecuting spirit,
which does prepare them for the uttermost and most dreadful punishment of Hell
hereafter. But as yet the wrath of God is not come, none in this world do or
can know the power of God's anger.

2. The wrath of God is to come, that is, it will certainly come, there are
some things which may come, such and such temporal judgments may come, such
and such deliverances may come; but there are some things which will come,
Death will come, and Christ will come, and as certainly as Death and Christ
will come, so certainly this wrath of God will come; God has foretold it, and
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one jot or tittle of what God has
foretold until it be fulfilled: God has threatened it, and God is not more
faithful in his promises to his people, than he is true in his threatenings to
his enemies. God's justice does engage him to send it, which can be satisfied
no other way, by those which have no interest in the satisfaction of Christ.
The wicked are Vessels fitted by sin for destruction, and prepared for wrath,
and therefore they shall be filled with it, even as the Vessels of Mercy are
fitted, and shall be filled with glory: God has Treasured up wrath for the
wicked, as they have Treasured up Sin, and God will give them that which they
have so much deserved, and he has prepared for them. However Sinners may
escape this wrath for a while, and vainly hope to flee or hid themselves from
the strokes of Gods vengeance, yet Gods Right hand will find out all those that
hate him, and he will make them as a fiery Oven in the time of his anger, and
swallow them up in his wrath, and devour them with the fire of his indignation,
Psalm. 21. 8, 9.

Thirdly, Upon whom will this wra^h of God come?

1. This wrath of God will come upon all the children of disobedience, see Col.
3. 5, 6. Mortify therefore your members, which are upon the Earth,
Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscense, and
covetousness, which is Idolatry: for which things sake the wrath of God comes
on the children of disobedience. Such are children of disobedience, who are
disobedient children, such who do nor yield obedience unto the Law of God, but
live and allow themselves in the practice of known sins, and in the neglect of
known duties; such who are under the reigning power of sin, who are willing
servants of sin, who yield up their members as Instruments of unrighteousness
unto sin, as Romans 6. 13. Who serve diverse lusts, Tit. 3. 3. Who make provision
for the Flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13. 14. Such who are
Blasphemers, or Swearers, or Sabbath Breakers, or Murderers, or Adulterers, or
Drunkards, or Thieves, or Covetous, or Unrighteous, or Extortioners, or
Revilers, or Scoffers at Religion, or Persecutors of Gods people, or have an
enmity to the power of Godliness; such as are Proud and Boasters, such as are
disobedient to Parents without natural affection, such as are lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God, such as are Liars and unfaithful, such as
are idle and slothful, such as live in envy and malice, and are given to
revenge, and cannot forgive injuries, and the like sinners, these are Children
of disobedience upon whom the wrath of God will come; see also Ephesians. 5. 6. Let
no man deceive you with vain words; for because of these things comes the
wrath of God upon the Children of disobedience. Let none deceive you with vain
words, neither deceive your selves with vain thoughts, as if you might escape
the wrath of God, although you live in the practice of such and such sins, see
how vain and groundless the security of such persons is, Deuteronomy. 28. 19, 20. Lest
there be among you a root that bears Gall and Wormwood; and it come to pass
when he hears the Words of this curse, that he blesses himself in his heart:
saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my heart, to
add Drunkenness to thirst: The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of
the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses
that are written in this Book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out
his name from under Heaven: Moreover we read, Gal. 3. 13. Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to
do them. Such as are guilty of any transgression of the Law, (whilst out of
Christ) are under the curse, and liable unto Gods Wrath, and it is said, Heb.
3. 2. That every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of
reward. Hence it is that the children of disobedience are called children of
Wrath, Ephesians. 2. 2, 3.

2. The wrath of God will come upon all Hypocrites, it is more peculiarly
appropriated unto them as their portion, Matthew. 24. 51. He shall cut him
asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Whoever escape Gods wrath, hypocrites shall not
escape, whoever are pardoned hypocrites shall be punished; such as have a form
of Godliness, but deny the power thereof; such as make some show of outward
reformation, but are without inward transformation, such as are like Painted
Sepulchers, fair and beautiful without, but within full of rottenness; such who
make it their great business to appear Religious, and take no care to be
Religious, but are rotten at heart and cover carnal designs with a cloak of
profession; as their sin is most offensive unto God here, so his wrath will
certainly come upon them, with the greatest severity hereafter.

3. The wrath of God will come upon all impenitent and unbelieving persons,
Luke 13. 3. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish, Mark. 16. 16. He
that believes not shall be damned, Repentance and Faith are two great duties
of the Gospel, and wrath is particularly threatened to such as do not obey the
Gospel: to such God will render indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish,
Romans 2. 8, 9. And Christ will come in flaming Fire, to take vengeance upon
them, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. Such as are impenitent and unbelievers, neglect the
Salvation of the Gospel which by Faith in Christ alone is attainable, and
sinning against the only remedy, they cannot escape, Heb. 2. 3. How shall we
escape if we neglect so great Salvation.

Fourthly, When this wrath of God will come.

1. The wrath of God will come in part upon the wicked immediately, after the
separation of their Soul from the Body, the souls of the wicked as soon as they
are loosned by death from the ruinous Habitation of their bodies, they
presently appear before God, and are condemned to Hell, and dragd by the Devil
the Jailer into that Prison, where they are bound in Chains of Darkness, filled
with horror and anguish, until the day of eternal Judgment. The Scripture
tells us of disobedient Spirits thrown into Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20.

2. The Wrath of God will come in full upon all the wicked together at the last
day, called the day of Judgment and Perdition of the Ungodly, 2 Pet. 3. 7.
When the Lord Jesus shall come to Judge the World, he will bring the Treasures
of Gods wrath with him, and render unto all the wicked that wrath and vengeance
which is their due, and therefore this day is called The day of Wrath and
Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2. 5. This will be a
dreadful day unto the wicked, when the Heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, and like a Stoll be rolled together, and the Elements shall melt with
frevent heat and be dissolved; when the Sun shall become black as Sackcloth of
Hair, and the Moon become like Blood, when the powers of Heaven shall be
shaken, and the Stars shall fall from Heaven unto the Earth like Figgs from
their Tree, when it is shaken with a mighty Wind; when there shall be
Thunderings exceeding loud, and Lightnings and Tempest exceeding horrid, when
the last Trumpet shall sound, and a mighty shout shall come down from above,
and awaken all the Sinners that are asleep in the dust; when Christ the great
Judge of the World shall come forth from his Fathers house, and make his
appearance in the World with Millions of mighty Angels, and all the Saints at
his right hand, clothed with Majesty and brightness of Glory; and when the
wicked shall come forth of their Graves, and so soon as they shall open their
eyes, shall see Heaven and Earth on Fire about their Ears, and the Lord Jesus
coming toward them in flaming Fire to take vengeance upon them; so soon as
they open their ears, shall hear the dreadful Trumpet and Shout in the Air, and
the Howlings and Lamentations of all their fellow Sinners about them upon the
Earth, O the dread and confusion which the wicked then shall be filled with!
when they are summoned and dragged to the Tribunal Seat of Christ, and there
have the Books opened before them, where all their fins are written, and which
then will be made manifest unto the whole World, and when the Sentence Depart
ye cursed into everlasting Fire, shall be passed upon them, and when the Lord
shall open the Treasures of Wrath unto them, and give them that portion thereof
which is their due; and when they shall see the mouth of Hell open beneath
them, and an horrible flame issuing forth from thence, giving notice of a more
horrible fire within, which is prepared for them; O the dread! O the shreeks!
Who can dwell with such devouring Fire? Who can inhabit such everlasting
burnings? How welcome would a great Rock or Mountain be, if they could find any
that would fall upon them, and hid them from the wrath of the Lamb, and keep
off the strokes of Gods vengeance, which then will be inflicted upon them? but
the Sentence being pronounced, the Execution will follow, and none can escape
it; from Christ's tribunal Seat the wicked will be rhrown into the fiery Prison
of Hell, where they will be shut down, and shut in, and that for ever; there
they will lie, there they will fry, and there they will cry, and though always
dying, yet they will never dye; the fire there will burn most dreadfully and
continually, and never be extinguished; and the wicked will be tormented there
in every part and in extremity, and their torment will never be ended.

Fifthly, Who this Jesus is, that does deliver from Wrath to come? In the Text
he is called Jesus, and the reason of this name we shall find, Matthew. 1. 21.
Thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall Save his People from their Sins.
This Jesus is (...) God and Man in one Person; he is the Eternal Son of God of
the same Essence with the Father, equal to him in Power and Glory, who before
the world, was appointed in time to be the Redeemer of Mankind, and when the
fullness of time was come, took to himself a true humane Body and Soul, was
conceived by the Holy Ghost, was Born of a mean Virgin, lived in a mean
condition, was owned by a voice from Heaven to be the only begotten and beloved
Son of God, who Preached the glad tidings of Salvation to Sinners, confirmed
his Doctrine by many Miracles; who died for the Salvation of sinners, and that
the cursed death of the Cross, was raised up the third day, appeared to his
Disciples after his Resurrection, and after forty day in the sight of many
Ascended up into Heaven, where now he is at the Right Hand of God, making
Intercession for us.

Sixthly. How does Jesus deliver from the Wrath of God which is to come? Jesus
does deliver from the wrath of God which is to come.

1. By his Death, hereby he has purchased deliverance, having hereby satisfied
Gods Justice; Jesus in his death did in our stead undergo that punishment which
our sins deserved, his Body was nailed to the Cross, which was a cursed death,
and his Soul was afflicted with the immediate impressions of Gods wrath, which
was so weighty and grievous, that any mere creature would have sunk under it;
but he being God-Man did bear up and break through, and got loose from under the
burden of wrath, and the bands of death, and the dignity of his person put a
merit upon his sufferings, especially the erernal compact or aggreement between
him and his Father being such, and so became a sufficient satisfaction to
Justice, and that accepted as fully as if sinners had done it in their own
persons. We read that Jesus himself bare our sins in his own body on the Tree,
1 Pet. 2. 24. That he gave his life a ransom for many, Mat. 20. 28. That we are
Redeemed with his Blood, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. That we are Reconciled through his
Death, Romans 5. 10. Jesus does deliver from wrath by his death, having therein
undergone it himself in the room of his People.

2. By his Intercession Christ does deliver from wrath to come; having offered
up himself a Sacrifice to satisfy Divine Justice for sin, he pleads the merit
of it at the right hand of God, in the behalf of sinners for their Redemption;
he is called not only our Surety to satisfy for us, Heb. 7. 22. But also our
Advocate to Plead for us, 1 John 2. 1. Our deliverance from Wrath to come, the
damnation and punishment of Hell does proceed not only from Christ's death,
whereby he has purchased it, but also from his Intercession, whereby he does
effectually impetrate and obtain it; and therefore the Apostle does join both
together in the procurement of freedom from condemnation. Romans 8. 34. Who is he
that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea, rather is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes incercession for us. And upon
this account he is said to be able to Save unto the uttermost, Heb. 7. 25.
Wherefore he is able to Save them to the uttermost; that to come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

3. By his Mission, or sending of his Spirit effectually to call People to
himself Jesus does bring them into a state of Salvation, and gives them an
actual Interest in this deliverance, which he has purchased for them, and this
leads to the next particular,

Seventhly, How any do or may have a share in this deliverance by Jesus, from
wrath to come? this is by faith in Jesus Christ, which is wrought by his Spirit
in effectual calling. When the Lord by his Spirit does open the eyes of
Sinners, and convinces them of the guilt and evil of their sins; awakeneth
their conscience, and works contrition, and a sense of their misery and
danger; and when the Lord shows and persuades them, how utterly unable they
are to Save themselves, that no reformation or righteousness of their own,
which either they have or can attain unto, can procure deliverance from wrath
for them; and withal, that no mere Creature in the World is able to help them
in this case; and when the Lord by his Spirit does discover himself, as the
only Savior and All-sufficient, and most willing to save and deliver them, and
withal does most powerfully and irresistably, and yet most sweetly how their
wills, and incline them to choose him for their Savior, and (grieving for sin
and renouncing their own righteousness) to call themselves, and rest upon him
alone for Salvation, and this accompained with a free, and resolved delivering
themselves up to his Teaching and Government; this is effectual calling,
wherein the Lord by his Spirit does draw, and lay hold on Sinners, and enableth
them by faith to lay hold on him, and hence arises their union to, and
Interest in Christ, and they come to have a share in the deliverance by Christ
from wrath to come. When the Jailer cried out with trembling to Paul and Silas;
Sirs, what must I do to be saved; the direction is, Believe in the Lord Jesus,
and thou shall be Saved, Act. 16. 30, 31. It is Faith that gives an Interest
in Christ, and hereby an Interest in the deliverance, which he has purchased.
It is Faith does unite us unto Christ, whereby we are said to be in him, and
there is no condemnation to them, which are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. We are
justified by Faith, Romans 5. 1, And so are absolved from the guilt of Sin, and
all obligation unto punishment; The Lord Jesus Christ having fully satisfied
Gods justice for our sins by his death in our stead, and this being imputed
unto us through Faith, and accounted as if we had done it our selves, (as a
surety's paying our Debt, is accounted by the Creditor as if we had paid it,)
we are acquitted, and no more exposed unto the wrath of God, and punishment of
Hell, than if we had never committed any one sin to deserve it.

Use 1. For Information.
1. See here the worth of Jesus, he is the Deliverer, and the only Deliverer
from wrath to come; Jesus Christ is a person of the greatest worth in himself;
the Divine and Humane Nature, being united in him, rendereth him infinitely
glorious, altogether lovely, and hence it is that he is replinished with such
transcendent excellencies and perfections, as are not to be found again in any.
Creature, either in Earth or Heaven; and Jesus Christ is esteemed to be the
most worthy person, by those that know him and understand what real worth is;
especially, sinners when awakened, and made sensible of the curse which lies
upon them for sin, and the wrath of God which hangs over them, and when they
come to apprehend how fearful a thing it is to fall under the strokes of Gods
vengeance, and see no way of escape, but only by Jesus, the only Deliverer from
future wrath, of all persons and things in the World, Jesus Christ is most
precious unto them; never did there appear in the world a person of such high
dignity, of such admirable beauty, and such wonderful Love as the Lord Jesus
Christ, who came down from the Father, and clothed himself with our nature, for
this end, that he might become our Savior and Redeemer, our Surety and
Advocat, and that he might deliver us from wrath to come.

2. See here the value of Christ's Death; without shedding of Blood there is no
Remission, Heb. 9. 22. And if no remission, then no deliverance from wrath to
come, if guilt does remain, punishment will ensue, and that of God's eternal
wrath in Hell; It was not the blood of Bulls and Goats, Sacrificed under the
Law that could remove guilt, and procure remission of Sin. Heb. 10. 4. For it
is not possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away Sin. But it
was through Christ's Sacrifice of himself once for all, and shedding of his
blood upon the Cross, that Remission of sins, and by consequence this
deliverance from wrath to come was purchased; It was not thousands of Rams, or
ten thousand rivers of Oil, or all the Treasures of the Earth, that could have
procured remission of Sin, because all this would have been no satisfaction
unto Gods Justice; but the Blood of Jesus, who is God-man, has satisfied Gods
Justice, by his death, Christ has paid the full price, which was due for sin,
surely then his death is of greater value, than the riches (were there so many)
of ten thousand worlds.

3. Here see the excellency of Faith, we read in the first Epistle of Peter, of
a precious Christ, Chap. 2. 7. And of Christ's precious Blood, Chap. 1. 19. And
of precious Faith also, Chap. 1. 7. Of all other graces, Faith is called
precious, and it has above other graces a peculiar excellency, not in respect
of it self so much, but in regard of it is object, as it does give Interest in
the precious Christ, and make application of his precious Blood, whereby we
come to attain a share in this deliverance by Christ from wrath to come. Christ
is most precious, as the Author of our deliverance; Christ death is most
precious, as the merit of our deliverance; and Faith is most precious, as the
instrument of our deliverance.

4. Here see what a Privilege it is to have the Gospel Preached amongst us,
which is a means to make discovery unto us of Jesus Christ, the only Deliverer
from wrath to come; as also to work Faith in us (which comes by hearing, Romans
10. 17.) Whereby alone we come to have Interest in Jesus Christ, and his
deliverance. Such as are without the Gospel are in darkness and unbelief, and
are hastening forward, toward the regions of eternal darkness, and they know
not whither they are going; It is of more use to have the Light of the Gospel,
than to have the light of the Sun, and the total removal of this light is a
greater judgment than any temporal calamity, since it is the means to prevent
eternal misery.

Use 2. For Examination.
Is Jesus the only Deliverer from wrath to come? it concerns all of you them
to examine your selves, whether you have an Interest in this Jesus, and the
deliverance from wrath, which he has purchased, and through him alone is to be
obtained. All of you are Sinners, you were born in sin, and you have lived in
sin, and should you dye in sin too, as certainly as the guilt of sin does lie
upon you, so certainly will the wrath of God come upon you; without an Interest
in Jesus Christ there can be no escaping for you; you may know whether you have
an Interest in Jesus Christ by your Faith, by your Life, by your Love, by your
Likeness, and by your Obedience.

1. If you have an Interest in Jesus Christ, then you have Faith, I don't mean
an Historical Faith, only to believe the History and report, which the Gospel
does give of Jesus Christ, what he has done and suffered, nor a temporary
Faith, which is the food presumption of some formal hypocrites, whereby they
may seem to cleave unto Christ, when indeed their hearts cleave chiefly to sin,
whereby through misapprehension of Gospel Privileges, and misapplication of
Gospel promises, they may attain unto some kind of fleshly love and joy, which
endures but a while, and they usually if put upon great trials do end in open
Apostasy: But if you have an Interest in Christ indeed, you have a true
justifying Faith, whereby being first convinced of sin, humbled and emptied of
your selves, resolvedly parting with all your sins as to affection, and
sincerely renouncing all your own righteousness as to dependence, you cast your
selves upon Christ, lean and depend upon him, expecting remission and
Salvation, alone through his perfect righteousness made yours by imputation.
Have you by Faith discerned Christ? have you by Faith applied Christ? are you
by Faith joined unto Christ? have you been by Faith taken off your own bottoms,
and built upon Christ the chief corner stone? have you by Faith been cut off
your old Stock, and engrossed into Christ the choice Vine? have you by Faith
been divorsed from sin, and married unto Christ the best Husband? are you
indeed got unto, and into Christ by Faith? and have you received him into your
hearts by Faith? without this true faith, there can be no true union to Christ,
without union to Christ, there can be no Interest in Christ, without Interest
in Christ, there can be no remission of sin, no Salvation and deliverance from
wrath to come.

2. If you have an Interest in Christ, you have Life, 1 John 5. 12. He that
has the Son has Life, and he that has not the Son has not life. He that
has an Interest in Christ, the Son of God, has life, he shall have Eternal
life hereafter, and he has Spiritual life, which is eternal life begun here;
such besides their natural life, which they received from their Parents in
their generation, they have a principle of spiritual life, which they receive
from the Spirit of God, in their regeneration; they are the only persons that
are quickened from their Spiritual death; but he that has not the Son has not
life; such shall never see life hereafter, but the wrath of God abides on
them, John 3. 36. And they are spiritually dead here, they are dead in
trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. You may know whether you have an Interest in
Jesus Christ by your spiritual Life, I do not say by your constant liveliness,
this may be wanting at sometimes in true believers, but you may know it by your
spiritual life; you were dead, but you are alive; and you may know your
spiritual life, by your spiritual motion from sin and toward God, by your
spiritual senses to discern between good and evil, by your spiritual appetite
after Christ and his righteousness, and communion with God in his ordinances,
and the like; if these be no symptoms of this spiritual life in you, it is a
sign that Christ is not in you, and if Christ be not in you, you have no
Interest in him and his deliverance.

3. If you have an interest in Christ, you have Love; you love Christ in
sincerity, Ephesians. 6. 24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus in
sincerity; and you love Christ with the supremacy of your love, Matthew. 10. 37.
He that loves Father or Mother, Son or Daughter more then me, is not worthy of
me. If any Man or Woman love any person or thing in the world more than Jesus
Christ, they are unworthy of him, and they have no interest in him, or any of
his benefits, and therefore a dreadful curse is pronounced upon such as do not
love Christ, 1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him
be Anathema Maranatha; that is, let him be cursed until the Lord come, and when
the Lord comes, the wrath of God also will come upon him.

If you have an interest in Christ, you have likeness, you are like unto
Christ, you have his Image upon you, Jesus Christ is formed in you, Gal. 4. 19.
You are like to Christ in your disposition, in humility, meekness,
Heavenliness, and the like; you are not perfectly like to him, yet in some
measure, and you imitate him more and more, and endeavor after more conformity
unto his Image; where Pride Reigns instead of Humility, where inordidate anger
reigns instead of meekness, where malice and revenge reigns instead of Love and
forgiveness, where the love of the world reigns instead of Heavenly minded,
ness, where evil concupiscence reigns instead of mortified affections, such are
without likeness to Christ, and they are without interest in Christ, they that
are graceless, are also Christless, and they cannot escape future wrath.

5. If you have an interest in Christ, you have Obedience; your Faith shows
it self in your works, Sam. 2. 18. And your love shows it self in your
keeping Christ's Commandments, John 14. 21. Such as do not obey Christ's, but
cast his Commandments behinds their back, and will not that this Lord should
rule over them, they have neither Faith, nor Love, nor Life, nor Likeness unto
Christ, and therefore be sure no interest in him.

Try your interest in Christ the only Deliverer from future wrath by these
marks.

Use 3. For Reproof and Terror.
If upon search, you find you are without an interest in Christ; suffer the
word of reproof. Sinners what do you think? is there no such thing as wrath to
come? is there no such place as Hell, where the damned shall be eternally
tormented? what blackmouth is there that dares to speak against this, which is
so clearly revealed in the Word of God? surely none but such as are children of
the Devil, the Father of lies will impeach the Word of God with falsehood, and
hereby make God a liar, who has foretold this so plainly in the Scripture;
only such as are loose in their lives, and deficient in their morals, whose
interest they think it is to do it, will deny the punishment by eternal fire in
Hell, that so they might sin with the less check and control; but when they
come to feell the heat of this fire, as of all others they are most like to be
cast into everlasting burnings, then they will be of another mind. And if there
be such dreadful wrath coming, such a horrible fire preparing in Hell, for all
disobedient persons, for all impenitent persons, for all hypocrites and
unbelievers, what do you do sinners? have ye not sinned, have ye not by your
sins deserved? and are ye not by your sins exposed unto the vengeance of
eternal fire? is there any way for you to escape, but only by Jesus Christ the
only Deliverer from wrath to come? and yet do you neglect him? do you refuse
and reject him? do you shut the door of your hearts against him? What! do you
mind only your bodies what ye shall eat, what ye shall drink, and wherewithal
ye shall be Clothed, and to provide for a short abode in this world, and in the
mean time negect the Salvation of your Souls, and take no care to prevent your
everlasting punishment? Are you not guilty of a great affront and indignity
against God, when he has made such provision for your Salvation, as to send
his Son into the World for you, and to proffer his Son with deliverance to you?
don't you sin against his chief command, which is to believe in and accept of
this Son? don't you sin against the greatest impression of his love unto
mankind? don't you spurn at his bowls, and in effect say, God might have kept
his Son to himself, for any thing you care? are you not guilty of the greatest
ingratitude toward the Lord Jesus Christ? Never was there such a thing heard
of, since the foundation of the world; never could such a thing have entered
into your thoughts or desires, as the Lord Jesus has freely, and of his own
accord done for you; and it is a most stupendous thing, which me thinks should
fill you with astonishment and admiration, that the Lord of glory should take
your flesh, and make himself of no reputation, and humble himself unto death,
even the cursed death of the Cross; and all that he might deliver you from the
curse of the Law, the wrath to come, and the pains of Hell for ever; now when
Christ by his death has fully satisfied God's justice for your sins, and
purchased eternal life for your souls, and out of wonderful kindness has
caused the everlasting Gospel, and glad tidings of Salvation to be made known
in this little nook of the Earth, and cast your lot in such a spot of ground,
as the like is not to be found again under the whole Cop of Heaven, for the
pure and powerful Preaching of the Gospel; I say, when Jesus Christ has sent
his faithful Ministers unto you, (whom you may find and hear if you will look
after them) with this Embassage, to tell you what Christ has done for you, and
to make tenders of him with all his benefits to you; when Christ by them lets
you know how able and willing he is to Save you, and knocks at the door of your
hearts for entertainment; that, though you are such helpless and miserable
Creatures without him, you should notwithstanding all thus refuse Christ or
neglect him, that you should prefere some base lusts before him, and to serve
the Devil, than to be saved by Christ; hereby you express great contempt of
Christ, and are guilty of horrid ingratitude; hereby you trample his Blood
under your feet, and you do in effect say he might have spared his pains in
coming down from Heaven, that he might have stayed until he had been sent for,
that he might have carried his Gospel to any other place, for any thing you
value it or him; thus you deal with Christ, and thrust him away from you,
though he come upon the most welcome errand, and ought to be received with all
readiness and thankfulness. And think sinners moreover how injurious you are
hereby unto your selves, what folly and madness you are guilty of; Do you know
what you are? if you do, you know that without Christ you are cursed wretches,
and children of wrath; behold a wonder in Christ, everlasting burnings are
become everlasting mercies, and he that will come at the last day as a Judge in
flaming fire, to take vengeance upon you, if you be found without an interest
in him, does now profer to be your Savior and Advocat, to deliver you from
wrath to come; and is it not depth of folly and sottishness to slight and
refuse such a person, and by refusing him, to plunge your selves into
unavoidable ruin and destruction? when you may have Christ, and with him all
things needful in this world, and that with greater security, than by all your
inordinate desires and endeavors; and moreover such riches as do exceed all
Earthly Treasures, and besides this a Crown of glory in the other world, and
notwithstanding this to neglect Christ, and choose rather the pleasures of sin
for a season, the gratifying of some base lusts unto the everlasting damnation
of your Souls and Bodies in Hell, to refuse with Christ everlasting happiness,
and headlong to run your selves into everlasting burnings; if this be not
folly and madness, I don't know what is. You cannot contrive or consult greater
mischief and injury to your selves, for I am persuaded that such as go to Hell
out of England, especially out of London, where they have or might have such
plentiful means of Grace, of all others will have the lowest and hottest place;
O how will it sting, and gnaw, and rack, and torture you for ever, to remember
what seasons and opportunities, what calls and invitations you have had; but by
your right of getting an interest in the Lord Jesus, the Deliverer from wrath
to come, you have brought ruin upon your selves. Think Sinners, how
unavoidable the wrath to come, is without an interest in Christ, and think, O
think, how intolerable this wrath will be when it is come, Who can dwell with
devouring Fire? Think of the extremity of pain and anguish, which is prepared
for you; and think of the eternity of Hells torments, that when you have been
there as many thousand Millions of years, as there are Stars or Sands, your
torment will be but beginning, and Never, Never, Never will it have any ending;
me thinks this should certify all Christless sinners, who are already
condemned to his place of torment, John 3. 8. He that believes not is
condemned already, and you know not how soon execution may follow upon the
Sentence, if you dye this night out of Christ, the wrath of God will seize upon
you immediately, and you will be miserable, inrecoverably, and to eternity.

Use 4. For Comfort, and that of all those who upon trial find well-grounded
evidence of their interest in this Jesus, the only Deliverer from wrath to come.
You are the only persons in the world, who are in a safe condition, Romans 8.
33, 34. Who shall lay thing unto your charge? If God do not charge you with
guilt, who can charge you besides? through Christ God does justify you, he
pardons all your sins as if they had never been, and accepts of you as
perfectly righteous, through the perfect righteousness of Christ made yours by
Faith. Who is it that shall condemn you? the Law may condemn you, and
Conscience may condemn you, but since Christ died for you, and in his death was
condemned and suffered in your stead, you are freed from the condemnation of
God, and the eternal damnation of Hell; and being out of all danger of future
wrath, you may the better bear any evil of affliction, which in this world may
be your portion; and you may comfortably wait for the coming of Christ from
Heaven, whom God has raised from the dead; even this Jesus who has delivered
you from wrath to come, and who will bring for you, and give to you everlasting
glory and happiness at the day of his second appearance.

Use 5. For Exhortation.
1. Of such as are without an interest in Christ the Deliverer from wrath to
come; O be persuaded without any further delay, to flee from this wrath of God,
which has you in the pursuit, and will overtake you ere long, and that by
fleing unto, and getting an interest in this Jesus, who only can deliver you. O
that I might be instrumental to bring some of you unto a closure with Jesus
Christ! Sinners will you be persuaded at length to accept of Christ? you may
have him, and you must have him, otherwise you are cursed, you are lost, and you
cannot escape eternal death and wrath. If you would be delivered from wrath to
come by Jesus Christ, take these few directions.

1. Labor for a through sense of your absolute need of Christ, and that not
only by reason of your guilt of sin and danger of Hell, but also that there is
no Salvation nor deliverance attainable by any other way but by Jesus Christ:
Think not that your repentance and reformation, though this be necessary and
without which there can be no Salvation for you, yet that this can save you
without Christ, if you should attain this, and rest in this, you will as
certainly go to Hell, as the most wicked transgressour; you cannot be saved by
any of your own righteousness, because your righteousness is imperfect and
therefore cannot satisfy Gods Justice for your sins, and therefore cannot
deliver you from wrath to come; should you weep for your sins till your eyes
were out, and sigh and grief for sin till your hearts did break, should your
wear you knees to the bones with kneeling, and wear your Tongues to the roots
with praying, and consume your flesh to nothing with fasting, should you be as
just, and temperate, and charitable, and as strictly Religious as any
breathing; yea, as holy for the future as any Angel in Heaven, all this would
not wipe away the guilt of your sin, nor deliver you out of the hands of Gods
Justice, which must be satisfied; one says very well, if any would be saved by
their own righteousness, they must first go to Hell, and there continue in
torments to eternity, and if that could be supposed, which cannot be supposed
to be done, because there is no ending of those torments which are eternal, and
therefore no possibility of getting loose from them, yet supposing that any
could do this, they must come back and fulfill the Law in every tittle, both
which being impossible for you, who are guilty of sin, you have absolute need
of Christ's perfect righteousness in order to your deliverance from wrath to
come.

It is this which damneth and sinketh many thousands in Hell, the looking and
seeking to be saved by a rigteousness of their own; I know that most are damned
for their unrighteousness, and go to Hell in the broader way of gross impiety
and wickedness; yet if that be the broader way and have it is ten thousands,
this is too broad and has it is thousands, besides the more sober amongst the
Heathens, who belived a future state of happiness, and looked to arrive to it
by the moral Righteousness; besides the Papists, who assert justification by
works, and that we are no otherwise justified than as we are made internally
righteous, and this expressing it self in acts of obedience; and besides
Socinians and other Sects together with the Quakers, who plainly affirms that
we must be saved by a righteousness within, which the Quakers call Christ
within, (all which do fundamentally err in their judgments concerning the
righteousness, which alone can save.) I say besides these, it is natural unto
all to seek Salvation this way; all are born under a Covenant of works, they
are under the Law, and not under Grace, and when any think how they shall be
saved, they presently run to work, and seek after a righteousness of their own,
and to fulfill the Law themselves, and hope if they repent and lead a new life,
though they have sinned that God is merciful^, and he will pardon and save
them. It is an ordinary thing, even where the light of truth does shine most
clearly, and the Gospel is Preached most powerfully, when any are convinced of
sin by the beams of this light, and awakened out of their security, by some
powerful Sermon, discovering their danger of eternal ruin, as the just desert
of Sin, they will cry out with the Jailer what shall we do to be saved? and
however they be directed as he was to believe, yet the most do rest in doing
and not believing; they fall presently upon confession of sin and sorrowing for
it, they fall upon reforming, they will not now be drunk or swear, or commit
Adultery, or break the Sabbath, or defraud in their dealings, now they begin to
hear the Word, and Pray in their Families, and pray in their Closets, and keep
days of Fasting, and conforms unto all the External acts of Devotion; and if
they can attain unto some kind of flashy affection, they think all is well; and
if they find their hearts dull and cold and hard, they may also be troubled for
it, not upon a right Gospel account, but because they feel they want such a
righteousness to present God withal as they desire, or through some secret
fear that their righteousness will not hold water; but all this while these
persons seek after salvation through a self righteousness, and Christ is left
out and his righteousness, either unknown or utterly disregarded and neglected
by them; and thus many go to Hell in a way of duty, their duties are the
occasion of their damnation, through their resting in them, and expecting
Salvation by them; It may seem strange, that any should have hopes of Salvation
by imperfect servings, but this I suppose may come to pass, either because they
don't mind the imperfections of their services, for want of understanding the
Law in the Spirituality of it, and examining themselves by it, or through
apprehensions that Gods mercy revealed in his Word will Pardon them, not
considering that all his special Mercy, in pardoning and saving is through
Christ; not considering that God is infinitely just and righteous as well as
merciful, and that there is no room for the exercise of Mercy toward Sinners,
until Justice be satisfied; that Gods justice requires a perfect righteousness,
otherwise there cannot be a perfect justification, that there must be full
satisfaction to Gods justice, for the breach of Gods Law, otherwise there can
be no clear remission, and that there must be perfect righteousness made out
some way, otherwise we cannot be accepted by God as righteous. Since therefore
this satisfaction to Gods justice cannot be by our selves, because being
finite, we cannot make an infinite compensation, which infinite justice does
require, and since perfect righteousness, which must include both original and
actual cannot be in us, who are guilty both of original and actual sin, and the
least sin rendering for ever a personal perfect righteousness impossible, and
the Law curses every one that continues not in all things, which are written
in the Book of the Law to do them, and therefore as many as are of the Law,
that seeks justification and Salvation by the way of works, or righteousness of
the Law, are under the curse, Gal. 3. 10. It is clear that whoever do expect to
be saved from wrath to come, it must not be by their own righteousness, but by
another righteousness, namely the righteousness of Christ; If you would attain
an interest in Christ, you must be sensible of your need of him and his
righteousness upon this account.

2. Labor for a through acquaintance with the nature, intendment, and efficacy
of the righteousness of Christ; The Apostle says of the Jews, Romans 10. 2, 3,
4. I bear them record, they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge,
for they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish
their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of
God, for Christ is the end of the Law for righteouness unto every one that
believes. And as it was with the Jews of Old, so it is with many nominal
Christians now, who may be led only by a blind zeal, to work out their own
Salvation in a way of doing, and it is through their ignorance of the
righteousness of Christ, (called here the righteousness of God either, because
it is the righteousness alone which God, will accept, or which God has found
out and provided for men, which sense it must have, Romans 3. 21. 22. But now the
righteousness of God without the Law is manifest, even the righteousness of
God, which is by Faith in Jesus Christ, etc. That is the righteousness which
God does accept, and has appointed for our justification; or it is called the
righteousness of God, because it is the righteousness of Christ, who is
God-man, no other righteousness than of such a person, being sufficient for man
in his fallen estate;) I say through the ignorance of this righteousness of
Christ, many Christians seeking after a righteousness in order to their
Salvation, they go about to establish their own righteousness, that is a
personal righteousness, and endeavor the gaining of Heaven in a way of doing,
and so do not submit themselves to the righteousness of God; It is through
Pride (so natural unto every one) that they are loath to be beholding wholly
unto another, and therefore they would have something of their own to commend
them unto God, and therefore they do not submit unto the righteousness of
Christ, which God has provided for them.

Therefore you must labor to be clear in your understanding, what this
righreousness of Christ is; there are two things requisite and absolutely
necessary unto fallen man. The first is satisfaction unto Gods Justice for his
sins, and without this there can be no escape of eternal death and misery,
because guilt does oblige unto punishment, and this cannot be removed until
Gods Justice be satisfied; the other is perfect actual obedience unto Gods Law,
and without this there can be no attaining eternal Life and Glory: the first
Covenant of works, (so Man in his fallen State) being still in force, Do this
and Live, and the Soul that sins shall dye; now man being finite, cannot
satisfy Gods justice for his sins, and being a Sinner, cannot yield perfect
actual obedience to Gods Law; but the Lord Jesus Christ has done both for man.

1. Christ by his sufferings, and death upon the Cross did make satisfaction
unto Gods justice, he being made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. And undergoing
equivalent punishment, punishment unto the damned storment, and being God-man,
though the humane nature only did suffer, yet the Divine nature in the same
person did put an infinite value upon the sufferings of the humane, and so
became a sufficient satisfaction unto Gods infinite justice, and hereby he has
purchased remission of sins and deliverance from wrath to come.

2. Christ has yielded perefect actual obedience unto the Law, he has
fulfilled all righteousness, that not having a righteousness perfect of our
own, his might he made ours, and we might attain life thereby; this passive and
active obedience of Christ which you should labor to understand, and that
Christ had not this righteousness for himself, he had no sin of his own to
suffer for, but it was in our stead, and as our surety, and this righteousness
was intended for us, and being the righteousness of such a person is highly
efficacious to attain, that for which it was designed, as will appear by the
Covenant.

3. Labor for a through understanding of the Covenant, and that both the
Covenant, which God made with Christ in the behalf of man, and the Covenant
which God has made with man through Christ.

1. Acquaint your selves with the Covenant God made with Christ, in the behalf
of man, whatever worth and value there was in the righteousness of Christ, yet
God might have required a personal righteousness and satisfaction, and Christ's
righteousness might have stood us in no stead; but God did eternally Covenant
and agree with Christ, that if he would take Humane nature and work out a
righteousness for fallen man, it should be accepted, that if he would take to
him the body, he should prepare for him, and make his Soul an Offering for sin,
that is, suffer what his justice did require for the sins of Man, that he
should see his Seed, and justify many, Isa. 53. 10, 11. It is through this
Covenant with Christ that Christ righteousness is accepted in the behalf of
Sinners, God having agreed before that, so it should be.

2. Acquaint your selves with the Covenant God has made with Man through
Christ, wherein upon the account of Christ God has promised remission of sins,
and eternal life, Heb. 10. 16, 17. This is my Covenant that I will make with
them says the Lord; I will put my Laws into their hearts, and their sins and
iniquities I will remember no more. 1 John 2. 25. This is the promise which he
has promised, even eternal life. If ever you be saved from eternal wrath, and
attain eternal life, it must be by virtue of this New Covenant of Grace,
wherein God does engage himself to give what his Son has purchased.

3. Labor to be acquainted with the nature and use of faith, which is the
Tenor of the Covenant of Grace; the Tenor of the Covenant of work was Do and
Live, the Tenor, or that required to give an interest in the Covenant of grace
is Believe and Life; Faith joins the Soul unto Christ, the Mediator of this
Covenant; and gives an actual interest in him and his purchase, and whatever
is promised through him in the Covenant; Faith is a resting of the Soul alone
upon Christ, and an application of the promises of Pardon and life unto the
Soul; Faith is not only a discerning, but applying or laying hold on Christ's
righteousness without us, whereby it is imputed to us, or accounted once by
God, as if it had been our own personal righteousness; If ever you would be
justified, that is, have your sins pardoned, and your persons accepted as
perfectly righteous in the sight of God, it must be by Faith, renouncing your
own righteousness as imperfect and insufficient, apprehending and applying,
resting and trusting in Christ's perfect righteousness.

4. Apply your selves unto God in Prayer, that he having given his Son for you,
would also him give to you, and that he would give you Faith to receive him,
and apply him; beg this again and again, with confession of your sins and sense
of your want of Christ, and never leave asking until you obtain; attend also
upon the Word where it is Preached most purely and powerfully for the working
of Faith, which comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17. And then in the strength of the
Lord put forth the hand to lay hold on Christ, and labor to cast your selves
upon him, resigning withal, your selves up unto him, not only to be saved, but
also taught and ruled by him.

Obj. I know it will be objected, that if we seek thus to be delivered from
wrath to come by Jesus Christ, and Faith in his righteousness without us, and
not by internal righteousness, and that of works, that this will open a door to
Licentiousness.

Ans. I Answer, That this is an old Objection against the Doctrine of
justification by Faith, even in the days of the Apostles, when the Doctrine was
first Preached. But as then, so also now this Doctrine does not give any
liberty to sin, for however we cannot be saved by inherent righteousness, and
any of our good works, yet we cannot be saved without them; none assert more
highly that there must be Regeneration and Sanctification, a new heart and new
life, otherwise there can be no admission into Heaven, no escaping of the
damnation of Hell; Yea, further we say that the same Faith which is an
instrument of justification, is also a part of Sanctification, being a heart
purifying grace, Act, 15. 9. That as Faith is a hand to lay hold on Christ's
righteousness without us; so it is a hand to receive supplies of grace and
spirit from Christ for the quickening of us unto newness of Life; yea, I may say
there can be no real inherent righteousness, withou an interest by Faith in
Christ's imputed righteousness, there may be some thing like it, a
righteousness of some kind there may be, but not of the right kind, not a
righteousness which springs from the true principle, which is says, and
therefore not a righteousness that is pleasing unto God, for without Faith it
is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. So that if you would have inherent
righteousness, and walk so as to please God, you must belive in the Lord Jesus,
and fetch grace from him, in whom all fullness does dwell, Col. 1. 19. If you
would have lust mortified, the world crucified, and overcome the Devil, who
endeavors by his temptations to draw you unto sin, you must by Faith draw
virtue and strength to do it. In a word, if you would deny Ungodliness and
Worldly lusts, and live soberly, righteously, and Godly in this present evil
world, you must do it by Faith. But how to attain the principle and practice of
Godliness, I may else where give direction.

Had I room I might speak much by way of exhortation, to such as have attained
an interest in Christ, and the deliverance purchased by him; in a word, learn
to admire free grace, to be very thankful and watchful, to endeavor the
bringing others to Christ, to adorn your profession, to be blameless and
harmless the Disciples of Christ, without rebuke in the midst of a crooked and
perverse Generation, among whom you should shine as Lights in the World here,
that so you may shine like Stars, yea, like Suns in the Kingdom of your Father
for ever.

FINIS.
Books of this Author Printed.
God's Terrible Voice in the City; being a Re-Plague and Fire in London.

Christ's certain and sudden appearance to Judgment.

Fire and Brimstone from Heaven, in the Burning of Sodom formerly. From Earth,
in the Burning of Aetna lately. In Hell, to Burn the wicked eternally. These
Printed for George Calvert, and to be Sold at his Shop at the Golden Ball in
Duck-lane.

Words whereby we may be Saved, and Words of advice to young Men. Printed for
T. Parkhurst, and to be Sold at his Shop, at the Golden Bible on Londen-Bridge.

The Foundation of God Stands Sure, or an Answer to W. Pens Sandy Foundation
Shaken.


