WORDS WHEREBY We may be Saved.

By THOMAS VINCENT, sometime Minister of Maudlins Milk-street, LONDON.

Act. 11. 14. Who shall tell thee Words whereby thou and all thy House shall be
saved.

Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which began
to be spoken of by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him?

LONDON, Printed for the use of the Poor, and freely given to them by some
worthy Benefactors, who desire their Salvation. 1668.

To the POOR.
THese few sheets were chiefly intended for you; and therefore I thought fit in
a few lines to dedicate them unto you. Some Benefactors give you Food, others
give you Raiment, others give you Money; all which gifts are for the relief of
your temporal necessities, and of concernment only to your bodies. Here you
have a gift in order to the relief of your Spiritual necessities, a Soul-gift,
which does concern your salvation. And as the Soul is more excellent than the
Body, and the Salvation here treated of, is of ten thousand times more value
than all earthly Riches: So in some measure of proportion you should prize such
gifts chiefly as are for the good of your Souls, and may be (through Gods
blessing) a help to you in the attaining of Salvation. Your souls are as
precious as the souls of the most honorable; and your souls whilst in a state
of nature, are in as great danger of ruin, as the souls of the most sinful;
and though you should be as yet out of a state of Salvation, you are as capable
of obtaining salvation as the most holy before Conversion. And for your further
encouragement I may tell you, that you may get to Heaven without so great
difficulties as the Rich: See Matthew. 19. 24. and Jam. 2. 5. you have not those
snares and temptations in your way as the Rich have; which as it should quicken
your endeavors after, so it will aggravate your sin if you should neglect your
salvation.

Wicked rich men have their good things here, some kind of Portion in this
life, and their evil things are chiefly reserved until hereafter; But you
which are Poor have little portion of good things in this life, and if you do
not obtain salvation, you will have no good things reserved for you in the
other World, nothing but treasures of wrath according to your treasures of sin;
and so besides the miseries you undergo here, you will be miserable hereafter,
and miserable for ever. My hearts desire and prayer for you is, That you may be
saved; therefore have I written these things. You have this little Book freely
given unto you by some Worthy Persons, who hope for a fuller reward than the
price of any Books can amount unto; especially if this Book be made use of by
the Lord as a means for the conversion and salvation of any of your souls,
their reward will be the greater that have been instrumental herein; therefore
accept of this Gift, read it in your Families, or get it read to you where you
cannot read your selves. But chiefly accept of the Salvation this Book speaks
of, which, however dearly purchased by the blood of Christ, is freely tendered
unto you. Salvation is a Gift, and the greatest, most excellent, and most
necessary Gift; to move and guide you in the obtaining of which, is the design
of these sheets; which that they may be successful, is the Prayer of a dear
Lover of, and Well-wisher to the Poor.

Thomas Vincent.

CHAP. I.
THE chief end which every one ought to intend in his Life, is the Glory of
God, and the Salvation of his own Soul: The chief work of Ministers is to tell
People words whereby they may be saved: Such words Peter speaks to Cornelius,
Act. 11. 14. and such words I shall endeavor in these sheets to tell sinners.

In order to your salvation, I shall speak, 1. Some Words to try you whether
you be in a state of Salvation. 2. Some Words to move you to endeavor after
your Salvation. 3. Some Words to guide you in the way to attain Salvation.


I. The first words shall be to try you, whether you be in a state of
Salvation; and here I must put you upon the trial of your selves, wherein I
may give you some help; take the Exhortation of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own selves. Examine
your selves by the Rule of the Word: And because these Words are chiefly
intended in order to the salvation of such as have not yet attained it; to
prepare them for the following Motives and Directions, which, if they mistook
themselves to have already attained to a state of salvation, would likely do
them no good: Therefore I shall briefly out of the Word of God give

Some Characters of such as are not in a state of Salvation.
1. Ignorant persons are not in a state of salvation. See this Isa. 27. 11. It
is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them will not have
mercy on them, and he that formed them will show them no favor: Those that are
grossly ignorant of the Fundamental Truths of Religion, concerning God and
Christ, the lost estate of Man since the fall, the way of Salvation,
Repentance, Faith, the Resurrection from the dead, the last Judgment, and the
future Rewards and Punishments in Heaven and Hell, and the like Principles of
Religion, which are necessary to be known in order to salvation, they cannot
for the present be in a state of Salvation; the meanest understanding is
capable of knowing these things by the teachings of the Word and Spirit,
therefore such as do neglect the means of Instruction, and do not search the
Word, and cry to God for it, but nuzzle up themselves in an affected ignorance
in these things, are inexcusable in their fault, and will bring unavoidable
destruction upon themselves, Hos. 4. 6. My people are destroyed for lack of
knowledge.

2. Negligent persons are not in a state of salvation, I mean such as neglect
their salvation. Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation? Such as do not value and prize this great salvation purchased by
Christ, and published in the Gospel; such as never were made sensible of their
need hereof; such as never had any great desires after it; such as never took
any pains in the use of means to obtain it; all which are evidences of their
neglect, they cannot escape the dreadful punishment of Hell, which is prepared
for such persons. Such as are diligent to make provision for their Bodies, but
neglect the salvation of their souls; if they persevere in this negligence they
must needs miss of salvation.

3. Impenitent persons are not in a state of salvation. Luke 13. 3. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. All are guilty of sin original, and
actual, and have matter for repentance; such as have an obdurate and impenitent
heart, which never was broken, and melted, and humbled; which never was
affected with true evangelical sorrow for sin; but on the contrary, can commit
sin with delight, rolling it as a sweet morsel under their tongue, which they
will not part withal, they must needs perish everlastingly, if they should die
in this estate; the word is express, that iniquity will be the ruin of the
impenitent, Ezekiel. 18. 30.

4. Unregenerate persons are not in a state of salvation. Joh. 3. 3. Except a
man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Such as never had a
gracious change wrought in their hearts, that are asleep in sin, and never were
awakened; as are dead in sin, and never were quickened; such as have old
natures and old hearts, and never were renewed; that never put off as
concerning their former conversation the old man which is corrupt, according to
deceitful lusts, and put on the new man, which is created in righteousness and
true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 22, 24. they are incapable whilst such, of this
salvation, there is no entrance for them into the Kingdom of Heaven.

5. Christless persons are not in a state of salvation, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Know ye
not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates. Such
as have not Christ, and are not themselves in Christ, they are for the present
in a state of Reprobation; It is Christ only can save; those that are without
Christ, that are not united to him by Faith and the Spirit, that are
Unbelievers without Faith, and carnal without the Spirit, they cannot, whilst
such, be saved.

6. Unsanctified persons are not in a state of salvation. Heb. 12. 14. Without
holiness none shall see God. Such as are unholy, such as live after the flesh
shall die, none but those that through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body shall live, Romans 8. 13.

7. And in a word, Disobedient persons are not in a state of salvation. Heb. 5.
9. He became the author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him, to none
else; and Ephesians. 5. 6. The wrath of God comes upon the Children of disobedience.
Such as walk in a course of disobedience, as live and allow themselves in the
practice of known sins, whatever they be, they are children of wrath because
children of disobedience. The Scriptures are so plain, that I need without many
words of mine, only lay them before you, as a Glass wherein you may discern
your spiritual state. Try your selves by these places, these Texts will reach
all that are not in a state of salvation.

CHAP. II.
II. THE second words shall be to move you to endeavor after your Salvation.

The Motives to stir up you to endeavor your salvation may be drawn, 1. From
the consideration of your selves, Whom you should endeavor the salvation of.
2. From the consideration of the salvation which you should endeavor to
obtain. 3. From the consideration of the Damnation of all such as do not obtain
salvation.


Motive 1. From the consideration of your selves, whom you should endeavor the
salvation of: It is the salvation of your selves, which I would press you unto;
It was the exhortation of the Apostle, Phil. 2. 12. Work out your own salvation
with fear and trembling, and this is my exhortation of you this day, Labor
after your own salvation: If I were to persuade you to do some great kindness
for another, were it a difficult thing and like to cost you much labor and
trouble, I should not likely prevail; but when I am persuading you to do a
kindness for your selves, and the greatest kindness in the World, even to
endeavor after the salvation of your selves; methinks the natural Love which
you bear to your selves should induce you to hearken and do whatever is
requisite in order hereunto, though it cannot be done without difficulty and
trouble. How far will carnal self-love carry carnal men? what difficulties will
they go through? what expenses of time and pains and strength will they be at?
how will some rise up early and sit up late, deny themselves food and rest and
many comforts of this life? how will others compass Sea and Land and hazard
life it self, and all to get an estate in the world for themselves? and should
not spiritual self-love, which is the only real self-love, carry you through
difficulties? should you think much of exspending time and pains that you may
get salvation for your selves? carnal self-love will bring destruction and
misery upon such as are swayed by it, and in the issue will prove self-hatred;
as you really love your selves, as you would escape the most dreadful misery,
and obtain the chiefest happiness for your selves, labor after salvation for
your selves. Your self, your Persons do consist of two parts, namely, Soul and
Body; it is the salvation of both, which I exhort you unto.

1. Consider, it is the salvation of your Souls which I would have you
endeavor after, the salvation of your precious souls; your souls are more
precious than your bodies, and they are more precious than the whole world.

1. Your souls are more precious than your bodies, they are by far your more
excellent part: the original of your soul is more immediately from God: he
forms the spirit of man within him, Zach. 12. 1. they are beams, they are
streams that issue forth immediately from God; moreover they carry more of the
impress and image of God upon them as they are invisible, spiritual, rational,
free, immortal; they have also more high and excellent operations than the body
is capable of, as of the understanding, conscience, memory, will, affections;
and I may add that if there be any luster upon the body, it does receive it
from the soul, when the soul is gone, the beauty is gone; whatever motion or
use there is in the body, it does depend on the soul; when the soul is
departed, the body can neither hear, nor speak, nor see, nor walk, nor do any
business; the body is a rotten stinking carcass without the soul; and whilst
the soul does abide in it, the body is the inferior part, the body is but the
Cabinet, the soul is the Jewel; the body is but the house of clay, the soul is
the living inhabitant; the body is as it were the beast (as one says Corpus
homini jumentum) which the soul does make use of to carry it from one place to
another; the body is the servant, it is the soul that rules, O labor then
after the salvation of your souls, which are your most excellent part; what
care do some take to preserve their bodies? much more reason have you to
endeavor the salvation of your souls: when London's Fire was burning the
houses, those who could not save all their goods, took care to save those which
were the most precious, especially their money and jewels; O whatever become
of your bodies here, whatever sickness or hardship they be exposed unto, labor
to save your jewels, your precious souls; the Cabinet will be spoilt, the clay
and mudd-wall will be broken down, and the soul will survive the body; O take
heed that when your souls come forth of their houses of clay, that they be not
cast into the deep and dark prison of Hell.

2. Your souls are more precious than the whole world; our Savior esteemed
them so, and he best knew the worth of souls, who knew the making of them, and
made purchase of so many lost souls, see Matthew. 16. 26. What is a man profited,
if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man
give in exchange for his soul? Suppose that you had your hearts-desire in the
world, that your baggs should throng in your Coffers, till there were no more
room; your gold and silver should increase without number; suppose you had
great possessions abroad, large revenues, stately houses, fruitful gardens and
orchards, pleasant groves and walks, spacious fields and meadows, which as the
Poet says, would weary the wings of a Kite to fly over in a day; suppose that
you had sweet and beautiful wives at home, like loving Hindes and pleasant Roes
unto you, like fruitful Vines about your houses; that you had towardly and
hopeful Children like Olive-plants round about your Tables; that you had most
kind and faithful friends of most pleasant conversation; that you had
servants, horses, chariots, coaches, dogs, hawks, and all sorts of serviceable
and delightful creatures, the best and in the greatest number at your commands
to attend your pleasure: suppose you were clothed with purple, wrapped in fine
linen, adorned with gold and silver, and precious stones, and had the most
rich and glorious Attire that the greatest cost and art could make for you:
suppose that your food were most delicious, that Air, Earth, and the Sea were
ransacked to provide dainties for your Table; that your courses were served up
with the most rich and generous Wine, the most sweet and harmonious music:
suppose that you were laden with titles of honor, and had all the Crowns and
Scepters of the earth laid at your feet, and that the whole world had you in
the highest esteem, and were in willing subjection unto you; yet what would it
profit you to gain all these things, or any thing else that the heart of man
could desire in the world, and lose your souls, which are a thousand fold more
precious: the gain of these things are but for the body, and but for a while;
whereas the loss of the soul is for ever; and when the soul is lost, all is
lost; when the soul leaves the body, a period is put to all earthly
enjoyments; and the more you have of these things, the more grievous will it be
to part with them; Think with your selves that you must dye certainly, and may
dye suddenly, and then, if not before, you will acknowledge the worlds vanity
and the preciousness of your souls, which are of longer duration than the age
of ten thousand worlds put together, and what is the gain of the world which is
so transitory and temporal, in comparison with the loss of the soul which is
immortal, and whose loss is irrepairable: a loss in the estate may be
recovered, Riches may fly away upon the wing, and sometimes return upon the
wing again, as in the case of Job; but the loss of the soul can never be
recovered; when once the soul has taken wing and is fled into the lower
regions, it will never find wings to return again to its former estate: O
therefore whatever you lose, take heed you do not lose your souls, your souls
are very precious, seek after their salvation.

2. It is the salvation also of your Bodies which I would have you endeavor
after: I do not mean the salvation of your bodies from sufferings, which
Religion does sometimes call you unto; nor a salvation of your bodies from
sickness and temporal death, which Religion does not exempt any from; but the
salvation of your bodies from perpetual death and pain of Hell; you may pamper
your flesh for a while on Earth, which may make it a more fit bait for the
Worms in the grave, and your bodies after death may be at rest, and take a
sweet sleep for many years in the dust; but there is a morning approaching
after the long night of death and many hours of darkness, in which the graves
will be opened and the dead will be awakened, and then your bodies will come
forth of the dust; and they will be adjudged by Christ unto most horrid and
endless torments in Hell, to burn for ever in unquencheable Fire, if you be
found under the guilt of sin: O therefore labor after the salvation of your
Bodies; when your bodies now are sick, you endeavor to get them cured, when
they are full of pain, you use means to get the pain removed; and you will fly
as fast and as far as you can from natural Death, and you will do much to
lengthen out and strengthen the thread of your life, though do what you can, it
will in time be cut asunder, and death which has you upon the chase will
overtake and overcome you whatever resistance be made; O labor to get
deliverance from the pains of body which are prepared in Hell for the damned:
Fly, O Fly from eternal Death and the strokes of Gods wrath which will come
upon the bodies of the wicked hereafter; if you would not have those faces
scorched, those eyes and tongues and hands roasted, and that flesh broiled and
fearfully tormented in the flames of Hell fire, labor after salvation. As you
love then your selves, your souls and bodies, seek after your salvation.

CHAP. III.
Motive 2. FRom the consideration of the Salvation which you should endeavor
to obtain; and here I shall set before you some properties of this salvation to
move you the more effectually to seek after it. 1. It is a great Salvation. 2.
It is a rare Salvation. 3. It is a necessary Salvation. 4. It is a possible
Salvation. 5. It is a near Salvation. 6. It is an evident Salvation. 7. It is a
free Salvation. 8. It is a sure Salvation.


I. It is a great Salvation, and that both in regard of the thing it self, and
in regard of the causes of it.

(1.) It is great in regard of the thing it self. As in Motion, so in Salvation
there is the terminus a quo, and the terminus ad quem, the term from which, and
the term to which; that which people are in Salvation delivered from, and that
which in Salvation they attain unto, both which are exceeding great.

1. That which people in Salvation are delivered from.

There are six great evils which those that are saved are delivered from.

1. From sin, the greatest evil of all, from the guilt of sin, Ephesians. 1. 7. and
the power, the reigning power of sin, Romans 6 14. 2. From Satan the greatest
enemy of all, from his power and tyranny, Col. 1. 13. 2 Timothy 2. 26. 3. From the
Law, the evil which it occasioneth, namely, the provoking to concupiscence and
disobedience, Romans 7. 5, 6. and the evil which it denounces, namely Gods
curse, Gal. 3. 10, 13. 4. From the world, not in regard of their place, but in
regard of their course, Gal. 1. 4. Joh. 15. 19. Joh. 17. 16. 5. From Death, the
sting of death, and the fear of death, at least the grounds of fear, Heb. 2.
14, 15. 6. From wrath, the wrath of God which is to come, 1 These. 1. 10.

2. This Salvation is great in regard of that which in Salvation people do
attain unto. All the privileges of the Gospel are wrapped up and included in the
word Salvation. Election is the foundation of it; Effectual calling is the
beginning of it; Justification, Adoption and Sanctification are contained in it,
and Glorification is the consummation of it. This Salvation then is great in
regard of the thing it self.

(2.) This Salvation is great in regard of the causes of it. 1. Efficient. 2.
Meritorious. 3. Instrumental. 4. Final.


1. This Salvation is a great Salvation in regard of the efficient cause, and
that is God the Father: Salvation is ascribed to him as the author, Tit. 3. 5.
According to his mercy he saved us. God is the cause of our Salvation, 1. as he
has chosen us unto Salvation, Ephesians. 1. 4. As he has chosen us in him before
the foundation of the world: which Election being of Free grace, we are said to
be saved by Grace, Ephesians. 2 5. 2. As he has sent his only begotten Son into the
world, to purchase Salvation for us, Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world that he
gave his only begotten Son that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life. Gal. 4. 4, 5. When the fullness of the time was come
God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them
which were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. 3. As he
reveals this Salvation unto us by the Preaching of the Gospel, for which end
he qualifyeth and sends his Ministers upon this Embassage to make known the
glad tidings of Salvation. 4. As he conferrs Salvation actually upon us in our
effectual calling, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification and Glorification,
all these are from God. Now that must needs be a great Salvation which is
effected by the great God, especially if we consider that it is the greatest
and most glorious of all his works in the world, and unto which all his other
works have some kind of tendency.

2. This Salvation is a great Salvation in regard of the meritorious cause, and
that is the Lord Jesus Christ, the excellency and greatness of whose nature,
office and sufferings do demonstrate the greatness of this Salvation which was
purchased by him. The sufferings of Christ were most properly the meritorious
cause of man's salvation, and they were the greatest sufferings that ever were
endured, insomuch as 1. They were the sufferings of the greatest person; as man
he was the head of the creation in regard of dignity, he was a greater King
than Solomon, Matthew. 12. 42. a greater Prophet than Moses, Heb. 3. 3. a greater
Priest than Aaron, even a Priest after the order of Melchisedec, Heb. 7.
Moreover he was God as well as man, God manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
and though the God head could not properly suffer, yet through its union in the
same person to the Manhood, it put an efficacy in his suffering, and
strengthened the humane nature to undergo greater sufferings as to the value of
them in that short space of time, than all the Angels and Men in the world (had
their strength been united together in one person) could have endured, if the
greatest extremity of misery had been laid upon such a one unto all eternity:
For 2. The sufferings of Christ were equivalent unto eternal death, and the
torments of the damned in Hell, yea they were far exceeding, as is evident,
because Gods infinite Justice is hereby fully satisfied, and there is
sufficiency of merit in them for the redemption of the whole world not only of
Believers, but also of Unbelievers, not only of Men but of Devils too: Christ's
sufferings were of infinite value, not in regard of the sufferings but in
regard of the Divine nature so closely united unto the Humane nature: Therefore
the salvation purchased by these sufferings must needs be a great salvation.

3. This salvation is a great salvation in regard of the Instrumental Cause,
and that is Faith; faith is a grace of great worth and excellency, insomuch as
it does not spring from any root or power of nature, but is wrought by the
power of God, and requires such exceeding great power in the effecting of it;
we read of the exceeding greatness of Gods power toward them that believe
according to the working of his mighty power, Ephesians. 1. 19. which shows that the
salvation is great which is effected by this grace of Faith.

4. This salvation is a great salvation in regard of the Final Cause, and that
is the manifestation of Gods glory: 1. The glory of his Wisdom in contriving
such a way for Man's salvation, which no created understanding could have
thought of: 2. The glory of his Justice which is as fully satisfied through
Christ's sufferings, as if all Believers had been eternally punished: 3. And
chiefly the glory of his free grace and mercy, which is set forth and magnified
so eminently in all the degrees of man's salvation, that nothing may be ascribed
unto Man, but all unto God alone.

Thus you see, that this salvation is a great salvation in regard of the Thing
it self, and in regard of the Causes of it. It is so great salvation as it has
no comparison, and is beyond expression, therefore labor to attain this
salvation; some endeavor to get a great Estate, others to get great Friends,
others to get great honor and repute in the world, do you labor to obtain
this great salvation which does exceed all in greatness, it is a high and noble
design, and is worthy your uttermost care and diligence in seeking after it;
other things are but small things, mere toys and trifles in comparison;
nothing in the world has the least degree of worth, compared with this so
great salvation. I shall be more brief in speaking of the other properties of
this salvation.

II. This salvation is a Rare Salvation: I mean, that few do obtain it; Many
are called, few are chosen, Matthew. 20. 16. Many are damned, few are saved:
There are many troops of sinners that are prosting in the broad way of
destruction, it is but a thin scattered company that are pressing forward in
the narrow way of life and salvation; this is evident from the Answer of our
Savior upon the Question propounded unto him, Luke 13. 23, 24. Then said one
unto him, Lord are there few that be saved? And he said unto them, Strive to
enter in at the strait gate, for many I say unto you will seek to enter in, and
shall not be able. In which words he does in effect say, that Few, very Few
should be saved, for he tells them plainly, that the gate of salvation is a
strait gate, and many cannot pass through a strait gate; and although many
should seek to enter in at this gate, yet they should not be able; and if many
that seek to enter in shall not be able, then it follows, that none of those
which do not seek to enter in shall be able: Hence then we may gather a strong
argument to prove, that very few shall be saved; If the most of men and women
in the world do not seek salvation at all, and they cannot possibly attain it,
and many that seek salvation shall never find it, then there are but few that
shall be saved; but the most in the world do not seek salvation at all, to say
nothing of the Heathen world which is by many degrees the far greater part of
the world, who sit in darkness, and from whom the Gospel of salvation is hid,
and therefore are expressly said to be lost, 2 Cor. 4. 3. Even in the Christian
world where the light of the Gospel does shine, the most of men and women, that
bear the name of Christians, are ignorant, or profane, or only civil and
moral, and live in the total neglect of the salvation of the Gospel, and such
cannot possibly attain salvation that do not at all seek after it: And of them
that make some profession of Religion, and do something in order to salvation,
many shall not be able to attain it; our Savior says, that many shall seek to
enter in and shall not be able, because they do not seek in a right manner,
because they do not seek salvation chiefly; they seek the satisfaction of their
lusts, before the salvation of their souls; because they do not seek it
diligently, they are careless and formal in the use of the means of salvation;
they seek, but they do not strive to enter in at the strait gate; they do not
press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling, and therefore they
fall short and miss of it; there are but few that strive to enter in at the
strait gate, that strive as wrestlers in wrestling, or racers in running, or
warriors in fighting, as the word (...) does signify; few that seek their
salvation above all other things, and with all their heart and might, few that
are resolved for salvation whatever it cost them, whatever they do, or suffer
for it, unto which resolution and endeavor all must come, or else they cannot
be saved, and these being so few, certainly there are but few that shall be
saved. More plainly our Savior speaks to the same purpose, Math. 7. 13, 14.
Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate and broad is the way that
leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat; because strait
is the gate and narrow the way which leads unto life, and few there be that
find it. The gate and way of sin which leads to death and Hell, are wide and
broad, and the most in the world are passing through this gate, and walking in
this way; the course of the world is a course of sin, the end of which course
is destruction, and the reason why so many go in at the gate of sin; which is
the outer gate of Hell, is, because strait is the (...), and narrow the way
which leads unto life; because of the difficulties in the way of life and
salvation, which require much pains and diligence if we would go through them;
we must give all diligence, if we would make our calling and election sure, 2
Pet. 1. 10. We must work out our salvation with fear and trembling, if we would
attain salvation, Phil. 1. 12. we must labor if we would enter into Rest, Heb.
4. 12. we must strive if we would enter in at the strait gate, Luke 13. 24. we
must run if we would obtain the prize, 1 Cor. 9. 24. we must fight the good
fight of Faith if we would lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 12. the Kingdom
of Heaven suffers violence, says our Savior, and the violent take it by
force, Math. 11. 12. we must lay siege to Heaven, if we would take it, and with
force and violence overcome those potent enemies, the Devil, the Flesh, and the
World, who would draw or drive us away from the walls and gates of the New
Jerusalem. It is not an easy thing to be saved, the way to Heaven is narrow,
and it lies up hill, our endeavors for Heaven especially at the first, are
like climbing up a steep hill, like hewing a way through hard rocks, like
swimming against a strong stream, like cutting hard wood against the grain; and
because of the opposition and difficulty in the way of salvation, therefore
there be but few that find the path thereof; most choose a broader and easier
way. It is evident then from what has been said, that this salvation is Rare
and scarce, the consideration whereof should not discourage you, but quicken
you unto the greater diligence in your endeavors after it; the rarity of it
shows the worth and excellency of it; Jewels and precious stones are rare and
hard to be got; what difficulties will some through? what dangerous voyages unto
the uttermost parts of the Earth will some undertake, to bring home some rare
things? but especially the consideration withal of the necessity of salvation
(of which in the next particular) should quicken you to seek after it. Think
with your selves (my beloved) think seriously, and think frequently, that there
are but few that shall be saved; and then examine, what reason you have to
think that you are in the number of those few: When our Savior told his
Disciples that but one of them should betray him, they looked one upon another,
and every one asked him, Lord is it I? there was none of them without their
fears which made them so inquisitive, and they seem to be in pain until they
are resolved; what then would they have thought and said? how fearful would
they have been, if our Savior had told them that the most of them should have
betrayed him, yea that all of them should betray him, but one? May not I
without uncharitableness say, that not one in twelve, no nor one in twenty, no
nor one in a hundred in this City and Nation shall be saved? If I should tell
you that hear me this day, that some of you will be damned, yea that many of
you will be damned, yea that m^ of you will be damned, and that but few of this
great company will be saved, should I be a false Prophet? I will not say it
will be thus, neither can I do it, because this is Gods secret; much less do I
desire it should be thus, for the end of my preaching is, that you all might be
saved; but let me tell you, that I fear that many of you here present will be
found in the number of those many our Savior speaks of, that shall seek to
enter in at the strait gate, and shall not be able; our Savior told his
Auditors, that flocked to hear him, thus, and are you better than they? you all
seek to enter in at the strait gate, by coming into this place where the Gospel
is preached, and where the gate is set open before you; but are there not many
amongst you that seek in a careless and negligent manner? May not I say of all
the seekers here, that there are but few that strive to enter in at the strait
gate? Do you all, or the most look as if you had your eye upon the mark and
glorious prize before you, and were pressing with all your might toward it? do
you hear as if it were for your lives, as if you might hear words this day
whereby you may be saved? do you pray and seek as if you were in earnest, as if
you were resolved to take Heaven by violence, and whatever you were denied in,
would not be denied your salvation? Such as do not strive shall never get
through the strait gate. Think with your selves, It may be that many in this
place shall be damned, and then say, Shall not I? shall not I? and O what a
miserable wretch shall I be if I should be damned! if I should get only to the
gate of Heaven, and not get through! if I should come only to the borders of the
Heavenly Canaan, and dye in the Wilderness! if I should be found in the number
of the negligent seekers which will miss of salvation? What grounds have I to
think that I shall be saved? there are but few, can I think that I am inthe
number of the few? Methinks this consideration of the Rarity of salvation
should awaken you to give earnest heed that with the most that seek it, you may
not miss of it.

3. This salvation is a necessary salvation: the great difficulty of obtaining
some precious things discourageth the endeavors of the most in seeking after
them, especially when they may be well enough without them; but this salvation
is necessary, you cannot be without it; it is of absolute and universal
necessity; some things you may have, this you must have; without it you are
undone, you will be irrecoverably and eternally miserable; there is no medium,
no middle condition between salvation and damnation (of which more by and by):
some things are necessary to the body, but salvation is necessary to your
happiness, without it there is no possibility (in this fallen state) of
obtaining the chief end, the chief good which you are capable of; without this
no coming near to God in whom your chiefest happiness does consist, no vision
or fruition of him either in part here, or in full and eternally hereafter.
Some men have need of one thing, and some of another, but all the men and women
in the world have need of salvation, because all are sinners, all are children
of wrath by nature. There is not one person amongst you all but have been
guilty of sin, for the whole world is guilty before God, Romans 3. 19, and every
moment of your lives you are exposed unto the punishment of sin in Hell, unless
you are brought into a state of salvation. It is necessary therefore that all
of you should above all things seek after your salvation.

4. This salvation is a possible salvation; though there were never so much
worth and excellency in, never so much necessity of this salvation, yet if
there were an impossibility of obtaining it, all arguments would be used in
vain to press any to endeavor after it; but this salvation is possible, it is
possible that you should attain it, that the meanest of you, the vilest of you,
yea that every one of you that hear these words may attain it.

1. The meanest of you may attain this salvation, and that 1. Such of you as
are of the meanest parts, though you have neither humane learning, nor capacity
or ability for it; though your judgment be shallow, your fancy and invention
dull, your memory weak, and so could never understand and retain the many Arts
and Sciences in Philosophy, and the diverse kinds of Languages, which learned
men have written their books in; yet you are capable of being made the
Scholars and Disciples of Jesus Christ, and he can teach the dullest and
shallowest of you all the deep mysteries of salvation by his Spirit; yea and he
can give you a greater understanding in them, than the wiselt and most learned
men that are without the Spirit do attain unto; For he hides those things from
the wise and prudent which he reveals unto babes, Matthew. 11. 25. And the
natural man, let him be never so learned a man, receives not the things of the
Spirit, neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor.
2. 14. And therefore when not many wise men after the flesh are called, God
chooses the foolish things of the world to exalt the riches of his free grace
in their salvation, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 31. Surgunt indocti and rapiunt coelum,
quum nos cum omni doctrina in Gehenn^ detrudimur, says one. The unlearned
arise, and take Heaven by violence, when we with all our learning are violently
thrown down into Hell. So that you who are of no learning, and but mean natural
abilities, have encouragement to seek after this salvation of the Gospel,
seeing the Lord can teach you by his Spirit, and it does better suit with his
design of glorifying his free grace in bestowing it upon such as you, rather
than on the wise and learned men of the world, who would be apt to ascribe the
glory unto themselves. 2. Such of you as are not only of the meanest parts, but
also of the meanest condition in the World, may attain this Salvation; the poor
have the Gospel preached unto them, Matthew. 11. 5. If with poverty in regard of
Estate, you are also poor in spirit, the riches of grace and salvation are
tendered freely unto you; read for your encouragement what the Apostle says,
Jam. 2. 5. Hearken my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this
World, rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised unto
them that love him. If you were to seek some great favor from an Earthly
Prince, your mean attire and condition might keep you at a distance; and you
might have no regard given to your request, should it have a hearing; The
Petitions of the great and rich are heard in Courts on Earth, when the poor and
mean are despised: but the King of Heaven does regard the rich no more than the
poor, Job 34. 19. And if you seek diligently after this Salvation, you may have
as free access to the Lord as any, and your Petitions shall be heard in the
Court of Heaven, and you shall certainly obtain this Salvation which you seek
after.

2. The vilest of you all may attain Salvation; Some of you it may be have been
notorious sinners, your consciences do accuse you of such great sins, with such
heinous aggravations, that you may be discouraged and out of hope that suchas
you should be saved; you have offered such high affronts and indignities unto
the highest Majesty that you think he can never put them up; you have run so
deep and so long upon the score, that you think the scores can never be wiped
off; if they had been smaller faults, or more ordinary slips, or you had sought
after Salvation sooner, you might have hoped to speed, but now you fear the
door of mercy is shut, and the day of Grace is spent, and there is no pardon
and salvation for such vile sinners as you: But let me tell you that the vilest
of you all may attain Salvation, the door of mercy is not so fast shut as yet,
but by knocking hard it may be opened; and so long as the day of your life is
continued, and the means of grace are continued, you cannot say that the day of
grace is quite spent; there is salvation attainable by the worst of you all, if
you will look after it; our Savior tells us of Publicans and Harlots that
entered into the Kingdom of Heaven sooner than the Pharisees who boasted in
their own righteousness, Matthew. 21. 31. He conversed with, and called the worst
of sinners to repentance, Matthew. 9. 11, 13. Indeed when the Apostle makes
mention of notorious sinners, he tells us, that such whilst such, could not
be saved, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God, Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
Adulterers, nor ^ffeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall
inkerit the Kingdom of God. Those that are such notorious sinners, and continue
in the practice of such sins without repentance, they cannot be saved; but
withal he adds in the 11. verse, that some of them had been such sinners,
but were now in a state of Salvation through their interest in Jesus Christ,
and the operation of the Spirit of God upon their hearts, And such were some of
you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God; they were justified, their
sins pardoned and persons accepted, in the name of the Lord Jesus, through the
imputation of his righteousness unto them, and they were washed and sanctified
by the Spirit of God, through infusion of Grace by the Spirit into them: I
might add further instances of notorious sinners who have been saved, as
Manasses, Mary Magdalen, Paul, who before Conversion calls himself the
chiefest of sinners, yet obtained Mercy and Salvation; and let me tell you
moreover, that if you repent now and apply your selves to Christ, the greater
your sins have been, the more will Gods glory be illustrated in your Salvation,
and the abounding of your sins will make way for the superabounding of his
grace.

3. All of you that hear these words may obtain Salvation, it is possible that
every one of you in this place may be saved; it would be a rare thing, but it
is a possible thing: indeed there are but few that shall be saved; but who
knows but all of you may be found in the number of those few; and O how would
it rejoice my heart to see all those faces in Heaven whom I see here this day
to hear the words of Salvation. Be encouraged to seek after your salvation by
the possibility of obtaining. Now salvation is possible for all of you that
have not as yet attained it; but let me add, that it will not be possible long
for you all; whilst you are in the land of the living it is possible, though
you be condemned to Hell for sin whilst unbelievers, Joh. 3. 18. He that
believes not is condemned already; yet the sentence of condemnation is
traversible, you may appeal from the Court of the Law, to the Court of
Chancery; you may fly from the bar of Gods justice, unto the throne of grace;
and if you heartily repent of sin, and by faith lay hold on Christ, you may
obtain pardon and salvation: Whilst the reprieve of your life lasts,
salvation is attainable; but when once your life is come to an end (which you
know not how soon it may be) and you be found in a state of impenitency and
unbelief, then the percullis will be shut down upon you for ever; then the
black flag will be hung out; then the talent of lead will seal up the measure
of your wickedness; and your condemnation will be irreversible; when the day of
your life is spent, the day of grace will be spent too, and the door of mercy
will be shut upon you for ever; and it will be impossible for any of you that
have not attained, then to attain salvation.

5. This salvation is a near Salvation. Say not in your heart, Who shall ascend
up into Heaven to learn what it is there? or who shall descend into the deep to
bring notice of it from thence? or who shall take the wings of the morning, and
fly into the uttermost parts of the earth thence to bring tidings of it to you?
for the word of salvation is near unto you, it is brought home to your own
doors, it is that word which is now sounding in your cars, even the words which
we Ministers preach unto you: read what those words are which are brought so
nigh, Romans 10. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth,
and in thy heart, that is the word of faith which we preach, That if thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart that God
has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved: For with the heart man
believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation. For the Scripture says, Whosoever believes on him shall not be
ashamed: For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek: for the same
Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon him: for whosoever calls upon
the Name of the Lord shall be saved. Heretofore salvation was only amongst the
Jews, and whoever of other Nations would be saved, they must travel to
Jerusalem, and worship the Lord in his Temple, and enquire for salvation in
that place: then salvation was afar off from the Gentiles, especially from
these British Isles; but now since the revelation of Jesus Christ, as those
which were afar off are made nigh by the blood of Christ; so the word of
salvation is brought nigh unto us; you have many Messengers of Peace, which
bring the glad tidings of salvation near unto you, and this may further
encourage you to seek after it.

6. This salvation is an Evident Salvation: I mean, that it is more clearly and
evidently made known unto us, than it has been in former ages unto any, or
than it is in other places unto many.

In former ages this salvation was not made known so clearly unto any, I mean
in the ages before the coming of Christ: the Prophets themselves who prophesied
of it, did not fully understand what the Spirit in them did signify, when it
foretold of this grace which should come unto the Church in after ages, 1 Pet.
1. 10, 11. And therefore the first preaching of the Gospel of salvation, is
called a revelation of the mystery which had been kept secret since the world
began unto that time, Romans 16. 25. And a manifestation of that mystery to the
Saints which had been hid from ages and generations, Col. 1. 25, 26, 27. The
Gospel of salvation was indeed revealed in the dispensation of the Law upon
Mount Sinai by Moses, but it was more obscurely; it was wrapped up in types and
figures; and as there was a vail before Moses his face, so there was a vail
before the truths of salvation, so that the children of Israel could not
steadfastly look unto the end of those things which were after to be abolished,
2 Cor. 3. 13. but this vail is done away in Christ, v. 14. When Christ suffered
upon the Cross, the vail of the Temple, which kept the people off the Holy of
Holies, was rent from the top to the bottom of it, and then the way into the
Holy of Holies was made manifest, and Christ by his appearance abolished death,
and brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. Then
darkness did pass away, and the true and mavelous light did shine upon the
Church, 1 John 2. 8. And now with open face believers do behold as in a glass
the glory of the Lord, 1 Cor. 3. 18. The scope of which places is to show the
obscurity of former revelations, and the clearness and evidence of the
revelation of the Gospel in these latter days.

In other places this salvation is not made known so clearly unto many; it is
not made known at all unto the most in the world; a thick darkness of ignorance
does overspread the greatest part of the face of the earth, and even amongst
those that call themselves by the name of the Church of Christ: there are in
many places such fogs and mists of error and heresy, that the truths of
salvation are darkened, and peoples minds are blinded; but now unto you this
salvation is made so clear and evident; the thing and way of it is made so
manifest, that it is a great encouragement to seek after this salvation.

7. This salvation is a Free Salvation; it will cost you no money, you may have
it for nothing, you may have it for accepting: If you were taken captive by
men, if you were slaves to the Turks, possibly you might not be delivered
without some considerable sum for your ransom; but you may be delivered from
the slavery of the Devil, and your own lusts, you may be saved from sin and
Hell without money: Indeed a price has been paid for your ransom, not silver
or gold, but that which is ten thousand times more precious, and that was the
blood of Jesus Christ, which was shed upon the Cross for you; yet though your
salvation cost Christ dear, it is free unto you, it will cost you nothing;
pardon is free, and grace is free, and eternal life unto you is a free gift;
you are invited to come unto the waters, and to buy wine and milk, but it is
without money and without price, Isa. 55. 1. The Spirit faith, come, and the
Bride faith, come, and whosoever is athirst let him come, and take of the
waters of life freely, Rev. 22. 17. There is sufficiency of grace in God for
the salvation of you all, and you may come and partake of this grace in your
salvation freely: You may have it without money, if you be poor; the gifts of
God cannot be bought; and you may have it without merit; if you conceit that
you deserve any thing, you shall be sure to have nothing; if you are sensible
of your unworthiness, and apply Christ's merits and righteousness, through him
you may have salvation freely.

8. And lastly, This salvation is a Sure Salvation; you have the promise of God
for it, and there can be no greater certainty of a thing than the word of God,
especially if you consider that God is infinite in power, and therefore can do
whatever he will, and that God is infinitely true, and therefore will do
whatever he has promised: God is most powerful, and therefore able to save
you; there is strength sufficient in his Almighty Arm, to bring salvation unto
you; and God is most faithful in the promises of salvation, which he has made
in the Covenant of Grace; if you get faith to apply the promises, you shall
certainly have the thing: There is an uncertainty in every thing else in the
world, but there is a certainty in this salvation; that there is such a thing
is certain from the revelation of the Word of God, who cannot lie; and that you
may have it if you will accept of it, is certain from the nature and firmness
of the promises; and when you have attained unto any degrees of this salvation,
the perfecting of it will be most sure; for he that has begun a good work in
you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1. 6. Thus I have
laid before you the properties of this salvation; it is a great salvation; it
is a rare salvation; it is a necessary salvation; it is a possible salvation;
it is a near salvation; it is an evident salvation; it is a free salvation; it
is a sure salvation; all which being laid together, may be a strong motive and
inducement to you to labor that you may attain a share in this salvation.

CHAP. IV.
Motive 3. FRom the consideration of the Damnation of all such as do not obtain
salvation. The damnation of all such persons will be Dreadful and Certain.

(1.) The Damnation of such as are not saved will be dreadful. 1. The Day of
their damnation will be dreadful. 2. The Sentence of their damnation will be
dreadful. 3. The Execution of their damnation will be dreadful.


1. The Day of the damnation of such as are not saved will be dreadful, and
that is the last day, the day of judgment: O how dreadful will this day be to
you that are wicked and ungodly, when the Heavens shall be opened, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Judge of the world shall descend with a shout, with the voice
of the Archangel, and the loud sound of a Trumpet; when the Earth shall be
opened, and you shall be raised out of the dust, and summoned to appear before
Christ's Tribunal; and the Books shall be opened, and all your sins shall be
made manifest before the whole world; when the Heavens shall be on fire, and
melt down upon you, and pass away with a great noise; and the Earth shall be on
fire, and burn under you; and every Mountain and Hill shall flee away before
Christ's face; and Christ shall be on fire, and come in flames of anger to take
vengeance upon you for your sins. Think, O think how dreadful this day of
damnation will be unto all such of you as shall not then be found in a state of
salvation! O what dread will seize upon you so soon as your eyes are opened,
and you find the predictions of the word which you formerly slighted to be
true, and perceive that now indeed the day of Gods wrath is come, when you
shall be dragged like so many malefactors before the Judgment Seat, and there
stand naked horribly lashing your selves in the reflections of conscience upon
your fore-past wickedness; how will you be ready to tear your selves to pieces
for your folly and madness, that you did not provide for this day, and flee
from this wrath of God, which then you will not be able to escape? how
willingly would you creep into some rock, or under some mountain, or abide
still in your grave, or cast your selves into the Sea, if possibly any place
could be found to hide you in this terrible day, but shall be able to find no
hiding place for your selves? Think what hideous thoughts, what sinking fears,
what horrible perplexity of mind you will on this day be filled withal, it
will be a dreadful day.

2. The Sentence of the damnation of such as are not saved will be dreadful;
when the Books are opened where your sins are recorded, and you are convicted
by the Judge; then he will proceed to pass sentence upon you. Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25.
41. O dreadful words! the voice will be loud with which they will be
pronounced, such as shall reach the cars of all the wicked together of all
generations, and how will they all quake and tremble at the sound thereof! You
may cry it may be to the Lord for mercy, but it will be in vain; you may say,
Lord open to us, and receive us into thy Kingdom, that we may participate in
the joys thereof; but he will say unto you, Depart from me, I know ye not all
ye workers of iniquity: But if you must depart, you may wish for his blessing,
as Esau, though it were but an inferior blessing; no, depart ye cursed, depart
with a curse: If then you must depart with a curse, you may wish for some
convenient place of abode, and good company, as Cain, when he went forth from
the presence of the Lord with a curse, he built a City to dwell in, and took
some comfort, it may be in his habitation, and wife, and children; no, depart
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; you must dwell in
devouring fire, and inhabit everlasting burnings, and your companions will be
the Devil and his Angels, and fellow-damned sinners, in whom you will not find
the least comfort, which leads to the third particular.

3. The Execution of the Damnation of such as are not saved, will be dreadful,
and this will be in Hell; when the irreversible sentence of damnation is passed
upon you, immediately the execution will follow, and you will be haled from the
Judgment seat, and the everlasting doors of the prison of Hell will be lifted
up, where a horrible fire is burning, which can never be quenched, into which
you must enter, and be shut down, and shut in to take up your eternal abode in
that place of torment; there every part will be tormented, every member of your
bodies, every faculty of your souls, and that in the highest degree of
extremity beyond your now capacity, and your torments will have no
intermission, neither will you have any hopes of their conclusion. I have
already treated in my Book of Judgment of the universality, extremity, and
eternity of the torments of the Damned, and therefore shall not here enlarge.
From what has been said, you may evidently perceive, that the Damnation of
such as are not saved will be dreadful, which should awaken you to endeavor
after your salvation, especially if withal you consider,

(2.) That the Damnation of such as are not saved will be Certain; where there
is no Salvation there will be unavoidable Damnation, because between these two
hereafter there will be no middle condition; such as are not saved will most
certainly be damned; Heaven or Hell, eternal happiness, or eternal misery will
be the portion of all the Sons and Daughters of Adam. I might show, that Gods
Justice, and Holiness and Truth, does require the Damnation of all such as do
not obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ, so that either God must prove unholy, and
unjust and false in his Word, which is impossible, or you which are not saved
must be damned; therefore this is most certain, there is no escaping of the
damnation of Hell by such as neglect the great Salvation of the Gospel, Heb. 2.
3.

And methinks by this time I should hear some of you cry out as the Jews when
Peter preached, or the Jailer, O what shall we do to be saved?

CHAP. V.
III. I Am to tell you Words to guide you in the way to attain Salvation. And
here I shall 1. Direct what things you must do, that you may be saved. 2. Show
what Means you must make use of to help you in those things.


I. What Things you must do that you may be saved. Take this in these Ten
Directions. 1. You must see your selves lost. 2. You must mourn for sin. 3. You
must turn from sin. 4. You must believe in Jesus Christ. 5. You must get a new
Nature. 6. You must lead a New Life. 7. You must resolve upon sufferings for
Christ, if called. 8. You must study and apply the Promises of the Covenant of
Grace. 9. You must give up your selves in Covenant unto God. 10. You must be
steadfast and persevere in the Ways of God unto your lives end.


Direction 1. You must see your selves lost, if you would be saved; Luke 19.
10. our Savior tells us, that he came to seek and save that which was lost.
You must be lost if you would be found: We read Luke 15. of the lost Sheep, the
lost Groat, and the lost Son, all which were found again, and that with joy.
When sinners perceive themselves to be lost and undone, and know not what to
do, then they are near to be found and saved by Jesus Christ: O then as ever
you expect Salvation by Christ, you must see and be sensible of your lost
estate, whilst you are in a state of Nature: And for this end you must get a
Conviction, 1. Of your sin. 2. Of the Punishment you have deserved for your
sin. 3. Of your Insufficiency to satisfy Gods Justice. 4. Of your inability to
make resistance, and defend your selves. 5. Of the Impossibility of your
fleeing and escaping Gods wrath. 6. That as yet you have no Interest in Christ,
who alone is able to deliver you from the wrath to come.


1. That you may be sensible of your lost estate, you must get a Conviction of
your sin, your eyes must be opened to see your selves guilty of sin before God,
and your mouths must be stopped, so as to have nothing to say if the Lord
should condemn you. You must not only understand the nature of sin in the
general, that it is a transgression of the holy, and righteous, and good Law of
the holy and glorious God of Heaven and Earth; but also you must be
particularly and thoroughly convinced, that you have transgressed this Law of
God; you must be convinced of your particular sins: As to the kinds of your
sins, you must 1. See your selves guilty of Original sin, of Adams first
transgression by a just imputation, you being in his loins, and parties in the
first Covenant: and then you must see what inherent sin there is in your
nature, that you were conceived and born in sin, that you are a viperous brood,
a Serpentine generation, a seed of evil doers; that the Toad is not fuller of
poison, than your natures are full of sin; that your natures are contrary unto
the nature of God, and have an enmity in them against the Law of God, Romans 6.
7. You must be convinced, how your natures are depraved, being wholly destitute
of Original Righteousness, empty of all good, and inclinable wholly unto evil;
that they are a polluted fountain, from whence can proceed nothing but what is
unclean; that they are a bitter root, from whence does spring forth such cursed
fruits of sin in your lives; and you should look upon your sin of nature to be
the worst, because the Original of all actual transgressions. 2. You must be
convinced of your actual sins, how you have broken Gods Law in thought, word
and deed, you must see your sins of Omission, and your sins of Commission,
against the first and second Table of the Law, and take notice of the number of
them, so far as you can remember, together with their aggravations; if they
have been committed through ignorance when you have had means of knowledge, if
against light of Nature and the Word, if against the reluctance of natural
Conscience, if against many Warnings and Reproofs, if they have been committed
with security, hardness of heart, delight, greediness, pride, presumption,
obstinacy, and the like; and that you might be convinced of the guilt of sin,
you must look into the Law, in which as in a glass you may see your natural
face, and all the spots thereof; the Law will discover the sin of your natures,
as it requires perfect conformity thereunto in habit, disposition, and
inclination, and forbids all evil byasses of the will and heart to sin, as
well as external transgressions; Moreover the Law will discover to you your
actual sins; but then you must look beyond the head Precepts of the Law, which
are but ten, for you must take notice of the several branches belonging to
every head, which are many; as for instance, If you would find out whether you
are guilty of Adultery, you must not only look upon the Precept as forbidding
only the gross outward act; Thou shall not commit Adultery, but as reaching to
the inward desires and inclinations, and so our Savior, Math. 5. 28.
interprets this Precept, that whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after her,
has committed Adultery with her already in his heart; and so in the Precept,
Thou shall not kill, it is murder not only to take away the life of another by
violence, but also to be angry with our brother without a cause; and so in the
other Precepts. And as you must look into the Law for Conviction of sin, so you
must also look into your own Consciences, and read what is there registered, and
compare your hearts and lives with the Law; and you should call to mind the
places you have lived in, the businesses you have been employed about, and the
circumstances of your lives may bring to remembrance many sins committed long
ago, with their aggravations. You must get thus a conviction of the guilt of
your sins, especially if you have fallen into any grosser sin in your life, as
adultery, drunkenness, theft, if you have been guilty of swearing,
Sabbathbreaking, profaneness, or the like; you must see the heinousness of
them, and withal you must see that every sin which you have committed is
heinous, as it is a dishonor to the highest Majesty, who is infinitely more
exalted above the greatest Earthly Kings and Potentates, than they are exalted
above the meanest Worm, or Fly; and for such as you to dishonor and affront
him by sin, is very heinous. This is the first thing, a Conviction of your
sins, which you must endeavor after.

2. That you may be sensible of your lost estate, you must get a conviction of
the punishment which God has threatened, and you have deserved for your sins;
will the Lord put up the affronts which are offered to him by his Creatures?
will he bear the dishonours of his great and glorious Name by sin, without
punishing the sinners? No surely, his holiness will not permit it, his Justice
has been offended, and must have satisfaction, and therefore he threatens to
punish the offenders most severely; God threatens temporal calamities and
death, as the wages of sin; and because through patience he forbeareth to
punish many transgressions so remarkably in this life; and the most dreadful
temporal Judgments which he inflicteth upon any, are no ways proportionable
to the desert of their sins, and the demands of his infinite Justice; therefore
he threatens eternal punishment in Hell; look into some places of Scripture,
where the Lord does denounce severe threatenings against sinners, Gal. 3. 10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the Law to do them. Romans 1. 18. The wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. Ephesians. 5. 6. Because
of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9. Christ will come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them
which know not God, and obey not the Gospel, who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the prefence of the Lord, and the glory of his
power, Romans 2. 6, 8, 9. God will render unto every man according to his deeds,
to them who are contentious and do not obey the truth, indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish on every soul of man that does evil. That you may see
and be sensible of your lost estate, you must be convinced not only in the
general of the justice and equity that such Judgments should be inflicted on
sinners, because God himself has denounced them in his Word, who cannot be
unjust toward his Creatures; and because sin has deserved them, being the
breach of his Law, which is holy and just and good; and an offense of an
infinite Majesty, whose Justice is infinite, and must be satisfied with a
proportionable punishment unto the offense: but also you must be convinced that
you are such sinners; that you have committed such and such sins, that you have
broken the Law in such a point, and such a point, and in every point; that you
are guilty of fornication, or drunkenness, or theft, or covetousness, or lying,
or profaneness; and it may be of all these, and more than these: The first is
the conviction of the Law, the second the conviction of the Fact, then follows
the third conviction which is of the State, that therefore you are under the
Curse, that you are condemned, that the wrath of God hangs over your head,
and that you must be tormented for sin most horribly and eternally in Hell: It
is the conviction of the dreadful punishment of Hell which God has threatened,
and unto which you are exposed for sin, that will awaken you to a sense of your
lost state, when the conviction is imprinted deep upon you by the Spirit; when
you believe that Hell is no Fiction, but a reality, as certainly prepared for
the wicked, as God is above preparing places in Heaven for his people; and you
have a peep-hole (as it were) into Hell, and imagine something of the torments
which the damned there do, and shall endure for such sins as you have
committed; how they roll and tumble in flames of brimstone, how they are lashed
by an accusing Conscience, tormented with and by the Devil, and even consumed
by the wrath of a sin-revenging God; how they cry, roar and howl, how they weep
and wail, and gnash their teeth, and that this must be their condition for
ever; and when withal you think that you are walking upon the brink of this
pit, and hastening toward the place of these flames, that Hell does belong to
you, that you are in the number of the cursed crew, some of whom have already
taken up their lodging in Hell, and that you are like to come thither shortly,
that you are liable every moment to drop into the burning Lake, then you will
perceive that you are lost and undone.

3. That you may be sensible of your lost estate, you must be convinced of your
insufficiency to satisfy Gods Justice for your sins; if you could do this, you
might do well enough; but this you cannot do, Gods Justice is infinite, and
requires infinite satisfaction, which you being finite are insufficient to
give; what can you offer to God? thousands of Rams, rivers of Oil, Mines of
Silver, Mountains of Gold, Rocks of Pearl, yea the whole Creation, if it should
offer it self to be annihilated, could not make compensation to Gods Justice
for one sin, nothing less than infinite must be the satisfaction; and therefore
this should make you further sensible of your lost estate in your selves.

4. You must get a conviction of your inability to resist and defend your
selves against God, who has threatened so severely to punish you for sin; as
Gods Justice is infinite, and therefore you cannot satisfy it; so his Power is
infinite, and you cannot resist it; who can stand in his sight when once he is
angry? who can defend himself against an Omnipotent arm? If God whet his
glittering Sword, and his hand take hold on vengeance, what Powers of Earth are
strong enough to make resistance? Read how God expresses himself concerning
such as set themselves against him, Isa. 27. 4. Who would set the briars and
thorns against me in battle? I would go through them, I would burn them
together. Look upon your selves as briars and thorns, yea as dried stubble
before a consuming fire, which has no power to resist the flame; and therefore
that you are lost and undone in your selves because of your sins.

5. You must get a conviction of the impossibility of your fleeing from and
escaping Gods wrath, which has you in pursuit; whither can you go from his
presence? or whither can you flee from his anger and indignation? See Amos 9.
2, 3. Though they dig into Hell, thence shall mine hand take them; though they
climb up into Heaven, thence will I bring them down; and though they hide
themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and take them out thence; and
though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the Sea, thence will I
command the Serpent, and he shall bite them. You cannot flee into any place but
God will follow you; you cannot hide your selves in any place but God will
find you; there is as little hopes of escaping Gods Wrath, as of resisting his
Power. See Psalm. 21. 8, 9. Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies, not
only some, but all sinners, thy right hand shall find out them that hate thee:
Thou shall make them as a fiery. Oven in the time of thine angers the Lord
shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them. By this
time sinners, methinks you should perceive your selves to be lost and un-done;
all refuge now fails you, there is no escaping for you.

6. But lastly, that you may fully know that you are in a lost estate, you must
get conviction, that as yet you have no interest in Christ, who alone can
deliver you from the wrath of God, which is to come upon the ungodly. Indeed
Christ can and does deliver his people from wrath, and the punishment their
sins have deserved; but when you know that you are out of Christ, then you may
know you are in a lost estate; if you suppose that you have an interest in him
without good grounds, you are like to be lost irrecoverably, and not know it
till it be too late; therefore you must know that as yet you have no interest
in him, that all your pretensions to him have been presumptuous conceits; that
so you may be lost in your own apprehensions. Can you think you have an
interest in Christ, that never truly mourned for sin, that never hungered after
Christ, that have no true Faith to apply him? have you interest in Christ that
have no true Love to Christ, and never yielded subjection to Christ? Have you
interest in Christ that have no Influence from Christ? have you Union to Christ
that have no Communion with him? No, no, all you that are Unbelievers, and have
persisted hitherto in a sinful course, are strangers unto Christ, and
therefore be convinced that you are in a lost estate: And O how should fear and
trembling possess you through the apprehensions of the dreadful wrath of God?
how should you go up and down like condemned malefactors, that are condemned to
Hell, and know not how soon they may be dragged to execution? O what reason
have you to lie down in terror, and rise up in terror, and feed upon terror
all the day long! Such thoughts as these are suitable to the condition of such
as you. It may be the next step I take, I may step into Hell: Alas! Alas! I am
in a state of damnation, and did not know it; I have been dancing about the
brinks of Hell, and did not perceive it; I have been affronting God all my
days by my sins; now I see that God is highly offended with me for those sins
I made light of: I am the covetous person whom the Lord abhors, Psalm. 10. 3.
I am the deceiver whom he curses, Mal. 1. 14. I am the Adulterer whom he will
judge, Heb 11. 4. I have greatly sinned, and now I see God is greatly angry,
and his anger burns like fire; he frowns, and his frowns are most dreadful,
and I fear he will cast me to Hell, and make me feel the power of his anger in
my everlasting ruin; I fear I must dwell with devouring fire, and take up mine
eternal abode with the Devil and my fellow-damned sinners: O I fear I am
damned! I am damned! O happy is the Dog and the Horse, yea the Worm and the
Toad, who ere long shall be anihilated; but I am cursed, and I fear that I
shall eternally be tormented: O I am lost, I have lost my God, and I fear I am
lost, and shall be lost for ever! O I am undone! undone! vile and miserable
sinner! O woe be to me that ever I was born! that ever I sinned, and provoked
God to such displeasure! But is there no spark of hope yet? is there no
escaping, no reconciliation attainable? O what shall I do to be saved! I cannot
save my self, and no creature can help me; but is there no other way? Thus you
must see and be sensible that you are lost in your selves if you would be saved.

Direction 2. You must mourn for sin, if you would be saved; except ye repent,
says our Savior, ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13. 3. Those that laugh
and rejoice now in a way of sin, shall mourn and weep for it for ever to no
purpose, Luk 6. 25. But blessed are they that mourn for sin now, for they shall
be comforted and saved, Matthew. 5. 4. The seed time of repentance accompanied
with the showers of tears, will return with the harvest of salvation, and
sheaves of joy and comfort, Psalm. 126. 5, 6. They that sow in tears shall reap
in joy; he that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless
come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him, Therefore see what
the Apostle exhorts unto, which is necessary to your salvation, Jam. 4. 9. Be
afflicted, and mourn, and weep; let your laughter be turned into mourning, and
your joy into heaviness. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he
shall lift you up. Sinners, you have delighted your selves in sin, you must now
be afflicted for it; sin has been sweet in your mouth, it must now be bitter
to your heart: God calls you to salvation by his Son, but withal he calls you
to weeping, and mourning, and deep humiliation in order hereunto; not that your
tears can wash off the guilt of your sins, nothing can do this but the blood of
Christ; not that God delights in your griefs and sorrows as such, but because
mourning is needful for you to prepare you for Christ, and Salvation by him;
whilst sin is sweet unto your taste, you will roll it under your tongue, and
hug it in your bosom; you will spare it, and nothing will persuade you to part
with it; but when you taste the bitterness of sin in compunction and sorrow for
it, then you will spit it out; when you perceive the gall and the worm wood,
then your mouth will be put out of relish, then you will desire no longer to
suck at the breast of sin; whilst you are insensible of sin, you will be
insensible of your need of a Savior: None but sick persons do prize and send
for the Physician, and none but such as are sick of sin, and groan and mourn
under the burden of this sickness, do prize a Christ who is the soul-Physician,
Matthew. 9. 12. Were you made sensible of sin indeed, you would eagerly enquire
after Christ, and greedily hearken unto the glad tidings of salvation which he
has purchased; what shall I do to get an interest in Christ? where is he to be
found? how is he to be received? what are his terms? what are his commands? do
any thing, part with any thing, you would not then think much to lay down your
selves, and all that you have at his feet, so you might have him; none but
Christ, none but Christ would you then desire; and if you might have all the
world without him, you would not be contented. Sinners, would you be saved by
Christ, get your hearts affected with godly sorrow for sin, and that you may
mourn deeply and kindly, you must get not only a conviction of the guilt of
sin, and the punishment which is due for it, which you cannot escape; but you
must look further into the nature of sin, and get a sight and sense of the evil
of sin; you must look not only to the consequential evil of sin, but also to
the intrinsecal evil of sin; not only to the Hell which is like to follow upon
it, but also to that Hell which there is in it; look to the evil of sin not
only as it is like to burn you, but as it has blackt and smutted you; as it
has depraved and deformed your souls, which are of heavenly original, as it
has degraded and debased you, polluted and defiled you. But chiefly look upon
the evil of sin as it reflecteth dishonor upon God, upon God that is so holy
and glorious, and that is so good and gracious, as it displeases that God that
made you, that has exercised so much patience toward you, when he could so
easily have cut you off in the act of sin, and appointed you your place and
portion amongst the damned in Hell long ago; and that has moreover been so
bountiful to you, though sinners and his enemies, that he has maintained you
at his cost and charges all your days; but especially see the evil of sin, as
it offends that God who is ready to be reconciled, and has made such
provision for reconciliation, which you could never have thought of, namely,
through the death and mediation of his Son, whom he has given for you, and
proffers to give to you; and in him does treat with you, and by us Ministers
does send entreaties to you, that you would accept of this reconciliation, lay
down your weapons, and be reconciled unto him, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Break, break ye
rocky hearts at this, what is God willing indeed to put up such high affronts?
and to forgive such great sins? and does he stoop to entreat and beseech such
mean creatures, and wretched sinners as you to be reconciled? O be filled with
astonishment and admiration, and go cast your selves down at his feet with
self-loathing and abhorrency at the hideous nature, and monstrous ingratitude,
and baseness of your sins! let your hearts melt within you like Wax, or Snow,
when the Sun shines upon it with heat and brightness; let your eyes drop down
tears, as the morning does drop dew upon the flowers: What! have I affronted
such greatness? dared such power? trampled upon such patience? and abused such
goodness too? and after all does God beseech me to be reconciled? was it such a
God whom I offended? vile wreth! O that I had never committed such sins! O that
I had never been drunk, or unclean, or profane! O that I had never sworn, nor
lied, nor stolen, nor offended God in any of my actions! It repents me, it
grieves me at the very heart that I have sinned, and that I can grieve no more
for it.

Direction 3. You must turn from sin, if you would be saved; see Psalm. 7. 11,
12, 13. God is angry with the wicked every day; if he turn not, he will whet
his sword; he has bent his bow, and made it ready; he has prepared for him
the instruments of death. And God threatens, Psalm. 88. 21. that he will wound
the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such as go on still in their
trespasses: Therefore men must turn from all their transgressions, otherwise
iniquity will be their ruin, Ezekiel. 18. 30. They must cast away their sins as a
menstruous cloth, saying unto them, get ye hence, if they would be received
into favor, Isa. 30. 22. They must not only confess their sins, but also
forsake them, if they would find mercy, Prove. 28. 13. The wicked must forsake
his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and turn to the Lord, and then
he shall have pardoning mercy abundantly, Isa. 55. 7. When men cease to do
evil, and learn to do well, then, though their sins have been as scarlet, they
shall be white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be like
wool, Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18. Sinners, turn from your evil ways, you have done
iniquity, do so no more; you have gone on hitherto in a way of sin, proceed no
further, it is the way to Hell, turn out of it: Let him that has stolen, steal
no more; and him that has been filthy, be filthy no more; and him that has
been unjust, be unjust no more: Drunkards, forbear your drinking; swearers,
refrain swearing; liars, teach your tongues to speak truth: Break off your
course of sin; turn from all gross sins as to the practice, and turn from all
sins as to the affection.

Direction 4. You must believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, if you would be saved:
This is the direction which Paul gave to the Jailer, when under conviction of
sin he came in to him and cried, What shall I do to be saved? he says to him,
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved, Act. 16. 30, 31. So
in Peter's Sermon, Act. 10. 43. To him gave all the Prophets witness, that
through his Name, whosoever believes in him should receive remission of sins.
There is no Savior but by Christ; and there is no salvation by Christ but by
faith, and therefore we are said to be saved through faith, Ephesians. 2. 8. As
faith is the instrument to apply the merits and righteousness of Jesus Christ.
Let me then exhort you to get faith, which is absolutely necessary unto
salvation: Get faith of the right kind; there is a general, common, historical,
temporary, hypocritical, dead and ineffectual faith; but do you labor after a
special, lively, unfeigned, effectual, justifying and saving faith; and that
you may not be mistaken in this great point on which your salvation does
depend, I shall describe that faith which is of the right kind, and will
certainly save you if you obtain it.

Faith is a grace wrought in the heart by the Spirit of God, whereby a poor
sinner being made sensible of the guilt and power of his sins, and the utter
insufficiency of himself, or any creature in the world, to give him any help or
succor; and having in the Gospel a discovery and proffer made unto him of the
Lord Jesus Christ, as an all sufficient, most merciful and faithful Advocate
and Savior, does go quite out of himself, and accept, lay hold, rely, and rest
upon him, and him alone, for pardon, and grace, and everlasting happiness. Or
more briefly thus, Faith is a grace of God whereby the humbled sinner does
accept and rely upon Christ alone for salvation, as he is held forth in the
Promises of the Gospel.

If you would attain this grace of Faith, take these Directions.

1. You must be fully persuaded that the Scriptures which reveal Christ, are
indeed the word of God; this is the foundation of all faith, therefore I shall
briefly suggest some Arguments to prove the divine Authority of the Scriptures:
As 1. Because of that majesty, purity, holiness, heavenliness which does appear
in the Scriptures beyond all other writings. 2. Because of the design and drift
of the Scriptures to debase man, and exalt God and his glory above all. 3.
Because of the admirable contexture, and contrivance, and sweet harmony of the
Scriptures in all the parts thereof, though written by so many several men in
several ages and places, which shows that they were all acted by the same
Spirit of God. 4. Because of the wonderful work of man's Redemption there set
forth at first more darkly, afterward more clearly, which no mortal brain
could have invented, much less could any created power have effected. 5.
Because of the great power which this word has to convince, convert, and
comfort. 6. Because of the confirmation of the Scriptures by miracles. 7.
Because of the acknowledgement of the Scriptures to be Gods Word in all ages.
8. Because of the many millions of Martyrs, who have sealed the Truths of the
word with their blood. 9. Because of the witness of the Spirit in and with the
word, which does bear testimony to the hearts of Gods people, that the
Scriptures are his Word, and were indicted by his Spirit. Whence it follows,
that the Scriptures are true, because God, the Author of them, is true, and
cannot lie; and whatever is there revealed, is as certain as those things which
are most demonstrable to sense or reason: This is the first step to your
believing in Christ who is made known in the Scriptures, to believe that the
Scriptures are Gods Word.

2. If you would attain a saving faith in Christ, you must be convinced and
fully persuaded of your lost estate without Christ, and your absolute need of
him, of which before.

3. You must be persuaded, that it is not in your own power to believe, that it
is not of your selves, but is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. and therefore must
apply your selves to God, that he would not only give you his Son, but also
give you the hand of faith to lay hold on him, that he would work in you this
grace of faith by his Spirit.

4. You must consider those Arguments of Scripture which encourage faith: As
for instance, I shall mention four heads of Arguments for faith, from the
consideration 1. Of God. 2. Of the Promises. 3. Of Christ. 4. Of the Saints.

1. From the consideration of God, who has given his Son to save sinners; it
is an encouragement to faith, to consider, 1. That God is merciful, and
therefore willing to pardon and save, otherwise he would not have sent his Son;
he does not delight in the death of sinners, Ezekiel. 18. 23. but delights to
show mercy; see Micah 7. 18, 19. Exodus 34. 6, 7. Psalm. 103. 8, 9, etc. 2. That
God is faithful in his Promises of salvation, which he has made through his
Son in his Covenant of Grace: God needed not have made the Covenant, nor
promised mercy to any sinners; but having made the Covenant, he is engaged to
make it good. 3. That it is for his glory to save sinners through his Son, the
glory of his free grace, yea and justice too, which has been fully satisfied
by Christ's death.

2. You have encouraging Arguments for faith, from the consideration of the
Promises, which are, 1. Large, made to all sorts of persons, and all sorts of
sinners, none are excluded. 2. Full, they extend to all sorts of sins, though
never so many and great, Isa. 55. 7. 3. Free, nothing is required on your part
but accepting. 4. Sure, being the Promises of God in Christ.

3. You have encouragement to believe in Christ for salvation, from the
consideration of Christ, the proper object of faith: 1. The quality of his
person who is God and man in one person, that he might reconcile man unto God.
2. The merit of his sufferings, which (as has been shown) was of infinite
value, and sufficient for the redemption of men. 3. His alsufficient power to
save those that come to him, Heb. 7. 25. 4. His mercy and faithfulness to make
reconciliation, Heb. 2. 17. 5. His interest with the Father. 6. His continual
intercession at the right hand of God, Heb. 7. 25.

4. You have encouragement to believe in Christ for salvation, from the
consideration of the Saints, the experience which they have had of salvation by
Christ, some of whom have been as vile sinners as you: You have as good grounds
to come unto Christ, and believe in him for salvation, as the most holy men
alive before conversion.

5. If you would attain this grace of faith in Jesus Christ, you must labor to
act it, looking up to God for help herein; endeavor to cast and roll your
selves upon Christ, to apply Christ and his merits, and to rely upon him and
his righteousness: It is in your endeavor that God does work; and here you
must endeavor again and again against all opposition which you find from the
Devil and your own evil heart of unbelief, which will be ready to carry you
away from Christ. So much for the 4th. Direction.

Direction 5. You must get a new Nature, if you would be saved: You must be
made partakers of the Divine Nature, if you would be made partakers of this
salvation: You have brought unholy and impure natures into the world with you,
which must be changed and renewed after the Image of God, in knowledge,
righteousness, and true holiness, before you can be in a state of salvation,
and see the Kingdom of God: This new nature, which is absolutely necessary unto
salvation, is begun in the work of regeneration, and carried on in the work of
sanctification: In regeneration the work of grace is begun, the habits of grace
are infused; a new principle of spiritual life is put into the soul; and sin
(which before lived, and had dominion over the man, employing all his members
as instruments of unrighteousness, to make provision for the satisfaction of
its affections and lusts) does receive its deaths wound, and loses its force
and reigning power: In sanctification, the work of grace is carried on, the
habits of grace are strengthened and increased; the new man does grow, and the
old man does decline and decay; there is a vivification or quickening more and
more of grace, by the influence of the Word and Spirit, and a mortification or
subduing more and more of remaining iniquity. What our Savior tells Nicodemus,
Joh. 3. 3. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God: I may
tell you, that unless ye be born again, unless ye be regenerated, ye cannot be
saved, no possibility of entering into the Kingdom of Heaven, without you get
this new nature: A man must be born the first time, before he can possess a
temporal inheritance; and a man must be born again, before he can possess the
eternal inheritance: You must be children, before you can be heirs, Romans 8. 17.
children not only by adoption, but also by regeneration: Ye must be Saints,
before meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.
12. You must have the new nature, before you can enter into the New Jerusalem:
You must be made like to God in holiness, before you can be admitted to live
with God in the place of everlasting happiness; God does suffer the wicked that
are unclean and unholy, to live before him in the Outhouse of the Earth; but he
will not permit any except such as are sanctified to live with him in the
Palace of Heaven. O then labor after a work of Grace upon your hearts; be
persuaded of the worth of Grace, that it is a rare and precious Jewel, that the
least measure of Grace is of more worth than ten thousand Worlds; be sensible
of your want of it, that naturally you are without it, that it does not grow in
Natures Garden, that you have no good Nature in you before God, till your
Nature is renewed; be ready to receive the seed of Grace, which drops down from
above whilst People are attending upon Gods Ordinances; be ready to hearken
and yield to the Spirits motions, whereby this work of Grace is effected: And
having the work begun, O cherish the Grace you have got, and as newborn Babes
desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby; and labor to
cleanse your selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, that ye may
perfect holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1.

Direction 6. You must lead a new Life, if you would be saved; see what kind of
Life the grace of God which brings salvation does require and teach, namely,
to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and
godly in this present world, Tit. 2. 11, 12. You must deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, you must put off concerning the former conversation the old man
which is corrupt according to deceitful lusts, Ephesians. 4. 22. and not fashion
your selves according to the former lusts, in your ignorance and unregeneracy,
1 Pet. 1. 14. not running with others unto the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.
4. not walking according to the course of a profane and ungodly world, Ephesians. 2.
2. but saving your selves from an untoward generation, Act. 2. 40. as he that
has called you is holy, so you must be holy in all manner of conversation, 1
Pet. 1. 15. you must live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world; soberly in regard of your selves; righteously in regard of others; and
godly in regard of the Lord.

1. Soberly, in regard of your selves; which implies, 1. Temperance in eating
and drinking, you must take heed of Gluttony and Drunkenness: 2. Chastity, you
must take heed of Adultery and Uncleanness, in thought, speech, look, and act.
3. Moderation, you must be sober in your desires after these earthly things,
and take heed of inordinate affection to any thing.

2 You must live Righteously in regard of others: You must give to every one
their due, and do to others as you reasonably can desire that they should do
unto you; you must take heed of unrighteousness either in regard of Commutative
Justice in your buying and selling, borrowing and lending; and in regard of
Distributative Justice in dispensing of rewards and punishments; you must
beware of oppressing, afflicting, injuring any, of going beyond or defrauding
any, of withholding dues, keeping back wages from those that have done you
service, knowing that if they cannot, God will be the avenger of all such.

3. You must live godly in regard of the Lord; you must especially show your
New Life in the immediate Worship of the Lord, and that publicly in his House,
privately in your Families, secretly in your Closets; you must worship God in
the Ordinances of his own appointment; and this you must do with reverence,
having an awe and dread of God upon your spirits, with whom you have more
immediately to do; with sincerity, having a sincere respect to Gods glory
therein, and that you might be accepted by him, and meet with him; with
vigilance watching the fittest time in regard of the thing, and the temper of
your Bodies and Souls, and the breathings of Gods Spirit; with humility,
sensible of your sinfulness, unworthiness, weakness, emptiness, neediness; with
diligence, before to prepare your hearts, and in Ordinances to engage them, and
resist the Devil and the contrary workings of the flesh; with frequency, laying
hold on all the opportunities as you can, without neglecting other businesses,
which for that time you may be more necessarily called unto; with servency,
getting your hearts if you can raised and enlarged, laboring that they may
burn within you with love to God; with delight and complacency in God, and
above all with Faith in Jesus Christ, through whom alone it is that you can
have strength to perform duties, and that you can have any acceptance in them
by the Father.

Direction 7. You must resolve upon sufferings for Christ, if called, if you
would be saved; you must bear the Cross, if you would wear the Crown,
remembering that if the Cross be weighty it will work for you a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. you must reckon upon
sufferings for Christ before hand, and resolve that you will stick to him and
his ways, though you should lose esteem by it, and become the Drunkards Song,
and be reproached amongst men; though you lose liberty by it, and be thrust
into Prison; though you should lose Estate by it, and be brought to pinching
want; though you should lose Friends by it, and have none to stand by you;
though you should lose Life by it, and be cut off in the midst of your years;
otherwise you cannot be Christ's Disciples indeed, and obtain this salvation
which he has purchased. See the terms which our Savior propounds, Luke 14.
26, 27. If any man come unto me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife
and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea and his own life, he cannot be my
Disciple. This we are to understand, that a man must choose to displease
Father, Mother, Wife, Children, the nearest and dearest Relations, and part
with any thing in the world, yea with Life it self, rather than to displease
and part with Jesus Christ; and that we must resolve to bear the Cross,
whatever it be that God has allotted for us, otherwise we do not accept of
Christ upon Gospel-terms; you must resolve to be partakers of the affliction of
the Gospel, if you would obtain the salvation of the Gospel; you must resolve
to suffer with Christ, and for his sake when called, if you would reign and be
glorified together with him. Whatever profession you make of Christ and his
ways in time of peace and prosperity, when the Sun of persecution does arise
upon you with burning heat, you will wither and fall away, and turn fearful
Apostates, and then your last estate will be worse than your first; and as your
sin will be greater here, so your punishment will be more dreadful hereafter
in Hell, where you will confess that the light sufferings which you have
declined for Christ's sake here, are not worthy to be compared with the far more
exceeding and eternal weight of wrath which you must endure for your Apostasy
unto all eternity.

Direct. 8. You must study and apply the Promises of the Covenant of grace, if
you would be saved; without the Covenant of grace there had been no possible
salvation for any of the fallen Children of Men; the Covenant of Works which
God made with Man at the first, being broken by sin, it does condemn all that
are under it; it is by virtue of the Covenant of Grace that any are brought
into a state of salvation; therefore study and apply the Promises of this
Covenant: Now you must know that all the Promises of the Gospel, which are
scattered up and down the Scripture do belong unto this Covenant; but I shall
spread before you those few more general Promises which the Apostle does make
mention of, where he treats of the New Covenant, Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12. For this
is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days,
says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their mind, and write them in their
hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People; and they
shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying know
the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least to the greatest; for I will
be merciful unto their unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities will I
remember no more. Here are Four great Promises which the Lord has made to his
People, which I shall explain (though not in the order of the Text) that you
may the better understand and apply them.

1. God promises that he will be to them a God, and they shall be to him a
People; this includes all the rest: It is a full and sweet promise that God
will be our God, it has a great deal more in it, than we can conceive; we may
look and look again, and though our Faith have never so piercing an eye, never
so large and deep reach, yet we cannot look to the bottom, and fathom the depth
of this Promise; we may suck and suck again at this breast, and though we draw
never so hard, we can never draw forth all the sweetness that is in this
Promise. To have God to be our God, it is very great, it is very sweet: Indeed
God is the God of all his Creatures, yea of his enemies, and the vilest
sinners; but to be our God in this place sounds and signifies more than that
which is common to all; it speaks a peculiar relation, a special interest and
propriety in God; in this promise God does make over himself and all that he
has to us, so far as we are capable of receiving; he gives himself to be our
portion, he engages his Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, Love, and all his
Attributes to be employed for our good, he promises to be our God here, and to
be our God for ever; it signifies that he will be our Father to love and
cherish us, to preserve, and provide for us whilst we live, and to take our
Souls to himself when we dye, and to raise up our bodies at the last day, and
make both perfectly glorious and happy in Heaven, when time shall be no more.
He promises also that we shall be his People; we cannot make our selves so,
but he promises that he will make us so; he will make us his Children, he will
adopt us, he will regenerate us, give us the title, and give us the disposition
of Children; all this and much more is contained in this Promise, That God will
be our God, and we shall be his People, even the whole work of our salvation
from our effectual Calling unto our eternal Glorification.

2. A second great Promise of the Covenant of Grace is, That God will be
merciful unto our unrighteousness, and that he will remember no more our sins
and iniquities; it is a promise of mercy in the free pardon and forgiveness of
all our sins, this is an exceeding great and precious promise, without which
there were no access for us unto God, no attaining eternal happiness, no
escaping eternal misery, guilt would shut us out of Heaven, and sink us into
Hell without a pardon. This Promise is of vast extent, it reaches to all sort
of sins, Unrighteousness, Sins, Iniquities; no sin is too great for God to
pardon, if the sinner does believe.

3. A third Promise of the Covenant of Grace is, that God will give us the
knowledge of himself; they shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every
man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the
least to the greatest; they shall not teach one another the knowledge of God,
that is, they cannot, or they shall not be able to do it; they may and ought to
teach one another instrumentally; it is the duty of some to teach, and the duty
of others, and they have need, to learn, but they shall not be able to teach
effectually; they may give instructions to one another concerning God and his
ways; but they cannot give light; they may set the light before them, but they
cannot set up the light in them; they may open Truths, but they cannot open the
Understanding; this is the work of God only to do, and this he has undertaken
by Promise to do, they shall all know me, they shall be taught of God by his
Spirit the knowledge of himself; he teaches by men instrumentally, but he will
teach us by his Spirit effectually.

4. A fourth Promise of the Covenant of Grace, is, that God will put his laws
into our hearts, and write them in our minds: the Law was written before on
Tables of Stone, but here he promises to write them on fleshly Tables of the
heart; which is done not with Pen and Ink, but by the Spirit of the living God,
2 Cor. 3. 3. this Promise is very comprehensive, it includes not only the
giving of a spiritual discovery of the mind and will of God, but also the
giving of spiritual dispositions, affections, and strength to perform it; and
by consequence the removal of indispositions, the purging out of corruptions,
the mortifying of lust, the taking away the heart of stone, and giving a heart
of flesh, the giving a new heart, the putting the Spirit within us, and causing
us to walk in his Statutes, and to keep his Judgments and do them, as this
Promise is branched forth, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27.

These in brief are the chief Promises of the Covenant of Grace, labor to
understand them, and apply them that you may be saved.

Direct. 9. You must give up your selves in Covenant to God, if you would be
saved; God has put his hand and seal to the Covenant which he has made
through his Son with you, and you should put your hand to the Covenant and
engage your selves unto the Lord; you were dedicated to the Lord by your
Parents when you were baptized, then you understood not what was done; now you
are arrived to years of understanding, you should make it your own act, and
dedicate your selves to the Lord: and the more solemnly you enter into Covenant
with God, the more strong Obligation it may be upon you to walk closely with
God all your days: Some have directed to do it under handwriting, subscribing
the name, and some have put words into your mouths, which you may do it, in if
you are not so well able to express the terms your selves; you have this done
in Mr. Guthry and Mr. Allen's books, if those Books be not at hand, I shall set
before you this Platform, which you may make use of in entering solemnly into
Covenant with God.

I A. B. do acknowledge my self to be the Creature and Subject of the great and
glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth, in whom I live, move, and have my being,
and from whom I receive every good thing which I receive; and therefore am
obliged to conform my mind, will and affections, to order my words, ways and
whole conversation according to his most wise and good, most righteous and
reasonable Laws: Besides which natural Obligation, however born in sin, and
thereby disenabled, yet being born in the Church, and Baptized in the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and by my Parents dedicated unto God when I
was an Infant; I am further obliged by Covenant to be the servant of the Lord.
But having proved a Rebel and Traitor against the Highest Majesty, breaking his
Laws, and Covenant-ties which have been upon me, spending years of my life in a
state of strangeness and enmity to God, in the service of the Devil and my own
Lusts, I do now solemnly renew my Covenant with God, that the breach may be
made up which sin has made between God and my Soul.

Being in the First place convinced of the guilt of my sins, whereby I have
affronted and offended the highest Majesty, whose Justice must be satisfied;
and withal convinced of my own utter inability to make the least satisfaction
either by doing or suffering, and that my Righteousnesses are as filthy rags,
and therefore altogether insufficient to procure for me the pardon of sin, the
favor of God, and the peace of Conscience; as also fully persuaded that no
mere Creature is able to give unto me any help and relief in this case. And
being informed by the Word of God what the Lord Jesus is, has done, and
suffered for poor sinners, That there is no Name under Heaven given amongst men
whereby we can be saved, but only the Name of Jesus Christ; that he is able to
save all them unto the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing be ever
lives to make intercession for them; that he is a merciful and faithful
High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation for the sins of
the People; that whosoever comes unto him, he will in no wise cast out: and
finding a Promise in the Covenant of Grace that God will be merciful unto our
unrighteousness, and that our sins and iniquities he will remember no more;
which Covenant is of full force through the death of Christ the Testator
thereof: and having Christ set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his
blood, and his Righteousness declared for the remission of sins which are past
through the forbearance of God; and this Christ freely tendered unto me, and
being invited earnestly, yea entreated that I would be reconciled unto God
through him; and by the Spirit being persuaded of the truth of these things,
and hereby encouraged to apply my self unto Christ, and the Promises through
him unto my self: I do now (grieving that I have offended God, groaning under
the burden of sin, renouncing all my own righteousness, hungring after the Lord
Jesus Christ and his righteousness) upon the bended knees of my soul come unto
him, and cast my self wholly upon him; I choose him for my only Advocate to
plead my cause in the Court of Heaven, to procure for me Pardon and
Reconciliation, that being justified by Faith, I may have peace with God
through my dear Lord Jesus Christ.

Next, repenting from the bottom of my heart^ of my sins, grieving that I have
such a sinful Nature, such a deceitful heart, that I have so adulterated my
affections, and gone a whoring from God to the Creatures, that I have so
indulged my flesh, and satisfied its irregular desires, that I have given ear
to the Devil, and complied as I have done with his temptations: I now renounce
all allegiance and service to the World, to the Flesh, and to the Devil, these
enemies of the Lord, and of my peace, which war against my Master, and against
my own soul; covenanting and promising never to give away my heart any more
from the Lord unto any person or thing in the World; to refuse the World for my
portion and chief happiness; to deny my flesh i^s sinful desires and demands;
to resist the Devil and his Temptations; not to live and allow my self in any
known sin, and to make use of all the known means which the Lord has
prescribed for the crucifying of the World, for the mortifying and utter
extirpation of sin, for the resisting and overcoming the Devil. And being
persuaded of the power and interest, the subtilty and deceitfulness of these
enemies, and withal sensible of my own imprudence, folly, weakness and
inconstancy, I humbly and earnestly implore and beseech the highest Majesty,
who is infinite in wisdom, power, and goodness, that he would give me counsel
and discretion in the use and management of all means and helps that I may not
neglect any, nor through sloth and imprudence suffer a lesser duty to justle
out a greater, that he would give me courage, strength and constancy in the
maintaining my spiritual warfare against these my spiritual enemies unto my
life's end. And if ever I should fall through unwatchfulness and weakness,
(which the Lord grant I may never do) I do promise in the strength of the Lord
to arise again by Faith and Repentance. And because of the Body of sin within
me, and remaining corruptions, I shall be subject (during my abode here) unto
daily failings and infirmities; I do promise to pray, watch and strive against
them, beseeching the Lord to strengthen me herein, and grant that my sinful
infirmities may be less every day than other; in the mean time looking upon
those disallowed miscarriages contrary to the settled bent and resolution of my
heart, as insufficient to make my Covenant void.

Furthermore, being convinced of the vanity, emptiness, and utter insufficiency
of any or all the Creatures in the World, to make me happy, had I the most
desirable enjoyment of them; and having a discovery of the infinitely blessed
God made unto me in his Works, chiefly in his Word, as being the chief good of
man, and withal a Promise in the Covenant of Grace that he will be our God,
yea our Father through Christ, and that we shall be his people, his Sons and
Daughters: I do here with deep veneration of Soul, and chief estimation of
mind, choose the thrice Blessed Jehovah for my Portion and chief good, beyond
all persons and things in this World; and do avouch him this day to be my God.
I humbly accept of the relation of a Servant and a Son, or Daughter, which he
has called me unto. I put my self under his wing, and commit my self to his
care and Tuition; and henceforth shall be bold through my dearest Lord to call
him, and look upon him to be my God and Father; and humbly shall expect from
him Protection and Provision in his way and work, Correction, Audience of
Prayer, and the fulfilling of all those Promises unto me, which he has made
unto his Children.

Moreover, being persuaded that none can come unto the Father, but by the Son;
nor share in any spiritual privilege, but through Christ's death and
intercession, and being persuaded of the infinite amiableness of Christ's
person, the greatness of his love and affection unto the children of men, as
also of his infinite desireableness in regard of those offices, and relations
which he has vouchsafed to take upon him, and enter into for the good of his
people: I do avouch the Lord Jesus Christ to be my only Savior, and choose him
in all his Offices and Relations. I choose Christ to be my High Priest, to
intercede, and procure for me daily pardon, access unto God, acceptance of my
person and service, audience of my prayers, and supply of all my wants. I
choose Christ to be my Prophet, to teach me by his Word and Spirit the will of
the Father. I choose Christ to be my King to rule and govern me, to command my
whole man into the obedience of himself. I choose Christ to be my Captain, to
go before me, and to tread down my spiritual enemies under my feet. I choose
Christ to be my Friend and Brother, to counsel and advise me, to stand by me in
all the difficulties and straights of my life. I choose Christ to be my Husband
and beloved, humbly accepting of this near and sweet Relation which he calls
me unto. I join and espouse my self unto the Lord Jesus; and do promise to be
for him only, and with full purpose of heart to cleave unto him, to love,
honor and serve him, never to deny nor leave him whatever reproaches and
distresses I may meet withal for his sake; though Persecution should arise,
and that even unto death, I do promise to own his Name, and Cause, and Truths,
and Ways, so long as I have breath in my Body: But knowing that I am utterly
insufficient to do any of these things in my own strength, therefore upon the
knees of my Soul, I earnestly beseech that I may have strength for all these
from himself alone.

Further, because God my Father is invisible to the eye of sense, and
incomprehensible by the grasp of Reason; and because my dearest Lord Jesus
Christ, who alone has declared him, in regard of his bodily presence is now in
Heaven, absent from his people; and because whatever spiritual light or life,
grace comfort, or spiritual communion with the Father, and with his Son, is
vouchsafed unto the people of God, it is by the Holy Spirit, who is appointed
by Office hereunto, and graciously promised unto them in the Word: Therefore I
avouch and choose the Holy Ghost to be my Teacher and Guide, to be my
Sanctifier and Comforter, to help my infirmities in duties; to strengthen me
with might in my inner man against sin and Satan's Temptations; to cleanse me
from all filthiness of flesh and spirit; to heal me of all my spiritual
distempers; to revive me under all my faintings; to supply me with all Graces
as to kind and measure, as shall be needful for me in my place and work; to
testify Gods love to my Soul; to give me earnests of Glory, and to seal me up
unto the day of Redemption: And O that I might have the presence and abode of
the Spirit of God with me, and never grieve, quench, resist, and drive away the
Spirit any more!

Also, because the Holy Scriptures are the Word of God, endited by the Holy
Ghost, the Epistle of Jesus Christ, wherein he has given notice of his love
and will; because they are the only sufficient, and in themselves a perfect
Rule for Faith and a holy Life, and (...) fully do declare the way and means
unto everlasting happiness: Therefore I choose the Word of God to be the Rule
of my Faith and Life; and the Ordinances of God therein prescribed to be the
means of my acquaintance and converse with my God so far as I am capable of,
and he shall vouchsafe; and to be the means also of preparing of me for the
full and perfect enjoyment of him beyond my present capacity.

And, because the Ordinances are but dark glasses to see the Lord in; because
ignorance and unbelief do exceedingly vail God from mine eyes, flesh and
corruption do damp my love to God, and my spiritual Joy in him, and interrupt
my communion with him; because of the sins, sorrows, temptations, and
afflictions which I cannot be wholly free from, and therefore cannot be
perfectly happy here in this World; and having life and immortality brought to
light by the Gospel; a discovery and promise of eternal Life made unto me in
the Word, and withal a command of my Lord, to lay up my Treasure in Heaven:
Therefore I choose Heaven for my Treasure and Inheritance, for ever to live
there in the company of all the holy Angels and Saints, in the blessed sight,
love, and enjoyment of the infinitely blessed God, to see and share in the
glory of my Dearest Lord Jesus Christ, whither I hope my Soul shall be
transported by the Angels, so soon as it is separated from my Body; and that my
vile Body, when awakened and raised in the Morning of Christ's coming, shall be
fashioned like unto Christ's most beautiful and glorious Body, and both inherit
the Kingdom prepared and promised by my Father.

Lastly, being persuaded of my Duty, and encouraged by Gods promise of
assistance and acceptance; I now dedicate and deliver up my self fully, freely,
and for ever unto the Lord; I yield and resign up my Soul with all its powers
and faculties; my Body with all its senses and members to be the instruments of
righteousness unto God: I resign up my Mind to think upon the Lord, and those
things which concern his Interest and Glory, to receive, embrace and maintain
his Truths; I resign up my Memory, to be a storehouse and receptacle chiefly
of the great things which do belong to his Kingdom, and other things of a more
inferior rank, as they may have a reference unto his Glory. I resign up my
Conscience to receive light and purity from his Word and Spirit, and desire
that it may act faithfully as the Lords Deputy. I resign up my Will unto the
Will of God, to submit to his Precepts, to embrace his Promises, to oppose what
he has forbidden, to comply with all the dispensations of his Providence
toward me, to be willing that I should be, and do, and bear, and choose and
lose what God would have me. I resign up my Heart and Affections to fear and
reverence the Lord, to believe and trust in the Lord, to desire and seek after
the Lord, to love and delight in the Lord, and desire to put them all under his
Government, and to have them exercised according to his will. I resign up my
Fancy to be governed and employed by my Reason in the service of my Master. I
resign up my Sensual Appetite after meat and drink, sleep, and any pleasures to
be subservient to my Rational Appetite, and no further to have satisfacton,
than will tend to the glory of the Lord. I resign up my Hands to work for God,
my Feet to walk for God, my Ears to hear for God, my Eyes to see for God, my
Tongue to speak for God. I resign up all my Graces, all my Gifts, all my
Talents, to be used for the Glory of my Lord and Master; and my whole Man to be
ruled and governed by his Laws: Promising, though my Flesh do contradict and
rebel, that I will endeavor to order my whole conversation according to his
Word; humbly looking up to him for strength so to do, that I may be enabled by
him to every duty. And now I look upon my self no longer my own, or that any
thing I have is at my own dispose; but I wholly belong unto the Lord: And
therefore, blessing, and praising, and giving thanks unto the Lord, for
vouchsafing to enter into Covenant with me, and enclining my heart to enter
into Covenant with him; Bending my neck under the feet of the most glorious
Jehovah, I subscribe my self,

Witness my Hand and Seal. The devoted Servant of the Lord, A. B.

Direct. 10. You must be steadfast, and persevere in the ways of God unto your
lives end, if you would be saved: And here you must be steadfast, 1. In the
ways of Truth. 2. In the Ways of Gods Commandments.


1. You must be steadfast and persevere in the ways of Truth; in the belief of
the Truths of the Word, without turning aside into ways of Error; there are
ways of Error which will lead you as certainly, and more securely to Hell,
than the ways of open profaneness. The Apostle tells us of damnable errors,
as well as open, damnable sins, 2 Pet. 2. 1. and we read of some that are
damned for believing a lie, that their delusion has been the cause of their
damnation, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. The Devil leads as many as he can in the cords
of more gross and known sins toward the place of endless misery; but if any of
them begin to perceive their thraldom and danger, if their eyes be a little
opened, and Conscience awakened, and hearts affected, and they are persuaded to
look after their salvation, then he endeavors to draw them into ways of
Error, he has his Agents and Ministers, who are very subtle and crafty, and
lie in wait to deceive, who with good words and fair speeches insinuate
poisonous doctrines; and pretending more glorious discoveries, higher and more
excellent ways, draw them out of the way of the Word and Ordinances, into
paths of darkness, where they wander and lose themselves for ever; where they
are tossed up and down, and beaten to and fro with every wind of doctrine unto
the shipwreck of their Faith and their Souls. As you hope for salvation, you
must take heed of Error; diligently inquire after Truth; search for it as for
silver, and digg for it as for hidden treasures; digg for it in the golden
Mines of the Scriptures, let the Word of God be the only Rule of your Faith;
and having found the Truth, keep it, hold it fast, labor to fix it in your
minds, let it be as a girdle about your loins; lay it up in your heart, let it
be rooted there; apply your selves to Christ as a Prophet to lead you by his
Word and Spirit into all Truth, and to keep you from being deceived and
deluded; and keep close to the Ministry and Ordinances of Christ's Institution,
which the Lord has appointed to continue unto the end of the World, for the
edifying establishment, and perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14.

2. You must be steadfast, and persevere in the ways of Gods Commandments; you
must patiently continue in well-doing, if you would obtain immortal glory, Romans
2. 7. you must endure to the end, if you would be saved, Matthew. 10. 22. you
must be faithful unto the death, if you would gain the Crown of life, Rev. 2.
10. It is absolutely necessary unto salvation, that you hold out in the ways
of God; none but such which come to the end of the race will obtain the prize;
the Gate of Heaven lies at the further not the hither end of the Holy Path;
therefore you must steadfastly persevere in this way; if you should fall down,
you must rise again, and go on; if you should fall back or through mistake turn
aside, you must return again, and make the more haste; but if you should fall
off, if you should fall away (as some have done who have seemed very zealous
and forward Christians as to the outward Profession) you are lost, you are
cast-awayes, and you will tumble and fall down into the bottomless Pit, from
whence there is no returning. Be not then followers of them that draw back to
perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the Soul, Heb. 10. 39. Be
followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the Promises, Heb. 6.
12. It is a glorious Inheritance that is before you, that is promised and
prepared in Heaven, let this encourage you to diligence and perseverance unto
the end; I shall conclude with the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 58.
Therefore my beloved Brethren be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the
Lord.

Thus I have given you Directions, What things you must do that you may be
saved.

CHAP. VI.
II. THE Second and last thing for your guidance in the way of Salvation, is,
To show you what Means you must make use of to help you in these things.

There are Ten Means to be used in order to the attaining of Salvation: 1.
Self-examination. 2. Reading the Word of God, and other good books. 3. Hearing
the Word Preached. 4. Meditation. 5. Prayer. 6. Christian-conference. 7.
Watchfulness. 8. Sanctification of Fasting-dayes. 9. Sanctification of
Sabbath-dayes. 10. Improvement of Sacrament-dayes.


Means 1. Self-examination. You must examine your selves, if you would see your
selves lost; you may read the mistake of the Laodiceans, Rev. 3. 17. Thou
say, I am rich, and increased in goods, and have need of nothing; and
know not that thou art wretched, miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.
You must examine and prove your spiritual state, that you may have a right
judgment thereof, that you may perceive how poor, and wretched, and miserable
you are whilst you are in a state of Nature. You must examine your selves,
that you may get a sight and sense of sin: Jer. 8. 6. I hearkened and heard, but
they spoke not aright, no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have
I done? every one turned to his course, as the Horse rusheth into the battle.
You must examine what you have done, if you would repent of your sins; you must
search and try your ways, if you would turn from your evil ways; you must
commune with your hearts, and come to your selves, with the Prodigal, if you
would return unto God, and turn your feet unto his Testimonies. Be serious then
in this great duty of Self-examination; and that you may be so, I would advise
that you would set apart time for it, when your thoughts are most free, and
affections most sedate and quiet; get out of the hurry of the world, and lay
aside other business for a while; and withal separate your selves from
company, and retire into secret, where you may be free from external
disturbances and interruptions; whatever indispositions and withdrawments of
heart you find, force your selves to the work; resist Satan, who will
endeavor to divert and discourage you: Set your selves in the presence of God;
desire him to search you; beg his help in the duty; labor to keep your mind
close to it; if vain thoughts arise, and would hurry you away, look up to
Christ to rebuke them, and to bring them into captivity and obedience unto
himself. And then sit down, and seriously consider what you have done ever
since you came into the World, and withal think with your selves what you will
do when your life and this world shall come to an end. Take a review of your
sins; they are noted down upon the book of your Consciences, peruse this book;
and if you extracted a Catalogue of your sins, it might be a help to you. Note
down your original sin; your actual sins; your transgressions of Gods Law, in
the first and the second Table thereof; your disobedience to the Gospel; the
aggravations of your sins.

Means 2. Reading the Word of God, and other good books. The rule whereby you
are to examine your selves is the Word; this is like a Candle, which will give
light in dark corners; this is like a Glass, which will discover spots in the
face; you must search the Word, and try your selves hereby, if you would have
knowledge of sin, and your spiritual state; and you must search the Word, if
you would have knowledge and acquaintance with God and his will. You may arrive
to some knowledge of God by reading the Book of Nature; the whole world is full
of God, and every Creature does represent him; but the world is full of sin
too, and the more immediate representations of the Creatures are sensitive
things, which our sense lays hold on first, and is apt there to stick,
without further piercing and searching to find out God; and where we have one
provocation from the Creatures to love and serve him (through the bewitching
temptations of the world, meeting with the worldly lusts of our hearts) we have
a thousand incitements and allurements from them to sin against God; but the
Word is full of God, and no incitement there to sin, full of perswasives to
holiness and obedience; God is to be seen more easily, and he sets forth
himself there most conspicuously; In the Book of the Scriptures you have the
most glorious discoveries of God, in his greatness, majesty, power, holiness,
love, mercy, and the like; and the way made known of acquaintance and communion
with him; if you would be acquainted with God in Christ, you must acquaint your
selves with the Scriptures: Read the Scriptures daily, and search them; Joh. 5.
39. read not only the history of the Word, but labor to understand the mystery
of Godliness therein revealed, 1 Timothy 3. 16. endeavor after a spiritual
discerning of the things of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 14. when you meet with
Doctrines in your reading the Word, labor to understand and believe them; when
you meet with Precepts labor to obey them; when with Prohibitions and
Threatenings, be cautioned against sin by them; when you meet with promises,
labor to apply them, to draw virtue from them. Read this Book as the Word of
God, and hide it in your heart; lay it up there, as a choice treasure, get your
hearts cast into the mould of it; get it written upon your hearts, and let it
have an influence upon your whole conversation; and that you may the better
understand and apply the truths of the Word, read as you have time other good
books, which open the Scriptures, and treat of needful points of Religion,
especially such as direct in the great work of Conversion, and give Rules out
of the Word for the ordering of your whole conversation; but above all Books
read and study the Scriptures.

Means 3. Hearing the Word Preached. It is by the foolishness of Preaching that
God saves such as do believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21. however the preaching of the Word
is to them that perish foolishness, yet unto Believers it is the power of God
unto salvation; therein God does put forth his power, and makes bare his arm,
in bringing salvation to lost souls. Hear and thy Soul shall live, Isa. 55. 3.
Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17. Lydia's heart was opened whilst she
attended upon the Word preached by Paul, Act. 16. 14. Attend therefore
diligently upon the Word preached by Christ's Ministers, as an Ordinance of his
own institution for the working and increase of Grace: Look upon Ministers as
Christ's Ambassadors; he that hears them hears Christ, and he that turns
away his ear from hearing them, turns away his ear from Christ, who by his
Spirit in them speaks from Heaven unto men, and how impossible it is for such
to escape the wrath of God, see Heb. 12. 25. Much more shall not they escape
that turn away their ear from him that speaks from Heaven. Hear the Word with
reverence, as the Word of God, as if the Lord should speak to you from Heaven
with an audible voice; hear the Word with diligence and attention as for your
lives, as for the salvation of your Souls; hear the Word with faith and love,
without which it will not profit and work effectually in your hearts; and in
hearing look not so much for those things which may please, as for that which
may edify; I mean, do not regard so much men's fancies, as the wholesome Truths
of the Word, which tend most to conviction, edification, to the killing of sin,
quickening and increase of Grace, and nourishment of the spiritual life.

Means 4. Meditation. The Word like Food must be digested by Meditation, that
it may turn to spiritual nourishment; you must ponder and consider in your
minds the Truths of the Word, that you may both understand them, and get your
Hearts affected with them, and your Lives ordered by them. Meditation is a
great help in Heavens way, such as are remiss herein cannot walk so steddily,
nor cheerfully; accustom your selves unto this duty, set apart time for it; I
know that some complain of barrenness in their thoughts, when they endeavor to
meditate; such I would advise, if they have not that fruitfulness of thoughts
themselves to supply them with matter, that they would make use of others help;
let them meditate on the Scriptures they read, on the Sermons they hear;
moreover I would offer some general heads for Meditation, which you may make
use of. 1. Sometimes meditate on God, his Attributes, his infinite Majesty,
power, holiness, omnipresence, omniscience, eternity, unchangeableness, his
infinite wisdom, truth, faithfulness, justice, goodness, mercy and
loving kindness; his Councels, especially his eternal decree of Election, which
is of most sweet consideration to Believers; his works of Creation and
Providence. 2. Sometimes meditate on Christ; his near relations, of Friend,
Brother, Husband; his needful Offices of Priest, Prophet, and King. 3.
Sometimes meditate on the Spirit, his way and workings on the mind and heart,
how he enlighteneth, enliveneth, strengthens, comfort, etc. 4. Sometimes
meditate on the Covenant of Grace, and the rich, free, suitable, sure Promises
of pardon, grace, salvation therein. 5. Sometimes meditate on the Gospel, and
its privileges, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, Assurance of Gods
love, peace of Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost, communications of grace, etc.
6. Sometimes meditate on the four last things, namely, Death, Judgment, Heaven
and Hell. 7. Sometimes meditate, and that frequently, daily, of such Arguments
as tend to the mortifying of your particular sins, which are most strong and
prevalent, and to the strengthening of your graces which you find most weak
and deficient.

Means 5. Prayer. Pray secretly; retire your selves from company into your
Closets, or some private place, and there confess your sins, and make known
your requests to God, that sees and hears in secret, and has promised an
open reward to such as secretly and sincerely seek him. Pray frequently, be
often upon your knees, give your selves unto Prayer; begin the day, conclude
the day with Prayer, and recover some other time to visit and speak to God; at
least mingle ejaculatory Prayer with every other work; and labor that your
minds may be always in a praying frame; and do not withdraw, but be glad when
an opportunity offers it self to come to the throne of grace. Pray fervently,
pour forth your hearts before God in the duty; wrestle with God in Prayer like
Jacob, be earnest in your Petitions as for your lives, be instant and
importunate, take no denial, follow hard after God; stir up your selves to take
hold on him, use arguments in Prayer, to plead with him. Pray believingly,
mingle your prayers with Faith; make use of the name and mediation of Jesus
Christ; and make application of the Promises which God has made to his People,
which he has made to Faith, and which he has made to Prayer.

Means 6. Christian Conference. Take heed of the company of the wicked; from
such turn away; if you are under ties to be in such company, converse with them
as infected persons, with an Antidote, lest you receive hurt by them, and with
endeavors of doing them good. But choose the company of them that fear God;
they are the excellent persons; the wicked are the Dross of the Earth, they are
the Gold; let your delight be in their society; associate chiefly, if you have
opportunity, with such as have most of the power of godliness; and labor to
improve by their company whenever you come into it; endeavor to get light, and
life, and warmth and strength from them; take heed of unprofitable discourse;
but let it be with grace for edification.

Means 7. Watchfulness. Watch unto duty; there are some golden seasons for some
duties, some choice opportunities of doing and receiving good, which if once
slipped, you may never have the like again so long as you live; watch that you
may know them, watch that you may improve them; understand the day of your
visitation; sow your seed whilst the weather lasts; hoist up the sail when
the wind blows; watch the breathings of the Spirit, and comply with its
motions. Watch against sin, and therefore keep your hearts with all diligence;
guard your senses; take heed of Satan; get on the Spiritual Armor, especially
the shield of Faith, and fight the good fight of Faith, that you may lay hold
on eternal life.

Means 8. Sanctification of Fasting-dayes. Set apart times to humble your Souls
before God in Fasting, and Prayer; and therein rend your hearts and not your
garments; labor to afflict your Souls for sin; meet God with weeping and
supplication; cloathe your selves with humility, lie in the dust, cover your
selves with shame; loath and abhor your selves in his sight for your
iniquities, mourn for your own sins, and for the great dishonours of his Name
by the sins of others: And seek to the Lord both for your selves, and for his
Church.

Means 9. Sanctification of Sabbath-dayes. Remember to keep holy the
Sabbath Day; break off timely the day before from worldly employments, and be
earnest with God to prepare your heart for the day; and when the day is come,
begin and hold on with God from Morning to Night, in the public, private and
secret duties of his immediate Worship, except what time works of necessity and
mercy do call for: Labor to be in the Spirit and in the fear of God all the
day long; lay aside worldly business, take heed of vain and unprofitable
discourse; let not the Duties of Religion seem tedious, but call the Sabbath
your delight; begin Heaven-work on such days, that you may be fitted by these
Sabbaths for the Eternal Rest: Praise God on these days for the works of
Creation, especially for the work of Redemption; and labor to grow in grace by
the dews of the Word which fall upon you most plentifully on such days.

Means 10. Improvement of Sacrament-dayes. Come frequently to the Table of the
Lord, if you have opportunity, to celebrate the Memorial of Christ's Death, and
come preparedly; examine your selves; pray for the Wedding Garment; read the
history of Christ's Passion; consider such arguments as may be a means to draw
forth your graces into exercise; and when you are there, labor to mourn for
sin, which has pierced the Lord; to hunger after his righteousness; to receive
him by Faith; to apply the Promises of the Covenant of Grace, whereof the
Sacrament is a Seal; endeavor after a burning love to him whose love has been
so great as to dye for you; and let your hearts be filled with joy, and your
mouths with Praises, and deliver up your selves in Covenant unto the Lord in
this Ordinance; After you come from the Lords Table, reflect upon your carriage
toward the Lord; if you have been straitened, endeavor to find out the cause,
mourn, and by after-pains and application of Christ, endeavor to get some
benefit, and prepare better against the next time; if you have been enlarged,
be humble, be thankful, be watchful, live up to Obligations; draw virtue from
Christ's death for the crucifying more and more of your flesh, with its
affections and lusts; and fetch influences of grace and spiritual nourishment,
that you may increase with the increases of God.

Finally, be diligent in the use of these, and all other means and helps, and
so at length you shall attain the ultimate end, for which they are appointed,
even your Salvation and Eternal Happiness.

FINIS.

