A VINDICATION Of a short TREATISE OF TITHES Lately WRITTEN, AND Excepted
against by a Pamphlet, stilled, The Funeral of Tithes, etc.

July. 7

London, Printed by T. Newcomb, for Thomas Heath, and are to be sold at his
shop in Russel Street, near the Piazza's of Covent Garden. 1643.

A Vindication of a short Treatise of Tithes lately written; and excepted
against by a Pamphlet styled, The Funeral of Tithes, etc.
HAving perused with an equal eye, and unbyased judgment, three late Writings,
the one called, A Tract of Tithes; and the other, A Treatise of Tithes; and a
third termed, The Funeral of Tithes, etc. in nature of a Reply to the Treatise;
wherein the party that wrote the Treatise is envited to a Rejoinder, and to
join issue, but upon what particular point that issue should be joined, is not
expressed; so that for clear satisfaction to all persons, the Allegations and
Reasons upon the whole matter on both parts are to be duly weighed, before
judgment can be given thereupon: We shall single forth whath has been
delivered in the Treatise, whereunto exception has been taken in the Reply,
and then peruse what is delivered in the Tract, which is not cleared in the
Treatise (for it seems unto me, that the Treatise was not penned with
reference to the Tract, or as an Answer thereunto) and to give such further
satisfaction thereto as the same shall require, especially because the person
that wrote that Treatise (as I am informed) intends to say no more, til a
more full Answer be given to what he has delivered in that Treatise.

The first Exception in the Reply, is taken to a passage in the Epistle,
concerning the Duty of payment, and that there is not any of the Learned
Histories, but question the Duty; but the Reply names none; and if he did, he
that says, The labourer is worthy of his hire, and that thou shall not muzzel
the Ox that treads out the corn, is above them all; therefore if the Replyer
peruse the Writers well he shall find, that it is the Rise, the Part and
Manner of Payment that troubles them all, and not a Tithe or Portion to be due
unto the Minister: And if the Reply be but constant to it self, you may see
page 4. and other passages thereof, that he does condemn the Appropriators for
detaining the Tenths and Tithes, as they are paid in this Nation, which he
himself there affirms are due unto the Ministers. And it does not appear to
me, that the Treatise did intend to write higher of the Duty of Tithes, then as
they are, and have been held due and payable in this Nation, by the established
Laws, whereby we are clearly bound: And since the time they have been settled,
both as for the part and proportion, as also for their Regular payment in this
Nation (which though neither the Decretal Epistle by Innocent the 3 in the year
1200. nor the Council of Lateran in the year 1215. could impose upon this
Nation for a Law, yet the same being held by the People of this Land to be
reasonable) the same have been received and established for a Law ever since,
and the people have thereunto submitted to the payment of them hitherto without
dispute, as is most truly affirmed by the Treatise, and it may be with
confidence enough averred, that there is no learned Writer that does oppose the
verity hereof, till this very age; neither are the places in the Tract, whereto
the Reply refers the Reader, at all against it; but true it is, that the
most Learned Writer upon this subject, quoted in that Tract, does show a
variety of payment of Tithes before the said Settlement and Establishment, but
for the practice of it since, you have his own words in the Treatise, page 14.

And becanse we will take things along with us as we go, least happily we may
be blamed as the Treatise is, for not giving an Answer to every thing contained
in the Tract and in the Reply, we shall not balk that Objection (which surely
the Treatise would not have done, had he thought it had been worth the
Answering) That the Receivers of Tithes were never any other then Officers or
Stewards for their employment to good uses, whose Mis-user, Non-user, or
Dis-user, is a forfeiture thereof. Here may be inquired whose officers or
Stewards are hereby meant that they are; if they shall say they are Gods
stewards, as al other people are of that which they possess in this world, then
are they only accountable to him; if it shall be said, that they are the
Patrons or Parishoners Stewards, they must prove it, and not barely affirm it,
for the Law says, the Parson is seized of the Tithes, etc. in Right of his
Church, as a man is said to be seized of Lands in Right of his Wife, and yet he
is not his Wives Officer or Steward, but true and lawful owner and Possessor,
to his own use. But admit him Quasi Officer or Steward, what a Non-sequiter
then do you draw frow hence, that Ergo, his Non-user, Mis-user, Dis-user, must
be a forfeiture of the Churches Right, and of the Patrons also: Do you not
know, that the Law has ordained a Commission to rectify Lands, Tithes, etc.
given to good uses upon their mis-imployments, and can you give any instance
that such things have been forfeited for mis-imployment: your cases of
Keepership of Wilde-Beasts, Stewardship or Cessation, per Bienium, suit not at
all with it, if it be but in that point only of the difference, by being
seized in their own right, and in Right of the Church or other Right, you
cannot be ignorant, that if an Executor be outlawed, he forfeits not the goods
whereof he is possessed as Executor, though his own he does: besides, is it not
clearly against the Statutes of 1 Eliz. and 13 Eliz. for a Parson to do, commit
or suffer a forfeiture of the Parsonage? it is not denied, but that a Parson
for scandalous life, etc. may be removed, but it is utterly that he can forfeit
the inheritance of his Parsonage.

And again, by your General words (Receivers of Tithes) you mean to include
Appropriators too, for Officers and Stewards, but which way do you prove it:
for you must know, that upon Appropriations there were by the Statutes of 15 R.
2. and 4 H. 4. Vicars End owed, and provision then made for the poor, which you
acknowledge, was as the value of things then were, equal or near to the worth;
and in all or most Parishes, where Tithes are appropriate, the Lands given to
the poor thereupon remain, and are known by the name of the poors Lands or Town
Land to this day; and by what clause of the Instrument of Appropriation do you
find, that the Appropriators were Officers or Stewards only? or by what
clause in all the Statutes that gave them to the Crown, or derived them out, or
gives remedy for their recovery, do you find them but Officers or Stewards? it
is plain by them, that they are due to the Appropriator and Parson, and double
and tremble damages given; but do you find they are accountable to any for
them? Besides, if there could be such forfeiture committed, who should take the
forfeiture. The Patron ought to be preferred before the Freeholder, for he is
the supposed Doner of Tithes, but that will not please the Replyer, it is the
true owner must have them; but who that true owner is, will be the question,
which he resolves to be every Freeholder, but he sets not forth his Title, how
he came by them, sure it is he never bought them, nor paid for them; nor ought
the Freeholder to be Judge in his own cause, whether the Tithes were well or
ill employed: And you conceive the Judges or Justices will not adjudge the
Title of the Appropriators to be good to Tithes: And yet you may see it every
day adjudged good by them, but it is so, that you will not acquiess in their
judgment: And then you inquire, why a Parliament may not take them away? To
which we Answer, That we will not dispute the Power of Supreme Authority: but
this you are to learn, that no man ought to have a dishonorable thought of
Supreme Authority, that they will do any unjust thing; and because they may do
what they will, that therefore you should press them to do all they may.

And though you may be bold with Parliaments of former ages (for the dead bite
not) and say that Tithes have come to Appropriators as Thief-stolen goods, and
now the true owners have found where they be, etc. Were you not shown in the
Treatise that the Appropriators who have them, came to them by several Acts of
Parliament, and you cannot make the Appropriators the Receivers, but you must
make all those Parliaments the Thieves, nor is the legal Possession of the
Appropriators derived unto them by that Authority, to be paralleled with the
Reign of that Julian; and the rather, because no Appropriation could be made,
without a consent of Parson, Patron and Ordinary, who by the Law of this
Nation, had as good power to return them as to take them.

And now to give you satisfaction to your wonder, that it should be affirmed,
that Appropriators had as good right to Tithes (for you admit the Parsons have)
as the Freeholder has to his Freehold: Are not Tithes made Lay-Fees by the
Statutes? and has not the Appropriator a Freehold in them? do you not see
daily that Recoveries are suffered of them, and fines, which are the grand
assurance of the Land, levied and acknowledged of them; are they not then
Freeholds as well as Land or Rents? and what, or wherein lies that vast
difference, they being both Freeholds, that should raise so great a wonder? may
not the admiration rather be, that you should thus contend against the Laws,
Statutes and Assurances of this Land: And when neither Judge nor jury will
comply with you, that you should with your frequent Addresses, interrupt the
more weighty and serious considerations of Supreme Authority, who whilst they
are endeavoring to settle the great affairs of the Land, you would have them in
the very first place to unsettle and confound, if not the Tenth part of the
People, yet the Tenth part, (say we, the Sixth part or more say you of the Real
Possessions of the Nation: the commencement where of was, as you are told by
that Treatise, if not by a Law enjoining them, yet (which is more strong) by a
voluntary Donation of the People, ratified by the common Laws, and confirmed by
a multitude of Statutes, which need not be again recited.

All which Statutes you affirm, till the time of H. the eighth, are no more for
the confirmation of Tithes, then other superstitious things abolished, whereby
you plainly acknowledge Tithes by them to be confirmed; and when you can prove
them superstitious which you deny in your Reply, p. 3.) you may take them; but
if they were as you imply, superstitious, why are you then offended that the
Appropriators have them, Reply, p. 4. to say truth, you answer this question
your self in the same place, because they are not employed as at first
intended; and so if Tithes be superstitious, rather then the Appropriator
should hold them, you would have them returned to the Minister, for the
primitive superstitious intention (as you suppose) that you may with the more
color take them away quite.

And as for all the other Statutes since the beginning of the Reign of H. 8.
you affirm contrary to the express words both of the Instruments of
Appropriations (which are to hold in Proprios usus, to their own proper use)
and contrary also to the very letter of those Statutes, which give them to the
Crown, as the Abbots, etc. held them, and so confirm the grants of the Crown to
the subjects also) that the makers of those Statutes meant, that the Tithes
should be employed, as at first intended. Certainly if you had ever read any of
those Instruments whereby Tithes were appropriated, and duly weighed the last
mentioned Statutes, you could not be of this opinion, nor that the
Appropriators were but Officers and Stewards entrusted for the Church and poor,
or that their employment of Tithes to other uses, should be a forfeiture of
their proper or appropriated right and interest: and it being made thus plain
unto you, that the Appropriators are seized in their own right, discharged and
free from all trust, by the very Instruments of the Appropriations themselves
in express words, and by the beforementioned Statutes; and whereof generally
fines have been levied, many five years since have passed, no claim til now
made, whereby your pretended owners are clearly barred; be not, now you are thus
enlightened, turbulent in the State, censorious of the learned and upright
Judges, inciters of Jurors to be perjured, whom you would not have to go
according to their evidence; in a word, strive not to subvert or overthrow the
settled Government of Church or State; for who are they that trouble, perplex
or strive to put this Nation into confusion (to use your own words) more then
they that are restless to unsettle the real Possessions, either of Church or
Commonwealth, for their own self ends and interests. But as to this of self-end
and interest (to do the Replyant right) I must partly excuse him of the guilt
thereof, for he deals thus far ingeniously herein, that though he would have
Tithes confounded, that yet the Landlord Freeholder or Husbandman should be
never a whit the better, nor gainer by it: for in his Tract p. 30. (whereunto
in his Reply p. 5. he does refer the Reader) he says, Such Heathenism is not
intended, that though Tithes be confounded in the Land, but that yet the Land
ought to be charged with somewhat equivolent thereunto for the maintenance of
the Minister. But if the multitude did take notice of this passage, they would
not con him thanks, nor return him to be their Advocate or Penman any more;
and therefore he did very warily in his Reply, refer himself in this point
silently to his Tract, rather then to publish this too often, least the
Petitioners mouths would hereby be stopped, and so he might want assistance to
cry down Tithes, which all the Arguments and Reasons which he can use or render
will not be able to do. But as I excuse the Replyant partly as to this; so I
must condemn his want of charity to the Appropriator, for he proposes nothing
equivolent for him.

And as to the Stipend propounded for the Minister in lieu of his Tithes,
because he has mis-imployed them that they must be forfeited, is the Replyant
assured, that the Minister will employ his stipend better then his Tithes? and
when the Ministers Tithes are gone, how can he be assured of his equ^volent
stipend: let him not be first stripped of his Tithes, till he see equal
allowance and consent thereunto, and then you may have them, in the mean time,
pay them for conscience sake to the one and to the other, and condemn not
former ages that have so done, for they are in conscience due, as all things
else are, that the Law gives relief for, notwithstanding any thing yet said to
the contrary.

Thus have I taken upon me (if I have not wronged the Gentleman who wrote the
Treatise) to vindicate it, not finding any thing therein at all asserted, but
what is most true, and may join issue, either upon the whole matter, or upon
any particular point therein, with all that hitherto has been said against it.

And if any thing more be here alleged, it is but for the illustration of that
which was therein the more concisely couched, and to satisfy the Replycant in
that his Beloved conceit of Officer, Stewardship and Trust, wherein he thought
himself not before Answered, which I hope is done in that perspicuity, that his
judgment will hereby be convinced, and his pen silenced, and his adherents and
others satisfied, truth vindicated, the Rights of the Church and Propriety
justified, which is the only aim and scope of him that has written this
Vindication.

FINIS.

