A VINDICATION OF Mr. Bryan Heyns FROM All the Calumnies and Reproaches Cast
upon Him by the PHANATICKS Together with a short RELATION of the Present
Presbyterian Plot. AGAINST THE King and Government.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON: Printed for the Author, Bryan Heyns, and Sold by Walter Davi^ in
Amen-Corner. MDCLXXXII.

The EPISTLE to the READER.
I Have hereunto annexed a Brief account of some of the Witnesses that appeared
against me at Oxford, when College was Tried, for two reasons: The 1st. is, I
was not able to defend my self against them there, because I could not presage
who would come to oppose me; nor indeed did I regard what any man could say in
Truth against me, to disparage my self, or extenuate my Evidence; for I never
committed that thing in all my life, that I cared it should be written in my
face, unless it was to kiss a Woman. And being asked by some Friends, before I
went to Oxford, whether or no I was ever Guilty of any Crime, to the end I
might be fortified to obviate the Adversaries blasting my Reputation? I told
them then, I would renounce the King's Pardon and Mercy, if any man living
could in foro conscientiae say, that ever I took the value of a Farthing from
any man, feloniously or fraudulently, since I was born out of my Mothers Womb;
nor ever was before any Magistrate upon any Felonious or Covinous account, in
all my days; so that I valued not what any man could say against me, if he
spoke the Naked Truth. The 2d. reason is, the Court where College was tried,
was so little, and the weather so hot, and such a Crowd of People, that the
Witnesses for the King were like to be stifled to Death; so that for my part I
could not hear what was said against me, by any one, but what John Lun said,
and of him I had a caution beforehand. Besides, I did not really believe, that
folks who pretend so much to the purity of the Gospel, as the Whigs do, would
ever suborn people to tell Lies in the face of public Justice; for though, as
they suggested, all was false that was said against College then, yet it was
no President for so Godly a Party to make themselves so great Villains, and
Liars, upon any account whatsoever, as to forge Calumnies against the
Witnesses. The Primitive Christians when they were persecuted, were used to
say, that Preces and Lacrymae sunt arma Ecclesiae: Tears and Prayers are the
Weapons of the Church; But instead of this Atonement to GOD, the Presbyterians
Weapons are, Subornation, Perjury, Forgeries, Dethroning and Murdering of
Kings. So even as a certain Author writes, treating of the Murder of King
CHARLES I. in these words: Annus 4^ paricidium protulit, gentibus omnibusque
seculis execrandum. Horet calamus vel rem designare. In English thus: The year
48. brought forth a Murder, of all Nations to be detested; My Pen shivers to
set down the matter, says mine Author. So let all honest men abhor their
cursed Actions, in these years 80. and 81. especially the Execrable ASSOCIATION
lately discovered, invented and contrived to Assassinate the best of Princes
CHARLES II. Exclude His ROYAL BROTHER, and pursue to Death and Destruction all
those that would Oppose the Ends thereof; which if we do, and link together, we
shall be able to dissipate the Phanaticks Tempestuous Fury which hovers over
our Heads, with the help of the Omniscient GOD, who in all Ages delivered his
Servants from the Jaws of the Devil, and the Rage of their Cruel Enemies; which
is the hearty Prayer of

BRYAN HEYNS.

Page 3. line 33. for name of prevarication, r. stain of prevarication.

A VINDICATION OF Mr. Bryan Heyns, FROM All the Calumnies and Reproaches Cast
upon Him by the PHANATICKS: Together with a short Relation of the Present
Presbyterian Plot. AGAINST THE KING and Government.
WIth a great deal of Patience I forbore, and almost slighted the phrensical
Malice of the Raging Whigs, who are not only contented to term me a Papist, but
also a Thief, Burglarer, etc. Nay, with all the Virulency imaginable, they have
printed in all their scurrilous Pamphlets, That there was not a Crime in
Nature, whereof I was not Culpable, although they can produce no Record of
Infamy against me. And all these Calumnies I passed by, for these subsequent
Reasons:

First, Because there was no Name to the two first Pamphlets, commonly called,
No Protestant Plot; so that I was to seek whom to answer.

Secondly, The Author of the third Pamphlet, is so Infamous a Villain, viz.
Newgate-Thomas Dangerfield, that I would not honor him so far, as to take the
least cognizance of what his Dangerfield BURNT in the island.
stigmatized Paw scribled against me; And in this I followed the Rule of Law,
which says, Semel malus, semper praesumitur malus, in eodem genere mali. I was
really possessed in my soul, that no man of Worth or Conscience, would give the
least atome of credit to what he wrote or spoke with his impious Dangerfield
compares in: Reproaches to Christ's, in his Pamphlet dedicated to Sir John Moore
Lord Mayor.
tongue against any man; for a Fellow that was Convicted often by Law, of so
many Notorious Felonies, and other Crimes, can never lodge Belief (in my
judgment) in the Intellect of any sober or honest Christian, although he had a
thousand Pardons: For though a Pardon obliterates Poenam Culpae, yet it alters
not the intrinsic and essential inclination of a man once depraved; For what a
man imbibes in his infancy, and thereof attracts a habit, is not with facility
excussed, but still there remains a tincture of it, according to that Axiom,
Quo semel est imbuta recens, servabit odorem testa diu; unless the Reformation
be, by a supernatural grace, infused by God into a rational soul, which uses
often the true Acts of Contrition, and hearty Repentance; but such celestial
Blisses descend not by Jacob's Ladder often in this Iron Age, especially to
that profligate Scum, of Mankind, Thomas Dangerfield.

And these precedent Reasons, were the sole Motives wherefore I vilifield
Dangerfield's Dangerfield stood in the Pillory.
Pillory Pamphlet. At last I saw a silly a silly Pamphlet, Entitled, The Irish
Evidence Convicted by their own Oaths, and subscribed by pettifogging William
Hetherington; In which, after this wonted rascally impudence, he reflects upon
Bryan Heyns, viz. That Heyns was one of the foresaid Evidences that forswore
himself about the Irish Popish Plot: Therefore Heyns, to acquit himself of that
Reproach, is willing to let the world know, That he never was concerned in the
Irish Plot, not knew more of it, than the Child unborn; neither did he ever
know any of the Irish Witnesses, till he saw them here in London; nor was he
ever a Witness in Ireland against any man; neither does he believe, that any of
the ancient Irish Nobility or Gentry, would hurt a Hair of His Majesty's Head,
though they may condole and lament, to no purpose, their unparalled
Oppression, under the late Usurper's Traiterous Crew, and worst of Rebels. The
Emperor Adrian, though a Pagan, and none of the best Princes, took no notice
of this kind of Vice in his Subjects, when actually oppressed by his wicked
Ministers of State, whom he trusted to administer Justice to his people. It Is
and old saying, That Losers have leave to speak; and if so, no History either
Sacred or Profane, ever made mention of the like oppression, as is done to the
Irish Nation; their Estates are given to those that actually fought against the
King, murdered His Royal Father King Charles I. and His Subjects. In fine,
perpetrated all the Villainy under Heaven.

Pardon me (Reader) for these Excursiions, being touched to the quick, to see
my Native Country planted with Presbyterian Traitors, whilst the innocent
Natives are famished with hunger and thirst, being wholly shut out from all
mercy by the Messiah, in which they hoped to be redeemed.

To return to our purpose: Heyns has not been in Ireland since his Minority but
once, about eight years ago, and then stayed not two months; so that it was
impossible he could in so short a time, come to the knowledge of any design the
Irish Papists had on foot, against the King or Government; his Business then
into Ireland was about his own private Concerns, as several persons of Honor
can testify, if occasion requires. Moreover, Heyns declares before God and the
world, he never was bribed by David Fitzgerald, as Hetherington alleges in
his said Pamphlet, much less managed by him, or any man whatsoever, to swear
against any person, living or dead; neither does he imagine Fitzgerald or
Hetherington, capacitated to suggest to him, such plenty of resined Reason; for
Heyns his natural Genius was better cultivated, than to borrow from such
blundred Fountains; and better principled, than to perjure himself through any
man's persuasions. Had Heyns no other reason to eschew Fitz-Gerald's company,
but how he brought his own chief Sir John Fitzgerald to trouble, it is a
convincing argument to him, he would never be true to a man altogether a
stranger to him, as Heyns was; besides, he can safely vouch, That he has not
been in Fitz-Gerald's company one quarter of an hour, since Heyns has been
reconciled to His Majesty; And, to speak the truth, Heyns has so little a
kindness for him, that he never salutes him passing by; and in this point, he
follows King James's Rule, who was wont to say, He never loved a Dog that bit
his own Tail. And notwithstanding all these lucid demonstrations, Heyns must be
managed by Fitzgerald, because Hetherington ipse dixit: But this, with diverse
other acervations of Villainy, are falsely imputed to Heyns, by the pestiferous
Presbyterians, that Bane of Mankind, to alleviate their present nefarious
Conspiracy against the King and Government.

An whereas Hetherington affirms in his lousy Pamphlet, That as soon as the
Earl of Shaftsbury and Wilmore were sworn against, etc. the Evidence were
rigged, and had plenty of money in their Pockets.

Heyns, to wash off that name of Prevarication charged upon him by that lying
Varlet, declares, He never was clothed upon the King's account in his whole
life, nor ever received any Bribes; and his Watch and other things which he
pawned when he was in the City, he never was able to redeem them since he came
from thence. But Hetherington takes his norme from the insipid Whigs, who have
not spared with all acrimony to maculate and blast Heyns's Reputation, since he
has been instrumental to discover their treasonable Practices: But the offers
here a fair Proposal to all the Phanatiques living, That if they can produce
any man, that is bona fide an honest man, and of the Church of England,
(without compulsion) as by Law established, which will depose upon Oath before
the King and Council, That the said Heyns was in all his life either Beyond
Sea, or in England, before any Magistrate for any Capital, or supposed Capital
Matter or Crime, only for the Peace, or before Mr. Secretary Jenkins, the day
he was apprehended by the Messengers, or when he endeavored with other
Prisoners to escape from the King's Bench; he will recant whatever he said, and
acknowledge his testimony in publico foro, to be invalid, and of no efficacy.
It Is true, such a Rascal as John Lunn may swear any thing, to boulster up the
eclipsed Cause, who offered at Oxford, when College was tried, to take the
Sacrament, that he met Heyns's, four days after Colledge's Ignoramus at the
Old Bailey, in the Darby Alehouse, near the Ditch-side, in Fleet Street, when
twenty persons can testify, that Heyns was then, and a great while after close
confined in a Messenger's house by the Hay-market. Moreover, this Villain was
made a lying, perjured Rogue, in open Court, at Oxford, by Mr. White the
Messenger, vide Colledge's Trial, fol. 45. So God infatuates pernicious men,
when they undergo wicked designs.

Another Bankrupt Villain of these Daemonish Whigs, by name John Whaly, whom
Heyns since arrested, said also at Oxford, That Heyns offered to steal a Silver
Tankard when he was a Prisoner in the King's Bench, and was therefore sent by
Mr. Lenthal, then Marshal, to the Common Side of the said Bench, which is the
falsest and infernallest Lie that ever was uttered by Man or Devil, for most of
the Officers of the King's Bench can justify, when occasion requires, that
Heyns was turned to the Common Side, for offering to escape out of the said
Bench. It Is a Paradox that he should never be charged with such a Fact by the
said Whaly, or any other these six or seven years, whereas Heyns never
absconded himself, but was publicly to the seen every day in the City and
Suburbs, where he practiced: But the Devil, who, ab origin, gave life and
birth to the Presbyterians, still governs their hearts and actions, and, as he
is the Father of all Mischief and Lies, they are by Regeneration his adopted
Children in all Vice and Iniquity, witness their Rebellions, Murders,
Massacres, stamping of the blessed Sacrament of our Savior's Body under Foot,
Sacriledges, Depredations in all parts of Vide Dr. Hey^, Histo^y of the
Presbyterians Printed in 16^0.
Europe, from the very commencement of them, to this very day, that it would
fill a whole Volume, to set down the Particulars of their horrid and bloody
Proceedings, insomuch that the Name of a Presbyterian is a shame and a scandal
to Christian Religion. Hetherington, the Manager of the Popish Plot, who durst
tell so many Notorious Lies before the King and Council, As that he was a
Justice of Peace about the age of sixteen years: And like wise he told Mr.
Atterbury the Messenger, that he kept his Coach and six Horses, besides his
vast annual Revenues in Ireland, when effectively he is and was always a
Beggar, (though Mr. Atterbury out of mere Charity, at that interim of time,
bought him Clothes to his Back) will not scruple to forge all Untruths to
poison the King's Subjects, thinking thereby to ingratiate himself with the
Factious Party, to the end his mendicant condition may be a little supported,
being he has shipwrack'd his rusty credit with the Royal Party already, who
have put Remora's to his pimping underhand dealings, and anticipated the
clandestine designs of his Brethren in iniquity the Whigs against them: And all
his Allegations against Witnesses, is only to palliate the flagitious
Machinations he was a hatching against the King, the innocent Queen, the Duke
of York, the Duke of Ormond, and all his Children, of whom he told my self, The
Three Kingdoms would never flourish till they were all Cut off, for they were
all Drones (that was his expression) which sucked all the Honey the purer sort
of Bees culled: for, said he, the King, with his Mistresses, eats up all the
Fat of the Land, and my Lord of Ormond, and his Sons, have engrossed into their
own hands the best part of Ireland: But, said he, I have almost done their
work, by my management of the Irish Witnesses.

And still to give a further testimonial of his zeal to the sinking Cause, he
incorporates himself with the Whigs, and offers impudently, in the Face of the
Sun, to sereen their disloyal Proceedings against their Prince, in saying, The
Irish Witnesses are suborned to drop the Popish Plot, and fix another upon the
Protestants. I would ask one question of Hetherington, Whether he knows
actually of his own knowledge any Irish Papists that ever wished His Majesty
any harm? If he knows any, he ought to discover them, that such pestiferous
Members may be cut off by Justice, if not, it is an unchristian Action to accuse
an innocent People, upon the bare Surmises of a few lecherous Irish rascally
Priests, who have renounced their Functions, and violated their Vows with God,
to satisfy their Beastly Concupiscence with the Whores of London. But
Hetherington's main scope in spattering of the Irish Witnesses, and herding
himself with the Whigs, is, because he may one day have Reprisals in lieu of
his own fictitious Lands, upon my Lord of Ormond's estate, when the Work is
effected, as the Phanatiques phrase it, for they are still so enchanted, that
they believe the Cause will be still Vpish notwithstanding all opposition; and
this gratification will be granted him by the Republican Party of England and
Ireland, for his assidual and indefatigable care, by endeavoring to extirpate
the Family of the Stuarts, and their Adherents, and, perhaps, as I have heard
him say, be remunerated with the honor of being Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, so
that you may see he aims at no small matter, but resolves to follow the old
saying, He violandum est jus regnandi gratia violandum est. But let
Hetherington and the Factious learn, that our Sovereign's great wisdom extends
as far as His Regal Power; and that His Royal and mature circumspection, has
and will obviate the preposterous designs of those Seditious Incendiaries of
State, of which His Majesty never merited the least Disloyalty, or ill Thought,
unless it be in graciously pardoning of them their black Treasons and excerable
Murder of the Royal Martyr His Father King Charles of blessed memory, for which
detestable and crying Sin, they deserved a total extinguishment and deletion.
Amongst all the Divine Graces and Blessings bestowed upon that Sacred Prince,
one is, That Handkerchiefs dipped in his innocent Blood, (ured very often, with
a touch thereof, the King's Evil; and this is a certain truth, that his very
Enemies cannot impugn or gainsay. Truly I may say of those Blood-hound
Regicides, what the great Tertullian pronounced against the Sins of Sodom and
Gourorrha, that Impiet as illa ignium meruit imbres: For certainly no man since
the Creation to this day, ever heard or read, either in Sacred or Profane
History, that a King, which had three Kingdoms devolved to Him, by so many Ages
and legal Successions, received, Crowned, and Anointed, by the common Suffrage
of all His People, having, likewise a long while governed, and impartially
administered the Laws, for diverse Years, to all His Subjects, should be at
length Tried, and after Sentenced to be Murdered, by a Company of Rake-kennels,
and lewd Presbyterians.

Had His present Majesty served these. Rascals after His Restoration, as
Alexander the Great did. to the Phanician Slaves who assassinated their
Masters, and usurped the Government, to hang them up all, there would be no
Plots this day to disturb the Nation. Although the old Cavaliers and their
Children grumble sometimes of their hard usage, since His Majesty's
Restoration, yet we will not suffer in Cromwell's Fellow-Rascals, to spurn
against our Prince, but we will cover the earth with our slain Bodies, (rather
than flinch) to support and perpetuate the Rights of the most Serene and
Ancientest Monarch Charles II. this day in the Universe, and His lawful Heirs
and Successors, whose Ancestors were Kings of Scotland and Ireland, Three
hundred and odd Years before the Birth of Christ, and this glorious Prince is
the 11th King of his own Family, as I can prove by an ancient History I have by
me: Nor will our Loyal hearts ever allow our Sanction of any spurious or
besotted Faction, to steer the Helm of that Hierarchical Series of Kings. And
if our present Sovereign were pleased to call to mind the Noble Actions of his
Grandfather Henry IV. King of France, who spared neither Civilities nor
Caresses to Gentlemen who served Him well, he could still find Friends enough
to espouse His Royal Cause, and easily allay the Pride of His Rebellious
Subjects. It Is reported of that Heroic Prince Henry IV. that after he was
Crowned King of France, he was wont to say these obliging words to those that
fought for him, and faithfully served him, That it was great reason they should
partake of his Feast, since they served so well at his Nuptials with France.
It Is also recorded of the same Prince, That his very Enemies the Papists, had
more confidence in his Word alone, than in the Writings of others. Thus the
prudent man never walks, but by ways strait and virtuous; the cunning, on the
contrary, by paths oblique and wicked. The prudent cannot but be generous and
good, whilst the other cannot be but base, deceitful and unworthy.

To return to our purpose: As for my part, I call God to Witness, There is no
King in the world I love better than Charles II. nor no Government under the
Sun I love so well as Kingly Government. It Is true, I was discontented, because
my Father's Estate was given to others, without the least color of Justice,
and he in his old days miserable, and in extreme want; he and his Ancestors
were always Loyal to the Kings of England, and the himself was a Prisoner
whilst His Majesty was in Exile, for adhering to the Marquis of Clanricard,
His Majesty's Lord-Deputy in Ireland.

And whereas it is reported by ill-affected persons, That his ancient Estate, or
what Lands he pretends too, was but 40 l. per annum; it is the falsest Lie that
ever was spoke by any man: For what he had in his own possession before the
late Wars, besides several Reversions that fell to him since, by his
Birthright, if he could have the benefit of them, or any other of his
Pretensions, I will maintain is above 400 l. per annum at this instant. If any
questions the reality of this Assertion, he may have an account by the Post
from the Auditor-General's Office in Dublin, where he shall see enrolled a
Patent in Hughboy-Heyns, of Leidigane his name, and how he held his Lands of
the Crown by Knights-Service This is no Ostentation, or Vainglory, but what I
am compelled to write by the Laws of Nature, and common Justice, to release my
Family (who can vie in Blood or Descent with any in Ireland, though not in
Estate, or borrowed Honor) from the waspish tongues of those, who studied with
all amaritude to spatter me and my Ancestors, for my Loyalty to my Prince.

Hetherington says in his scurrilous Pamphlet, That the English Witnesses
herded themselves with these tainted Irish Cattle. I would have the Vagabond
Beggar learn to distinguish betwixt his infamous Rascals which he picked out of
all the Gaols in the North of Ireland, and the ancient Irish Gentry, who never
were contaminated or reputed base, until those Rake-kennels of Oliver's
Fellow-Brewers, Tinkers, Cobblers, Sweep-Chimneys, Carr-men, and Jakes-men, etc.
were all planted in Ireland. These sordid and dunghill Mechanics instructed and
seminated amongst the Irish all Vice and Wickedness, so that instead of the
Virtue and good Nature that was in the ancient Natives, these forementioned
Ruscals have taught them Disobedience, and all manner of Villainy. Sure I am,
the most profound and learned, both in Gospel, Law, and History of the Noble
English Nation, and formerly no ill Sentiment of the ancient Irish, when they
celebrated their Encomiums to Posterity in their famous Writings, witness my L.
Cook in his 4th Institutes, fol. 349. For-I have (says he) been informed by
many of them that had Judicial places there, and partly of mine own knowledge,
that there is no Nation in the Christian world, that are greater lovers of
Justice than they are, which virtue must of necessity be accompanied with many
others; and besides, they are descended of the ancient Britains, and therefore
the more endeared to us.

Likewise Cambden, fol. 370. Patricii discipuli tantos progressus in re
Christiana fecerunt, ut subsequenti aetate, Ribernia sanctorum Patria
diceretur, and Scoticts in Hibernia and Britannia Monachis, nihil sanctius,
nihil eruditius fuerit, and in universam Europam sanctissimorum virorum examina
miscrint.

Jocelinus Anglus in vita sancti Patricii, fol. 191. Ita ut Hibernia speciali
nomine insula sanctorum ubique terrdrum jure nominaretur, and paulo post, it a
ut exteras atque longinquas regiones illustrarent verbo ac religionis exemplo.

The extraordinary Merits and Loyalty of the Irish Nation, was declared in open
Parliament, 27. July 1660. by our most Gracious Sovereign Charles II. touching
the Act of Indemnity in these words: I hope I need my nothing of Ireland, and
that they alone shall not be without the benefit of My Mercy; they have showed
much Affection to Me abroad, and you will have a care of my Honor, and what I
promised them.

And another time His Majesty is pleased to own their Loyalty in His
Declaration in these words: And in the first place, We did and must always
remember, the great Affection a considerable party of that Nation expressed to
Us, during the time of Our being Beyond the Seas, when with all Chearfuness and
Obedience they received and submitted to Our Orders, and betook themselves to
that Service which We directed, as most convenient and behooveful at that time
to Us, though attended with inconveniency enough to themselves: Which demeanor
of theirs, cannot but be thought very worthy of Our Protection, Justice and
Favor.

Here I could quote the Authority of many other ancient Authors, besides our
present Sovereigns most Gracious and Royal words in extolling the Irish Nation;
but this taste shall suffice, to let all rational men understand the good
opinion the English had of the Irish in former Ages. And that the defection of
Virtue in some few Irish, had its emanation from the English Whigs planted in
Ireland since 1641, is most apparent and perspicuous by the said Authorities
before cited.

Thus the Phanaticks condemn the Irish for their Loyalty, for it is a common
saying with them, That none will side with the King, but a Rogue or a Papist.
Here you may see how they crucify Virtue, and countenance Vice; they hold
Loyalty a Crime, and Treason worthy of Reward and Applause. Such mungrel
Rascals as Petherington have always scandalized the Irish Nation, who
understands neither Honor nor Learning, or the Principles of a true Moralist
that says, Est act us fortitudinis more pro Patria: It Is the greatest Valor in
the world to dye for the good of ones Country. And although he breathed his
first Air in Ireland, he is like the Moths or Caterpillary, that destroy that
gives them their Being; or like the Snake, that would infect the Countreyman
and his whole house that saved his life a little before from perishing in the
Snow. There is no English Whig that maliciously reflects upon the transactions
of the Irish, if he will retrospect and ruminate seriously what intestine Wars
and broils the Presbyterians created in these three Kingdoms, and how their
traiterous and murderous Actions of the Best of King and His Subjects, renders
them infamous and odious to God and man, he can say but very little against the
Irish. I have seen a learned Treatise in Latin, proving the necessity of that
War raised by the Irish, having begun it in their own defense, to prevent the
general ruin and destruction designed against the Kingdom and themselves, by
the beggarly Presbyterian Party, that resolved to thrust them out of home and
house, for no other reason, but because they were Papists. Yet I will never
vindicate any Subject that flies to Arms, or to any manner of Hostile
Commotion, upon any specious pretenses whatsoever, without his Princes
Commission or Power; for according to St. Paul's Rule, We must not commit evil,
that good may come thereof; but we ought to submit in every thing to our
Superiors, and not be Judges of our own Cause.

The Irish Rebellion is more excusable than that of the English Whigs, who had
no color to invade the Prerogatives of their. Prince, not Elective ad nutum
populi, but Successive by many Ages, and that established by all the
fundamental Laws of England. And whosoever will but read that learned and pious
Work Icon Basilike, of King Charles I. where he writes of the Rebellion of
Ireland, and seiriously balances the occasion, of their raising in that
Kingdom, can never harbor such ill thoughts of the Irish, as is spread abroad
of them, by their constant Enemies the Whigs. And that Royal Martyr having a
deep sense of the daily Injustice done to that Nation, by those who thirsted
after Irish men's Estates, more than the settlement of a Peace and Unity, writes
of that Rebellion in these words following:

And certainly, it is thought by many wise men, that the preposterous Rigor,
and unreasonable Severity, which some men carried before them in England, was
not the least Incontive, that kindled, and blew up into those horrid flames,
the sparks of discontent, which wanted not predisposed Fuel for Rebellion in
Ireland; where despair being added to their former discontent, and the fear of
future extirpation to their wonted oppressions, it was easy to provoke to an
open Rebellion, a People prone enough, to break out to all exerbitant violence,
both by some Prinicples of their Religion, and the natural desires of liberty;
both to exempt themselves from their present. Restraints, and to prevent those
After rigours, wherewith they saw themselves apparently threatened, by the
covetous Zeal and uncharitable Tury of some men, who think it a great argument
of the truth of their Religion, to endure no other but their own.

In another place, the same Royal Martyr says, (treating still of the same
Rebellion) That Men are more greedy, to kill the Bear for his skin, than for
any harm be has done. The confiscation of Men's Estates being more beneficial,
than the charity of saving their Lives, or reforming their Errors.

And thus this Wise and most Christian Prince, considered the Tyrannical
Usuage, of the Irish, under those hellish Fiends, the Presbyterians, who, in
those days, governed Ireland, and forced the Natives to Rebel, of purpose to
get their Estates, as we afterward saw by woeful experience.

The Emperor Honorius was of the same Sentiment with our Royal. Martyr, the
said Honorius having discovered the treasonable practices of Eucherlus against
himself and his Empire, told the said Eucherius as follows: Three sorts of
Traitors are to be considered (said he) by the Sovereign Prince, viz. He that
commits Treason out of Discontent, or Injury done him, is pardonable. He that
acts Treason out of madness, is to be pitied. And finally, He that perpetrates
Treason ex dominand libidine, ought to feel the keenness of the Axe; for, said
he, Ense recidendum est, immedicabile Vulnus: Which last Sentence I wish His
Majesty would put in execution, against all those that thirst after Democracy,
for no other inducement or provocation, but because they themselves would Rule
all. I would expose my Body to the flames of the most violent Fire (like that
gallant Roman Mucius Scaevola) upon condition that His Majesty would make an
Edict, That all that served under the late Usurper, or were Authors of the late
Rebellion in Forty One, might be banished out of the Three Kingdoms, or
stigmatized in the Forehead, to distinguish them from the King's liege people;
then every honest man could sit under his own Vine, and our King live in his
Throne with Honor, Tranquillity, Peace and Plenty, hourly enjoying the Fruition
of the hearts and affections of His Loyal Subjects, until is pleased the
Almighty to call Him to Himself, and crown Him with immortal Glory.

Let the Whigs, with all laudable Apology, shroud their oblique Transactions,
and present Conspiracy against the King, and Government, and pretend to all the
Loyalty and Innocence in nature, none will believe them, that has the least
spark of reason; for, to my certain knowledge, they have been a plotting these
many years, to plant a Commonwealth in England and Ireland, etc. And this is
easily made manifest, by their frequent Libelling against His Majesty; by
criminating Him of Incest with the Duchess of P --, intimating that she was
the Earl of st. Alban's Daughter, by the late Queen Mother of England.

Another Libel I saw, reflecting upon the King's Natural Children: That His
Majesty had Fifty five Royal Bastards, Boys and Girls, besides those that were
in the Panniers: That these, in time, would devour the Three Kingdoms, unless
they were all knocked in the Head: That it was a deed of Charity to crush the
old Serpent, meaning the King, lest He would fill the Land with His Lecherous
Brood. They have not spared His very Effigies or Statue that is set up in the
Stocks Market, to Libel against; and the other Effigies of the old King, set up
at Charing Cross, and this Libel was called, The Speech between the Two Horses.

Another of these Libels I saw, where the Duke of Lauderdale persuades the King
to Rule all by His own Great Will; for it was a Mickle Shame for Majesty to be
controuled by such prating Loons, as were Members of the House of Commons.

Another of His Majesty's Cabinet-Council, in the said Libel, desires the King
to embrace the Mother Church, viz. Rome, and destroy all the Heretics in one
Night, as they were at Paris; and then His Holy Father the Pope would Canonize
Him a Saint, for rooting out the Enemies of God, and the Catholic Church: For
as the Pope gave Henry VIII, the Title of Defensor Fidei, so it was given to
this King since His Restoration, as the said Libel sets forth, the Title of
Restaurator Ecclesiae Catholicae, and habuit transmissum and illum, Gladium
Benedictum, ad extirpandos and expellendes Haereticos: These are the very words
of the Pamphlet.

Moreover, That it was the worst thing that ever the Parliament did, to settle
the Militia upon His Majesty; yet Charles could not live long, because His
whole mass of Blood was all corrupted in His Body, as some of His own
Physicians related to the Whigs. That Nature was all consumed in Him, only
conserved for some interval of time, by high Cordials: But if He were once
dead, farewell then for ever Kings of England. And unless the People could have
their Ends by Parliament they would hire some of the King 's Physicians, that
would administer Him a Powder, or some Poisonous Dose, (when He should fall
into any Fit of Apoplexy) of the same Nature, with that, which put a period to
King James's days: Being the Guards and Militia could not be taken from Him.

Other Pamphlets I have seen, one whereof was so Satirical and Malicious
against Henry VII. Owen Teusder, his Grandfather, and all the Welsh, that
nothing could be more venomous. The other was against King James, and the
Scotch Nation; and what a great Vilification it was to the lofty hearts of
English men, to sloop to Welsh and Scotch Beggars to reign over England, etc.
These two last Pamphlets were the senecallest and odiousest, that ever were
penned by man, insomuch that Nature it self would even blush, to give the least
auscultation, to the perusal of any thing, specified or included in them. The
person that caused the Sandals, Crucifix, and Beads, several years ago, to be
fixed to Mr. Speaker's Chair, in the House of Commons, knew all the
forementioned Pamphlets.

In this Epitome (Reader) you may see, as in a transparent Glass, the
Phanatiques hearts, by their exterior Deportments, and Overt Facts; for qualis
arbor, talis fructus; such is the Tree, such is the Fruit; Et qualis vir, talis
oration; such is the man, such is his talk. The Whigs sement Treason in
obscurity, and when it is ripe, and ready to be acted, it is gilded over with
the Cloak of Religion, Liberty and Property: So when they determine to murder
Princes, it must not be as Raviliac or the Jacobin privately that murdered two
Henry III. and Henry IV.
Kings of France, but publicly, by common seeming Justice. Here I offer every
loyal heart, to give a compendious Relation of the design of these Stygian
Rascals against Church and State, and their constant malice to imbase all
honest and loyal Subjects, to their King and Country. St. John Damascenus
writes, That in exordio nascontis Ecclesiae, unicum crat cor, una anima, and
una sententia: And if all honest Subjects, and true Church of England men,
would be of one Heart, of one Mind, and one Opinion, as the primitive
Christians were, the Whigs might be easily scattered like dust in March. The
Arians were more numerous and more learned than every they were, or are at
present in these Three Kingdoms; yet the Orthodox Christians, by their
Concatenation and pious Union together, soon suppressed and dissipated those
contagious Heretics, and common Incendaries of Mankind.

Let us therefore join our hearts and hands together against these cankerous
Vermin, to defend our Religion as by Law established, and our Sovereign's
Rights, hoping that God may infuse into His Royal Heart, in due season, to
reward His Loyal Subjects, and chastize Rebellious Villains, who thirst after
His Blood, as they did His Fathers: So he that does not wish CHARLES II. our
dread Sovereign, the Sanctity of David, the Wisdom of Solomon, the Years of
Nestor, the Wealth of Croesus, the Glories, Trophies, Laurels and Triumphs of
Caesar; That God may confound his Devices, and his Name be razed out of the
Book of Life, and Memory of Future Ages:

Which is the daily Prayer of B. HEYNS.

POSTSCRIPT.
IN the 29th Page of the Second Part of No-Protestant-Plot, there it is
inserted, That Personae vili non facile creditur, says the Civil Law, A
Beggarly or Base Fellow is not to be credited. Such an one, says the Author,
Quem fames, magis quam faima incitat, whom Hunger and Want have greater power
over, than respect to Reputation, is not to be hearkened unto what he says.
Surely the Scribler of the said Pamphlet, was some what intoxicated when he
wrote that Paragraph, otherwise he never considered how all men knew T -- O --
to have begged of Pickering for Crumbs of Bread at Somerset House: Besides, that
he was a common Beggar, amongst the Roman Catholics; for some Years, is an
undeniable matter of Fact, that none dare contradict. And how D -- ld was in
most Gaols of the Kingdom, for Pilfering, Cheating, and Stealing, all England
knows: Yet what these beggarly and infamous Scoundrels swear, though it be as
false as God is true, must be Gospel, because they swear for the people of God,
per antiphrasin the Devils.

Did not O -- swear that he gave a Commission to Sir Francis Ratcliffe in
Wild-house Garden, when diverse persons of Quality did testify before the King
and Council, that Sir Francis was not in London four years before: And when O
-- saw him, he knew him not, though the pretended Commission was but given to
Sir Francis by O -- himself, a little before he discovered the Plot, as O --
pretended.

Did not the same O -- swear against one Mr. Preston, that he was a Priest, and
heard O -- 's Confession in Wild-house; though all the Masters of the Parish
knew Preston to be a married man, that lived in Duke-street for many years, and
paid all Parish-duties. A Lie so absurd in it self, and so excentrical to
common Reason, that the Spanish Ambassador, who always keeps a Catalogue of all
the Priests in his House, (for fear of any Abuse or Scandal in Protestant
Countries) would allow a man that was publicly known to have a Wife and
Children, to celebrate Divine Service in his Chapel; whereas if the least
information were made against him to the King of Spain, for permitting such
sacrilegious Actions to be done in his said Chapel, he incurred not only the
danger of Excommunication, but also the loss of his life, if ever he went home.
And this all men can witness to be true, that knows the Canons and
Constitutions of the Romish Church. The said Preston was kept two years and
above a Prisoner in Newgate till he was run'd; and when his Wife brought the
Chief of the Parish, to prove Preston was no Priest, before the House of Lords
at Westminster, in the beginning of the Plot, a certain Noble Lord overruled
all things, and would not allow O -- to be made a Liar in such a High Court of
Justice, lest the Son of Belial's Forgery might be detected, and consequently
the Achitophelian Plot frustrated.

An infinite number of other Lies I could here set down, but these two shall
suffice, to prove the Savior of the Nation, (to wit O --) not to be exempted
from the number of perjured Villains.

In the Third Part of the No-Protestant-Plot, page 87, the crude and foolish
lying Scribler thereof, thunders forth against Heyns, all the Billingsgate
Language that his black and filthy Soul can breathe out of his polluted lips;
but because Heyns does not know what Spawn of a Dunghill it is, he will
retaliate the Sycophant-Slave with same Language as he gives.

And whereas the Varlet charges Heyns in his said Treasonable Pamphlet, to be a
Witness in some matters betwixt Major Bill, and my Lady Windham, the Hangman is
not only a Liar in this Point, but in all other Particulars; for Heyns was
never a Witness betwixt Major Bill, and my Lady Windham, in his whole Life, nor
ever for, or against any man upon Oath, only the Deposition he made before Sir
George Treby, touching the Earl of Shastsbury, till he appeared against
College, and the rest of that Gang. It Is true, Heyns called my Lady Windham
Whore, by reason of some difference that happened; whereupon she arrested him,
and when he was too hard for her, and all the Judges of the King's Bench, and
others, against her, for her idle ways, she got an Affidavit man, that swore
Heyns should say, She was my Lord-Chief-Justice Rainsford 's Whore; and because
for Age he could not act with her, that she Frigged him. Which so incensed the
old Gentleman against Heyns, that he ordered him to be kept a close Prisoner in
the King's Bench, until my Lady and Heyns were reconciled, and drunk a Bottle of
Burnt Brandy together; and this is the truth of that story about my Lady
Windham, as an hundred Persons can testify, if occasion requires.

The next Lie the Pimp frames in his said Pamphlet, is about my Lord
Chief Justice Pemborton, that Heyns should swear at Colledge's Trial, That in
March last College did rail against my Lord Chief Justice Pemberton; when he
was not at all Chief Justice, nor no thoughts thereof. Heyns answered that
Point so well once before, that he thought he put an end to the Whiggish
Tautologies; for when mention was made of my Lord Chief Justice Pemberton in
Colledge's Trial at Oxford, Heyns never named any particular month, time or
place, in relation to Sir Francis Pemberton; for if there had been any such
Query demanded of him, he could easily answer, That College spoke ill of my
Lord Chief Justice Pemberton diverse times, and especially in his own house,
before Mrs. Fitz-Harris, and Mr. Ivy; nay, if need requires, an eminent Citizen
of London will be produced, that can verify that College called Sir Francis
Pemberton a thousand Rogues, and that he hoped the next Parliament that sat,
would hang him up, because he gave his opinion to the King, that Fitz-Harris
might be tried out of Parliament.

And for Heyns being married to one Mrs. Mansfield, (as is alleged in the said
Pamphlet) it is such Nonsense that none but a foolish simple Whig, would
publish such a ridiculous Story, for the Gentlewoman her self denies she ever
spoke any such thing. If any be curious to know the truth of this false
Alarm,-Mrs. Mansfield lodges at the Twisted Posts, in James-street in
Covent Garden, who will certify him of the truth of things. But it is no marvel
the Phanatiques will six two Marriages upon Heyns at once, when they impose two
upon His Majesty, viz. that He was married to the Duke of Monmouth's mother,
Horrid Indignation to His Sacred Majesty.
although he denied it upon the word of a Christian, and a King.

Another idle Fable is set down in the said Pamphlet of Mr. Heyns, how he
counterfeited a Letter from one Mr. Oliver, a Prisoner in the Fleet-Prison, to
one Mr. Harbottle of Lincoln, whereby Mr. Oliver was cozened of the value of
200 l. Heyns answered this Whiggish Lie once before, and had it printed in Mr.
Thompson's Intelligence. But I leave it to the judgment of any rational man,
how the said Oliver could be cheated of 200 l. having sworn himself out of
Prison, not to be worth 10 l. in all the World, by the last Act of Parliament
made three or four years ago, for the Release of poor Prisoners for Debt,
Besides, the Statute of Bankrupt was extended upon all his real and personal
Estate, many years before Heyns ever knew him, and Mr. Adams that lives in
Holborn, a Barrister of Lincoln's Inn, was one of the Commissioners for the said
Statute of Bankrupt; moreover, Heyns calls God to witness, he never knew Mr.
Harbottle in all his life. Some few things more I have to answer, that are
published in the said Pamphlet. One is, that it was beneath the Earl of
Shaftsbury, to speak to such a mean Rascal as Heyns is, or words to that
effect. Of this Pamphleteer, I would ask these two Questions, What does he
conceive by these word, mean Rascal? If he intimates Heyns baseness of Birth,
he can easily prove himself as well born, by Father and Mother, as the Noble
Peer, setting aside the King's Impression of Honor; his Father is descended
from the ancient Family of the Heyns of Connaught, originally sprung from a
younger Son of Miletin^, that was Monarch of Ireland. And in Henry the VIII's
Reign, his Ancestor by the Father, side, had power of Life and Death upon his
own Estate, and had Fifty Manors that were his real Inheritance. His Family
was always Loyal to the Crown of England, so that he will put his Life to
issue, if ever, there was a Traitor of his own Line.

His Mother was descended of the Noble and Ancient Family of the Burks of
Clanricarde, that have been Peers of England, and are still Peers of Ireland.
The Royal House of Lancaster married the only Heiress and Daughter of the Earl
of Vlster and Clanricarde, whose name was Burke, the Title of Vlster being
given to the sole Heirs of his Body, lawfully begotten, and in her Right the
Duke of York by the Lancaster Line, is Hereditary Earl of the said Province. In
all Ages the said Family of the Burkes have showed their Loyalty to the Kings
of England, and kept the Crown of Ireland upon Queen Elizabeth's head, having
with unspeakable Fortitude and true Valor, defeated the confederate Irish, and
Spaniards, in several pitched Battles, when the Spaniards invaded Ireland in
Queen Elizabeth's Reign.

If he means that Heyns was Basely Educated, the Pamphleteer will be laughed
at; for no private Gentleman's Son could have better Documents instilled into
him, than he had in those liberal Sciences imbellishing a Gentleman. Besides,
he lived always by his own honest industry, and independent of any man, which
several Whigs in London can witness. It was his Fathers Loyalty to his Prince,
that clouded his Birth and Breeding; for had he sided with the late Usurper, he
might enjoy his own Inheritance to this day. Let no man imagine, that I publish
these things of my Family, out of Vainglory, but to let the world know, I want
nothing to make me a complete Gentleman, but an Estate, and that I am not such
an abject person as the Whigs render me to the world. Besides, I think I do my
Prince a great deal of Justice, in clearing my Reputation from those Aspersions
daily spoke of me by his Enemies

And whereas it is printed in the said Pamphlet, that it was altogether
groundless, what Heyns deposed against the Earl of Shaftsbury, relating to the
Duke of Buckingham, viz. That his Mother was not descended of the Plantagenets.
Heyns desires the Reader to consult the Heralds, who are ready to prove that
she was descended of a Sister or Daughter to Edw. IV. But the Pamphleteer may
as well deny this point, as that the Noble Peer never spoke to Heyns. And I do
really believe the Earl of S -- y would not involve his Native Country in a
Civil War, as it is there mentioned, out of any love he had for the Duke of
Bucks, but out of that odium he bears to the Duke of York, and others, he would
make a New Association, with the Infernal Fiends, and offer all things that are
dear to him in this Life, as a libation to the Devil, upon condition he might
revenge himself upon the Yorkists. And whereas the said Pamphlet denies that
the Earl of Sh. spoke contumeliously of the King, all men know that is not only
usual with him to revile and speak ignominiously against the King privately,
but also publicly in open Parliament: See the Speech of the Noble Peer, where
it is said, We want a Prince that we may Trust; And in another paragraph of the
same Speech, he bids the King to change His Principles, etc. This uncivil
Dialect is customary with Whigs in all Ages to Princes, as any Historian can
tell, that has read the Life of Mary Queen of Scots, Vide, The History of the
Rebellion in Scotland against the said Queen.
whom Knocks the Minister called often Whore and Jezabel, and told her she lied
a thousand times to her face. And were not all the opprobriums in nature cast
upon that Royal Martyr King Charles I. before they brought His Royal Head to
the Block? Certainly, if we do but look back into the Transactions of elapsed
times, there is no Family under the Sun ought to detest the Whigs more, than
the Royal Family of the Stuarts; for since the Reformation in these Kingdoms,
that pest of People have not only Rebelled, but also do facto murdered Three
several Princes of the said Royal Family, viz. Prince Henry King, James's
Father, Queen Mary beforementioned, and the best of Kings, Charles the late
Royal Martyr.

Had the Whigs any grain of understanding, they would never believe that the
Author of The Earl of S. would have have Holland destroyed.
Carthago delenda, was ever a True Protestant, but a Self interested
States-mans; not ambitious to propagate True Religion, but avaritious to
accumulate Riches and Honor to himself; and to accomplish his unsatiable
requests, God is the Cloak wherewith he shades his Monstrous Treason my be
compared to a Monster.
Hydra; And to attract a Popular Faction, of purpose to acquire his
unreasonable ends, he deludes the ignorant sort of people with these bugbear
words, Religion, Property and Liberty are in a tottering state, if the Duke of
Y. be not Excluded. It Is an old Saying, that quoties vis fallere, plebem singe
Deum: If thou would deceive the Rabble, pretend Piety. Such is the subtilty
of Crafty men in all Ages, to insinuate into the minds of the Vulgar, either
out of Discontent, or Self-interest, Rebellion and Treason, gilded over with
the Blessed Name of In nomine Domini incripit omne malum.
God. These two Deified Pills, viz. Rebellion and Treason, exteriourly
appearing specious to their corporeal senses, (though intrinsically venomous)
are unsensibly swallowed by the inconsiderate sort of men, and in time infects
and pestifies their minds and bodies, and takes such rooting in their Souls,
until the intellectual parts are depraved, that nothing will stem them from
revolution against the Government, but the panick fear of a Gallows, or being
cut off by the Sword.

But let the Statesman animadvert, that there is 'no greater Glory, than to
learn to subdue Ambition, when it flows not from Justice; and to endeavor to
preserve our Conscience and Honor inviolable, rather than acquire an Empire by
sinister means. Diadems won by ill ways, are not Characters of Glory to those
Heads that bear them, but rather Wreaths of Infany, such as are fixed on
Varlets, and Thieves.

And whereas it is alleged in the said Pamphlet, that it is altogether
incredible that such a sagacious and wise Peer as the Earl of Sh. could be
Guilty of so great an Error, as to make such Rascals as the Witnesses are (for
so the Pamphleteer calls them) privy to his Secrets: All men will deem the same
as morally possible, as it was for His Royal Highness, and the Noble Lords in
the Tower, to communicate their Secrets to such Rascals as Thom. D -- ld and
his Accomplices are. There is none but a silly crack-obrain'd Whig would
publish such a simple Argument. For, had he consulted the Records of
Parliament, and how the Noble Peer acknowledged his Errors upon his bended
Knees, before the Bar of the Lords, in these words following, he would not
justify the Earl's Infalibility. These are the words: I do acknowledge, that
my endeavoring to maintain that that the Parliament is Dissolved, was an
ill-advised action, for which I bed the Pardon of the King's Majesty, and of
this most Honorable House And also I acknowledge, that my bringing of an
Habeas Corpus in the King's Bench, during this Session, was an high violation of
your Lordships Privileges, and a great aggravation of my former Offense; for
all which, I likewise most humbly beg the pardon of this most Honorable House.

Did not David err, that was a man after God's own heart? And also his Son
Solomon, with whom God Covenanted, offered Victims to Idols, and false Gods:
And shall the Phanaticks presume to say, that he that was of the late Usurpers
Factions, contrary to his Allegiance, and the Honor of a true Gentleman,
cannot err? It Is such a Non-sensical Assertion, that none but a stupid Whig
would write the same, Besides, has not the Noble Peer eaten of the King's
Bread? was he not promoted to all the greatest Preferments in England, Si
ingratum d^xeris omnia d^xeris.
next to a Crowned Heard? And how he has remunerated His Majesty, by his late
Association against His Royal Person and Government, I leave to the
consideration of any sober person.

But such is the blind Zeal of those Factious Spawns of a Dunghill, that they
will Canonine any man a Saint after their own impious manner, though never so
wicked himself, that espouses their Diabolical Intrigues.

OF the Witnesses that were suborned to appear against Mr. Heyns at Oxford,
when College was tried, take this short Relation. Frist of Betty Oliver, who
has been a common Whore to several persons, and especially to one Mr. Cock that
was a Prisonet in the Fleet; and after he relinquished her, she had a Bastard
by one Mr. Briwingham a Red-Coat Soldier, now living in Tangier; afterward
she lived in a Bawdy House by Doctors Commons. If any question the truth of
this matter, let them repair to the Fleet-Prison, where they may be confirmed
of most of the premises, but several persons there. This Whore was suborned to
appear against Heyns at Oxford, by one Mr. Angel and the foresaid Cock, the
former having bought off the Pillory, he being convicted of Forgery, and
several other Misdemeanors, as Heyns will make appear, if occasion requires.
The later is the greatrsts Whig and Rogue in Nature, and a Pimp to his own
Daughter. He was a Prisoner in the Fleet for Cheating and Cozening; and his
Chamber whilst he remained there was always full of Pick-pockets, Whores and
Bawds.

As for Edm. Ev -- d, he was born in Ireland, his Father ^ilius populi, in pain
English a Bastard, and all his lifetime a common Beggar, and a Plebean: Ev --
d himself went into France when he was a Boy, and one Monsieur Gilow a Ronish
Priest, seeing him begging, like one of the Black-Guard-boys, in the streets at
Paris, he took him up for Charity-sake, and kept him till the Beggar began to
grow pround; but at last he was expelled out of the College, for a
misdemeanour modesty obliges me not to divulge: Afterward Father Gascoine (Sir
Thomas Gascoine's Brother) having kept a Community in the College of Montague,
took him for Charity-sake to wipe his Shoes; but committing some other Crime,
he dismissed him; And afterward he turned Footman to the Abbot of Rheni, and
remained in that station for some time. One passage I must not omit of him,
which was this: His Father being a common Beggar in Holland, (where he dyed)
came to Paris to visit his Son Edm. Ev -- d, expecting some relief from him;
but he seeing his Father in a most despicable condition, absolutely renoune'd
the old man to be his Father, notwithstanding all his Contrymen then at
Paris knew the same poor man to be his Father; The old Beggar was fore'd to
take his Staff and his Wallet, and mump all the way back to Holland again. He
has this day a Wife at Paris, a Bakers Daughter in the University, but she
knows not what corner of the Universe he lives in. This Villain Ev -- d, with A
-- S -- and others, instructed the most part of those Witnesses that appeared
against Heyns at Oxford, as some of the said Witnesses deposed upon Oath before
a Magistrate, since the Trial of Stephen College. After he left being Footman
at Paris, he turned common Cheat; for he used to have a Port-mantle stuffed
with some heavy metal, and wherever he took Lodgings, he made the folks
believe his Port-mantle was full of Cold and Silver; and this course of life he
led, till he cozened hundred; but a last he was seized upon at Pont-neufe, (in
English New-bridge) in Paris, and carried before the Judge of Criminal matters,
who committed him, in order to have him Hanged; for you must understand Cheats
are hanged by the Civil-Law; But his Contrymen got him off, because he was a
stranger, and a Roman Catholic, and conveyed him out of Town, in order to his
coming for England, where he has played several pranks, and still will, until
the Hangman sanctifies his Neck with a Rope.

Another of these Rascals that were suborned against Heyns, is one H -- H --, a
common Affidavit-fellow, as seveeral in Town will witness, when occasion
serves. This Hickman says, he heard Heyns through a Keyhole say to one Mrs.
Scot, H -- 's Lodger, it was Heyn's Trade to live by Swearing, ( vide Colledg's
Trial, fol. 40.41.) where the Rascal says in these words: I was at the
Chamber Door, and looked at the Keyhole, and he sat at the window. When the
Varlet was asked by the Judge how long ago it was he heard Heyns say so to Mrs.
Scot? He replied, it was a year and a half before the said Trial of College;
whereas it will be made out, by the Gentlewomans Daughter, and many more who
live in Town, that Mrs. Scot parted from London the 25th. of July 1679. being
the Feast of St. James, which was 2 yearrs the 25th. of July 1681. before the
17th. and 18th. of August, when College was tried at Oxford; so that A -- S --
and Ev -- d did not instruct him to a hairs breadth, having mist half a year
and above of the time he saw Mrs. Scot, as he pretended, in Heyns's Company.
This Villains Testimony against Heyns may be comparted to T -- O -- 's, who
swore he saw His Royal Highness the Duke of York at Mass, peeping through a
Keyhole.

Thus these Perjured Rascals have endeavored to stifle the Truth against
Stephen College, who was known by the very Whigs themselves to be a man of
very pernicious Principles against his Sovereign Prince, and the present
Government.

FINIS.

