A TENDER INVITATION Unto all those that want Peace with GOD, by reason of the
burden of Sin that keeps them from acceptance with the LORD JESUS, and from an
Assurance of SALVATION, though it be very desirable to them.
OH its the weary and heavy laden that he tenders rest unto, and they that take
heed to his good Spirit which is Light, and leaves off that which it condemns,
and follows its instructions, they obtain the way of Life, and he becomes their
Shepherd, and they hear his voice, and a Stranger they will not hear, but they
follow him, and he feeds them with that which the Strangers to his voice and
Hireling Shepherds cannot attain unto by all their Arts or Parts external, but
it comes to be enjoyed by Faith in Christ Jesus that gives Victory over Sin,
and therefore its time for all People to consider; and as the Apostle said, To
try and examine their selves, whether they be in the true Faith or no, for there
is no true Faith but that which stands in the Almighty Power, and that gives
Victory over the Power of Darkness; and without this Faith it is impossible to
please God, as it is left upon Record in the Scriptures of Truth: So All is to
believe in the Son of God, who is the Light of the World, and has enlightened
every One that comes into the World, as says the Scripture; and in the
universal love of God, He gave his Son for a Light to enlighten the Gentiles,
and to be Salvation unto the ends of the Earth, and he Died for all; and his
love so far extended unto all both Male and Female, that he would have None to
Perish, but that all by turning to his good Spirit, may be saved from all that
the evil Spirit leads into, for whosoever, follows the leadings of the Spirit
of Jesus, who is given for a Leader of his People, he leads them in the Path of
Righteousness, and as they come to be Servants of Righteousness, they come to
be free from Sin; but John said in his Epistle, That the servants of sin are
free from Righteousness, and they that commit sin are of the Devil, for he is
the original of Sin, but Christ Jesus is the original of the pure and holy
undefiled Religion that keeps from the evil of the World, which is Pride,
Adultery, Lying, Cheating, and Idolatry, and Superstition, and other spots that
those are stained with who are not acquainted wi^h him, that said, Wisdom leads
in the midst of the Paths of Judgment, ^o teach them that love me to inherit
substance; there is much talking of loving him, but few inclined to keep his
Commands, and much talking of his fear, but little standing in aw, so as not to
offend him; but so far are many from taking heed unto the measure of his Spirit
of Light, as he has placed in their hearts, that they do not know it leading
them to the heart cleansing fear; for if they did, how could they plead for
Sin, so long as they remain in these Bodies; whereas it has been said by the
Spirit of the Lord, and left upon Scripture Record, That the fear of the Lord,
is as a Fountain of Life to depart from the snares of Death: and the beginning
of the true Wisdom, and a good Understanding, have all they that follow after
it, for they depart from Iniquity, and it cleanses the heart and keeps it
clean, according to the Testimonies as the Scripture bares Record of; and
therefore unto it I recommend all People, that all may have the privilege of
it, that their hearts may be cleansed, for it is well known there is no
Repentance in the Grave, but as Death leaves, Righteous Judgment will find; and
therefore let the Long Suffering and Patience of the Lord lead to Repentance,
Such a Repentance that needs no repenting of, a changing of the Heart,
abstaining and refraining from every appearance of Evil: This is that which the
Lord has long waited for, and does yet wait to be good and gracious unto all
those that confess and forsake their evil Thoughts, Words and Works, and they
shall surely find Mercy with him, and be acquainted with him, and feel
acceptance with him, and know the work of his Sanctifying Power to Sanctify
throughout in Body, Soul and Spirit, that the Work of Sanctification may not be
to do when the Messenger of Death will not be denied, for then it will be too
late to work out Salvation with fear and trembling: And therefore it would be
good for all to consider how good the Lord is, in that he has considered the
Frailty of all Flesh, and has given unto every one a measure of his good
Spirit, to help our Infirmities, and to teach us: But if we neglect the gift of
God, we shall be unexcusable in the day of account, and he will be clear of us
all; and therefore let all be diligent to here the Word of Reconciliation; that
the Work thereof may be experienced, for it begets again unto God, those that
were afar off, and when the Work of Regeneration is witnessed, and the birth of
the Water of Life, and Spirit of Jesus; then the new Creature that avails with
God, comes to be in unity and peace with him, and then the Spirit of Jesus
bears Witness to the Spirits of such, that they are the Children of the Lord,
but except a being born again, there can be no entering into the Kingdom; for
the first birth cannot enter: in the first Adam's nature, all are dead but they
that are begotten again by the Word of Gods Power, as the Scripture testifies,
if they come to be changed into the nature of the Second Adam, the Lord from
Heaven, the Quickening Spirit, in him all such are made alive, and as they live
in his Fear, and do not grieve his Spirit, their sufficiency is in the
Ingrafted Word of his Grace that is able to save, and in the same do witness
preservation, as in the days of old; it is the same that David hid in his
Heart, that he might not sin against the Lord, and it was as a Lanthorn unto
his Feet, and a Light unto his paths: And so it is now, blessed be the Name of
the Lord, unto them that are truly watchful in it; but those that are obeying
the Power of Darkness, breaks the command of Christ Jesus, and its left upon
Scripture Reord, that he did not say only unto one, but unto all, Watch; and
surely it is as much need as ever, for us to keep a narrow Watch, and that in
the Light; for our Souls Enemy works always in the dark, and except we keep a
continual Watch over our Hearts; in that which does discover his Snares we
cannot escape; and so let all that have any sense, that it is their Duty to
wait upon the Lord, be careful to keep the command of Watchfulness, that the
Enemy nor any of his Instruments do not prevent from waiting in stilness upon
the Lord, for he does renew the strength of them that do truly wait upon him
and have said, That they shall run and not be weary, and walk and not faint;
and now he is fulfilling the Scripture, wherein it was said, The Children of
the Lord, shall be taught of the Lord, and they shall be established in
Righteousness, and great shall be their Peace. Oh! let all that want it,
hearken unto the true Shepherd of the little Flock, for whom the Kingdom is
prepared, who incourages them, and bids them fear not though the Woolfish
Destroyer is nigh unto them; yet he is the Over-seer, and in all trials and
exercises he is their Preservation; and them that have been exercised deeply,
and tried thoroughly, they can tell of his Wonderful Works, and have cause to
speak well of his most worthy name, and to invite others to come and taste and
see for themselves how good the Lord is, in that he gives all a time of tender
Visitation. Oh! that People would but consider it before it be too late, that
while the good Spirit of Light is striving, their hearts may be affected with
it, and joined to it, for it will not always strive; and therefore let such as
could not come into Obedience because of Sufferings; now consider how good the
Lord is in that he has calmed the storms of Persecution, and opened a door for
such as are convinced to come into Obedience; let them now perform what they
promised to the Lord, when they were looking to see what the Lord would do with
his poor despised People (called Quakers) for said they, Its the Truth that
they suffer for, but we cannot suffer for it; their Sufferings is too hard for
us to bear, else we should own it. Oh! let all such truly consider the
wonderful Love of God, that his tender Mercy may not be disregarded, nor his
great Love undervalued, but let every such a one double their diligence, and
make no delays, for delays in this weighty concern, are very dangerous; for
who knows how little time they have to come, or what it may bring forth;
therefore that the present time be not ill spent, But while it is to day, if
any will hear his Voice, let them not harden their Hearts, as it was in the Day
of Provocation. For many are the invitations of the great Love of God, and if
it be slighted, he will certainly withold his Mercies; and therefore we have
great need to embrace his Love, that we may not provoke him to Wrath; for he is
just, and will render unto all People according to their doings.

Charlow, 14 day of the 3d Month, 1687. Joan Vokins.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXVII.


