A TRUE COPY OF THE REMONSTRANCE AND PETITION, PRESENTED To the Honorable the
House of COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.

BY Sir David Watkins Knight, Mr. Shuite, and others, (the now principal
Designers and managers of the public Affairs of the City) earnestly arguing
for no Accommodation, but a vigorous prosecution of the present War.

WITH A Petition of certain other CITIZENS of London, intended to be presented
for Peace.

LONDON, December. 13. Printed by T. F. for J. B. 1642.

TO The Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons House
of PARLIAMENT.
The humble Remonstrance and Petition of many of the Citizens of LONDON.
Showing:
THat ever since the beginning of these present sad distractions which threaten
ruins to these flourishing Kingdoms, and indeed ever since the sitting of this
present Parliament, they have been ready out of their Zeal to the cause of
GOD, and sense of their duty to this Honorable Assembly, upon all occasions to
Contribute, subserve, and lay out themselves, in all those ways, which they
did either discern, or were directed, did tend to the maintenance of that
Cause, or were necessary for the defense of the Common safety, wherein they
have at all times with all cheerfulness and readiness, advanced such moneys
as have bin desired, (in the whole to very great and vast sums) and have had
leavied and raised amongst them the greatest number of those men, who both
first formed and now also recruted the Army.

By all which they hoped to have seen the end of their dangers and removal of
their fears, by the just, severe, and exemplary punishment of Delinquents, who
are the causes of all these ruining perturbations, and to have bin by this time
settled in the enjoyment of that happy Peace they have always desired: But
deceived of this hope, they cannot omit humbly to Remonstrate, that after all
this vast expense, they find themselves but little nearer their end, if not
more dangerously involved, and like enough to keep these intestine Wars on
foot, till they shortly become a prey to a foreign force, as late discoveries
give them cause to fear.

And however they are very sensible of the great Burden of renewed
Contributions, both beyond the example of former Times, and their own
expectation of such supplies; yet they shall with the same life and
cheerfulness go on to adventure more; so as it may be employed in a more
speedy and effectual prosecution of the Wars, which they humbly conceive
would not have bin drawn out to this length, had it not bin for giving ear to
those councels of Accommodation, a Proposition induced by our Enemies to gain
time, which if concluded, they will keep only so long as to serve their ends,
but the very conclusion of it wholly incomptable, as your Remonstrants humbly
conceive, with the Protestation of bringing to condign punishment these grand
Delinquents, and Incendiaries, who have imbroyled our State, and sought to
introduce a tyranny, without whose council and influence, nothing on that
side can be concluded, and as also the ready way to expend and waste their
remaining Treasure, and render them thereby wholly unable to defend themselves.

The contemplation of their eminent danger thereby, inforceth them humbly to
remonstrate, that if these distructive councels of accommodation be
reassumed, they shall think it necessary to look to their own safeties, and
forbeate to contribute to their own ruin; to which only Accommodation, and
not the greatest force of these Enemies of the public Peace can ever bring
them; the motion whereof your Remonstrants believe, will be exploded with the
greatest indignity by all the good Patriots of your Honorable Assembly, yet
humbly desire you will be pleased to publish such a Declaration herein, as
shall seem good to your Wisdoms, whereby not only the People may be assured,
that men misaffected to the Public may not serve their own ends, or drive on
their particular designs in this distructive Accommodation; but also the
Ingeniers of these contrivances may lie under the expectation of a just and
heavy censure; if they shall yet dare by such dangerous and unreasonable
interpellations, to bereave us of the right and wholesome use of our advantages
and opportunities; by which for the present, besides all other dangerous
effects, the Delinquents and Incendiaries are encouraged, with the hope of a
good retreat, when they have done their utmost.

The sad effects of this Accommodation appearing at distance, more terrible
unto your Remonstrants then the present view of the worst of this unnatural
war, gives the boldness to them, to make this humble address to this most
Honorable Assembly; withal professing that they are resolved with the utmost
expense of Lives, and estates to stand by, assist, maintain, and execute all
your councels, and commands, that shall tend to the vigorous and effectual
prosecution of this war.

They therefore humbly pray you will be pleased to declare your Sense against
this dangerous Accommodation, that being assured of your fixed resolution not
to treat with his Majesty, but in Parliament, and divided from his wicked and
desperate Counselors, they may with the greater resolution be prepared, to go
on cheerfully in such supplies, as are necessary to bring these Distractions
to a happy issue.

For which they shall ever Pray, etc.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS now assembled in the high Court
of PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of diverse Inhabitants of the City of London, and the
Liberties thereof.
SHOWS.
THat the present sense of our miseries, and apprehension of inevitable ruin
both of the Church and Commonwealth, make us to become humble suitors to this
Honorable Assembly (the like^^est means under God for on (...) (to consider
our distressed estates, and to provide a speedy remedy for out present and
future evils, earnestly desiring you to weigh the care and Judgment of our
predecessors who by a known Law, settled and preserved our Protestant
Religion, our Liberties, and Properties, with a right understanding between
King and Subjects, which produced peace and plenty in our Streets.

And to reflect with serious thoughts upon our present distempers, violating
Religion by Papists and Sectaries, engaging our Nation into a civil, bloody,
and destructive War, invading our Laws and Liberties, endangering all our
Lives, and utterly disinabling us to relieve our distressed brethren in
Ireland: We beseech you likewise to consider the effects of continued War, as
the destruction of Christians, the unnatural effusion of blood; fathers
against sons brothers by brothers, friends by friends slain, then famine and
sickness, the followers of a civil War, making way for a general
confusion, and invasion by a foreign Nation, while our Treasure is exhausted
our Trade lost, and the Kingdom dispeopled. These things weighed and enlarged
by your wisdoms, we doubt not will be strong motives in us to desire a speedy
Peace, and a happy Accommodation.

Wherefore we humbly crave, that (not lending an ear to any fomenters of these
present Wars, under what pretense soever, nor remembering ought that may
increase Iealousies, or continue divisions between his Majesty and his Houses
of Parliament) you will speedily tender his Majesty (according to his Royal
intimations) such Propositions for Accommodation, as he may with honor and
safety to the whole King dome accept. For effecting whereof we shall be ready
to assist you with the best and utmost of our abilities, and whilst you
endeavor Peace, We shall send up our Prayers to heaven for the blessing of
peace upon you, and all those that desire it.

FINIS.

