THE Duke of Savoye HIS DECLARATION OR THE ACT of RE-ESTABLISHMENT, Granted to
the VAUDOIS.
Done out of French.
THE Signal Proofs of Loyalty and the Evident Marks of Zeal for Our Service,
which have been given Us, and are continued to be given us every day by our
Protestant Subjects of the Valleys of Luzerne, Peruse, St. Martin and the
adjacent Places, viz. Perousin, St. Bartholony, and Rocheplatte; having already
invited us to receive them a fresh under Our Protection: We have thought sit on
Weighty Considerations that We should no longer delay the Publishing their
Entire Re-establishment in Our Favor, to incite them so much the more to
deserve it.

Therefore We by these Presents, which we will to have the Force of an Edict,
of Our Certain Knowledge, full Power, Absolute Authority, and with the Advice
of our Council, grant to the said Protestants ample Pardon and Entire
Absolution, Remission and Abolition of all Crimes, which they had been taxed
with for Contravention of our Edicts of the 13th of January and 9th of April
1686. as well in general as particular, and of all others which they have
committed in dependence of the said Edicts, how Enormous and great soever they
might be, without excepting any, even that of laese Majesty Divine and Humane,
and which require specific or Individual Mention, and of all the Pains
declared or incured by reason of them. Revolting and Annulling, for this End,
the said Edicts and their Registrings, As also the Declarations of Punishments,
Sentences, Ordinances and all other Acts and Orders made in Execution of the
said Edicts against the said Protestants; so that for the future they shall
remain without any Force and Effect, as if they had never been made.

We re-establish them and all those who had given them aid, Counsel and Favor
in their former honor and in our good Grace, as they were before the
Contraventions of the said Edicts: Ordaining that all those of the said
Protestants, that are yet in Custody, be immediately set at Liberty, and that
the Sons and Daughters of the said Protestants of what Age, and in what Place
of our Estates soever they are, be left at full Liberty to return to their
Parents, in the said Valleys, and to make profession of their Religion there,
and that for this Effect they be returned without Payment of any Charge,
Restoring, and Willing that the said Protestants be maintained with their
Children and Posterity in the Possession of all and every their Ancient Rights,
Edicts, Customs, Usages and Privileges, as well in respect of their
Habitations, Traffic, Commerce and Exercise of the Religion which they
profess, as of all other things without Exception Re-establishing them again in
and restoring them to the Quiet and Peaceable Possession and Enjoyment of all
the Goods, Fonds, Houses, Heritages Names, Accounts and Actions, and of all
other things which shall be found in being and in nature, and which they can
justify, by all manner of Proofs, had appertained to them immediately before
the said Edicts of the 13th. of January, and 9th. of April 1686. Ordaining all
those that may have been in Possession of the said Goods and Effects, which
belonged to the said Protestants before the said Edicts, that in conformity to
what is above, they restore them, and leave the said Protestants in the free
and peaceable Enjoyment, without disquieting or molesting them any manner of
way, and under any Pretense whatsoever. Prohibiting all Magistrates, Judges
Officers and Fiscals, and all others to whom it shall be necessary, any further
to disturb really nor personally the foresaid and their Adherents, as well for
the present as future by reason of the said Contraventions and Delicts,
Annexes, Connexes and Dependances, so that they may no more be called to
Account, in general or in particular, much less disquieted in any sort in their
Persons and Goods, by reason of the said Edicts, nor Adjurations which they may
have made: Imposing on the Fise and on all others that might molest them a
perpetual and final silence.

Declaring from this present Null all that might follow on the contrary. W E
permit further to every Person professing the same Religion, and to go and
settle freely in the said Valleys, they taking the accustomed Oath of
Fidelity, and to live and be always Faithful and Obedient Subjects to Us, and
our Royal Successors to the Crown.

For this End we Charge and Command all Magistrates, Ministers, Officers,
Vassels and all others whom it may concern, to Observe, and cause inviolably to
be observed these presents. And to our Senates and Chamber of Piemont to
Register and approve in every point and every where according to the Contents.
And to the End that none may be ignorant of the Content, WE charge that the
same be Published and Affixed in the Places and manner accustomed; Declaring
that the same Credit shall be given to the Copy Printed by Valleta, as to the
proper Original: For such is our Pleasure.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed and Sold by H. Hills, in Blackfriars, 1692.


