A DECLARATION OF THE L. Admiral Vantrump, CONCERNING The King of Scots, and
the Parliament of ENGLAND; published by sound of Trumpet throughout his whole
Navy.

With his Protestation thereupon; and his Preparations and Resolution to fight
the English Navy, either to Death or Victory, and purchase Honor and Freedom
with the price of his Blood.

ALSO, The last Engagement of the English and Dutch, and the particulars
thereof: With the coming up of Sir George Ayscue to General Blague in the
Downs, and their further Proceedings and Resolutions touching Vantrump and the
Navy.

SEnt in a Letter from Captain Tyl^rs Ship, the Tiger; to a Member of the
Council of State; And Ordered to be published and dispersed throughout the
several Counties of this Nation.

LONDON: Printed for SAM: COTTON, 1652.

A DECLARATION Of the Lord Admiral VANTRVMP Published By sound of Trumpet,
aboard the Dutch Navy, etc.
SIR,
SInce my last of the 12th. instant, We have had another engagement with the
Hollander, which was disputed with sundry fiery arguments, and maintained with
great gallantry on both sides; for, indeed they are a very stout enemy, and
fight with great courage and magnanimity of Spirit, and as their ships are of a
great Bulk and Burden, so are they also well manned; their Musketeers man the
Decks with unresistable courage, notwithstanding the bullets flying as thick as
hail (a comparison by way of simile) their Captains are excellent Navigators,
and seem to infuse a second nature into the Mariners, before an assault be
given, the better to enable them to withstand a storm, that is; before they
begin to sight, it is their usual custom, to give each one three cups of
Brandy wine, viz. strong-water, to encourage them, which makes them as valiant
as so many Hectors; but the Captains prove not right Alchymists at all times;
for that which they last administered to the poor Seamen, took not its full
operation, but rather struck a spirit of Cowardice in them, as appears; Captain
Peacock, Commander of the Tiger, having received orders from Genesis Blake, to
scout forth, for making a discovery of Vantrump, met with five Dutchmen, who
hailing them, and commanding them to strike sail, they refused; so great is
their imperiousness: whereupon he gave them one gun with a round ball, they
answered in the like nature with three; insomuch that a bloody fight began, and
for the space of four hours a hot dispute was with great gallantry performed on
both sides; till at last it pleased the divine power, to make the English
victorious, by finking one, and taking three, but not without loss, yet not so
great as was supposed; for the truth is, our General much feared, that he had
been either sunk or taken, by reason that he was missing three days; but upon
the fourth day he returned with triumph, and brought in three Dutch prizes with
him; we have taken in all about 44 sail, yet many there are that stick not to
say, that Vantrump has given the English a great overthrow, which makes the
Scots to rejoice exceedingly, and say, that Commonwealths folks must not reign
always; neither must the Commonwealth of England trample over the whole world,
hut away hut, quoth the Scot, they misken themselves; Alas! they are grossly
mistaken it is not apparent, that we know them better now, then ever, and have
made a further progress into that barren Country, then in any Kings reign
formerly; But I will pass them by, and proceed again to Vantrump (the Dutch
Lion as the Flemings call him) who has set forth a Declaration abroad the
Navy, published by sound of Trumpet, that what Captain, or Officer whatsoever,
that shall strike sail to the English, shall die without mercy; so great is his
imperiousness and malice, that he endeavors nothing more then to beget a war
betwixt the two States; he lies now hovering about the Coast of France, and
gives out, that he will have the other bout, although it be with the price of
his blood, which may soon be; for the General is resolved to weigh anchor with
60 sail, to find him out, and fight him: Sir George Ayscue is come up to our
Fleet, from Plymouth, who saluted General Blake, with discharging his guns our
whole Fleet answered him again with the like salutation; both Fleets being
joined sudden action is expected, we hear that six fireships are coming to
us, and twenty more men of war, which will make us about one hundred sail;
Colonel Goffs Regiment of foot, and Colonel Ingoldsbies are come aboard, and
seem very unanimous, having protested to live and die with our Seamen.

From aboard the Laurel in the Downs, June 22. 1652.
A Letter from Ireland.
Honored Sir,
YOu may perceive by the Articles of Kilkenny; that all the Rebels in the
several Provinces had time prefixed them for the accepting of those conditions
if they pleased, but Clanrickard and his party in Connaught, Grace, and his
party in the Kings and Queens County, Colonel Phelim Birne and his party in
Wexford and Wicklow, and Sir Phelim O Neal, with the O Relies, Mac Mahon, etc.
in Ulster, have wholly declared against the acceptance of the Articles; in
order to which, the Lord of Clanrickard, with the Connaught Forces marched to
Ballishanon about May 16, drew some Ordnance from Sligo, and battered two days,
made abreach, and stormed it, but was twice beaten of with co^siderable loss,
yet at length carried it. From thence he marched, and took Dongal Castle, and
the Ulster Forces joined with him. This intelligence came to us the second
instant, and brought us also assurance, that the Lord President with the
Connaught and Athlone forces marched to Ballishanon^n prosecution of the Lord
Clanrickard, and was there about the 24 of May. That Col. Venables with the
Ulster forces lay about Omagh, the Commissary General marched toward Venables
the 24 of May, with about 300 horse to strengthen his party, and that the Legan
men, headed by Col. Sanderson, had taken the passages upon Barns-moore to stop
Clanrickards passage into Rapha. So that you see, all the care and vigilance
possible is taken to prevent Clanrickards return, and to fight him with the
Ulster men in the north, where I hope God has brought them to judge and avenge
upon them the innocent blood that was first shed in that Province. I doubt not,
but by this time our forces are near an engagement with the Rebels, or that it
is already done, and if so, I am consident you will hear of it as soon as we
where we now lie. As for Grace, whose force consisted of about 1200 foot, and
400 horse, they have been (of late) so hunted from place to place by Col.
Sankey on the one side, and Col. Axtel on the other side, that to save
themselves they were forced to disperse, and some of his Officers (as well
horse as foot) have come in, and submitted and delivered up their arms. We hear
also that Westmeath, Slane, Dungan, Scurlogh, and others have laid down their
arms in Lemster, of which I am sure you have a more particular information then
we have.

It remains now that I give you the knowledge concerning the actings of the
Lord Muskerry, which has been transacted by the Commissioners at Clonmel. He
sent the Commissioners an absolute rejection of the Articles of Kilkenny,
desiring to have a Treaty entertained with himself. The Messenger that brought
this, was Captain David Power of Kilholme, a man subtle enough to avoid the
danger he sell into, but that God that commonly takes the wise in their own
craftiness, led the Commissioners to enquire why a man of his quality should be
employed about so fruitless an errant. Whereupon further search being made,
they found about him and his servant, some Letters to the Enemy of dangerous
consequence, and also ciphers, and other papers, which his safe conduct would
not bear him out in, upon which he was committed in order to his further trial,
and an intimation of all was sent to his Lord, the Lord Muskerry. After this,
seeing a further Treaty would not be granted him, he sent another Messenger,
intimating, that if he might himself have assurance for life, he would submit
with his party to the Parliaments mercy, and render the strong hold of Rosse
again into the Parl hand, with his other strengths. This message came from him
on Sunday last, when the Lievt. Genesis was prepared to march into Kerry the
Tuesday following, with a party of 1^00 foot, and 800 horse to reduce that
County to the Parliaments obedience. Upon due debate and consideration, it was
advised to send the Lord Muskerry a safe guard for life (and accordingly acted)
only upon the condition aforesaid. Upon Wednesday in the evening his messenger
returned, and assured us that his Lordship was still constant to his first
resolution, but that several of his party had deserted him, because their lives
were not secured as well as his, and that if the Lievt. Genesis marched up to him
he would deliver Ross into his hands. This answer come to the Lievt. Genesis
vesterday morning, whowe believe was then within 12 miles of the place, what
the issue is we know not, but when we receive it you shall know it the first
opportunity.

FINIS.

