The Watermens Case, In Relation to the BILL for Increase and Encouragement of
Seamen.
IN the Bill for Encouragement of Seamen, the Register for them is made
Voluntary, as fearing that an Act to force them into a Register would be so
great an Infringement of Liberty, as might discourage and obviate the future
Breeding of Seamen, and cause many of the present, either to decline going to
Sea, or betake themselves to the Service of some Foreign State. For which
Reasons it is Humbly hoped, That the said Register may be made Voluntary to the
Watermen as well as others; since the forcing them thereinto, will much
Discourage, and be the Ruin of many of the present Company of Watermen, That
are more subject to, and have suffered more by the Sea-Service, than any other
Society, and may put a great stop to the future Breeding of Watermen. Whereas
the said Company now is one of the best Seminaries for Breeding up Youth to the
Sea, and is computed to have afforded above 4000 Volunteers and Pressed Men for
the Navy, since His Majesty's Happy Accession to the Crown.

It Is therefore Humbly submitted to the great Wisdom of this present
Parliament, Whether it might not highly conduce toward the Furnishing the Navy
with great Numbers of Able Men, and thereby better promote the good purposes of
the designed Registring of Seamen.

1. If the Watermen were allowed to continue their being Registered in their own
Company as they now all are.

2. And all Lightermen, Bargemen, and others employed in Rowing on the River
Thames (Fishermen and Trinitymen excepted) be Incorporated with the Watermen
into one Body Politic, and be Registered in the same Manner, and under the
same Penalties, as the Watermen now are; which Register may from time to time
(as required) be transmitted unto the Admiralty. Whereby a more Exact and full
List of all Watermen may be more speedily had, and with less Charge than others
can procure, that do not know or are conversant amongst the Watermen.

3. And several Thousands of Stout and Able Men, as Lightermen, Bargemen, etc.
will be added, and made forth coming, more than the Registring Bill
comprehends, or seems to have any notice of. Which Persons being now subject to
no Order or Regulation, withdraw and absent themselves in times of Pressing,
and commit many other Irregularities on the River, which cannot by any means be
so certainly and readily prevented, as by Uniting such persons unto, and
bringing them under the same Orders and Regulations with the Watermen. For the
Barges now leave their lusty and able Men at Kingston, etc. and are brought
from thence to London with Old Men only.

And the Young and Able Lightermen hide and withdraw from their Employments,
until the Press is over, which makes Wages very dear, obstructs Trade, and
raises the price of Provision, Fuel, etc. which tends to the prejudice of all,
especially the poorer sort.

4. A great many more Substantial and considerable Persons will be then added
to the Watermens Company; for want whereof, and good Bylaws, with reasonable
Penalties, for punishing Offenders, many Abuses have formerly been committed,
the Company's Stock misapplyed and embezelled, (none being qualified to Sue for
the same) and the Charities of several discouraged or diverted. Which then it is
hoped will be effectually prevented, and the Income thereby considerably
increased, and duly applied for Relief and Support of the Decayed and Disabled
Members of the said Company, and the Widows of such, and in Educating and
Breeding up their poor and helpless Children in the Art of Navigation, to the
great Increase and Encouragement of Seamen, Advantage of Trade, and Security of
the Kingdom.


