A LETTER FROM The Earl of WARWICK: RELATING The taking of all the Forts, and
16 Pieces of Ordnance, from the Malignant Cornishmen, that had before besieged
the City of EXETER.

TOGETHER WITH An Apology made by an English Officer of Quality, for leaving
the Irish Wars:

Declaring the Design at this time now on foot to reconcile the English and
Irish together:

And by their joint Power having expelled the Scotch and Irish Protestants, to
bring their Popish Forces against the PARLIAMENT.

This is Licensed, and Entered into the Register-Book of the Company of
Stationers, according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for John Partridge, and Laurence Blaiklock. July 29. 1643.

A LETTER FROM THE EARL OF WARWICK.
Master Smith,
I Have received Yours of the 11. of this Month, and am now in such haste, as
I cannot say much to you: I am here at Topsham Bar, and have begun by Gods
blessing well yesterday, having taken all the Forts on both sides the River,
and Sixteen Piece of Ordnance, and now have sent up some small Ships to secure
the River, with Eight Hundred Land and Seamen, I hope this day, if the rain
hinder not, to give a good push to the Business I came for; I yesterday took
one of their Companies, Captain White by name, a great Papist, and under the
Marquess Hertfords Commission, all his Popish trinkets about him. I have
little Force with me, only the James, Swift sure, Martin, Cap^^ Dicke, 2.
Whelps, who are out of Victuals, and Danske also, so that it is not possible
for me to send to Carrickfergus: Nay, I shall be puzzled how to send any Ship
hence for a Convoy, with Ammunition to Bristoll, for want of Shipping:
Therefore you must send them from London or Bristoll.

Captain Batten likewise Writes for more Ships, for fear of the Danes, and some
lesser ones, to guard that Coast, I have none: I pray acquaint the Committee
with it, they must set out more Ships, if they will employ so many, for in my
life, I was never so put to it for want of Shipping, and there is but three on
the West end of the Channel, which is much too little.

What our Ships do at Guernsey and Jersie, I know not: As Soon as I have done
here, I must for the Isle of Weight, to replenish the small Ships with
Victuals, and my self. I pray give order that their Victuals meet us there,
that are to come to them and to us. Captain Bowen is at Portsmouth setting a
new Mainmast, Somaster in the Downs, went after the Marmaduke to carry her in
to you.

And where you write that the French Merchants desire a Ship to go from hence
to Morlays, to convoy some Vessels they have there laden with Linen, for this
Kingdom, as soon as I have dispatched this Business for Excester, I will
endeavor to send some one of those few Ships that are with me, if I can find
any of them so well furnished with Victuals for such a Voyage.

As touching that business of the Hollanders, and my Writing to Trump, I was
by their Order to receive an Answer from Trump; And if the Committee received
not satisfaction upon Trumps Letter to me, then I was to Write to Master
Strickland: You have sent me the Letter only in Dutch, which I understand not.

I pray excuse me to my Vice Admiral, for not Writing to him at this time, and
acquaint him, That I have no small Ships for him, for the Lucie and the Samuel,
which I purposed for him, I sent them long since to the Coast of Holland, with
Directions when they had done that Service, to repair to him, and if they be
not gone to him, you must speak to the Committee to supply him with some small
Ships from London, for I have not any.

And so having no more for the present, being in great haste,

Aboard the Swift-sure at Topsham-Bar, the 19 July 1643. I remain Your assured
loving friend: Warwick.

AN APOLOGY MADE By an English Officer of Quality, for leaving the Irish
Wars: Declaring THE DESIGN At this time now on foot to reconcile the ENGLISH
and IRISH together: And by their joint Power having expelled the SCOTCH and
IRISH Protestants, to bring their Popish Forces against The PARLIAMENT.
I Perceive that unless a Lord Lieutenant, well affected to Religion, be sent
over, or another Lord General, That all the English in Ireland must come to
ruin:

For

1. All such as are well affected to Religion, and against the Rebels, are
disgraced with aspersions of being Factious, and other lies devised against
them, as against my Lord Lysle at Rosse Battle, That he should call out and
offer ten pound for a guide to Duncannon, which is well known to be a false
blur cast upon him for his forwardness.

2. Many such, and the best of them are removed out of their places, as Sir
William Parsons from being Lord Justice, Colonel Monk from being Governor of
Dublin City, Doctor Teate from being Governor of the College.

3. They are not entrusted with Employments of weight, but some Commander or
other in chief must be ever sent along, to see that too much service be not
done at one time.

4. Or else they are that by some Irish spirit, that seems to be with us, but
in heart against us, as Sir Laurence Carye, at the Town of Swords, and Sir
Charles Coote at Trym.

5. Others thrust into Offices who are tooth and nail for the Irish, as the L.
Lambert to be Governor of Dublin City, the Bishop of Mead Governor of the
College, Sir George Wentworth, a deadly professed enemy to the Parliament, to be
chief Martial, Captain Barroughs, an Irish man, to be Provost-Martiall, who
hanged Joh. Ste^^, a lusty able English man, who being forced by mere
necessity, took 10. d. worth of bread from two Irish.

6. Such Irish Papists as are known to have betrayed our Armies, as did the
Earl of Ormonds Troop in the Voyage to Drohedah, and such as are caught in the
fact robbing our English peoples goods, are nevertheless suffered to escape,
and to continue Troopers still.

7. Such as have been taken in open Rebellion, and committed to the Castle,
many of them are suffered to go at large, and we meet them daily in the streets.

8. Many of these that have been Indighted at the King's Bench for notorious
Rebels, by set Juries of their friends, and some contrary to their Office and
Oath, have been heard to plead for them in open Court, how honest and good
house keepers they have been.

9. The chief Havens, which at first might have easily been taken, as Wexford,
was least thought on, where the enemies have received more Ammunition and
supplies then we have done: At the Battle of Rosse, when our men were entering
the breach, and many fell, being shot out of the Town, they called for the
Fireballs to clear the way, but they were forgot, and none brought out with
the Army.

10. Before our Armies go forth the Rebels have aye warning to look to
themselves, and notice which way our Forces are to go; By whom?

11. The Irish Papists, though they have been often caught sending Letters and
Ammunition to the Rebels, and to harbor them, permitted to live amongst us,
yea suffered to escape with little or no cesse and press, our English are
intollerably burdened, and many of them forced thereby to break and depart for
England.

12. Such are protected, under pretense of sending relief to our Garrisons, as
are known to murder our English when they find opportunity.

13. After diverse of our men have been shot and slain, in besieging Castles,
the Rebels have fled by night, not a man of them hurt, our men have sometimes
been charged under pain of death not to discharge at them.

14. Many prisoners have broken prison and escaped, as has been reported by
some, but by others it has been said, They have opened the door with a silver
key.

15. An English Sergeant about Whitsontide last, hearing there was a Priest in
Bridge-street saying Mass, went according to an Order of the Board to take
him, but the Priest having notice was gone, the Officer and his Soldiers
seized only upon his Vestments and trumperies left behind; their friend, the
L. Lambert, hearing thereof, imprisons the soldiers, and swore some of them
should be hanged for it.

16. Our best Ministers, as D. Harding and M. Yates, are silenced, that we have
hardly any left to keep a fast with any life.

17. An English Papist (called James Room:) in S. Patricks street Dublin, being
Plundered by the Soldiers, for suffering songs in his house made by the Irish
women, wherein they cursed our Armies, triumphed for the loss of Ballanakell,
and prayed for the Rebels prosperity: whereto he said, Amen; and bade them to
sing it again: had his liberty and goods restored him, by the L. Lambert: and
the Soldiers were committed.

18. Ballanckell, the very key of our Garrisons in Leinster, wherein were 300
valiant men, who did as much as men could do, were neglected 5 whole weeks
together, and no help sent them, till they were enforced to yield; to the utter
disheartning of the rest of our Garrisons.

19. Our Armies are usually sent forth, sometimes on Sundays, sometimes on
Fast-dayes, after this sin has been openly Preached against in the hearing of
the Lord General and other Commanders.

20. All the Pillage seized on by the Officers and the famished Soldiers, when
great preys have been taken, were not permitted to kill a beast to relieve
their hunger.

21. The general abounding of all open sins without any restraint.

22. The L. Taffe has been suffered to come and go to the Rebels with
directions, which few of the Privy Counsel have been acquainted with.

23. Some of our Preachers have declaimed against the bloody Rebels cruelties,
thereby to excite the Soldiers to resolution in prosecution of the wars
against them, have been declaimed against by others for bloody Preaching and
Praying, and charged to desist from such extravaganeies.

24. Some have directly and professedly Preached for mercy to be showed to
these merciless Rebels, as Archdeacon Buckley, and the Bishop of Mead, who
said in a Sermon before the State, That four sorts of them should be saved;
viz. 1. Children. 2. Women. 3. Laborers. 4. All that resist not: Yet women are
worse then men.

25. A faction is fomented among our selves to take off our Soldiers from the
Rebels, and to turn their edge against the Parliament, and to this end tend
many of the Sermons that have been Preached many a day before the State,
containing nothing but most bitter Invectives against the Schismatiques (as
they call them) and hardly a word is to be heard to proceed from any of them
against the Rebels, except the Bishop of Down, who glanced against them at the
first, and yet in the end affirmed The Schismatiques to be worse then them.

26. Likewise M. Yates being called before the Archbishop for a Sermon he
Preached, after some conference, he taxing the Archbishop for taking a Lecture
from him, and giving it to a common Drunkard; reply was made by the Archdeacon
Buckley his son, that was there present, That Lecturers had more disturbed the
peace of the Church and Commonwealth, then ever they did good: and it had been
well if never none had been: The Bishop likewise said, That so long as he had
power, there should be none in his Jurisdiction.

27. Also Captain Lucas coming to Dublin, to convey some corn by sea thither,
having been often at the Council, to demand relief for him and his men (it
being often by them promised) was demanded, If whether he was able, as also
whether he was willing to fetch in Captain Plunket: He answered, He was able he
thought: but Captain Plunket being employed by the Parliament, as well as he,
he could by no means betray that trust in him reposed; and he demanded, what
would be if h-e should sink him? They answered. They were able to secure him:
But he answered, If they were able to secure him here, yet they could no An
England, where his wife and children and estate is; As also he was forced to
discharge 30 of his men for want of means, and thereby unable for that service.

28. Our last Army going forth in May, continuing forth 50 weeks, when we
expected great service to be done, there was done nothing. It was so ordered,
that the Battering pieces which should have gone with them, came not to them
till a fortnight after. Then we expected that Ballashanan Castle, that has cut
off so many of our men, should have been taken: but it was protected by whom
not known, though Captain Armstrong at the same time had like to have been
slain by some of them: And likewise Allens Castle, which has done much
mischief to our men: In it all the Rebels wealth thereabout was, when the men
and pieces were drawn up to it, they showed a Paper Protection by Sir Arthur
Loftus, Governor of the Naas. Likewise, the same night, our men Quartering
near the said Castle, their Horses were stolen by them, and fetched from them
by violence by the Soldiers, who with the Officers also, were ready to run mad
for anger that they might not take it.

29. The day before the Earl of Ormond went to the Treaty, being the 22 of
June, the chief Protestants of the City were called before the Council, to
know if they would give 10000. or have a Cessation: They answered, They were
utterly unabled, and were grieved to hear the Officers complain, and to see the
Soldiers go barefoot and bare-legg'd, and the City undone; and would be loath
to see them that had killed their friends and kinsfolks, walks Dublin streets,
yet durst not call them Rebels. Whereupon they were dismissed, and the next day
they went to treat.

30. The Parliament, with all those that are employed by them for the good of
the Kingdom, are notoriously abused, to the great grief of all good people; as
may appear by the base usage of Capt. Smith, captain of the Swallow, by captain
Flower, a professed enemy to the Parliament, giving him many opprobrious
speeches, calling him Traitor and Roundhead, etc. urging him to draw, so that
he was fain to withdraw himself, fearing further danger.

31. But a more inhumane carriage was showed to the Master of the Swallow, a
faithful and honest man in his place, who coming to the Globe Tavern in
Castle-street, Dublin, to see some of his friends, who there called for some
Sack, and was answered by the master of the Tavern, That he had none for such
Rebels and Traitors, etc. as he was; and threatened, if he would not be gone, he
would fetch a Guard of Musketeers to bring him thence: Thence going to the
Fleece Tavern, and there demanding a bed for his money, was answered as at the
Globe, and a Guard of Musketeers was sent for by the Vintner, master of the
house, with a Corporal, who by force brought him to the Guard, of which
Lieutenant Congreave was captain, a deadly enemy to the Parliament, who
presently, in most hase manner, reviled him: an honest neighbor, who being
there before, having sent for some Beer for the Soldiers; the said Lieutenant
drank a Health to the confusion of the Parliament, whom he called Rogues and
Traitors, and would have forced the Master to have drank it: but he answered,
They were honest men, and he would rather die then drink it: whereupon the
Lieutenant answered, He would make him confess that either the Parliament, or
Lords Justices were Rogues and Traitors, before the morning, or he would hang
him: the Master replied, They might do with him what they pleased, he being in
their hands; and that they were but boys; and he an ancient man: Whereupon
they with Match drew his neck and his heels together, in so violent a manner,
as though they would have killed him; but by the entreaty of the honest man
there present, he was unbound, and caused to lie upon the boards all night:
from whence he was the next morning by the Sergeant of the Guard releast: The
Council have likewise given order for the apprehending of the captain of the
Swallow, if by any means they can come by him.

32. A Treaty of Peace, or cessation of Arms is in agitation, now the Rebels
are driven to such exigencies, as that they see now they cannot longer subsist
otherwise, are likely to perish for want, if our Soldiers might be suffered to
pillage them, and now it is well known they want Powder. The intent of it is,
so far as all honest, loyal, and religious Subjects conjecture, The ruin of
all the British Nation, as appears by the relation of Mistress Dillon, who is a
good Protestant, and her husband a Papist among the Rebels both of them, she
heard them amongst themselves to say; That their intent is, After this Treaty,
they will draw down their Forces to the Scots, and cut them off; then that
being finished, they would cut off the English. And also a most execrable Oath
after this is concluded on to be administered to all the Protestants that are
well affected to the Parliament; which if they refuse to take, they shall be
all pillaged.

The premises considered, I conceive that this may suffice to make mine excuse.

The Lord look down upon his poor Church in Ireland.

FINIS.

