A DECLARATION OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord Admiral VANTRUMP, Touching the Royal
Fort of Monarchy, the King of Scots, and the D. of York: sent to the King of
Denmark, and the Q. of Sweden: With his desires thereupon; his Resolution
touching England; and the Answer of their Royal Highnesses thereunto.

The advance of Vant^ump toward the Downs; A gr^^t Victory obtained; the
particulars of the fight; And the bloody proceedings of the Dutch against the
English; with their stripping and whipping them; and afterward washing them
with Vinegar and Salt.

depiction of the English lion rampant

London, Printed for George Horton, 1652.

A Declaration of the Lord Admiral Vantrump, touching the King of Scots, the
Duke of York, and the Royal Fort of Monarchy: sent to the Kings of Denmark,
France, and the Queen of Sweden; With his ardent desires thereupon; his
Resolution touching England; and the Promise of the said Christian Princes.
SIR,
ON the 15 instant Vantrump called a Council aboard his Navy, to advise and
consult of their Maritine Affairs, and to attempt some sudden Action, if
possible, upon the English: whereupon, it was mutually assented to, that the
Navy (consisting of one hundred Men of War, besides Fireships) should be
divided into two Squadrons, with a Resolution to attend the motion of the
English in the Downs, and fall upon, sink, burn, and destroy them; as also to
way-lay and intercept all others that shall come to join with them.

It Is said he has sent a Message and Declaration to the King of Denmark, and
the Queen of Sweden, wherein he gives a demonstration to their Highnesses, of
the just Grounds and Reasons of the present Engagement of the Low Countries
against England; protesting his innocence, from having any design or intention,
to strike at the Royal Fort of Monarchy; but shall to the utmost of his power
endeavor the support and preservation thereof; and augment the splendour of the
Crown in its full orient brightness.

In order whereunto he desires and implores their aid and assistance even in
this juncture of time; but the King of Denmark seems to wave it, by reason of
the Treaty with the Parliament. The Queen accords thereunto; and bath sent a
Letter to the King of France to be assisting-therein, especially for the
restoration of the King of Scots, etc.

This is with great alacrity rescented by the Royal party; and Vantrump seems
to declare for the interest of that Family; which business is carried on with a
very high hand by Count William of Nassaw, Cousing to the Prince of Orange;
which the Boors perceiving, arm themselves apace, and grow very desperate,
declaring, That if the Estates do not immediately and vigorously proceed on in
the War against England, that they will pull them out of their houses headlong,
and make them greater Presidents to the world, then they did the English in the
Indies; which great affronts and injuries, or rather contumelies, are not to be
paralleled in any Age; for the Dutch most insolently bound the English to
stakes, with ropes about their necks, throtling some of them therewith, and
flourishing their naked swords about them, as if they would presently have
dispatched them; then taking them so amazed and bound, and tumbling them down
the Rocks, and after carrying their crushed and bruised carkases away in irons.
They have exceedingly insulted by usurping sovereignty to inslave the English;
and have executed many cruel Sentences, seizing of the English Companies goods,
fining, imprisoning, stocking, yea whipping the English at a post in the open
Marketplace, and after washing them with vinegar and salt. O monstrous! and
unheard of cruelties! acted against them, who have disputed their Title, when
the loss of brave Sidney, and many others.

Bril, July 19. 1652.
Advertisements from the Navy.
On the 15 instant, his Excellency General Blake having received Advertisements
of a great Fleet of ships, under sail Northwards, supposed them to be Hans,
designed for the relief and safety of the Flemish Busses: whereupon, Major
Bourn was commanded forth with seven Scouts, to make a discovery thereof; and
coming within a League of them, found them to be men of War, having their
streamers, Jacks, and bloody Flags all forth; Admiral Hantz being Commander in
chief, selected forth Ten chief ships, to give Us a revengeful salute; which
Major Bourn perceiving, prepared to receive them, sending the Saphir back to
the General, to hasten up the rest: the Dutchmen being exceedingly enraged,
with great fury bore up to us, with their Pendants flying, and Thunder-like
their broad sides they let fly; we answered them again, putting forth our
bloody flags in defiance; and in the midst of our dispute, each man acting with
a most heroic mind, our General made up to us with 37 sail; which the Dutch
Admiral seeing, bore up with 40 stout ships to them; and entering battle,
saluted Us with many great vollies; we rung them the like peals again; and
after two ho: dispute, maintained with great resolution on both sides, we came
to grapling, in which action the Land soldiers performed singular service, but
was several times blown up and repelled from the Enemies decks; til at last the
nimble Saphir bore up to the head of their Admiral fired both sails and
tackling, shot her in the Keel; and immediately upon the next broad side sunk
her; at which instant, most of our ships being engaged, the General resolved to
bear up, and to play the Grenades; the which, was with such dexterity of
spirit attempted, that in a moment 5 of their ships was fired, which could by
no means be extinguished; 17 we took; sunk 9, dispersed, rent, and torn many of
them, but not without loss; and had not the sable Curtains of the night
prevented, we had made the victory far more glorious; but we are in pursuit,
and have sent 700 prisoners to Dunbar, with some ships.

Aboard the Reformation July 17, 1652. Since which time, we hear, that he has
taken about forty Busses, four Men of War, and sunk one, with the loss of two
Frigates. Sir George Carteret begins to prosecute the King of Scots Cause with
great vigor; and it is conceived, will endeavor a conjunction with the Duke of
Vandoom High Admiral of France, who with 50 Men of War is sailed toward the
Western coast, to fight the Spanish forces.



FINIS.

