LETTERS OF Affairs LOVE and COVRTSHIP. WRITTEN To several persons of Honor
and Quality; By the Exquisite Pen OF Monsieur de VOITURE, A member of the
Famous FRENCH ACADEMY established at PARIS by Cardinal de Richelieu.

Englished by J. D.

LONDON, Printed for T. Dring and J. Starkey, and are to be sold at their
shops, at the George in Fleet street near Cliff^rds Inn, and the Miter at the
West end of St. Paul's Church, 1657.

TO THE Worthily Honored GEORGE BOSWELL Esquire.
SIR,
WEre I to make this Address to a person unacquainted with my Author, and the
Work I now publish, it were, happily, pardonable in me, to give it and him, the
greatest Elogies a piece and person of so much worth might justly claim. Nor
were it hard to imagine, what I might, did I make it my business, say of one
of the most eminent members of the FRECNH ACADEMY (an Association of Wits,
such as no age till this ever saw) a man so rarefied by Travel and experience
into the noblest heights of an elaborate Eloquence, and one so versed in
Criticisme, that he could raise beauty and luster out of the ruins and
rubbish of the m^st ancient Authors. But, Sir, since my application is to you,
whose correspondence with Learning is so universal, the trouble is spared, and
if there be any thing remarkable by way of account of him, it is but fit it
were done ( pro more) in another place. Nor is there, in this, any more
necessity, I should (though I might easily take the occasion) celebrate this
kind of writing as the most advantageous of any. It is in a manner the Cement
of all society, the foundation and superstructure of all Friendship and
conversation, the remedy of absence, the Intelligentiall part of all Loves,
which which lays the plots and carries on the designs of united hearts at the
greatest distance; in a word, it is the general Agent of all inclinations and
passions, and what, out of the roughness of Barbarism, has raised man to the
highest Gentilesses, courtships, and civilities. My design therefore is, not
to make, but, renew your acquaintance with the exquisite de VOITVRE, yet far
from a presumption, that your entertainment of him in this language will be
proportionable to your esteem of him in his own. But, if I may measure it by
the infinite affection, and consequently, the general indulgence and patronage
you have for all Learning, that you will afford it such as it may in some sort
deserve, is, I must confess, a confidence I know not how to avoid, but presses
so much upon me, that it contributes not a little to that it is in me, thus
publicly, though with the greatest submissions and respects, to express my
self,

SIR, Your most humble

To the General READER.
WHen I have given my Author, the great recommendations he might but justly
claim, and that the present work bear not a sufficient proportion thereto, I
know what it will signify, by interpretation, with the many; That it is done
purposely to ensnare the Reader, and gain the more reputation to the work, or
amounts to no more then a compliance with the custom whereto all that employ
themselves in Translations are strictly tributary, that is, to say, something
of their Authors. This indeed is easily imagined, but, for my part, what I
have to say of mine, seems, at least to me, to be the effect of a certain
necessity, or, if you will have it so, a convenience, that I should give some
account of him. For certainly, when there is so much briguing and courtship
used to procure Letters of Naturalization here by persons that have lived long
among us, for me to naturalize a person, who only took occasion to see this
Country, some three and twenty years since, and never thought of traveling
into it again so long after his death, without the least satisfaction given,
whether he be such as may be made a free Denizen, and enjoy the privileges of
an English man, were certainly a presumption I know not how to answer.

The person I solicit for is very famous in his own Country, but one of the
most eminent Members of the FRENCH ACADEMY, a Consort of wits assembled
together to harmonise the language of that Country, and amidst their
contributory Labors to all Learning in general, to endeavor the cultivation
thereof so far as to make it capable of the highest Eloquence and ornament.
But this happily is a recommendation not calculated for the meridian of the
ordinary capacity, which ^xpecting to find him more particularly characterized,
I have thought fit to take him asunder, and consider him in his several
qualities and perfections.

He was excellently well furnished with all those qualities which are any way
requisite or advantageous to Conversation, having a certain confident
familiarity, whence all he did or said, was attended with a more then ordinary
grace. His carriage was full of mildness, affability and complaisance, far
from all animosity, deriving neither reputation nor envy from other men's
works, but judging of things soberly, without prejudice or passion. When any
discourse was advanced about any point of Learning, or that he was to give his
judgment of some opinion, he did it to the infinite satisfaction of all the
Audience, with a certain Gallantry which spoke him much free from the
supercilious contentiousnes of the Schools* Insomuch that many imagine his Wit
and Genius naturally expressed under the name and person of Callicrates in the
third Volume of the Grand Cyrus. He was an excellent pattern of a good and
real Friend, which disposition of his Heart attended by those others of his
mind gained him so great a number, and that of so great ones* He never
contracted friendship with any he had once convinced of falsehood, whence it
came to pass, that laying the foundation of his affections on virtue and not
on Fortune, they were not shaken by disgraces.

These endowments, though they are not so frequent in Courts, yet do they often
bring men thither. They at least forced our Author, and gained him a
reputation there, such as that, by the means of Monseigneur d' Avaux,
(sometimes his Fellow-Collegian, but always his Friend and Patron) the doors of
Lords and Princes were open to him. Nay nature seemed to requite the smalnesse
of bulk she had bestowed on him with certain letters of recommendation writ in
a character that purchased him the esteem and caresses of the greatest, and
raised him to acquaintances much beyond what a Courtier of his birth and
quality could have expected.

This would be thought a fair step to publish charges and employments, but his
Genius directed him to other things, as having a great dis-inclination for
whatever was of Affairs, by reason of the distraction and attendance incident
hereto. Yet, I know not how it happened, he was a kind of Master of the
Ceremonies to the Duke of Orleans, his business being the introduction and
entertainment of those Ambassadors that came to visit his Highness. He was
also sent as an Envoy to the Great Duke of Florence to acquaint him with the
birth of the present Lewis XIV. King of France. He went twice to Rome, and was
once here in London. During the Broyls of France he accompanied the Duke of
Orleans into Languedoc, whence he was by him sent to the Spanish Court, where
he was very familiar with the late great Favorite the Conde Duke d' Olivares
and other Grandees. He staid so long in this negotiation, that he arrived to
such perfection in the Spanish Tongue, that he made those much celebrated
verses, which were taken to be Lope de Vega's, one of the greatest wits of that
Nation.

For his Correspondences they must needs be great, that is, consonant to his
Friendships and acquaintances, which were with the greatest. The late Prince of
Conde, he that is now, and his Brother the Prince of Conti, had very great
respects for him; he was also much in favor with the King and Queen, the late,
and the present Cardinal, with whom he had been a long time acquainted, and
had received diverse good offices from him. His familiarity with the Cardinal
de la Valette may be much seen in his letters. Nor is it less manifest what
particular obligation he had to the house of Rambouillet, (a place dedicated to
be the mansion of virtue, where, in the chamber of the illustrious Artenice,
met a Club of the most excellent persons about the Court;) he having written
more letters to Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, since Marchioness de Montausier,
then to any other.

But among his more letterd acquaintances, that is, such as were more
conformable to his humor and quality, are to be numbered Monsieur de Balzac,
Monsieur Chapelain, Costart, and indeed all that pretended any thing to wit,
had a reverence and admiration for his, and have now no less veneration for
him dead, then they had esteem for him alive. Among his letters, we find but
one to Monsieur de Balzac, which gave us occasion to premise that of Monsieur
de Balzac whereto it was an answer. But in de Balzac's letters there are many
to Mr. de Voiture, both in his Volumes, and his choice letters, not yet
published in English.

His Estate consisted for the most part in pensions, as may be seen partly in
his letters. His great Benefactour Monseigneur d' Avaux allowed him 4000.
Livers per ann* by a place (which yet obliged him not to the least trouble or
attendance) he gave him in the Revenue. The Author of the history of the
FRENCH ACADEMY, will needs make him a great Gam^ster, but unfortunate, and
says he lost 1500. pistols in one night, which was somewhat high for a person
of his fortunes. That story and much more concerning him, as he was a member of
the Academy, who is desirous, may find in that History, newly published and
sold by T. Johnson at the Key in Paul's Churchyard.

He was also courted to be one of the ACADEMY of the HUMORISTS at Rome, such a
reputation was his wit in even in foreign parts, before any thing of his was
yet abroad in the world. As to his Person, he who best could, describes
himself, in his letter to an unknown Mistress, Letter LXXIX.

The Author of the history of the French Academy, gives this account of his
way of writing; His Prose, says he, is more correct and exact, having a
certain air of gallantry, which is not found any where else, and something so
natural and elaborate together, that the reading thereof is infinitely
pleasing. He many times slights Rules, and liek a Master thinks himself above
them, as scorning to be fettered by them, so that his writings are not Copies,
but Originals; having, out of the Ancient and Modern wits, made a certain new
character, wherein he imitated no man, and scarce any can imitate him. This I
shall have something to say to anon, taking thence at the present only occasion
to give the account I think fit of his LETTERS, which in this address was my
particular design.

The present Collection was made according to the directions of Monsieur
Chapelain, and Monsieur Conrart, two Members of the Academy, who, out of the
esteem they had for the Authors memory, took the pains to cull out of an
infinite number, these, as fittest, a^l circumstances considered, at that time,
to be published. For the order, it is according to the time as near as could be
guessed, but it was the Authors negligence, that he seldom dated his letters,
especially as to the year. There are ^ome few words in the Italick Character,
which signify something particular, which, out of the same modesty, as those
who have put out the several Editions of this book in French, I have forborne
to give any explication of, not so much for fear of mistake, as a tenderness
for the Correspondents. Let therefore the Reader make what he can of them, it
suffices that I have acknowledged that there is in them some extraordinary
meaning. The letters of Love are disposed by themselves, for their sakes who
shall not happily think them so full of wit and vigor as might be expected. In
both these and the other, there is abundance of variety, as to expression and
something particular as to matter of invention. Only his familiarity, with such
great persons as he writes to, may seem strange; but it may be supposed he knew
how far he might be free, and that that was excusable in him, which, in any
other happily would not, yet on some occasions he has expressed much
reservednesse, a great conduct of judgment.

But to take the just value of this work we are to appeal, from even the most
judicious men, to the women, whose approbation and suffrages, we shall, in this
case, look on as most considerable. Those were they that thought his writings
and discourses their noblest entertaiments. Nor indeed is it less difficult,
or less glorious to be favorably heard in the Cabinet then on the Theater. He
made it his business to please the Court, that is, the noblest part of it, the
Ladies. Among these, there was (why may I not say?) a Trium virate (since in
their judgments and their comprehension of things of this nature they were
more then Masculine) which had an infinite esteem for him, and to please them*
signifies no less then to please all the wits of the sex. They are, the
Duchess of Longueville, and the two Marchionesses de Sable, and de
Montausier, such as a man no sooner hears named, but his soul is filled with
the image of three the most accomplished persons in the world. Such they are,
that Princes, Ambassadors, and Secretaries of State preserve their letters as
so many rarities of the French Tongue. So fortunate was this Author in this
particular, that it caused two impressions of his works in the first six
Months, since which, they have had 4. or 5. other Editions both in France and
Holland.

And now I come to what I intended to say to the foregoing character of his
writings, given by the Author of the History. I produce of him the judgment
of his great Friend and Correspondent Monsieur de Balzac, in the XXIX. Letter
of the second Book of his familiar Letters to Monsieur Chapelain. Le CAR (says
he, alluding to the LIVE. Letter of Monsieur de Voiture's) de nostre Amy est une
fort jolie chose, and il faut av^uer qu'il a le genie de la belle and de la
noble raillerie. Je voudrois seulement qu'il travaillast un peu a purifier son
style. Dans ses Escrits la construction est souvent embarasse^e, and niles
chooses, ni les paroles ne sont pas tousjours en leur just place. All the
concernment I have in this, is, that if there cannot be a greater affectation
then the slighting and scorning of Rules, and that it must be ever attended
with obscurity, an imperfection in any Author, he who employes himself in the
translation of such things, must expect to meet with much ambiguity.

But of all writings there are not any lie more open to various construction
then LETTERS, it being supposed there is ever something particular between the
two correspondents which a third person cannot possibly imagine. To this
therefore may the defects of the present work be justly attributed; and that so
much the rather, that the Author never intending any thing of these Letters to
the public, and seeming to write all he did only for his Friends, does it in
such characters as were only intelligible by them.

His Poetry is excellent, but free and unconstrained, as having been rather his
diversion then his Business. He began a kind of Panegyric for the Conde Duke
d'Olivares, to express his gratitude, and acknowledgements of the favors he
had received from him; As also an History under the name of Alcidalis,
mentioned several times in his letters; but both are so imperfect, that there
is little probability the world will ever see them. Of his Correspondence with
Monsieur Costart (for whom it seems he had an infinite esteem) there is a great
Book extant.

As to the advantages may be made of the present work of his Letters, I doubt
not but they will be thought considerable by those whom Conversation, generous
acquaintances and Affairs, have any way raised above the Multitude. Besides
these, it is not unfitly addressed to the greater number of young Students in
the Universities, who wanting the forementioned conveniences, may by their
serious perusal of these Letters, learn to shake off their nurseries, and
pedanticall correspondences, and be refined in some measure proportionably to
the Eloquence and style of Courts and Cities.

J. D.

THE TABLE.
TO Monsieur de Voiture from Monsieur de Balzac LETTER 1. Monsieur de Voiture's
Answer. 2. To the Marquess de Rambouillet 3. To my Lord Duke de Bellegarde,
with an Amad^s 4. 66. To Madame de Saintot with an Orlando Fu^oso translated by
du Rosset 5. To the same 77, 78, 80. To my Lady Marchioness de Rambouillet
under the name of of Callot, an excellent Graver with a Book of his Figures 6.
To the same 7. 37. 82. 96 151. To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet under the name of
the King Sweden. 8, 9. To the same upon the Word CAR 54. To the same 14. 23.
30. 49. 51. 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60* 62, 63, 64, 65. 71. 86, 87, 88. 94, 95. 98.
104. 112. 115. 129, 130. 134. 152, 153. 160. 161. To Mademoiselle de Bourbon
10. To my Lord Cardinal de la Valette 11. To the same 52. 67, 68, 69, 70. 83,
84. 101. To Mademoiselle Paulet 12. 20. 21, 22, 24, 25, 26. 28, 29. 31, 32, 33.
39. 41, 42, 43. To Madame du Vigean, with an Elegy he had made for her, and
which she had often begged of him. 13. To^ my Lady Marchioness de Sab^e 15,
16, 17, 18, 19. 86. 109. To Monsieur de Chaudebonne 27. 38. 40. 54. To Monsieur
de Puy-Laurens 34, 35. To Monsieur du Fargis 36. To Monsieur 45. To Monsieur
46. To my Lord Marquess de Montausier, fin^e slain in la Valtel^ne 47. 107. To
the same, prisoner in Germany 143, 144. To my Lord Marquess Pisany 48. 85. 94*
120. To the same, having lost all his equipage at play at the siege of
Thionville 146. To Monsieur Gourdon, at London 50. To Monsieur Godeau since
Bishop of Grass 53. To the Marquess of Soudeac, at London 61. To Madame 73,
74. To Madame ^6. To Monsieur upon the taking of Corbie from the Spaniards by
the Kings forces 75. To Monsieur 103. To an unknown Mistress 79. To Monsieur
Arnaud under the name of the sage Icas 81. To Monsieur Costart 91, 92, 93. 97.
126, 127, 128. 136. 148. 166. 186, 187. 192, 193, 194, 195. To my Lord Bishop
of Lisieux 99. To Monsieur de Lyone, at Rome 100. To my Lord 102. To Madame la
Princess 105. To Monsieur Chapelain 106 112. 133. To Madame 107. To Madame
108. To Madame 110. To my Lord Cardinal Mazarine 116. To the Duchess of
Savoy 117. To Mademoiselle Servant 118. To the Count de Guiche 119. 124. To the
same upon his advancement to the charge of Marshall of France 125. To the
Marshall de Grammont upon his Fathers death 159, 170. To Monsieur de Serisantes
Resident for the King with the Queen of Sweden 121. To Monsieur de
Maison-Blanche, at Constantinople 122. To Monsieur de Chavigny 123. 140.
Butillerio Chavienio, V. Victuru, S. P. D, 200. To my Lord President de Maisons
131, 132. 141. To Monsieur Esprit 135. To the Marquess of Roquelaure 138, To
the Marquess of St. Maigrin 139. To my Lord Duke d'Anguien upon the success
of the battle of Rocroy, 1643. 143. To the same, when he crossed the Rhine to
join the Marshall de Guebriant, 1643. 145. 174, 175. 179. To the same upon the
taking of Dunkirk; 133. To the Prince 191. To my Lord d' Avaux surintendant of
the Revenue, and P^enipotentiary for the Peace 147. 153. 167. 177, 178. 184,
185. 188, 189. 196, 197, 198, 199. To Monsieur de Chauchroche 149. To the
Marchioness de Vardes 150. To M. de B. M. de B. and M. C. 154. To my my Lady
Abess -- to give her thanks for a Car she had bestowed on him 155. To Monsieur
Mauvoy to thank him for the sealed earth he had sent him 156. To the Count d'
Alais 158. To Monsieur Chantelou 162. 171, 172, 173. To the Marshall de Schom^
e^g 164, 165. 174. So the Marshall d' Emery, cotroller general of the Revenue.
168. To the Duke de la T^imouille 177. 181, 182. To the Queen of Poland 180. To
the Duchess of Longueville at Munster 190.
TABLE Of the AMOROUS LETTERS.
TO Floricia 1. To Madame 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. To Diana 14,
15. To Climene 16. To Mademoiselle de 17. To M. D. 18. To -- 19. To Madame 20.
To Madame -- 21.
THE LETTERS Of MONSIEURE de VOITURE.
The Letter of Monsieure de Balzac; To Monsieur de VOITVRE. LETTER I.
SIR,
THough one half of France lie between us, yet are you as present to my
Thoughts as the Objects I see; and you are concerned in all my imaginations.
Rivers, Plains and Cities, may well oppose my content, but cannot take off my
memory from the entertainment of, and a frequent reflection on those excellent
Discourses you have honored me with, till I recover the happiness of hearing
them again. Should you grow proud of any thing, I must confess, it should be
only of those seeds you have scattered in my soul; and your company, which at
first was extremely pleasing, is now become absolutely necessary to me. You may
therefore well think it is much against my will that I leave you so long in the
Embraces of your Mistress, or suffer her to enjoy what is mine, and not be
accountable to me for it. Every moment she allows you of entertainment, are so
many usurpations made upon me; your whisperings are secrets concealed from me;
and to enjoy your conversation in my absence, is for her to enrich her self to
my disadvantage: But there is no reason I should envy so fair a Rival, were it
only because you are both equally happy; or build my affection upon your mutual
enjoyments; provided (at my coming) I find my self after four Months absence
fairly charactered in your memory, and that Love has there assigned some place
for Friendship, and thence hope your condoleances for the miseries of the
times, and injustice of mankind. In the interim, as my joys, where I now am,
are but slender, so are my afflictions inconsiderable; I am at an equal
distance from good and bad Fortune; that fickle Goddess, who is employed in the
depopulations, and subversions of States and Cities, is not at leisure to do
mischief in mean places. I converse with Shepherdesses, who can say I and no,
and are too dull to be deceaved by understanding persons; and though they are
equally strangers to Painting and Eloquence; yet because I am master of them,
they would suffer me to show how small a distance there is between Power and
Tyranny. Instead of the fine words, and quaint discourses wherein your Ladies
abound, there issues from their mouths a pure and innocent breath, which
incorporating it self with their Kisses, affords a taste, which ordinarily the
Court does not. If therefore you prove not happier in your choice there, then I
shall here, I make over-particular profession to rely on your judgment, and be

SIR, Your most humble Servant, BALZAC.

To Monsieur de Balzac. LETTER II.
SIR,
IF it be true that I have ever had that place in your esteem, you tell me, you
have not been, in my opinion, as careful of my satisfaction as you should,
since that in not affording me the knowledge of so great a piece of News; you
have continued me in the ignorance of my being the happiest man in the world.
But, it may be, you conceived that happiness to be so far beyond any thing I
could hope, that you thought your self obliged to take time to bethink you of
expressions, such as might represent it to me as credible; and were to master
all the forces of your Rhetoric, to persuade me that I still live in your
memory: This indeed I must confess, very much speaks your justice, since that,
being to make me no other return of the affection I might claim of you, but
Words, you have made choice of those so Rich and Noble, that, to be free with
you, I am in some doubt whether the Effects would signify much more; and am
absolutely of belief, that any Friendship besides my own, might take it for
good satisfaction. But what I quarrel at, is, that so much Artifice and
Eloquence cannot shadow the truth from me, and that I therein am like your
Shepherdesses, who, through an overgreat simplicity, cannot be ca^oll'd by too
much wit. You Will however, excuse me; if I am a little distrustful as to that
Science, which can find Elogies for Quartan Agues, and Nero's; and wherein I
know you have stronger charms then ever any man had. All those Gentillesses,
which I admire in your Letter, I take to be expressions of your greatest wit
rather then of your good affection; and of so many excellent things as you have
said in my commendation, all that I can flatter my self to believe, is, that
Fortune has been pleased to make me some part of your Dreams; and yet I am to
learn whether the resueries of a soul so Elevated as yours is, are not too
serious, and too rational to descend to any reflection on me; and I shall
accordingly acknowledge you deal too favorably with me, if you have afforded me
your Love but in a Dream. I dare not imagine, that amidst those high
designations, whose present employment is to make distributions of glory, and
to proportion rewards to all Virtues, you may have reserved any place for me;
no, I have a greater opinion of your worth, then to be drawn into such a
disesteem of it, nor should I wish your enemies had so much to reproach you
with. I am satisfied, that that measure of affection which you may with justice
have for me, is that which you should have. That precept of knowing ones self,
which all others should look on as a memorial of humility should have on you a
contrary effect, that is, oblige you to a contempt of whatever is without you.
For my part, I must profess to you, that, disdaining all pretense to your
Friendship, I should have been content, if you had only preserved, with some
little tenderness, that which I had vowed to you, and had disposed it, if not
among those things for which you have any esteem, yet at ^east among those you
would be unwilling to lose. (...) that you have left me here so near this fair
Rival, whom you mention, not to disguise my thoughts to you, signifies that
your jealousy is not very strong, and you give her so much advantage, that I
have some reason to believe you hold a correspondence with her, to my
prejudice. If so, I conceive I have much greater cause of complaint then you,
since she has enriched her self by your losses, and that you have suffered her
to gain that whereof I thought to have eluded her Tyranny, by disposing it into
your hands. Had you made the least opposition in the world the better part of
my self were yet at our disposal; but your negligence put it into her power,
and enabled her so to improve her conquests over me, that when I have possessed
you of all that remains, you shall not find the one half of what you have
lost. Yet I dare assure you, on the other side, that you have recovered in my
esteem the same place that had been taken from you in my affection, and that my
love no sooner began to decrease toward you; but I thought my self obliged to
honor you the more. I have not met with any thing of yours since your
departure, which seems not to me above whatever you had done before; nay, by
these late pieces of yours, you have gained the honor of having excelled him
who had out-gone all others. I cannot in the mean time but think it strange,
that having so much reason to be content as you have, yet you cannot be so, and
that all Great Persons expressing their satisfaction of you, there wants only
your own. All France is become your Audience, and there is not any one that
has arrived to reading, looks indifferently on you. All those who any way
concern themselves in the glory of this Nation, are not more inquisitive to
know what the Marshal de Crequi does, then what you do; and we have more then
two Generals, who make not so much noise, amidst an Army of thirty thousand
men, as you do in your solitude. You are not then to wonder that so great
Reputation should be attended by much envy, but bear it patiently, if the same
Judges, before whom Scipio was found a Criminal, and who condemned Aristide's
and Socrates, allow you not, by a joint sentence all your merits can pretend
to. It was ever a Custom with the people to hate the same excellencies in any
man, which they admire in him, every thing that is out of their Road, being
offensive; whence they are more ready to bear with a common Vice, then an
extraordinary Virtue. So that if that Law, which ordered the banishment of such
as were over-powerful, either as to Authority or Reputation, were still in
force among us; I believe the greatest burden of the public Envy would fall
upon your shoulders; and that the Cardinal of Richelieu would not run so great
a hazard as your self. But be it your care, that you call not that your
misfortune, which is properly that of the Times, and complain not any longer of
the injustice of men, since that all those who own any worth, are of your side,
and that among those you have found a Friend, whom it is not impossible but you
may lose once more. At least give me leave to assure you, I shall do all that
lies in my power, to put you into a capacity of doing it; since it is now
become so great a vanity to be numbered among yours. I have hitherto made so
public a profession thereof, that if it should happen, I cannot but love you
less then I was wont, assure your self you will be the only man to whom I shall
presume to acknowledge it, and that to all the world besides, I shall as I have
ever, express my self,

SIR, Yours, etc.

To my Lord Marquess de Rambouillet, Amb^ssador for the King in Spain. LETTER
III.
My LORD,
I could never have believed it possible, that I should give you any cause to
complain of me, or that ever Libels should be written against me in Madrid.
And, to deal ingenuously, I should not easily have been appeased for the one or
the other, if, when I received that unhappy tidings, I had not at the same time
met with an account of your welfare, and the great Reputation you daily gain
among a sort of men, who, before they saw you, could not admire any thing but
themselves. But since I number all your happinesses amongst my own, I must
think it absolutely unlawful for me to be sad at a time when all the world
speaks so advantagiously of you; nor can I do less then rejoice as often as I
hear it said here, that you have taught the Spaniards humility, and that they
have as much honor for you, as if you were of the blood of the Guzman's, or
that of the Mendoza's. You may therefore hence conclude, my Lord, that my soul
is more tender then you make it, and that I have this, at least, common with
all the virtuous, that I concern my self in whatever good fortune happens to
you. It Is true, I had once resolved to smother this sentiment, so as not to
communicate it even to you. For amidst those great affairs whereof you have now
your hands full, I thought it a breach of the public peace to occasion the
least diversion of your thoughts, by any unnecessary address; and how much
liberty soever you might have given me to do it; yet should I not have had
confidence enough to make use of it, if I had not another extraordinary
adventure to acquaint you with. Be pleased then to know, my Lord, that upon
Sunday the twenty first instant, about twelve at night; the King and the Queen,
his Mother, having assembled the whole Court; there was seen at one end of the
great Hall in the Louure,, where nothing appeared before, a great brightness
brake forth on a sudden, and immediately there appeared, amidst an infinite
number of Lights; a company of Ladies covered all over with Gold and precious
Stones, and seemed as it were newly descended from Heaven: But there was one
amongst the rest so easily observable, as if she had been all alone; and I have
a certain faith, that humane eyes never saw any thing so excellent. She was the
very same, my Lord, that upon another occasion, had been so much admired under
the name, and in the habit of Pyramus, and that had, another time appeared
among the Rocks of Rambouilllet, with the bow and countenance of Diana. But
imagine not that you can represent to your self above half her Beauty, if you
measure it only by what you have seen; and know, that this night, the Fairies
had shed on her those secret advantages of Beauty, which make a difference
between Women and Goddesses. For even when she had masked her self with the
rest, in order to the Ball, which they were to represent, and consequently had
lost the advantage her face gave her over them, the Majesty of her stature and
carriage rendered her as remarkable as before; and whithersoever she went, she
drew along with her, the eyes and hearts of the whole presence. In so much,
that renouncing the error I was in, in believing she could not dance
excellently well; I now confess, it was only she that could. And this very
Judgment was so generally given by all present, that those who cannot endure to
hear her praises, must needs banish themselves from the Court. This, my Lord,
acquaints you, that while you receive great honors where you are, you miss
great enjoyments here, and that Fortune how nobly soever she may employ you
elsewhere, does you no small injury, when ever she takes you from your own
house. For, in fine, now that you have gone over the Pyrenean Mountains, if you
should pass that Sea which separates Europe and Africa; and proceeding
further, would visit that other side of the World, which Nature seems to have
disposed at a great distance, purposely for the greater safety of her Wealth
and Treasure, you should not find there any thing so rare, as what you have
left behind you; and indeed all other parts of the earth, cannot afford you
what may equal that you have left at Paris. This puts me into ^belief, that
your absence will be as short as may be; and that as soon as his Majesty's
affairs shall give you leave, you will return hither to enjoy those Goods,
which none but your self can be worthy of. But, my Lord, I am not satisfied,
whether we are not over confident of a Nation, that has made so great
usurpations upon us, to have trusted you in their power, and accordingly fear
the Spaniards will be as loath to part with you as la Valteline. This fear
certainly would put me into a far greater disorder, were I not confident that
those of the Council of Spain, have not since your coming into the Country,
been Masters of their own resolutions; and that you have already made too many
servants there, to stand in fear of any violence. We may then hope, that as
soon as the Sun, which scorches men, and dries up Rivers, shall begin to
reassume his heat, you will return hither and overtake the Spring, which you
had already passed over there, and gather Violets, after you have seen the fall
of Roses. For my part, I expect this season with much impatience; not so much
because it furnishes us with Flowers and fair weather, as that it brings your
return, and I promise you I shall not think it pleasant, if it come without you.
I am of opinion you will easily believe what I say for I am confident you allow
me to be so good, as that I should passionately wish a felicity wherein so many
are concerned; besides that, you know how particularly I am,

(My Lord) Yours, etc.
Paris March 8.
To my Lord Duke de Bellegarde, with an Amadis. LETTER IIII.
My LORD,
IN a time when there is such a confusion in History, I thought I might presume
to send you Fables; and that being in a place where you only study a remission
of your spirits, you might afford some of those hours you spend among the
Gentlemen of your Province, to entertain Amadis. I hope, considering the
solitude you are in, he will find you some pleasant diversions, by the relation
of his Adventures, which certainly must be the noblest in the World, till you
shall think fit to acquaint it with your own. But what ever we may read of him,
we must acknowledge your Fortunes are as extraordinary as his, and that of all
those Enchantments which he has dissolved, there is not any one which you
could not have mastered, unless it be happily that of the Ark of the faithful
Lovers. In a word, my Lord, you have raised in France a more amiable, and a
more accomplished Roger then he Greece, or that of Ariosto, and this without
any enchante^ Arms, without the assistance of Alquif or Urganda; and without
any other charms then those of your own person, you have had both in War and
Love the greatest successes imaginable. Besides, if we consider that exactness
of courtesy, which could never degenerate, those powerful graces whereby you
gain the affections of all that see you; and that height and constancy of mind,
which would never permit you to decline into any breach of duty, or civility;
it will be hard not to conclude you descended from the Race of the Amad's. And
I am of opinion, if you will believe me, that the History of your Life will be one
day added to those many Volumes we have of theirs. You have been the Ornament
and Esteem of three several Courts, you have so behaved your self, that you
have had Kings to your Rivals, yet not to your enemies, and at the same time
possessed their favor, and that of their Mistresses, and in an Age, wherein
Discretion, Civility, and true Gallantry were banished this Court; you have
given them a Retreat in your self, as in a Sanctuary, where they have been
admired by all the world, though not imitated by any. And truly one of the
chiefest reasons whereby I was persuaded to send you this Book, was to let you
know what advantage you have even over those who have been dressed up by
imagination to be the patterns of others; and how far the inventions of
Italians and Spaniards come short of your Virtue. In the mean time, my humble
suit to you, is, that you would be assured among all the affections it has
gained you, it has not raised in any so much admiration and true passion as it
has in me, and consequently, that I am much beyond what I am able to express,
and with all manner of respect,

My Lord, Yours, etc.

To Madam de Saintot, with an Orlando Furioso in French, Translated by du
Rosset. LETTER V.
MADAM,
THis certainly is the noblest Adventure, that ever Orlando was engaged in,
nay, when he alone defended the Crown of Charlemaigne, and snatched Scepters
out of the hands or Kings, he could not pretend to any thing so glorious, as
now that he has the honor to kiss yours. The Title of Furioso, under which he
has wandered all over the earth, must not divert you from granting him that
favor, nor frighten you from affording him your presence; for I am confident
he will be civilized by being near you, and that he will forget Angelica as soon
as he shall have seen you. This at least I know by experience, that you have
already done greater Miracles then this, and that you have sometime, with one
word, cured a greater madness then his. And certainly, it were far beyond all
that Ariosto has said of it; it he should not acknowledge the advantage you
have over the Lady, and confess, if she were placed near you, that she would
address her self, with much more necessity then ever, to the Virtue of her
Ring. This Beauty, who of all the Knights in the world, met not with any
completely armed, who never smite the eyes of any one, whose heart she wounded
not, and who by her love, burnt up as many parts of the world, as the Sun
enlightens, was but a faint draught of those Miracles which we are to admire in
you. All the Colors, all the Adulterations of Poetry have not been able to
represent her so fair as we find you, it being a thing even beyond the reach
even of Poetical extravagance; for to say truth, it is much more easy to
imagine Chambers of Crystal, and Palaces of Diamonds; And all the enchantments
of Amadis, which you look on as so incredible, cease to be such when once
compared to yours. At the first sight, to fix the most obstinate minds, and
settle such as are at the greatest distance from slavery; to kindle in them a
certain love, that submits to reason, yet knows not what hope or desire means;
to Crown with Glory and Delight those souls whom you have deprived of all rest
and Liberty, and to dismiss those infinitely satisfied, whom you do not any
ways oblige; these are effects more strange, and more remote from probability
then Hippogryphs and flying Chariots, or whatever our Romans furnish us with
that is yet more wonderful. I should make a greater Book then that which I send
you, if I continue this Discourse; but this Knight, who could never be brought
to give any man precedence, is troubled that I wait on you so long, and
advances to entertain you with the History of his Loves. It Is a favor you have
often denied me; and yet I shall, without jealousy, allow him to be in that
more happy then I, since he promises me, in lieu thereof, to present you but
with this Discourse in my behalf, and to oblige you to read it before any thing
else. This enterprise is too great for a heart less confident then his, and I
know not how fortunate he may be in it. However, it is in my opinion, very
just, since I afford him the means to entertain you with his own passions, that
he give you some account of mine; and among so many F^b^es, ^^^ain^ you with
some truths. I know you will not hear them always; but since they find you
impenetrable, and that it amounts not to so much as should oblige you to any
resentment thereof, there is no danger to let you know, that I esteem you alone
above all the world beside, and that I should not be so ambitious to command
that, as to obey you, and be,

Madam, Yours, etc.

To the Marchioness of Rambouillet, under the name of Callot, an excellent
Grauer, sending her from Nancy a Book of his Figures. LETTER VI.
MADAM,
OF so many several imaginations as have been the productions of my mind, the
most rational I ever had, is that of presenting your Ladyship with this Book;
your Ladyship I say, Madam, who excel all others in that part of the soul
which inspires Painters, Architects, and Statuaries, and who by your example
exemp it from that blame which is cast upon it, which is, that it admits not
excellency, where there is a perfection of judgment. For not to mention that
great illumination of mind, which enables you at the first sight to apprehend
the truth of things, you own a Fantasy, which, beyond any other in the world,
can discover their beauty. And as there is not at this day any one seems so
much concerned, that Noble things should have the esteem that is due to them as
your self; so is there not any knows so well how to commend them. It is a very
modest Flattery, Madam, to tell you, that you can judge of them, since I durst
affirm, that, when you are so pleased, you can exquisitely do them. And indeed
it has happened, that even when you have not been serious you have done some
Designs, that Michael Angelo, would think it no disparagement to acknowledge his
own. Nay further, it may be boasted of you, that you have put one Piece into
the world, which excells the best things that ever either Greece or Italy
produced, and discredits even the Minerva done by Phidias. It is not hard to
imagine that I speak of the Noble Lady your Daughter, in whom alone, Madam, it
may be said, you have done many Miracles. But it must be a hand more confident
then mine, that shall undertake to represent what is either in you or her, and
I should not be able to do it, though I can dispose into one sheet of Paper
numerous Armies, and represent the vastness of Seas and Mountains; I shall
therefore only tell you, but with infinite respect, and truth, that I am

Madam, Yours, etc

To the Same. LETTER. VII.
MADAM,
EVer since I have had the happiness of your sight, I have been inexpressibly
troubled, and yet, all notwithstanding, I have not been unmindful of what
commands you had laid on me. As I passed by Espernay, I went, by your order, to
visit the Marshal Strozzi, and was so much taken with the Magnificence of his
Monument, that considering the condition I was in, and finding my self not able
to get thence, I was very desireous to be buried near him. But this was a
little boggl'd at, because it was perceived I had yet too much warmth about me:
I resolved therefore to cause my Body to be translated to Nancy, whither, at
length, Madam, it is come, but so out of case and flesh, that I assure you,
there are many interred, that are not so much. Eight days have I spent here,
yet not recovered my self, and the more rest I take, the wearier I am. Besides
there is so vast a difference between the fifteen days wherein I had the honor
to be with you, and the fifteen last past, that I wonder how I can suffer it;
and me thinks, Monsieur Margone, who is a Schoolmaster here, and my self, are
the two most deplorable examples of the inconstancy of Fortune, that ever were
seen. I am troubled with certain obstructions and weaknesses, which spare me
not a day, there being no such thing here, as Theriacon; and consequently, I am
sicker then ever I was, and that in a place where I can find no Remedies. So
that Madam, I much fear, Nancy may prove as fatal to me, as it was to the Duke
of Burgundy; and that after I have run through great hazards, and opposed great
Enemies, as he had done, it is decreed I shall end my days here: But I will
hold out as I can, for, I assure you, I never am so much in fear of death, as
when I think I shall not have the honor to see you again. And therefore having
missed death by the hands of one of the most excellent Ladies in the world, and
neglected a many opportunities to dye in your presence' it would trouble me
very much to come and lay my bones three hundred Miles, from you, and to think
one day, when I should rise again, that I should have the dissatisfaction of
finding my self once more in Lorrain. I am

Madam, Yours, etc.
Nancy, Sept. 23.
To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, under the name of the King of Sweden. LETTER
VIII.
MADAM,
BEhold the Lion of the North, and the Conqueror whose name has made so much
noise in the world, casts at your feet the Trophies of Germany, and, having
defeated Tilly, broken the Fortune of Spain, and the forces of the Empire,
comes to submit himself to yours. Amidst the acclamations of joy and Victory,
which my ears have been so long accustomed to, I have not heard any thing so
pleasant as the report of your good inclinations for me; which I had no sooner
understood, but I changed all my designs, and directed to you alone that
Ambition, which aimed at the whole earth. This is so far from abating any thing
of my designs, that it elevates them; for the earth has its limits, and the
desire of being absolute master of it, has fallen into other souls besides
mine. But that Mind, which all admire in you, and which is immeasurable and
incomprehensible; that Heart which is so far above Crowns and Scepters, and
those Attractions, whereby you command all Wills, are infinite Treasures, to
which none but my self durst ever pretend; and those who wished worlds, were
more moderate in their wishes then I. But if mine prove effectual, and that
Fortune, which makes me every where victorious, attend me into your presence, I
shall contemn Alexander and all his Conquests, and acknowledge, that those who
have commanded all mankind have not had an Empire of so vast an extent as mine.
I should tell you more, Madam, but I am just now going to give battle to the
^mperial Army, and some six hours after I intend to tak Nuremburg. I am

Madam, Your most passionate Servant, GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS.

To the same. LETTER. IX.
MADAM,
ALL the inventions you have furnished me with for my diversion, have proved
ineffectual in this Country, and the more rational your advices seem to me, the
less reason I find to take any heart, since they are only my remembrancers,
that I can no more hear a person, whose discourses are so excellent. All those
I converse with here, tell me the place is pleasant enough; and there is not
one of the quality of a Monsieur who has not a Highness, much more a Princess
to entertain. But how gallant soever the Court of Lorrain may be, I find my
self as much alone, as I was eight months since in my Travels through La
Because; and I remember I have met better company in the streets at Paris, then
I have in the Datchesse's Chamber. I know not whether it may be an effect of
the Spleen, which I have for some time, been extremely troubled with, but am of
opinion, there are not any more conversable persons in the world then those I
met in the last journey I had the honor to make with you; and I should be
infinitely more pleased with the entertainment of Monsieur -- then with that of
the Duchess of -- The melancholy which has fastened it self on my heart and
eyes makes all faces seem to me as if I saw them through the fume of
Aqua-vitae, and I perceive not any thing which carries not a certain frightning
with it. Those hours, which my Lord Marquess calls the hours of digestion,
last with me from morning to evening, and I am become so ill company, that
Monsieur de Chaudebonne is somewhat vexed at it, nay to speak truly, takes it
very ill. But I have made my peace with him, with a promise that he shall hear
me speak one of these days two hours together, and that I will entertain him
with a history more pleasant then that of Heliodorus, and that done by a
greater Beauty then Cariclea. You may easily judge, Madam, that my promise can
aim at no other then that of Zelida and A cidalis; for there is not any other
in the world, whereof it might be said. What stupidity soever I am arrived to,
fear not I shall put her to any loss of Beauty in the relation; for amidst all
my misfortunes, I have still preserved my memory sound and entire, and doubt
not but I shall find it faithful, were it only for your sake, since you are as
much concerned in it as any, and that I am, much beyond what I can express,

Madam, Yours, etc

To Mademoiselle de Burbon. LETTER. X.
MADAM,
UPon Friday in the afternoon, I was tess'd in a blanket, because I had not
made you laugh in the time assigned me to do it, according to the sentence of
Madam de Rambouillet, upon the motions of the Lady her Daughter, and the Lady
Paulet. They had once put off the execution till the return of Madam la
Princess and yours, but they have since resolved not to delay it any longer,
out of a consideration that punishments ought not to be referred to a season
that should be absolutely consecrated to joy. It was to little purpose for me
to cry out, or to resist; the blanket was brought, and four of the strongest
could be met with, were chosen to do the business. All that I can tell you,
Madam, is, that never was any man so high as I was, nor could I ever have
believed Fortune should ever have exalted me so much. Every toss sent me out
of their sight, even beyond the Soarings of Eagles. The Mountains I saw
infinitely below me, and could observe the winds and the clouds traveling
under my feet, I discovered countries which I had never seen before, and Seas
which had never come into my imagination. There cannot be any thing of greater
diversion, then to see so many things at a time, and to take a survey of one
half of the earth at one sight. But I assure you, Madam, that all this cannot
be seen without disturbance, when a man is in the air, and is certain to fall
down again. One thing I was extremely frightened at, was, that when I was
gotten up very high, and looked downwards, the Blanket seemed to me so little,
that I thought it impossible I should ever fall back into it, and this I must
confess put me into some disorder. But among so many several objects, as at
the same time entertained my eyes, there was one which for some minutes put me
out of all fear, and found me a m^re then imaginary pleasure. And that is,
Madam, that desirous to look toward Piedmont to see what was done there, I saw
you at Lions just as you were crossing the Saone. At last, I perceived on the
water a great light, encompassed with an infinity of beams, such as are those
of the greatest Beauty in the World, I could not well discern who was with you,
by reason that at that time my head was downwards, so that I believe you saw me
not your self, for you looked another way. I made signs to you as much as I
could, but as you were going to lift up your eyes, I fell down still, and one
of the tops of the Mountain Tarara deprived me of your sight. I was no sooner
got down, but I would needs give them an account of you, assuring them I had
seen you, whereat breaking into a laughter, as if I had told a thing absolutely
impossible, they began to make me dance up more nimbly then before. There
happened one strange accident, such as will seem, to those who saw it not,
incredible; in one toss which they gave me, as I came down again, I fell into a
cloud, which being very thick, and I extremely light, I was for a good while
entangled in it, and could not get out so that they below were at a loss for a
long time, stretching the Blanket, and looking up to the skies, not able to
imagine what was become of me. By good fortune there was not any wind stirring,
for if there had, the cloud passing along would have carried me some^way or
other aside, and consequently I had fallen to the ground, which could not have
hapened, but I must needs hurt my self very much. But there fell out afterward
a much more dangerous accident, the last cast they gave me into the air, I fell
amongst a flight of Cranes, who at first sight were amazed to see me so high,
but coming nearer, they took me for a Pigmey, with whom, as you know, Madam,
they have carried on a war from the beginning of the world, and thought I was
sent as a spy to see what they did in the middle Region of the air. They fell
upon me pell-mell, pecking at me as fast as they could, and that so violently,
that I thought my self stabbed in a hundred places with Ponyards; and one of
them, having fastened on my Leg, pursued me so importunately, that it let me
not alone till I was fallen into the blanket. This put my persecutors into a
certain fear of returning me to the mercy of my Enemies; for there was an
infinite number of them got together, that hung still in the air, expecting I
should be sent among them. They carried me therefore to my Lodging in the same
blanket, so bruised that it was impossible I could be more. And to deal
ingenuously, this exercise is somevvhat violent for a man of so much weakness
as I am, You may judge, Madam, what Tyranny there was in this action, and how
great reason you have to disallovv it, and to be free with you, since you are
borne with such endovvments as dispose you to command, it concerns you in time
to accustom your self to hate injustice, and to take the oppressed into your
protection. It is therefore my humble suit, Madam, that you would declare this
manner of proceeding illegal, and such as you must disapprove; and for
reparation of my Honor and strength, to order that a large Canopy be set up
for me in the blevv-Chamber at Rambouillet-House, where I may be attended and
treated magnificently for eight days, by the two young Ladies, who have been
the cause of all my misfortune, and that at one corner of the chamber, there
shall be Svveetmeats made, that one of them shall constantly blovv the fire,
the other shall not do any thing but put Syrup upon plates to cool it, and
bring me of it, as often as I shall call for it. Thus, Madam, shall you do an
act of Justice worthy so great and so excellent a Princess as you are, and I
shall be obliged with more respect and reality then any man in the World, to
be,

Madam, Yours, etc.

To my Lord Cardinal De la Vallette. LETTER. XI.
My LORD,
I Am now satisfied that the ancient Cardinals assume a great authority, in
comparison of such as are but lately admitted to the dignity, since that though
I have written diverse times to you, and not received any thing from you, you
yet quarrel at my sloth. But in the mean time I meet with so many persons of
good quality, who tell me, that you honor me too much in the remembrances you
are pleased to afford me, and that accordingly I am obliged to write to you,
and send you my most humble thanks, that I am resolved to follow their advice,
not minding any concernment of my own therein.

Be pleased then to know, my Lord, that six days after the Eclipse, and
fifteen days after my death, Madam La Princess, Madam de Burbon, Madam du
Vigcan, Madam Aubry, Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, Mademoiselle Paulet, Monsieur
de Chaudebonne and my self, left Paris about six of the Clock in the evening,
to go to La Bar, where Madam du Vigean was to entertain Madam la Princess at
a Collation. We met not with any thing by the way worth the observation, save
that at Ormessan, we saw a Dog, which came to the boot of the Coach, and fawned
upon me. You may be pleased to take notice my Lord, that, as often as I say, we
met, we saw, we went, etc. I speak in the quality of a Cardinal. From thence we
arrived at la Bar, and came into a Hall strewn all over with Roses and
Flowers of Oranges. The Princess much admiring that piece of magnificence,
would needs visit the walks, in the interim between that and supper-time. The
Sun was then setting in a cloud of Gold and Azure, and scattered no more of his
beams, then would suffice to shed a pleasant and gentle light; the Air had
dismissed all wind and heat, and Heaven and Earth, in a certain competition to
Madam du Vigean, would needs entertain the noblest Princess in the world.
Having passed through a spacious Court, and large Gardens full of Orange Trees,
she came into a wood, into which, Day had not been admitted for a hundred
years, till that hour that it came in along with her. At the end of a spacious
walk, as far as we could see, we found a Spring, which alone, was guilty of a
greater liberality of water, then all those of Tivoli. About it were disposed
four and twenty Violins, which had much ado to drown the noise which the
falling of the waters made. Being come near it, we discovered in a hollow Seat,
which was within a Palisado of fruit trees, a Diana about the age of eleven or
twelve years, and more beautiful then the Forests of Greece and Thessaly had
ever seen her. She carried her Bow and Arrows in her eyes, and had about her
all the Beams of her brother. In another Seat not far from it, there was one of
her Nymphs, handsome and gentile enough to be of her retinue; those who give not
much credit to Fables, thought them to be Mademoiselle de Burbon, and the
Virgin Prianda, and indeed they were very much like them. All the company stood
in a profound silence, as admiring so many objects, which at the same time
charmed both eyes and ears, when on a sudden the Goddess, issues out of her
Seat, and with a grace, beyond all representation, began a Bal, which lasted
for some time about the Spring. What is most remarkable, my Lord, is, that,
amidst so much pleasure, which should absolutely take up and surprise the minds
of those engaged therein: there wanted not remembrances of you, and it was the
general acknowledgment of all, That there was something defective to so great
enjoyments, in that you and Madam de Rambouillet were not there. Whereupon I
took a Harp, and sung.

Pues quiso me suerte dura,
Que falt ando mi Sennor
Tambien faltasse mi dama,
And went through the rest so melodiously and so mournfully, that there was not
one in the company, who shed not abundance of tears; and this had lasted a long
time, had not the Violins suddenly struck up a Saraband so full of life, that
all rise up as jocund as if nothing had been, and so leaping, dancing,
vaulting, turning, and tumbling, we came into the house, where we found a Table
so well furnished, as if it had been served in by Fairies. This, my Lord, is
such a circumstance of the adventure, as cannot be described, and certainly
there are no colors or Figures in Rhetoric, can represent six Bisques, which
were the first entertainment of our eyes. But this was particularly remarkable,
that there being only Goddesses at the Table, and two Demigods, that is to
say, Monsieur de Chaudebonne and my self, they all fed, and that neither more,
nor less heartily, then if they had been really mortal. And indeed, to say
truth, never was there a handsomer service, and among other things, there were
twelve sorts of F^esh, so disguised, no man ever heard any talk of, and whereof
the very name is yet to be learned. This particularity, my Lord, has
unfortunately come to the ears of the Marshal of Saint -- Lady, who, though she
had given her twenty drams of Opium more then ordinary, yet could never sleep
since. At the beginning of Supper we had not your health up, as being otherwise
very merry, and at the end there was no more done, by reason, as I think, it
was not thought on. You must not, my Lord, expect that I should flatter you,
but that, as a faithful Historian, I give you a true account of what past; for
I would not have posterity misapprehend one thing for another, and that some
two thousand years hence it should be believed your health was drunk to, when
there was no such thing. Yet dare I not but do truth this right, that it was
not for want of remembrances of you, for all Supper-time, there was much
discourse of you, and the Ladies wis^^'d you there, some of them very heartily,
or I am much mistaken. At the rising from Table the noise of the Violins drew
up the company into an upper chamber, which was so well enlightened, that the
day, which was gone from above the earth, seemed to be wholly retired thither.
Here the Bal was reassumed in better order and more handsomely, then it had
been about the Spring, and that which was of greatest magnificence in it, was,
my Lord, that I danced my self. Mademoiselle de Bourbon was indeed of opinion,
and that justly, that I did not dance well, but that I was a good Fencer,
because that at the end of every cadence, I seemed to put my self into a
posture of defense. The Bal continued with much pleasure; when on a sudden, a
great noise was heard without, which obliged all the Ladies to look out at the
windows; and there issued out of a great wood, which was about three hundred
paces from the house, such a number of Fireworks, that all the boughs and
bodies of the trees seemed to have been turned into crackers, that the Stars
were falling out of Heaven, and that the Sphere of fire were to take possession
of the middle region of the Air. These three Hyperboles, my Lord, well prized,
and reduced to just value of things, are worth three dozen of crackers. When
all were recovered out of the astonishment, whereinto this accident had put
them, it was resolved we should depart, and we took our way toward Paris, by
the light of twenty Torches. Having crossed over the quarter of Ormesson, and
the great Plains of Espinay, we passed without any opposition through the midst
of St. Denis's. Sitting in the Coach immediately next to Madam -- I repeated to
her in your behalf, a whole Miserere, whereto she answered with much courtesy
and civility. We sung by the way, abundance of Scavans, Petits-doigts,
Bonsoirs, and Bon-Bretons. By that time we were got a League beyond St.
Denis's, it was two of the clock in the morning: the trouble of the journey,
watching, and the exercise of the Bal, had made me extremely heavy; when there
happens an accident, which I thought would have proved my final destruction.
There is a little Village between Paris and Sr. Denis's called La Villette, at
the end whereof we met three Coaches, in which were gotten the Violins, whom we
had entertained all the day before. Take then, my Lord, the strange accident
that happened; the Devil would needs put it into the mind of Mademoiselle -- to
give order they should follow us, that we might spend the whole night in
Serenades. This proposition made my hair stand upright, and yet it was seconded
by all the rest. The Coaches were stayed, and the order sent them what they
should do; but, as good fortune would have it, the Rascals had left their
Instruments at La Bar, for which Heaven reward them. Hence, my Lord, you may
easily judge, that Mademoiselle -- is as dangerous a Lady for the night as any
in the world, and that I had much reason to say at Madam -- there was a
necessity of sending away the Music, otherwise that it was in vain to
entertain any thoughts of a departure. We kept on our way without any
disturbance, till that, entering the Suburbs, we met six lusty Plaisterers, who
being stark naked, passed by the Coach wherein we were. At last we got into
Paris, and what I am now going to tell you, is more dreadful then all the rest:
We found the whole City covered with a horrid obscurity, and whereas we had
left it about seven hours before full of noise, Men, Horses, and Coaches, we
now meet with a general silence, and a frightful solitude; the Streets being so
dis-peopled, that they could not afford one man, only we saw another sort of
Creatures which at the light of the Torches hid themselves. But my, Lord, for
the rest of this adventure, you shall have it another time;

Qui el fin del Canto, a torno ad Orlendo,
Adio Signor, a voi mi raccommando.
To Mademoiselle Paulet. LETTER XII.
MADAM,
THere were never certainly any Enchantments so strong as yours; and all those
Magicians, who have made use of Images of wax, have not known so strange
effects as you have: That which you have sent, has caused amazement in all
those that have seen it; and, what is much more to be admired, and which I
think beyond all the power of Magic, it has raised in the Marchioness of
Rambouillet a Love, and in me a Joy, the very day of your departure. I cannot
apprehend how that could happen to you. But the Letter and Present which came
from you, made me forget all my misfortunes, and I received the little Europa
with as much satisfaction as if I had been presented with that which makes one
of the three parts of the world, and which is divided into diverse Kingdoms.
And indeed it is of greater value, since it is like you; and upon that account
my Lady Marchioness took it away from me by force, and swore by Styx, it should
never come out of her Cabinet. Thus has Europa been raivsh'd a second time,
but much more gloriously, (in my opininion) then when she was carried away by
Jupiter. It Is true, that by way of satisfaction, I have received two Dogs,
which have snouts so long, that, in my judgment, they are worth a Gentlewoman;
and I know not whether there be any one in Paris, for whom I should part with
them: Nor indeed, the humor I am in, considered, ought I to converse any
longer with rational Creatures; and in the despair I am in, I should wish my
self in a desert, within the paws of the most cruel Lions; though I said, there
should nothing be loved but Dogs. Be you then pleased, who have made them so
gallant, to make them also grateful; and that they may bestow some remembrances
on me, since I honor them above any one in the world, and am,

Madam, Yours, etc

To Madam du Vigean, with an Elegy he had made for her, and which she had often
demanded of him. LETTER XIII.
MADAM,
I send you herewith the Elegy which you have but too often demanded of me, and
which heretofore has indeed been heard by diverse, but till now has not been
read by any. It should be my wish the same fortune might in this happen to me
as has befell you; who, after you have for so long time concealed the noblest
things in the world, have, in the discovery of it, dazzl'd all those that have
seen it. But it is an overgreat fondness of my own Verses, to wish them that
advantage, nor indeed should I wish them better, since they were not made for
you: If you think them very ill, you are so much the more obliged to me for
them, in that knowing it as well as you, yet I have not forborne to send them
you. And, to deal freely with you, to prevail with me to do it, a lesser power
then what you have within these few days gained upon me would not have been
sufficient: And without your command Madam, they had never known any other
place then that of my Memory. But it is high time it were delivered of them, to
make room for something more delightful, and that which Mademoiselle --
afforded me the sight of, the other day, fills it so much at present, that I
doubt whether there be place for any thing else. I perceive, Madam, that where
it was my design to send you a Letter of excuse and complement, I am fallen
into one of Love; but I wish all the other defects you shall find in it, were
as pardonable as that. In the mean time let me assure you, that I have not of a
long time been so engaged, and that there are a many in the world to whom I
would not say so much, even though they held a Dagger at my Throat. But since
there is no fear of any scandal, you are obliged, Madam, at least in my
opinion, to look favorably on those Elements of affection, were it but to see,
how I should behave my self, if I should fall in Love; and, if I were
permitted, what might be the consequence of it.

To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, upon the death of her second Brother, who died
of the Plague, and whom she attended during his sickness. LETTER XIV.
MADAM,
HAving no less admiration for your courage and good Nature, then Sympathy with
your grief; I am so highly sensible of both the one and the other, that if I
were capable to render you those commendations which are justly due to you, and
that comfort whereof you stand in need, I must confess I should be much
troubled where to begin; for what obligations can be more equally enforcing,
then to render to so eminent a Virtue the honor it merits, and to so violent
affliction the comfort it requires? But I am to blame to put a distance between
these two things; since Charity has so perfectly united them, that the
incomprehensible assistance you afforded your late Brother, should now prove an
extraordinary comfort to you, and God bestow that on you out of Justice, which
others obtain out of his indulgence; his infinite Goodness being such as will
not suffer unrewarded so exemplary an act of tenderness, as what, through a
contempt of your own life, engaged you in the offices of the best Sister of the
world, beyond the limits of all obligations; and by an admirable constancy,
made you assured amidst a danger that terrifies the most daring. Upon this
account am I confident that he will preserve you from it, and will shower on
you, as a reward of your Virtue, the blessings are wished you by

Madam, Yours, etc

To the Lady Marchioness of Sable. LETTER XV.
MADAM,
I Know no better way to ease you, as to the bad news you have already
received, then to put you into a fear for your self. Know then that I who write
this to you, have been three days together in a house, out of which two persons
died of the plague. The best thing you ever did, was to leave Paris, since it
was the time that all the Virtuous were to expect persecution. Madam de
Rambouillet has lost her Grandson, who in three days made a shift to dye of
the plague, yet would she not hear of leaving the House while there was any
life in him. You may easily think, Madam, that nothing could divert me from
being constantly among them, since you were not here: But I am afraid I
frighten you too much, and that the Remedy I apply to your affliction is too
violent for the Disease. Know then, that I who write unto you, am not the
writer hereof, but have sent this Letter twenty Leagues from this place, to be
coppy'd out by a man I never saw. I think my self very much concerned, Madam,
in the trouble now lies upon you, and apprehend that this disaster could not
have happened in a more unfortunate time; yet the moderation I know your mind
subject to, and the dis-care you have for the things of this world, raises in
me a hope that you have a better pennyworth of this affliction then any other
would, and that the Loss of fifty thousand Livers, per annum, now gone from
your House, whereat some other more interress'd then your self, would be more
then ordinarily disordered, will cause in you an affliction not exceeding
mediocrity. But, Madam, I must not, by a consolatory Letter, think to answer
the most obliging Love-Letter in the world; for the latter part of yours cannot
be termed otherwise. My humble Suit therefore, Madam, is, That you would not
repent you of your writing so favorably to me as you have, for amidst all my
discontents, I have entertained that joy with as much resentment, as if I had
known the greatest serenity in the world, and I cannot conceive my self
unhappy, while I have the honor of your affection. I am so fortunate, and so
confident, that I am not in the least doubt of it; and my good fortune is great
in this, that I esteem that the greatest good of this world, which I conceive
my self most assuredly possessed of. You are so well satisfied with me, Madam,
that I know you will more favorably receive those assurances which I express
of your affection, then those I might give you of mine; and though you wish my
happiness in all things, yet can you not desire any thing more advantageous for
me, then that I should believe you love me; and those who have seen what
alteration your absence has wrought in me; and how great a part of my mind you
have carried away with you, may one day satisfy you, that I, in some measure,
deserve that honor. But Madam, I cannot forbear to tell you, that Monsieur Le
Maistre, who saw with what tenderness I bade you adieu, will be confirmed in
his former opinion, and hopes one day to find our Characters engraved together
upon the Tree of Bourgon; at least, it is no small joy to me, that he has
observed the acknowledgment, and reciprocality of our affection. For my part,
Madam, I once more tell you what I so much pressed upon your faith at your
departure, which is, that I shall not esteem or effect any thing in this world
as much as I do you, and shall ever, with all manner of respect, remain,

Madam, Yours, etc

To Mademoiselle de Chalais
MADAM,
IT was not my design, to put you into any danger, no more then my Lady, by
forcing you to the reading of this Letter; but I believe that those who have
taken off the tincture of Gold, cannot be prejudiced by any infectious Air. For
my part, I take every morning thirty grains of Antimony, and fix eyes of the
fish you wot of. With this Antidote I can go any where without danger. Be you
pleased to continue me the honor of your affection; for if it fail me, I shall
take my Antimony without preparation. I am, Madam, most sincerely,

Yours, etc

To the Same. LETTER. XVI.
MADAM,
I have with your Letter received, the greatest joy I met with, since your
departure hence. If you please to call to mind with how much ingenuity and
Friendship, all the Letters you do me the honor to direct to me, are written,
you will no longer doubt of it; and you would discard the opinion you are in as
to my negligence, if Fortune had not pleased, the last I writ to you should
miscarry. It Is a miscarriage you should be the more sensible of, in regard
there was one enclosed from Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. She entreats you to
satisfy your self from Madam de St. Amand, to whom it was directed, what is
become of it; for she is much troubled, by reason of diverse things she writ to
you about. But for my part, Madam, assure your self I take so much delight in
writing to you, that I take not much more in being idle. And my Letters are the
productions of so sincere an affection, that if you judge aright, you will
esteem them much beyond those which you are so importunate for. Those were only
the issue of my invention, these of my heart, those I was at some charge at,
these extremely divert me. Should I not have troubled you a little, Madam, if I
had repeated these and those five or six times more, and would you not have
been surpised at the novelty of the style? I thought to have done it, merely
to see what you would have said, but since you are not here, I am in no great
inclination to laugh, and I should have been gone hence long since, if a
certain change of my affairs had not detayn'd me. My sloth is born under the
most fortunate constellation that may be, it never wants some pretense or other
to avoid the doing of what it has no mind to do, and I have put off my
departure from one week to another, yet it is no fault of mine, that I am here
still. I believe, Madam, you will not think this strange, since you would have
staid here till now, had not the Chariot of the Post House forced you hence.
But I am resolved to snatch my self out of Paris within ten or twelve days, and
I conceive I shall find no great difficulty in it. At least, the greatest
inducement I had to stay here, was taken away the day of your departure; and if
any thing could at the present enforce me thereto, it should be Madam, and
Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, who tell me every day that I should be gone. I can
assure you, Madam, without any violence done to the sincerity I owe you, that
you are loved by these two Ladies, as much as you can desire, and I hear them
daily discourse of you with so much tenderness, that one of those things I so
much at this present esteem in them, is the affection they bear you. Be
therefore as much assured of them, as of me, and place not their Friendship
among those Goods which you may lose. I am extremely glad that you have
satisfied some others who are not of this nature, and that you have taken that
order in your affairs that you desired. I return you my most humble thanks,
that among your own you have had a careful reflection on mine. The indifference
I am guilty of as to that particular, bespeaks a necessity of knowing what I
should do, so as I durst not disobey, and that I should entertain the advice of
a person, whose counsels are commands. That about which I was so much troubled,
and was the cause of my stay, is in a better condition then I could have hoped,
and I doubt not but we shall take some order in it, by the advance of a certain
sum of money. But I shall think my self well out of the Briars, if I escape so:
Besides Madam, I shall henceforth be the less troubled for wealth, now that I
am assured you will not want any. If it come to the worst, the Secrets I know
in Physic and Chemistry, may prevail with you to afford me a retreat, and to
cloth me like a Gentleman, when you shall think fit I should usher you. You
were very much in the right, when you thought I should want your recommendation
to Mademoiselle d'Atichi, and I humbly entreat you, Madam, to write to her in
my behalf. I have seen her but once since your departure. That with what
Monsieur Nerti shall be able to acquaint her with, will, I hope, satisfy her,
that you recommend unto her a person you look not indifferently on, and one,
whom you have found so faithful, as to have deserved that good office from you.
If she believe it, I conceive, Madam, that she will think better of it, then of
many other things; for there is nothing more certain (pardon me, Madam, if I
speak it not with respect enough) then, that I love you beyond any thing this
world affords, and with all sincerity, am,

Madam, Yours, etc

To the Same. LETTER. XVII.
MADAM,
THe beginning of your Letter gives me occasion to admire your Judgment, for I
must acknowledge you have been more apprehensive of a resentment, which lay
dormant in my heart, then I was my self. Me thought I was extreme earnest to
depart: but what pleasure soever it may be to me to hear from you, yet I must
confess that when I saw Robin, I was somewhat at a loss to think I had no
pretense for any longer stay, and I think I should have been content to wait
seven or eight days for that joy. However, Madam, I cannot have been so far
surpised, but I should easily recover my self, through the care you are
pleased to have of me, and I am extremely satisfied, to see that you have
written more Letters for me in one night, then you have done in four years for
Madam Desloges and Madam D'aubigni.

It is questionless, the greatest expression or affection may be expected from
you, especially if I consider the circumstances wherein you write to me, and I
must no longer doubt, that you will direct all things to the advancement of my
Fortune, since you contribute thereto your own pains, I acknowledge it, Madam,
with such a heart as you know I have, and besides the great satisfaction it
affords me, as to my own particular, I think it a far greater, to find you as
generous and as noble a friend as I have ever wished you. And I am to profess
to you, I am so far at rest, as to that part of my Fortune, that I am afraid I
shall neglect it in others things, and shall slight the friendships of Queens,
whenever I shall think my self assured of yours. Be not therefore, I shall
entreat you, Madam, the least troubled at what you have done for me, or what
may be the issue of it, nor what effect your Letters may have; but if you have
written any, either for my advantage or reputation, assure your self they have
proved as effectual, as you could have wished. I shall not fail to observe the
order you have given me for the delivery of them. For the rest you have done
very well to excuse the style, for, not to dissemble with you, that jargon of
Marfisa, Merlin, and Alexis, is to me insupportable. And yet I cannot amidst
all this, but observe abundance of wit, and a strange vivacitty, but above all,
an extraordinary inclination to do me some favor. I am extremely pleased at
what you tell Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, that if they be not more careful, I
shall go into Flanders, as if I went to Vaugirard; and in my judgment, that
very word is worth a good Letter. It Is very true Madam, that had they not been
so careful as to give me notice of it, I had gone with the Messenger of
Brussels. And to deal truly with you, I go this journey with so much regret,
that I cannot imagine I should fear to be taken; and were it not for Madam -- I
should be content to pass the rest of the Winter in a chamber in the Bastille,
so that it may be allowed good fires. The -- is absolutely ruined; Monsieur --
has for these four months past, professed a strict friendship with him, and
Monsieur de Bellegarde: you may easily judge, Madam, he will never be the better
for it, no more then I. Mademoiselle d'Atichi has promised me wonders, and
that with so much affection, as you could have done your self. I acknowledge I
have not deserved so much at her hands, and know not whether I ever shall;
assure your self of Madam de Villeroy, and be not troubled for any thing else,
I have received all your instructions, and shall observe them. Madam and
Mademoiselle de Rambouillet have an infinite affection for you. I bid you
farewell Madam, with the tears in my eyes, and assure you, I love you
proportionably to your merits, and much beyond your imaginations.

To the same. LETTER XVIII.
MADAM,
TO deal freely with you, It is an impardonable ingratitude in you not to have
taken the pains to send me some Answer, and to be more slothful then I am,
speaks a sloth absolutely insupportable. What fair pretenses soever I made a
shift to find for my not writing to you for six Months together; yet have I
not dismissed Robin, without something to assure you, That notwithstanding all
that, I am more yours then ever. But it is certain, Madam, that you cannot
loose me, be as careless of me as you please. I could sometimes heartily wish,
that I might, with Mademoiselle de Chalais, deliver my self out of your
service, and there are not here awanting those who would endeavor to convey me
away, but I cannot consent thereto; and me thinks, that to save my self in that
manner were the only way to lose my self. Madam de Rambouillet has commanded
me to tell you, that out of a belief you may want an able and discreet person
to supply her place, who is gone from you, she has sent you Mademoiselle --
who by good fortune had not been entertained any where; she hopes you will
receive her as a person she has chosen for you, and accordingly has dismissed
her two days since. I should not have written so confidently if I had not been
commanded; for, believe me, Madam, my heart is too too sensible of your
indifference for me; be pleased to cure it of that disorder, for I assure you
it is all your own. I am,

Madam, Yours, etc.

To the same. LETTER XIX.
MADAM,
IF you concern not your self in my content nor my quiet, yet at least be not
so negligent of my fortune. I am upon the point of my departure, which yet I
must put off till I hear from you. I fear me, that the Letters you have sent me
bear too old a date; if you have not broke off all correspondence in that
Country; I believe it were much to my advantage that you gave me others, or
took some occasion to speak in my behalf, if you think fit. But if otherwise,
it will be but necessary that you speak for your self, and that by your Letters
you renew the assurance of your fidelity and service. And that, Madam, will
prove a continual kind of recommendation for me. I humbly beseech you to send
to me with all possible diligence, for there is not any thing else stays my
departure. I bid you Adieu, Madam, with so great affection, and so much
tenderness, that it were much more dangerous that Nerli should see this then
the other, and assure your self I am much more troubled to live at a distance
from you, then to quit the Ladies I leave here. Thus, Madam, are you more
considerable with me then all the world besides, and if you knew after what
manner it is, you would be satisfied with it, though nothing but whole hearts
will content you. I tell you this with as much sincerity, as if they were my
last dying words: Never shall I love, honor, or esteem any other person, as
much as I do you, as resolved, at all times, and in all places, to be,

Madam, Yours, etc

To Mademoiselle de Paulet. LETTER XX.
MADAM,
I Return you my most humble thanks that you quarrel not at me, and withal
assure you that you have as little reason to abstain at any one in the world. I
am extremely surpised at what you tell me, that those who honor me with their
affection, quarrel at my sloth, when they themselves are so far guilty of it,
that they employ others to reproach me with it. The condition I am in
considered, it were much more rational to send me Consolatories then
complaints, and it seldom happens that the persecuted, the banished, and such
as are sequestered, find others sport. When I say so, I shall entreat you not
to think that I mean any thing against that excellent Person, whose excess of
merit, and want of health, exempt her from all obligations of this nature. But
those whose business is to complement, and only to exercise their wits, are
not, in my judgment, to be pardoned, the neglect of doing me that honor. I
assure you there never was any sadness comparable to mine, and if I durst write
pittyful Letters, I could tell you things would make your heart burst: But to
say truth, I shall be glad it should remain whole, and should much fear that,
if it were once in two, it would be shared away in my absence. You see how well
I can apply those ingenuous things I hear spoken; but Madam, it concerns you,
(from whom I have this, since I forget not any handsome expression of yours not
in two years after I have heard it) to send me some, since I can so well make
my advantage thereof, and send me some words which I may think my self obliged
to remember as long as I have those: All I have ever seen from your departure
till now, is so indifferent that it has not taken away any thing of my
affliction; and therefore I would entreat you to send me some thing of greater
virtue, since you can furnish others with as much as you please. Otherwise I
shall believe the precipitate reconciliation which was made so suddenly before
my departure, was feigned, and that there was not any thing of sincerity in
you, but what signifies your coldness, and your indifference. I leave it to you
to judge whether it is possible I can live with this imagination, and whether
you are not the most ill-natured in the world, if you put me into that danger.
I beseech you therefore to be more careful of me, for you are more then
ordinarily obliged to be so, since it is certain I am, more then ever,

Madam, Yours, etc.
When I had written this Letter, me thought it contained five or six Drams of
Love, but it is so long since I have so much as made mention of Him, that I
could not abstain; besides that, I am of so small a bulk, that you know there
is fear of me. On the other side, the Person you speak of, has been dead long
since, it remains only that he should be buried, but he is let alone through
negligence.



To the Same. LETTER XXI.
MADAM,
I was extremely happy to receive your Letter before I left Brussels and with
it so much comfort on the very Eve of my departure. Since that, I have known no
disturbance though I have had much pain; for I would not have it said, That a
man, for whom you are pleased to have any providence, can be unhapy, and should
be ashamed Fortune had a greater influence over me then you. I have Traveled
twelve days without any resting from morning till night; I have passed through
Countries where Wheat is a rare Plant, and where Apples are preserved with as
much tenderness as Oranges in France. I have come into places, where the most
aged cannot remember they ever saw a Bed; and for my Recreation, I am at this
present in an Army where the stoutest are wearied out: And yet I live still,
and do not find any one in better health then my self. I know not what to
attribute such an extradinary strength of constitution too, unless to the power
of your Letter; and me thinks I am like those men who do things more then
humane after they have swallowed certain Characters: As Soon as I came, I got my
self, by the favor of Monsieur de Chaudebonne' Listed in a Troop of Tories;
and I dare tell you, Madam, and that without vanity, that I behave my self as
gallantly as any of them. Nevertheless, I have not as yet ravished any Wife or
Maid' as having not yet shaken off the weariness of my Journey, nor recovered
my full strength, and all I could do was to set three or four Houses on fire;
but I grow stronger and stronger every day, and am resolute beyond all faith.
To be serious with you, I am quite another man then you have known me, and he
should not escape my clutches now, who heretofore might easily give me the
slip. And yet I believe, how mischiefous soever I make my self, you do not
conclude I am become such, and that you think I am not much to be feared;
especially by you, Madam, since you know you have absolute power over me, and
that I am most Cordially,

Madam, Yours, etc.
At my departure from Brussels, I sent to him that was to bring you this
Letter, certain Pictures; and I entreated him to leave them with you, and I
humbly beseech you to direct them to the Person to whom you conceive I send
them, and tell her that they are a Parcel of my Plunder; and that I send her
that in part of what I lost to her at Moure.


June 27. From the Port Igoin, upon the Loire, which we are now going to cross.
To the Same. LETTER XXII.
MADAM,
YOu should hear from me oftener, were it in my power; but ordinarily we come
into places where any thing is more easily found then Ink and Paper; besides
that it being expected I should write with so much reserv'dness, I am at such a
loss, that I tremble when I take Pen in hand, for fear of saying too much and
endeavor what lies in my power to avoid it. Even at this present, I am almost
out of my self to write things which it were more convenient not to mention,
and such as happily you your self would not think too well of: For I remember, in
your last Letter you forbad me to speak of Love, and I must needs obey, though
with ever so much violence to my self. And yet Madam, I cannot forbear telling
you, that how strong soever the passion I have for the war may be, yet I have
another that is much more prevalent in me, and am not ignorant that our first
inclinations are ever the most predominant. We meet nothing that opposes us, we
make daily nearer approaches to the Country of Musk-millions, Figs, and
Muscadine-Grapes; and we go to fight in places, where we shall not gather
Palms, but what are mingled with Flowers of Oranges and Pomgranates; but I
assure you I should willingly quit my part of our Victories, for the hononr of
being at this present at your feet, and that I shall not so much esteem the
Title of a Conqueror, as that of,

Madam, Your Slave, etc.

To Madimoiselle de Rambouillet. LETTER XXIII.
MADAM,
I am very far from having any thing to object against your Prudence, since it
is accompanied with so much Goodness, and that it is not less employed for the
advantage of others then your own. I must confess I should have been very much
troubled to be the first unfortunate man that you should have given over for
such, and that you should have exercised on me the apprentiship of that
dis-compassionate Virtue which never yet could claim any acquaintance with your
Generosity. And whereas those actions which are not performed without danger
are of greater esteem then others, it cannot be expected there should be always
security for doing well, and you are, Madam, in my opinion, particularly
obliged to be tender of the unfortunate, since that to change their condition
you need apply nothing but words. Those I have had the honor to receive from
you, have wrought on me the effect you could imagine, in so much that I have
not since known any affliction save that of being unable to express the
resentment I have of them. There is nothing so certain, Madam, as that when you
are pleased not to be cross, you are the most accomplished person in the world;
and Goodness, which is so delightful wherever it is found, is much more
adorable in you, where it is better attended then ever it was in any one. You
had long ere this met with my most humble thanks for what you are pleased to
have for me if I had had the feast favorable opportunity to send them you: and
I put this Letter into the hands of Fortune as a forlorn, though I perceive not
how it shall pass through so many difficulties and fires, wherewith we are
encompassed. And yet I believe it will not be so unhappy as to miss you, merely
because it is directed to you, and that you must needs receive it through the
assistance of that good fortune, which you say you have in things of small
consequence: I should here take occasion to acquaint you with diverse that are
of great, and which I could wish within your knowledge; but I conceive it is
your desire I should be discreet as well as your self, and that I should not
write any thing, that mightlye open to censure. In the mean time, though we are
of contrary parties, I suppose I may affirm, without any crime, there is not
any one of ours whom I would so readily follow as I should you, and that I
shall be while I live, with all manner of respect, and sincere esteem,

Madam, Yours, etc

To Mademoiselle Paulet. LETTER. XXIIII.
MADAM,
IT concerns me much more then you, that the accomodations you had sent me,
should not fall into other hands then my own. Of all the Goods I have left me,
there are none I am more unwilling to part with, then those I have received
from you, and I shall easily digest the want of all the others, if I may but
enjoy those. If the Stones you have bestowed on me, are not able to break mine,
they will at least help me to bear my pain with greater patience; and me thinks
I should never complain of my cholick, since it has procured me so great a
fortune. And yet I must needs tell you, that this generosity was like to cost
you dear, and it was not improbable, that these Stones might prove so many rubs
in your way. He at whose house I sojourn, knows you honor me with your
Letters, ever since I showed him that wherein you remembered your selt to him.
He was in place, when your Letters came to my hands, and he either knowing or
guessing by the superscription, it was your hand, I acknowledged it was so. My
first curiosity was to look into a paper, which seemed much heavier then the
rest, and having opened it, I disburthen'd it of a Bracelet, the most
glittering and gallant that ever was. I cannot express the greatness of my
surprisal, to find a thing so little expected from you, and to see how
indiscr^et I had been in the first favor I had received from you. I
out-blush'd the Riband you had sent me, and he who was present, put on a
Countenance so severe, as if it had been sent me by Mademoiselle -- But having
read your Letter, I found that, what seemed to be a favor, proved a Remedy,
and that the Bracelet was not sent to a Gallant, but to a sick person. You may
say your pleasure, Madam, but me thinks I am of a very good nature, for though
I should have given all I have in the world, that you would have done a piece
of Gallantry of this nature to me, yet was I much pleased on this occasion,
that it was not any, and was very glad to be my self, less happy, that so you
might seem less censurable. So that for this time, L'Ejade has had for you an
effect which you expected not from it, and its Virtue justifyes yours, which
was accused, and in my opinion, ready to receive a severe Sentence. This
supposed, I cannot but esteem it very precious, and coming from so good a hand,
I have a great faith in it. I stood in much need of such a remedy, in a Country
where there is no other to be had, and where relief is rather to be expected
from stones then men. And if you call to mind a certain particularity, which
was told us heretofore concerning this place, you would have a greater pity for
those that have the Colic. Though you should not find out what I mean, I shall
not be much moved, for in a man that should think himself felicified, but with
a moment of your favor this discourse is not over-gallant. I shall only tell
you, Madam, that you are more then ordinarily obliged to be careful of me; For
besides your having been subject to the same infi^mity, I am to acquaint you
that at this time, mine proceeds from the same cause, and the Physicians of
Madrid give me the same advice, as we received formerly from Monsieur de la
Grange, and Monsieur de Lorine. When you were at the height of your melancholy,
you never were more solitary, more intractable, nor indeed more inhumane, then
I am here. You can hardly imagine how different my present life is, from what I
have formerly led, and you will one day be astonished, when I shall tell you,
that I have passed over eight months without speaking to any woman, without
quarrelling, without contestation, without playing, and what is more strange,
without putting on a pair of shoes. This is a very lamentable thing to relate.
I have endured a Winter more piercing then that of France, in a place, where
there are no such things as Nightgowns or Chimneys, where there is never any
fire made, unless it be for a Victory, or the birth of a Prince. Amidst this
misery, I have often wished the fire at Rambouillet-House, here, and regretted
the time, that I refused to be the Cyclops, of a much more amiable person, then
she that governs their master. There Is a great deal of Learning requisite to
understand this. But if you guess at the person I mean, I humbly crave your
pardon, Madam, to assure her hence, that I honor her with a greater passion
then ever, and that I should not quarrel at my absence, if I thought it had
wrought in her the same effect it has done in me; for, to deal sincerely with
you, it has reinforced the affection, which I ever have devoted to her
Service, and having past an Act of oblivion for all the injuries she has done
me, I can now only remember those excellent endowments, which rende her both so
amiable and admirable. However I might dissemble it in my countenance, yet had
I still a secret grudge against her, nor could I ever, till my last sickness,
be induced to forgive her, the affront she once did me in your presence, when
she thought to have murdered me with a Basin of water. ^ut now, I have changed
all desires of vengeance, into wishes to see her, to honor and to serve her;
and if there be any one in the world, that I love beyond her, it is only one,
whom she also loves beyond her self. For that other, I shall ever, in my mind
and in my esteem, reserve for her a particular place, she shall never have in
my affection, either company or competitor, no more then she has in the world:
and if the love I bear you, proceeded only from friendship, I must confess, I
should have a greater affection for her then for you. Frown not at ihis, nor
think it strange, that I avoid not in my Letters, those things you may take
offense at, since you have not that tenderness for me in yours. For what
necessity was there you should tell me that, those two persons had made such
new acquaintances, as might oblige them to forget their old friends? And to
what end must this come at the close of the most obliging Letter in the world?
If my disease could be cured like the quartane Ague, by some extraordinary
apprehension, this crossenesse might serve for something; and yet I should be
little obliged to you, when curing me of the Colic, you will needs force me
into jealousy. Be pleased therefore to endeavor my quiet as to that
particular; for, to be free with you, I am thereby so much discomposed, that e
have taken very little rest since. I was already in some inclination to that
fear; not that I any ways question the goodness of those Ladies, but I often
think what great danger there is in a great distance. In a word, Madam, it is
of you that I dare assure my self, for, to struggle with so long on absence,
there is not only a constancy requisite, but an obstinacy. But since you have
done me the favor to number me among your Friends, I am confident my
unhappiness will not give you occasion to retract it, and that you will not
suffer Fortune to bring that about, which so many religious men, and other good
people have attempted without effect. If there be any other who afford me the
honor of their affection, it is a happiness I enjoy not without some distrust,
as being a good which I may loose, and from which, time happily takes away
somewhat every day. You tell me, your Mistresse's Mistress has not forgotten
me. This I question whether I can decipher. Your Mistress, is it not a young
Gentlewoman, very much Eagle-sighted, having somewhat a short nose, one that is
subtle, fierce, scornful, self-conceited, and obliging, one that is of a good
and bad nature, much given to chiding, and yet is ever pleasant, a very
virtuous Gentlewoman, who has a mother that uses her very harshly, and whom I
loved one time from Bagnolet to Charronne? If it be the same, her Mistress,
without question, deserves to be Mistress of all the world, and I have
maintained for eight months together in this Court, that there is not beneath
Heaven any thing so good and so glorious as she. I have not so great a
resentment of all my own afflictions put together, as I have of hers, and I
have shed abundance of tears, wherein she has been the most concerned. It is
certainly a thing very strange, and pleads much compassion, that there should
be so much happiness in her birth, and so little in her life, and that the
same person own at the same time all the graces, and all the disgraces in the
world. I receive the honor she does me, with all the respect and all the joy I
ought, and my prayers to God are, that he would comfort her, as she does
others. This goodness should cause no small shame to the Lady, on whom were
once found a brace and a half of lice. But me thinks your Mistress is too
retentive to let me know any thing, and yet she might without any danger of
jealousy, have afforded me a complement. You make it much your business to
assure me of the friendship of your Servant, but if it be not the same I mean,
I should not take it well, you bestowed so much of your thoughts on him: but
that person deserves all things, and I know not any thing I should envy him.
For Madam de Cl^rmont, though you had said nothing to me, yet should I be
satisfied she does me the honor to love me; having the experience I have of
her charity, I cannot doubt of her affection, and there needs no more to come
into the number of her friends, then to be listed among the miserable. Amid'st
the joy, the honor I have done me by so many excellent persons, brings with
it, it is an extraordinary grief to me that you tell me nothing of a man from
whose remembrance you know, I derive no small comfort. I am satisfied Madam,
that it is not your fault; that is, that you have not any thing to acquaint me
with concerning him. There Is not any circumstance of all my misfortune troubles
me so much as that, nor for which I can have less patience. I fear me, he takes
it not well that I mention him; but neither this consideration nor any other
shall make me ungrateful, nor hinder me from declaring wherever I am, that
there is not any man can deserve the affections of his Friends, and the esteem
of his enemies, more then he. If the Count de Guiche be at Court, be pleased to
give me leave, humbly to entreat him to spend some few thoughts on me, and to
give an instance of his constancy, by loving a person at so great a distance,
and withal so unserviceable. I was the other day very much pleased to find
Madamoisele de Montausier in the News-Book; but me thinks it were much more
reasonable that the young Gentleman had been there, and by what acquaintance I
have with him, I should not think the fame of his Sister should spread further
then his: I wish he knew how much I am still his humble servant, and wish him
all the happiness and noble adventures he merits. But I must except a certain
Lady, in whose Embraces I once wished him; and I now assure her, that she will
be guilty of the greatest ingratitude in the world, if any thing cause her to
forget me: For, without flatery, the passion I have for her, is beyond any
thing she can imagine. Which yet if after all, she reward with a treachery, I
shall one day not stick to make use of Steel or Poison to revenge my self: You
can hardly guess, Madam, who it is I mean; and it is a secret too important to
be trusted to any one. I only desire you to show this passage to Mademoiselle
du Pin. But I fall into a custom of writing large Letters, though afraid to be
too tedious; and yet I have a thousand other things to acquaint you with; nor
is it without an extraordinary violence to my self, that I can only tell you, I
am,

Madam, Yours, etc
From Madrid.
To the Same. LETTER XXIX.
MADAM,
YOu have more reason then any one to grant that though my body is, my
inclinations are not capable of any change, for you may assure your self I am
inalterable as to what ever relates to you. If you think I am furnished with
Affections of all Rates, know also that those Rates are just and proportioned
to the value of the Persons. While I observe this Rule, you may be satisfied I
shall never own any passion more violent then that to serve you. If you allow
this to be according to reason, it is no less consonant to my own inclination;
and therefore you may sa^ely believe, I shall never cease to love y^u, though
you tell me I am nothing cautions, and that I cannot improve my pleasures with
discretion. I know not any, I pro^ess it, greater then to honor you, and to
flatter my self with frequent imaginations of all those Goodnesses, and all
those perfections which I know reign in you. Though the Presents you send me
are poisoned, yet I receive them with a wil^ing mind, and shall no otherwise
what ever comes from your hands. It has been no small joy to me to find my
justification in the same pieces, whereby it was expected I should have been
condemned. Those two Rows of bl^ck, mentioned in the Stanza's of the Youth,
are easily discovered not to be for the young Gentlewoman, She deserves that
name as well as Mademoiselle de N^uf-vic, and I assure you the Tablets are come
to her hand after the same manner. The business of Madamoselle Mandat is much
more innocent, and if you have opened the Letters concerning it, it is a great
injustice to quarrel so much with me about it: However, I have read, not
without shame, the Stanza's yon sent me, and I am much more excusable for being
unfortunate in Verses then in Courtship; Thence I perceive, that since Monsieur
Chaud^bonne has reinstated me with Madamoielle de Rambouillet, I have derived
from them another mind, and that I was but a simple Lad in that time, that
Mademoisel^e du Plessis says I was so ingenuous. But, Madam, when any will
needs put these affronts on me; I beseech you take them not upon your account.
They write to your Hu^band to have a great care of me, as, that he should wrap
me up in Silk and Cotton; and in the mean time they endeavor what they can to
take away my life. I find the advice of Mademoiselle de Bourbon excellent
good, that I should be preserved in Sugar; but it will take up a great deal to
sweeten so much bitterness, and then I should taste like Lemmon-Pill candy'd.
Thousands of thanks most humbly presented reach not any acknowledgment of the
trans^^ndent honor she does me by her remembrances of me. I wish with all my
soul, that that Aurora (for the name you have given her suits her very well)
may be seconded by as fair a day as she deserves, and that all those of her
life may be free from all cloudiness, and express a clearness and serenity
consonant to that of her mind and countenance. My most humble services, with
the greatest passion that may be, presented to Madam de Clermont, and to the
Ladies her Daughters. I return my most humble thanks to Monsieur Gedeau, for
the Verses he sent me; I find them suitable to the rest of his works which I
read over daily, employing my whole Study in what he has done.

To the Same. LETTER XXVI.
MADAM,
ABout a Month since I received a Letter you were pleased to write to me of
the twenty of January; the last Post brought me another of the twenty sixth of
the last Month, and both came accompanied with a many Papers you also thought
fit to send me. You may well think it unreasonable, say what you will, that I
should moderate the praises I am to give you, and that I should begin to
speakless well of you when I receive most good from you. I could not answer the
former, because I was sick when the Messenger departed, and to show that the
joys of miserable people are but short lived, the next day after I had received
it, I was taken with the Colic, which I thought I had lost, and one days ease
cost me seventeen days torment. Madam de Clermont honors me beyond all
possible desert of mine; and I am thoroughly sensible of the extraordinary
obligation she has cast upon me. And yet I shall not believe she loves me to
that height she speaks, nor that I am so much concerned in her Prayers, if I
continue in this decay both of health and fortune. And yet it is a greater then
I can ever hope that the Lady, whom you know I ever place above all the rest,
will be pleased to look after my concernments. There Is no Oracle I should more
willingly rely upon then her Providence; and I receive her counsels and her
commands, as if they came from Heaven. Though I cannot find a place high enough
for her in my own mind, yet I dare assure her, that I have ever thought her
present at whatever has befallen me. She has often comforted me in my
greatest afflictions, and that part of my Soul, wherein she was, has been free
from all troubles and disturbances, into which my miseries had hurryed me. I
adore her as the noblest, the most beautiful, and most perfect thing that ever
I saw: And yet all the respect, all the Veneration I have for her, cannot
hinder me from having a most tender affection for her as the best creature in
the world. I must also confess, the Lady her Daughter owns no less goodness,
if it be true, as you tell me, Madam, that she is pleased to think of me. I
should gladly some way acknowledge this honor, but me thinks one heart will not
suffice both and her mother, and that when one has taken her share, there will
be little left for the other. The favor done me by three persons so
accomplished, frees me from all troubles, yet gives me withal a new one, which
is, that I can never deserve it, nor express, as I would, the resentment I
have of it. And since it requires infinite thanks, I humbly beseech you, Madam,
to employ yours together with that Eloquence, which is so natural to you, for
to thank them; and let me not want your assistance in this, which you afford me
in all things. When I reflect on the honor you and they do me in your
remembrances; I wonder, that, being so happy in that, I am so unhappy in other
things, and that so much misfortune can befall a man that has so many Guargian
Angels. I am not yet satisfied, whether be greater the happiness of being
beloved, or the unhappiness of being absent; and I find that of all men I am
the most to be envied, and the most to be pittyed. I have the greater reason to
say this, that I am not mistaken in your Letter; and if it be true the Lady,
whose generosity you so earnestly maintain, though not impeached, has done me
the honor to write to me, I shall eesily swallow down all the checks you gave
me upon that account. Nevertheless, I shall entreat you not to think I raise a
particular quarrel against her; but not having received any recommendations,
save from two or three persons; the complaint was general against all the rest,
from whom I had not received a word since my coming hither. It Is true, I think
her much more to blame then any other, that she who has the greatest memory in
the world, should be so scanty of it toward her friends; and since her
thoughts have often passed the Pyrenean Mountains for Alcidalis, and to imagine
in Spain persons that never were there; I could not but wonder she should
forget those that are, and are at her service. And if she has done me the
honor you tell me, she has gone much beyond my hope, and done for me more
then I durst have desired. But it being past, it is a loss I know not how to
brook. I know, Madam, that, though I had said nothing to you, you will easily
imagine with what regret I suffer it: But me thinks, you, who take the pains to
send me the Letters of Monsieur de Balzac: and Coppies of all the best things,
should not have forgotten that. I have perused with much satisfaction, what was
sent him upon the death of the King of Sweden, and am glad to see the greatest
Wits pay him the homage and acknowledgment due to his mem^ry. The Sonnet I am
much taken with, and the Letter is excellently well Penned. I have particularly
observed this in it, that the Author of it, must needs be well acquainted with
the humor of ^he person to whom he writ; since that having lost a Lover, he
says not one word to him by way of consolation. By good fortune for us, she is
more tender for her friends, and since she remembers the most inconsiderable,
and indeed who can never deserve that name, there is no doubt of the rest: For my
part, whatever I may have sometimes heard from that man, who you say is so
severe, and for whom I durst say nothing here; I have thought it impossible
that a person that begets a friendship in all that see her, should have none in
her self; and that having derived so many excellent qualities from the Lady her
Mother, she has mist the most Noble, which is, that of being the best Friend
in the world. You see Madam, how I can correct those faults you reprove in me.
I bileeve I have reformed them by what I have said, and answered those
reproaches you cast on me for commending you to her prejudice. I have chosen
rather to retract my thoughts of her, then what I had said of you, and I have
thought it easier to add to her praises, then to abridge yours. I have received
you Judith with extraordinary satisfaction; I say, with extraordinary
satisfaction, because it deserves it, besides what I do therein for your sake.
For I think you are extremely taken with this History, and are well pleased to
see an action of blood and murder justified by the Scripture; I could not in
the reading of it, stave off an imagination, that I saw you holding a Sword in
one hand, and the Head of Monsieur de St. B -- in the other: You tell me it is
done by the Author of the Translation of St. Paul's Epistles; you consider not
Madam, that a Person who has waded through so much sickness and affliction,
must needs have forgotten abundance of things, especially since what is left is
taken up in things wherein it is so well employed. You put me to a like
nonplus in another Letter, telling me, your servant desired to be remembered to
me; what likelihood is there to guess aright who it should be? My first
imagination was it might be a Cardinal; the next, a Doctor of Divinity:
Afterward I thought it might be a Merchant of Aubry-Boucher-Street, or a
Knight of Malta; a Privy-Councellor, a Poet, or a Judge; and there is not any
Rank, wherein I found not some cause to doubt: But if it happen to be a young
Gentleman, flaxen hair'd, of a very fair complexion, and a person infinitely
ingenuous, nothing could happen more to my satisfaction, then the least
expression of his remembrances of me; and it shall be the main business of my
life, by my most humble services, to deserve his affection. As poor as I am, I
would it had cost me a thousand Crowns, that I could have played a Game at
Tennis with him, which had not been impossible, had I been suffered to take my
own course; for I was fully resolved to return by Paris, and you might have
seen me within a while of the Religion of Monsieur d' Aumont; but I submit and
obey, though with no small trouble. I am not certain when I shall leave this
place, whether within a Month, two, or three. I have told one man here how
much he is obliged to you for your remembrances of him: He returns you his most
humble thanks, and has engaged me to tell you he is infinitely your Servant.
We keep house together, and live in the greatest Friendship possible: I crave
pardon of the Lady you know; and I leave her to judge, who is so skillful in
things to come, what I may promise my self thence, and whether I may not one
day arrive at a good subsistence as well as he. Behold, Madam, another large
Letter, whereof you know but the least part, and whereof I have said nothing of
what most nearly concerns me. Behold what it is, not to answer the Gallantries
which you write, and to send me Letters, wherein you speak only of your
Friends, and say in a manner nothing of your self. Nevertheless I have not made
it so much my business to be revenged, as that I can avoid professing in this
place, that I repeat for you alone, all the expressions of esteem and
affection, which I have directed to every one of them in particular; and that I
am, much after another manner,

Madam, Yours, etc.
From Madrid.
To Monsieur de Chaudebonne. LETTER XXVII.
SIR,
ABout ten or twelve days since, I writ to you, and thanked you for two
Letters, which I have at length received from you. If you could apprehend what
satisfaction they brought along with them, it would be your grief you had sent
me no more; and that you had not afforded me this comfort, in a time that I
stood in so much need of it. Madrid, which is the pleasantest place in the
world for the healthy and the debauched, is the most wearisome to the temperate
and the diseased; and when Lent comes in, and makes a Vacation among the
Players, I know not of any one Recreation which a man may conscientiously make
use of. The sorrow and solitude I struggle with here, have wrought on me at
least this one good effect, that they have reconciled me to Books, which I for
a while shaken hands with; and meeting here with no other entertainments, I
have been forced to admit those of Reading. Expect therefore, Sir, to find me
almost as great a Philosopher as your self; and imagine what great advantages
he may arrive at, who for seven Months together, has constantly studied or
been sick. And if it be granted that one of the principal ends of Philosophy is
the contempt of Life, I know no better Master for it then the Colic, then
which Socrates and Plato are much less persuasive: It has read me lately a
Lecture which lasted seventeen days, which I shall not in a short time forget,
and has made me many times consider how weak we are, since there needs but
three grains of sand to cast us to the ground. If it oblige me to be of any
Sect, I shall not be of that which maintains that pain is no evil; and that the
Wiseman is always happy. But Sir, happen what will to me, I can neither be the
one nor the other, if I am not near you; and nothing can assist me so much to
attain both, as your example and your presence. I am yet to know when I shall
depart hence, and, expecting men and money to come to me by Sea, I am afraid I
shall stay longer then I desire, for these are two things that come not always
at the time appointed. My humble suit therefore is, That you would not forget
me so long as you have done, nor to express, by honoring me with your Letters,
that you are satisfied with the sincere affection which speaks me,

Sir, Yours, etc

To Mademoiselle Paulet. LETTER. XXVIII.
MADAM,
SInce the favor I receive by your writing to me cannot be valued, and that it
was not in my power to deserve it, you ought not to discontinue it, though I
come short in the acknowledgment thereof. The condition I was in two Months
since forced me to suffer the ordinary Messenger to depart without a Letter,
and if that be only the reason, as in all likelihood it must, that he is
returned again without any from you; I assure you it is the greatest
discourtesie my Colic ever did me. Since then your Letters are so necessary, I
beseech you Madam, let me not want that assistance, and you, who are so
charitable toward those who are in any affliction, express your self such
toward one that wrestles with so many kinds of it. You are further obliged to
be so, out of this consideration that my greatest, and which I am least able to
resist, is, that I am at such a distance from you. And if this regret be
accompanied by any other equally apprehensive, it is for persons whom you love
as your self. I humbly desire you to acquaint them, and that often, that the
passion I have for them is too great to be expressed, and let me ever have some
place in their inclinations, where you your self have so much, that we may
there, since we cannot any where else, be together. For your own part, Madam, I
beseech you once more not to forsake me, the honor of receiving Letters from
you, is a happiness, which though I could not have hoped, yet I cannot be
without, now that I am so much accustomed to it. Deprive me not therefore of
it, after you have so generously afforded it me, and do not herein oppose two
virtues which are so natural to you, your liberality and your constancy, and
though it is beyond my power to satisfy this obligation, yet shall not I be
awanting as to wishes, nor shall importune Fortune for any thing, so much as
that I may be able to express otherwise then in words, how far I am,

Madam, Yours, etc

To the Same. LETTER. XXV.
MADAM,
THere cannot be any thing more acceptable in your Letters, then the Letters
themselves; I have met with in the beginning of yours, what you would not have
had me to hope till I came to the closure, and you have granted me the
satisfaction which you promised me elsewhere. It is very p^obable you did not
read what was added to your Letter by another hand, and that you, who send me
gold and precious stones, or words of greater value, would not entertain me
with reproaches. And yet I must confess that I do in some sort deserve what
has been written to me, and that I am not very much a Gallant, since I have
not the confidence to be such toward you. It is a great shame to me that I
have written such large Letters to you, which yet contained nothing of that
style, whereof a Female Friend of yours says, that it seems to her to be all
poetry; and that being so many leagues distant from you, never durst acquaint
you with any thing of my thoughts. But I will not be disgraced any longer upon
your account, and if you cause not some satisfaction to be made me for this
affront, I am resolved to treat you with Letters wholly made up of Love, full
of fires, darts, and pierced hearts, and shall break forth into so many
gallantries, that it shall repent some, they have offended me. I am at this
present extremely troubled to keep my hands in, and I find no other inducement
to refrain, then to think on that excellent person, of whom I have learnt to
prevent in all things what may be to be feared, and whose very memory obliges
me to respect and prudence. I humbly beseech you, Madam, who are acquainted
with all the transactions of my mind, to let her know in what posture she is
there, and with what resentment and sincere affection I return the honor she
does me. You may also if you please, since you own so great a goodness, engage
in the same manner, Madam de Clermont to continue her affection to me, and her
prayers to God for me. I shall for my part, as much as lies in me endeavor to
deserve the favors I shall obtain through her intercession, and it were
certainly very hard, that a man, whom you preach to, and she prays for, should
not be converted. But you may let her know, that I beg not so much her prayers
as her affection, and though I believe she can make me constant holy and happy;
I care not so much for all this, as to be loved by her: I have read, with
inexpressible apprehension of joy, what you tell me concerning that divine
person, before whom I once made my Epitaph. I dare assure her, that when I had
two and was in the power of my greatest Persecutresses, I was not more to be
pitied then I am now, and that I should wish rather to die in her presence,
then live far from her. After the extraordinary honor she does me, there were
not any thing I could desire additional to my glory, save that I were so happy,
that the Lady, who should have been carried away once at Lima, had but
remembered me. But it is the pleasure of Heaven, that the Lady her mother should
remain yet in the world unparalleled, and if happily there may be any thing as
fair as she, there cannot be ought so good. Me thinks, she, for whose sake I
once made the Dryads laugh, Madam de C -- (I think there were no danger to put
her name at length) should not be so much incensed against the Rebels, but that
she might do me the honor to think on me sometimes. If the report be true,
that we had a design to carry her away, it should have been after the same
manner the Greeks took the image of Pallas out of the power of their enemies,
in confidence that Fortune and Victory would always attend the side where she
were. But for my part, I had no hand in it; she knows, that my pretenses, if
ever I had any to her, have been in a fair way, and she may remember that my
addresses have ever been full of respect and esteem. Seriously, I cannot be so
passionate for our affairs, but I must be also very much for her. When ever I
reflect on her, I silence my wishes, and I have much ado to continue well
affected to my own party. I have been more generous in commending her, then she
has been in her remembrances of me. It Is not eight days since, that I found
means here, to represent her so like her self, that I scru'd up a man, who has
no reason to wish well to all her Friends, if not into a Love, at least into an
extraordinary esteem of her. I am your Servant's most humble Servant, and I
dare assure him, he has not a greater passion for you then I have for him. You
tell me, Madam, that one of your house has a greater esteem for me then for
any man, and that I should look on it as an extraordinary obligation: but it
were also but fitting you described him more particularly. I wish it him I
mean; if so, I desie all misfortunes. You may easily guess for whom I make
this wish. I know not whether it may be any thing dangerous to mention me to
him, but I beseech you, Madam, let not that frighten you. What countenance
soever he may put on it, he is not so much to be feared, he is better then he
is taken to be, at least I know thus much of him, that it is impossible he
should not love those that love him. I have diverse times thought to have sent
him half a dozen Spanish -- the neatest and most glittering can be had. Be not
frightened, Madam, I mean Blades; and if as I pass through Granada, I meet with
a pretty Sarazine Less, I shall not fail to send her to him: I believe I shall
take that way when I go hence, and to follow the directions, or rather the
commands I have received, I must go two hundred Leagues out of my way by Land,
and be forced to measure five hundred by Sea. I quarrel not so much at the
hazard and inconveniences of it, as it troubles me that I cannot pass through
France. Though I have long since been engaged to promise, I shall be much
troubled to perform it, and it never cost me so much to effectuate any
resolution as this. Had I been left at liberty, I should have taken the Road,
with as much freedom, and safety as ever, and should have gone from hence
directly to Bourg-la-Reyne. I should have had at least the satisfaction of
passing one night in Paris, and I had resolved to have bestowed on you by the
way, Ravergarde, and Rousette, and assure your (If you should have had it home.
I think that while they diswade me from that design, and seem to have a fear
for me, they also stand in fear of me, and imagine they might learn so much at
the office of Address, and that I fool-hardily durst venture my self any
where. But I was resolved to be a little more circumspect. I should have been
glad to have bestowed Serenades on three or four persons, with a little
Roaring, and away; but I must obey, and believe that what is imposed on me is
the better. This submission therefore ought to be acknowledged, since in my
opinion, it speaks both Obedience and Sacrifice. At least I hope never to be
reproached with obstinacy, since I have been so complyant in this. That, and
the itch of writing so much, that I know not how to end my Letters, are two
notable alterations in me. Pardon me the one for the others sake, and be
pleased sometimes to remember, that I am mostcordially,

Madam, Yours, etc

Madrid,
I humbly crave your pardon, Madam, to return two or three words, as gently as
I can, to the person who falls so foul upon me in your Letter. I have a long
time considered who this little man should be, of whom I hear such great
things, and who is esteemed so much above and below me. It cannot be Monsieur
de Vigean, for I am but two fingers breadth taller then he, and he is but ten
times more gallant then I. After a long reflection, me thinks it smells very
much of his story, and that it is not possible, there should be in the world a
man so little or so gallant. I humbly beg, Madam, a true account of this
business.

To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. LETTER XXIX.
MADAM,
IF your other Letter was of the same metal as that I have received, I have
not been so unhappy in the loss of it; and it had been to be wished this
second time that I had only known, without seeing any thing, that you had done
me the honor to write to me. Having read what you sent me, as that you had
been much troubled to send your complements as Forlornes, I expected to meet
with some of them, and this past, I find none save that you take occasion to
tell me, I am but a little man, and assure me that I am guilty of very little
gallantry. If you had no other to make me, you needed not, Madam, to have put
them under the protection of the most valiant Lady in France; and though they
had been found, you would not thence have been thought well affected to the
Rebels, and as to the manner your Letter was written in, you should fear
nothing so much as that it should be delivered me. After so much earnestness
as I had for a Letter from you, that I can assure you I made it my only
business, you take the pains to write five or six lines, wherein you chide
Fortune very much for offering to lay her hands on any thing that came from
yours. And for what concerns me, There is a man there now, not so tall as you
by a Cubit, and i will take my oath a thousand times more gallant. This indeed is
an excellent consolatory Letter, after so long expectation, and words finely
shuffled together, to make me forget so many sorts of afflictions. If I am not
mistaken, I have often told you, Madam, that you are fitter to write a
challenge then a Letter. Having done as you have, there needs no more then to
add, that you will justify, in the Court of Trebizonda, what you have
written, and sign it ALASTRAXAREA. Is it possible, that being mistress of so
many excellent endowments, and having so great power over me, you should make
use of neither, but to hurt me, and be like those Fairies, who are never well
but when they do mischief, and disturb the good which the others do. When
Mademoiselle Paulet, had written me a handsome obliging Letter, when my Lady
Marchioness assures me of the honor of her Friendship, when Madam de Clermont
promises me her prayers, nay when the most excellent and most accomplished
person in the world honors me with her remembrances, you come last of all, to
trouble the general joy, and spoil all that they had done for me. It Is strange
the Pyrenean Mountains, the Limits of two great Kingdoms, cannot defend me
from you. You are it seems, so far from being moved by my misfortunes, that you
persecute me to the worlds end, and torment me much more then my own
ill-fortune. At a time, when my choicest Friends durst not hold any
correspondence with me, and when it was dangerous even to write to me, you
trample on all considerations, to tell me, you find me not very gallant, and
that there is a Dwarf whom you are a thousand times more taken with then me. My
opinion is, Madam, that I have just cause to chide, and raise all these
complaints. But that you may not be confirmed in what you say of me, and to
show you that I am not so small a gallant, as not to entertain mildly what
comes from so good, hands, I shall tell you, Madam, that,

I thought my misfortunes had been absolutely irrelieveable, and I had no
sooner read over what you did me the honor to write, but they are extremely
moderated. Not that I was mistaken in their greatness, but it is because
nothing is impossible to you, and that you can apply remedies to things
incapable of any. The miracle is, that, though you speak nothing but ill of me,
you should be able to do me so much good, and that, not regarding what you
write to me, I have been satisfied with the bare sight of your hand: Those that
profess Magic produce not such admirable effects, whence it is manifest, that
you can, as well as the other, instill into words a secret virtue, and other
force then they have of themselves. That in objecting my imperfections to me,
you have cured all ^y afflictions, and that I should ^ake pleasure to read that
you es^^em another beyond me, is a miracle beyond my comprehension But; Madam,
it is long since I have sought for any natural reason in the greatest part of
what comes from you. I know that a person (...) full of Miracles, may very well
do some: but how great soeve^ (...) may be, the strangest that ever you did,
is, to have raised joy in a person of my condition, and felicify'd a man out of
Poverty, banishment, and sickness. Herein you make it appear, that Fortune who
has the world under her feet, is her self under yours, and that you can pardon
those, whom she condemns to be unhappy. Besides, if I am but under your good
influence, I matter not the malevolence of the Stars, and though they all
conspired my ruin, yet if you protect me, I shall think the better part of
Heaven benevolent to me. Forsake not, Madam, I beseech you, a person that
reposes so much confidence in you. There needs no more, to make me happy, but
your will I should; and if you can afford but good and hearty wishes, I shall
immediately feel the effects thereof. You are obliged to direct some of them
hither to me, for I assure you all mine are for you, and the most passionate I
own, are, that you want not any thing your Beauty and your Virtue merit. It is
true I am also concerned in that; and if so, there were no differences of
parties, nor no distinction in the world, all men should have but one will, and
the whole earth would obey you.

This, Madam, is to give you notice, to be more cautious of what you say
another time, and that I am not so small a Gallant as you conceive. But if you
will needs oblige me to believe you, command your Little man to write a Letter
a thousand times more gallant then this. But though he had that advantage over
me, I should have another which I esteem no less, which is, that I dare
confidently say, I am, a thousand times more then he, or any whatever,

Madam, Yours, etc.

To Mademoiselle de Paulet. LETTER XXX.
MADAM,
THough I may not be allowed any satisfaction when I want your sight, yet it is
some excuse, that I have not any but what I receive from you. It Is to you that
I owe all the joys I have here, and though I have lately been to see the
Escurial, and Aranw^^z, and have seen the entertainment of the Bulls, and that
of the Canes, I should not have seen any thing I could esteem in Spain, had I
not received your Letters there. Your trouble takes off a great part of mine,
and I forget my unhappiness, when I think that you allow me a place in your
memory. This obligation is so excessive, that I doubt much whether any besides
my self could satisfy it. But if you please to consider, you will find I have
long since paid all by the way of advance, and from the first moment I had the
honor of your acquaintance, there has not passed a day, wherein I have not
deserved what ever good you should ever be able to do me. I am confident,
Madam, you will not attribute this to any vanity, but to an extraordinary
apprehension of that passion wherewith I honor you, and to a certain faith I
am of, that a perfect affection is to be preferred before all things. That
which I have to serve you, is at such a high point, that no other then your own
can recompense it; and though you should give me my life a hundred times, and
with it all the goods of this world, you were still very much in my debt, if I
wanted your affection. And certainly herein you show your self very just, in
that, since you cannot make me full satisfaction, you strive to give me content
otherwise, and cover an injustice with abundance of Civility. But a grain of
good will cannot outweigh'd by all the fair words, if any could, they were
certainly your own, n^r should you need to make use of others. I wonder much,
that when I receive from you a large packet, I find but one small Letter, and
what comes through your hand makes but the least part of what comes from you.
And as I very seldom had the honor to visit you at home, but there have been
five or six persons in your chamber, so also you take occasion to engage as
many into your Letters, and not to write to me but in public. Imagine not
however it shall oblige me to be the less free with you; I will make those
confidents whom you seem to appoint for my Judges, and I should choose rather
to discover my Secret to them, then conceal it from you. But to be more
earnest, Madam, for I know you wish I had not spoke all that you have read,
instead of complaining of it, I return you thousands of thanks for the
extraordinary honor I receive from so many excellent persons through your
means, and which I should never deserve without you. I must needs acknowledge
that my wishes cannot aim at a greater satisfaction then to see your Letters,
but I am very glad that you therein exceed them, and show me more favor then I
durst desire. If I mistake not, I discovered in your last certain lines drawn
by the best hand in the world, and I have entertained them with so much
veneration, as is requisite to compose the leaves, whereon a Sybil wrote her
Oracles. I have a greater esteem for these four Verses, then for all the works
of Malherbe, and I, who have in my time seen some upon the subject of Love, and
were done to praise me, assure you, I never met with any thing of Poetry, that
I was so much taken with. I know not of what kind the affection is, which I
have for that person, but I never hear or see any thing from him, which
searches not into my very Soul, and I cannot apprehend how it comes to pass,
that esteem and respect work in me the same effects as an over-violent passion.
Though you say nothing of Madam de Clermont, yet am I confident she cannot have
forgotten me, and I humbly desire you, Madam, to do me the favor to tell her,
that to become more worthy of her affection, I endeavor to grow better and
better every day. The Lectures you read to me, and the Books you send me,
contribute not a little thereto. I thank you for the Psalm, but why, in the
condition I am in, do you send me such heavy things? What better Paraphrase can
be had upon the Miserere, then my self? I have at last gotten St. Paul's
Epistles. The two Books, whereof you sent me one in December, the other six
weeks after, I received the same day; and for ought I can judge, the person,
whom you represented to me as so little, is one of the greatest men in France.
The Preface, amongst other things, I extremely like, and have been mightily
satisfied with the reading of it. I should say more, but that at the present I
can admire nothing but Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. This I cannot but
acknowledge, Madam, whether it happen through stupidity or presumption: I had
seen, without jealousy, all the gallant things, which till now you have
thought your self concerned that I should, but when I had read over the answer
of the Infanta Fortune to Master Lac, I was much troubled who should be the
Author, and, to be free with you, was extremely vexed it should be any other
then my self. I reflected a long time on the most deserving persons to find out
the Author, yet was not able to pitch on any one; but when I understood by your
Letter who it was, for I keep it still for the last, I must confess, it was
the greatest joy I had had of a long time. I was extremely satisfied to find
the glory due to a person whom I honored so much before, and to whom I
resigned so great a part of my Soul, that it is a question whether the writing
of so gallant a Letter may be attributed rather to his then to mine. But
indeed, she seems rather to be actuated by that of all the world, if it be
considered how apt she is for all things, and be^ides, that no other has so
much as she, there is not any has so many different lustres, or the advantages
of all lights as much as hers. It may be he may take it ill; but I must needs
tell you* that I thought to have continued in the same incrredulity I was in
once before, for another miracle of her understanding; and I could not think it
possible, she could be so fortunate in things of that nature, having never read
any Books of that kind. But she is not to be discovered by Reason, but by
Faith, and as she composes Histories, wherein all the passions are represented
to the life, though she never was subject to any; makes a description of Italy
and Spain, though had never seen the map* of them, and is acquainted with all
the earth, having never been further then Chartres: In like manner, without
sight of the ancient Romans, she speaks the Language of Lancelot du Lac,
better then the Queen Geni^ura could have done, and I believe she could speak
Arabic, would she but undertake it. It must be acknowledged she is a person
very hard to be comprehended, and that if Madam de Rambouillet be the greatest
perfection in the world, the Lady her Daughter is the more admirable. Be
pleased, Madam, to understand the praises I give with their due restriction,
knowing you as I do. It has hapen'd moreover very fortunately for me that I
have not met with this expression of her understanding, but at a time when I
had another of her Civility: for it would have troubled me very much not to
love a person, whom I was obliged to esteem so highly. The five or six lines
she has honored me with* I have received with all the respect, affection, and
joy she can imagine, so that they have taken away the resentment I had of the
other Letter. This is one advantage that persons that are mischeivous have over
those that are not, that all the good offices they do, are much better taken,
and the rarity seems to set a value on the action. And though I know she has
not done me this favor, but to make me the more sensible of an ill-turn
another time, yet can I not avoid being drawn in by it, and loving her, at this
present, as if she were the best natured person in the world. As for the
reproaches which she has in store to cast in my dish one day, it is a menace
takes away nothing of the ambition I have to see her, and I shall so far
justify my self, that she shall acknowledge I have merited even in those
things, wherein she thinks I have failed. Amongst a many things which have
given me extraordinary satisfaction in your Letter, I am particularly pleased
at one thing you tell me, that, as you were writing, a deserving person was
troubled that he was forced to retire at one of the clock in the morning,
without seeing me. It is long since I have passionately wished some assurance of
the honor he does me in his remembrances. I shall not stick to tell you, there
is not any man in the world, for whom I have a greater respect; but I dare not
acknowledge how much I love him, least the interest of your Husband oblige you
to take it ill, and reproach me with an ill disposal of my affections. You, who
hold it as a general rule, that all persons of that quality cannot love, ought
to admit of some exceptions as to him; and as I have heard you often affirm,
that he had more generosity then others, you may also conclude, he has also
more Friendship. But grant it were not so, and that he had absolutely forgot
me, yet is it certain, I could not possibly abate any thing of the passion I
have for him. I can no more oppose this inclination then that I have for you,
and you should not think it strange I should love an ungrateful man, when you
know I have so long loved a woman, that is such. Nay, to be free with you, even
at that time that I thought he had quite forgotten me, I have not passed a fair
evening in the Prade, but I have wished him there. The Gros-d'^au were as
acceptable at Madrid as at Paris, and if I had been here; I would carry him to
sing before gates which should open more easily then yours, and where we should
be better entertained then we were at your house. There are in this place
certain Creatures, which those of the Country call Morenites, which as to their
shape are very handsome, having a very smoth skin, being mild, active, and
gamesome, very easily tamed, and naturally compliant to mankind. The coolness
of the night, which they are much taken with, causes that about that time, they
are ordinarily found in the steeets, and if I mistake not his curiosity for
things of this nature, I am confident he would be extremely glad to see some of
them. I humbly beseech you, Madam, since I am endebted to you for all things,
to employ all the interest you have in him, to oblige him to honor me with his
remembrances; and if you can engage him to love me, I will bear with you six
months longer, for what you owe me. I know not whether your Servant has done
me the honor to write any thing to me, I am ever his most-humbly, with as much
passion as ever, and it is not three days since I locked my self into a chamber,
and in memory of him sung Pere Chambaut, half an hour together: There are at
the bottom of your Letter three several hands, which I know not whose they are,
and if I mistake not, never knew. I had once resolved to have got them answered
by three of my Friends, Spaniards; but I have not had the time, being on the
eve of my departure. I hope to be gone hence within three or four days, in
order to the progress I writ to you of, as also to see Portugal and Andaluzia.
Some endeavored to dissuade me from it, by reason of the great heats of this
season; but to improve my experience, I am resolved to see the world a little,
and to recover my self of a Winter I have passed over here without so much as
warming my self, I am going to find out the Dog Days in Africa, and to spend
the Summer in a Country where the Swallows spend the Winter. The danger I am
like to meet with in this Voyage frighten me not at all, it may be I should
meet with greater near you. All I am troubled at, is, that, if I chance to die
in it, Mademoiselle de Rambouillet will be much pleased to say, that three
years since she foretold I should dye within four. But, Madam, a preson
concerned in your prayers ought to hope for better fortune. I know not whether
I have yet a long time to live, but me thinks I have a great many years to love
you in, and therefore, my affection being so great and so perfect, I conceive
it impossible, I should so soon quit the relation of

Madam, Yours, etc.

To the Same. LETTER. XXXI.
MADAM,
THere is nothing awanting to your fortunes, save that you have never been
guilty of High Treason, and now see I furnish you with a fair occasion for it.
Fortune, who has not neglected any to bring you on the Stage, will not happily
fail to make use of this, I easily perceive that I put you into some danger by
writing to you, and yet that very consideration cannot oblige me to forbear.
Hence you may also infer, that I would set any thing at stake to put you in
mind of me, since I bring your self into danger, on whom I set a higher value
then on all this world affords. This I tell you, Madam, in a time, when I would
not dissemble, no, not in a Complement. For, (that you may know how the case
stands) I have made an extraordinary advantage of the sickness which you have
been told I have had. It has engaged me to take such good resolutions, that if
I had them not, I should gladly purchase them with all the health I have. I do
not doubt but you will laugh at this, as knowing my weakness, and will think it
unlikely for me to execute simple resolutions, who have broken so many vows.
And yet it is certain, that I have looked on all the Spanish women as if they
were no other then the Flemish of Brussels, and I hope to prove a virtuous man,
instead of a man of this world, where there are so great temptations, and where
Satan shelters himself under the handsomest shapes. In all this reformation I
am troubled but with one scruple, which is, that I think too much on you, and
that I desire with much impatience the honor to see you again. Though I have
moderated all my affections, I cannot reduce that I bear you, to that point,
wherein it is permitted we should love our neighbor, that is to say, as our
selves, and I fear me, you have a greater part of my Soul, then should be
bestowed on a Creature. Be you pleased to consider, Madam, what remedy there is
for it, or rather, what may be said to maintain it; for as to remedy, I cannot
believe there is any, and withal that it is impossible, I should not, with all
manner of passion, ever be,

Madam, Yours, etc.

To the same. LETTER XXXII.
MADAM,
THe consolation I have received from you was but proportionable to the
greatness of my misfortune, and I have received your Letter as a reprief that
Heaven sent me after my condemnation. I cannot call by any other name the news
that engaged my return hither; and I assure you there are many sentences of
death, that are not so cruel. But amidst all my disasters, I should do ill to
complain, when you honor me with a place in your memory: and it were not hard,
me thinks, to scorn the favors of fortune, when one is so happy as to enjoy
yours. Upon this consideration, I shall be content to stay here, and not upon
that you mention, viz: that, it is better be an exile in a strange Country,
then to be a captive in ones own. You see but one half of my unhappiness, if
you consider not that I am both together: and if you observe well, you will
find, that two things seemingly incompatible conspire in me, to be banished and
a Prisoner at the same time. You will be troubled, Madam, to find out this
riddle, if you call not to mind, that I have taken up a custom to say somewhat
of Love in all my Letters, And whereas you tell me, I should have here some
Liberty, which I should not in France, I humbly desire it may be only that; and
give me leave to assure you, that I am extremely passionate in the affection I
have to serve you. I were too ungrateful, if, for a person, that does such
extraordinary things for me, I should have only an ordinary Friendship, and I
ought to be in Love, though it were only with your generosity. I have been
acquainted with the obligation I ought a Gentleman and a Lady, (from whom I had
received a many before) and the pains they take to have an account of me. For
the rest, they have sacrificed so much to Silence, that I have not so much as
heard them named these six months. I know not whether it be forgetfulness or
prudence, and to tell you truth, I know not what construction to make of it.
Besides it seems more excusable, not to say any thing to a person whom one has
no remembrance for, then to remember him, and not make any expression of it. I
leave you to judge, Madam, how much what you have done for me is hereby
magnified, and how highly I am obliged to you, for a large Letter, in a time
when the rest durst not send me commendations. Which goodness, I must assure
you, if I cannot acknowledge, yet shall I celebrate and esteem as it deserves^,
nd, to the utmost of my power, remain,

Madam, Yours, etc

To Monsieur de Puy-Laurens. LETTER XXXIII.
SIR,
I Have received the Letter you did me the honor to write to me, with more joy
then I ever expected to meet with here, insomuch, that though I have abundance
of things in desire, am at so great a distance from the place where I wish my
self, am here in a languishing condition, and cannot without infinite
difficulty get hence, yet was I satisfied as to all, when I once perceived your
tenderness toward me. And since, as you tell me, I have an interest in your
Friendship, I look on it as a happiness that out-weighs all others, and that
those on whom you have bestowed Riches and Honors, have not been so well dealt
with as I. I assure you Sir, it is the only consolation I have received in this
Country, where the continual want of health makes me incapable of any
diverssion, and where I have not seen any women unless it were in the Prade,
or upon the Stage. I shall therefore without any violence agree with you, as to
what you say in disparagement of the Ladies of Madrid in comparison of those of
Brussels; and before either your presence or theirs oblige me thereto, I now
subscribe to whatever you can say to their advantage; Innocence, Youth, and
Beauty, for which you say you so much esteem them, are Qualifications, which
here never met together, and which yet are not so common where you are, but
they give me occasion to guess at the reason, why you take that side with so
much earnestness. If it happen to be the same person I mean, I should cross my
inclination and my judgment, were I not of your opinion, and acknowledge, that
though Xarifa, Daraxa, and Galiana should return into the world again, Spain
would not have any thing comparable to the other. The artifices they use on
this side, and the illusions wherewith they would appear what they are not,
cannot represent any thing so beautiful; and the very white it self of this
place, is not so white as she. The most accomplished beauties that are here can
no more compare with hers, then brass and ebony can Gold and Ivory, and
between the handsome faces of this place and hers, there is a difference
proportionable to that between a light Night and a fair day. So that, Sir,
whereas I have often affirmed that of all the Ladies, the Spanish only deserved
to be courted, I now acknowledge that a single Lady of the Court where you are,
were enough to baffle them all, and that the only advantage they have over
those of that side, is, that they can be more amorous: nor do I think that to
be generally true, and that if the same fortune which you meet with every
where, attends you in Flanders, you have taught some not to yield to them even
in that. But this discourse should have been reserved for the confidence you
promise me when I shall be near you, the hopes whereof augments the impatience
I have to return. I therefore humbly beseech you, Sir, to remember that
promise, and be pleased to have a care that the multitude of your adventures
make you not forget any circumstance of it. For my part, whereas all those that
approach you do it to advance their Fortunes, and beg either employments or
pensions of you, I shall never desire any thing of you so affectionately, as
the honor of your conversation, nor do I believe you can bestow any thing on
me of greater value. I know it is an iudulgence, whereof you are much less
liberal, then any of the other, and that there are very few persons, to whom
you easily communicate it; but the passion I have for all yours, gives
meadmittance into that n^^^ber, together with the extraordinary sincerity,
wherein I am on all occasions,

Sir, Yours, etc.
Madrid. March. 13. 1633.
To the Same. LETTER. XXXIV.
SIR,
YOu have in five or six lines comprised all I can think acceptable in this
world, and by promising me the presence of my Master, your conversation and
Friendship, you have answered all my wishes. Being put into this hope, there
are no difficulties I should think insupportable, the Sea will afford me an
easy passage to come and possess my self of so great advantages, and all the
gallant men upon earth were once embarked upon a design less considerable
then this. But I must first dissolve the enchantments of Madrid, and overcome
the destiny of this Court, which has decreed, that every one be stayed here
ten or twelve months after the last day he proposed to himself to be here.
This, Sir, is so certain, that having attempted this winter to make an escape
hence before this season, the force of the charm drew me back, when I was
gotten forty Leagues hence, and I am here to this day, as deeply engaged as
ever: However I expect some good issue of what you tell me you have written in
my behalf, and if this adventure must be accomplished by one of the most
gallant persons in the world, I hope I must be your debtor for my deliverance:
I know, Sir, it is not the noblest that you have put a period to, but I assure
you, it is one of the most difficult and the most just. For, to be free with
you, you are somewhat concerned to be tender of a person who honors you with
that sincerity I do, and bearing the character you do, there is nothing you
cannot with more ease find, then affections pure and disinteress'd as mine.
Those that are in such places as yours, are commonly treated like Gods; many
fear them, all sacrifice to them, but there are few that love them, and they
more easily find Flatterers then Friends. For my part, Sir, I have only looked
upon your self abstracted from all things else, I see in you things greater and
more shining then your Fortune, and such endowments as will not permit you to
be an ordinary person. You will find I speak this with a great deal of
experience, if you reflect on the discourse you gave me the honor to have with
you in the meadow at Chirac, where having opened your mind to me, I found in
it so much resolution, courage and generosity, as absolutely conquered and took
in mine. I then discovered you had such sound apprehensions of whatever men are
surpised by, that those things which they looked on, as most considerable in
you, were such as you made least account of; nor could any man judge more
impartially of any third person, then you did of your self. I must confess,
Sir, that at that time, seeing you perpetually engaged on precipices, with a
countenance cheerfully confident, and not thinking Constancy able to hold out
at that rate, I found some reason to imagine you were not aware of them. But
you soon convinced me, there was nothing in your person, nor about it, which
you most clearly understood not; so far, that seeing two paces from you,
imprisonment and death, and so many other accidents that threatened you, and on
the other side honors, reputation, and the greatest rewards, you considered
all, without the least agitation, and saw reasons not much to envy the one, or
to fear the other. I was astonished to see a man, that had been bred all his
life in the bosom of Fortune, acquainted with all the secrets of Philosophy,
and that you had learnt Wisdom, in a place where all others lose it. From that
minute, Sir, I entered you into a List of three or four persons I love and
honor beyond all the world besides, and made a great additional of respect and
esteem to the passion I have ever had for you, which I afterward cast into a
far greater affection. This is that I have still, and which I shall preserve
while I live, in so high a deg^ee, that, it is certain, you ought to acknowledge
it, and withal that it is some satisfaction to you, I am so much and so highly,

Sir, Yours, etc.
Madrid. June 8. 1638.
To Monsieur du Fargi^. LETTER XXXV.
SIR,
YOu are, I perceive, as liberal of praises as of any thing else, and not being
able otherwise to relieve me in the exigencies I am in, you would needs send me
the fairest words in the world. I could make no better use of them, then to
return them upon your self, and if I use not the same, I confess I shall be
much troubled to find any to requite the honor you do me. Nor can I but think,
Sir, you writ them out of a foresight of the necessity I should have for them,
and by giving me so much reason to commend you, you have also been careful to
furnish me with materials to do it. This favor obliges me to pocket up with
patience, the reproaches you load me with, and as I receive from you those
honors I durst not own, it is but reasonable, I bear the reproaches I have not
deserved. Were it not for that, I should call you to account for accusing me
for the extreme desire I have to leave this place, and to know, why you call
that hatred, which you might have attributed to affection. I am as much as any
man acquainted with the delicacies of Spain, but if I mistake you not, Sir, you
think there cannot be any so great for me, as to be near my friends, and if I
have quarreled with Paris it self, by reason of my Masters absence, you should
not think it strange I am grown weary of Madrid, and that I can take no
pleasure in a place where I cannot have my health. But though this passion were
as unjust as you would have it, yet should you not reproach me with an
injustice I am guilty of for your sake, nor take it ill, I over-passionately
desire to see you. If I were to struggle with the same inconveniences, in a
place where you were, as I met with here, they would not seem to me the same,
when I were to encounter them in your company; and I wonder at that expression
of your Letter, where you tell me, that there are on that side some persons,
with whom, what seems most unpleasant in life you would think easily
supportable. Assure your self, Sir, I am also very much eased by that kind of
consolation, and say you what you please, being where you are, I can fear
neither melancholy nor necessity; when I call to mind that even in the
Mountains of Avergne, we have ever found with you, cheerfulness and good
entertainment. There are certain treasures in your person, which I shall enjoy
maugre all ill-fortune, and never know either poverty or sadness. This is that
which makes me so impatient to get out of this place, and if all my Friends did
not oppose it, I should at my departure take the shortest way to find you out,
and would my self take down those e^^igies of you, which you say they have
hanged up upon the F^ontie^s. I suppose, Sir, your imagination is a little more
brawny, then that you should expect any consolation for that; but it is not to
be thought that you, whom death it self, as near as you have seen it, could not
frighten, should be daunted at his picture. It is not by that posterity will
judge of you. Fortune, who is always unjust, will find out some other more to
your advantage, and for these effigies, she will one day bestow Statues on you.
All the changes she has wrought in your life, seem to me like those pieces of
Tale which is used on pictures, which alter nothing in the countenance, and
only change what is about the person. Thus does she make sport with great men,
she loves to see them in diverse shapes, and in a breath she advances those into
a Chair of State, whom she had exposed upon a Scaffold. Sir, I hope, at my
arrival, to find that change, and for my own particular, I only desire I may
soon have the honor to see you, and that all my fortunes were so engaged in
yours, that I might never be happy or unhappy without you. Ia^,

Sir, Yours, etc.
Madrid. June 8. 1633.
To the Lady Marchioness de Rambouillet. LETTER XXXVI.
MADAM,
THough my liberality were, as you say, greater then Alexander's, it were more
then recompensed by the thanks you have been pleased to return it. Even his
ambition, as insatiable as it was, would by so extraordinary a favor have been
limited. He would have valued this honor more highly then the Persian Diadem,
and he would not have envied Achilles the praises of Homer, might he have had
yours. In like manner, Madam, the reputation you do me considered, if I envy
his, it is not so much that he has acquired, as what you have bestowed on him,
and he has received no honors which I conceive not below my own, unless it be
that you do him, when you call him your Gallant. Neither his own vanity nor his
Flatterers have ever advanced any thing so advantageous to him, and the quality
of the Son of Jupiter Ammon was not so glorious as that. But if nothing can
cure me of the jealousy I have of it, yet, Madam, knowing you as I do, I am
confident, if you do him that favor, it is not so much because he is the
greatest of mankind, as because it is two thousand years since he was. However
it be, we may see in this the greatness of his Fortune, which not able to
forsake him so many years after his death, adds to his conquests a person
which celebrates them more then the wife and daughters of Darius, and has
reinfus'd into him a Soul greater then that of the world he has subdued. I
should fear, by your example, to write in too high a style, but can a man aim
at one too high, speaking of you, and Alexander? I humbly beseech you, Madam,
to assure your self I have for you the same passion, which you for him, and
that the admiration of your Virtues shall ever engage me to be,

Madam, Yours etc

To Monsieur de Chaudebonne. LETTER. XXXVII.
SIR,
WHile you commend my Eloquence, you should have some regard to my modesty, and
take ^eed you cause me not, to lose a good quality, which I have, out of a
desire to bestow on me one I have not. However, I have received your
commendations with much joy, not that I believe that of my self which you say
of me; but look on it, as a signal expression of your Friendship, and that you
must needs have a great affection for me, since that to favor me, you have
been surpised in a thing, whereof you are otherwise so well able to judge.
Thus, Sir, do I find it more to my advantage, to think my self unworthy the
honor you do me. And that which raises me to a good opinion of your
Friendship, I am more proud of, then what would have raised me to a good one of
my self. And indeed, if I were as eloquent as you would have me, I should
desire to make no other advantage of it, then to gain in your Soul that
place, which I know, by that I have there already, and to persuade you, to love
me as you do. And if, this granted I were to desire any thing else, it were in
the best dress of words that can be had, to return my thanks to those the
Ladies, who, you say, honor me their remembrances. But particularly for one
of them, I would gather all the Flowers, and all the graces of Rhetoric, and
should immediately write her a Love-Letter, so full of gallantry, that she
should be ready to hearken to me, at my return. Since they are three, me
thinks neither of then should take any offense at it. They were too too cruel
to deprive me of the liberty of my wishes, and hinder me from building Castles
in the air, since it is the only satisfaction I have. I begin now to
entertain a stronger hope of my return, then I have had hitherto. The pleasure
I shall find in leaving this place, will recompense the disturbance I have met
with in it, and I feel, by way of advance, the joy I shall receive when I see
you. Thus, Sir, is there a Mixtion of all things; good and ill are dispersed
every where, and when either of them is not at the beginning, it fails not to
be at the end. I am as yet uncertain which way to take, but think I shall take
shipping at Lisbon. If it had been left to my choice, I would have passed
through France, how dangerous soever it might have proved. Not that I would be
thought over-confident, or take, as you do, a dangerous way, when I may take
another; but the shortest seems to me ever the surest. Besides, to tell you
truth, I could never imagine my self born to be hanged. Nevertheless, I am
commanded to take another way, and the persons whom you have given an absolute
power over me, and should exercise it over the world, have so express'dly
ordered it, that I may not so much as put it into deliberation. In the mean
time, while they charge me not to hazard my self, they cast me on the mercy of
the Sea and Pirates. Yet I dare tell you, I fear neither, and am afraid more
of the calmes which may delay my happiness of seeing you; I shall not trouble
my self for the rest, if I may but soon arrive at that, together with the
opportunities, to make it one day appear by my services, that you have made
another man (...) generous as your self, and that I am, as much as I ought to
be,

Sir, Yours, etc.
Madrid Jun. 8. 1633. To avoid here a long Catalogue of Names, which you say is
troublesome, I present my services to none. But you must give me leave, to make
it my humble suite to you, that you would give order, that in case the
Countess de Moret, and the Count her Husband, and my Lord his Brother have
forgotten me, they may at least acknowledge me at my return. I cannot
apprehend, by what misfortune it has happened, that I have heard nothing from
them, having written two Letters to them. However I am confident, they cannot
want a goodness for me, since they have so much for all the world.



To Mademoiselle Paulet. LETTER XXXVIII.
MADAM,
I Have now an excellent subject to write you a Love-Letter upon, and I might
safely say, that I pass the days without light, and the nights without closing
my eyes. At least, this has been my course of life, since I left Madrid. In
ten nights, I have made ten days-journey, and am got to Granada, without seeing
the sun, unless it be at rising and setting. It is here so dangerous, that the
comparison which Bordier made between him and some eyes, holds no longer: for
as they did, so he burns all he sees, and is no less to be feared then the
Elementary fire. I have made a shift to escape him by the help of the
darkness, having always the whole Earth between us. I rest my self at this
present in the shade of a mountain of snow, wherewith this City is covered.
Three days since, I saw, in Sierra Morena, the place where Cardenio and Don
Quixot met; and the same day I supped in Ven^a, where were accomplished the
adventures of Dorotea. This morning I saw el Alhambra; the place of Vivarambla,
and the Zaccatin, and the street where I lodge is called, la call de Abenamar,
Abenamar, Abenamar Moro de la Moreria. I am extremely satisfied, to see the
things I had imagined: but much more to imagine the things I have some times
seen. How excellent soever those objects may be, which present themselves to my
eyes, my imagination furnishes me continually with such as are more: and I
would not exchange the images I have in my memory, for all I have seen that is
most real and most precious. Yesterday, looking on the walks and springs of
Generalifa, and wishing to meet there Galiana, Zaida, and Daxara, in the
condition they sometimes were in, I wished there moreover another person, one,
to do her right, a thousand times more gallant, and more amiable, and such, as
Xarifa, set near her, would forfeit her name and her Beauty. By these marks, I
think, I have sufficiently described her. But it is a lamentable thing, Madam,
that I am forced to speak with so much artifice and circumspection, and that I
cannot easily be persuaded to say, it is your self. You may indeed give me
leave to be gallant now, being the source of all Gallanterie, and at the place
whence it has spread all over the world. From hence I hope, with God's
assistance, in four days to reach Gibralter, whence I am resolved to pass to
Ceuta, and to visit the place of your birth, and your Parents, who reign in
the deserts of that Country. As I shall give them an account of you, so, Madam,
I humbly desire you to do of me, to the persons whom you know I most love and
honor, and to do me the favor to assure particularly three of them, that how
far soever Fortune may cast me, my better part shall ever be where they are.
For your part, you cannot doubt of the passion wherewith I honor you, and know
that I am but too much,

Madam, Your, etc

To Monsieur de Chaudebonne. LETTER XXXIX.
SIR,
I Write to you in sight of the Coast of Barbary, and there is between me and
it, but a channel three leagues broad, and yet is the Ocean and the
Mediterranean sea both together. You will be astonished to find so far off a
man, who takes so little pleasure in running, yet was in such have to find you
out. But advice has been given me, that this season is not the fittest for
Navigarion, by reason of the great calmes happening therein, and that I should
hardly meet with any opportunity till September furnished me with the desire
and leisure to take this progress, choosing rather to undergo the toil of the
voyage, then the Sloth of Madrid So that when I had seen at Granada, all that
was remaining of the magnificence of the Moorish Kings, el Alhambra, le
Zaccatin, and the famous place of Vivarambla, where I had some time imagined so
many tournaments and combats, I am come to the point of Gibralter, whence as soon
as a Frigate shall be provided for me, I hope to pass the Straight, and see
C^uta, and at my return thence, take my way to Cadiz, St. Lucars, and Sevil,
and so to Lisbonne. Sir, I have not yet had any occasion to repent me of this
enterprise, which all the world thinks rashly undertaken in this season.
Andalusia has reconciled me to all the rest of Spain, and having passed
through diverse parts of it, I should have been troubled I had not seen it in
that part where it is most beautiful. You will not think it strange I should
commend a Country, where it is never cold, and where the Suga^-canes grow. But I
dare assure you it affords such a Melon, as would invite a man four hundred
leagues to eat it, and that Land for which a whole Nation wandered so long in
the desert, could not be, in my opinion much more delicious then this. I am
waited on by Slaves, who might be my Mistresses, and, without danger, I can
gather palms any where. This Tree, for which all old Greece fought, and is not
to be found in France, but in our Poets, is here as common as Olive Trees, and
there is not an Inhabitant of this part, who has not more of it then all the
C^^sars. There needs but the same ^ight to see the mountains covered with
snow, and the Valleys burdened with Fruits. Here is Ice in August, and Grapes
in January: Summer and Winter being so reconciled, that when the Earth becomes
hoary through the age of the year every where else, it is here always green
with Laurels, Orange Trees and Mir^les. Sir, I must confess, I endeavor to
make it appear the most beautiful I can, and having heretofore aggravated the
ill I have met with in Spain, since I cannot retract what I have said, I think
my self obliged to celebrate to the greatest advantage, the good I have found
in it. In the mean time, it may be much wondered at, that a man of such a
Libertine humor as I am of, should make such have to quit all this to find out
a Master. But, to be just, ours is such a one, as no enjoyments are to be
preferred before the honor and satisfaction of his service; Liberty, which is
thought the most amiable thing in the world, being not to be esteemed such in
competition with his Highness. You know I am not much given to Flattery, and it
is one of those remarkable endowments his Highness has, that he cannot suffer
it. But it must be acknowledged, that besides those glorious Virtues he derives
from the greatness of his birth, his affability and goodness, the beauty and
vivacity of his understanding, the delight wherewith he hears good things,
and the grace wherewith he entertaines others with them, are qualities hardly
to be found any where else at the height they are in him, and were it not for
the sight of something rare, that I wander about the world, I need go no
further, but shall do better to get near his person. I consider every thing
here with much more curiosity, then I have of my self, to satisfy one day that
of his Highness. And I doubt not, but, when I shall have the honor to
entertain him therewith, he will be more knowing in it then I am. The
prodigious memory of this Prince is one of those considerations I found so much
encouragement in during my exile, for I am confident I have a place there
still, since I have some time had the honor to be there, and I shall not be
so unhappy, as to be the only thing, it should disburthen it self of. His
Highness, who could never forget a Tribune, an Aedile, no, not a Legionary
Soldier, once mentioned in History, will not, I hope, one of his Servants; and
the whole terrestrial Globe being much better in his Imagination, then in any
Map, how far soever I may go, I need not fear I shall go beyond his
remembrance. However, since I owe all the honors, and advantages, I have
received to the mediation of your goodness, I shall entreat you, to take
occasion to acquaint his Highness, how infinitely desirous I am of the honor
to cast my self at his feet, and what orisons I daily put up to Heaven, for
one, in whose welfare the whole world is concerned. If this once granted, I
desire any thing of you, it is only that you be pleased to see, that Time
deprive me not of any part of that affection, whereof you have been so liberal
toward me. But observe where the excess of my own carries me, in that it
makes me distrustful of the most constant and most generous of mankind. But
you, Sir, who are not ignorant, that all those, who love much, are guilty of
certain agitations not strictly justifiable by reason, will be pleased to
pardon me this fear, and allow me excusable, as being with so much passion,

Sir, Yours, etc.
I heartly wish that the Countess of Barlemont, and the Princess de Barbanson
knew how infinitely they are in my thoughts at one of the extremities of
Europe, and that I am going to cross the Sea, to see if Africa, which they
say, always produces something rare, own any thing comparable to them.



To Mademoiselle Paulet. LETTER XL.
Madam,
I Am at length got out of Europe, and have passed the Strait which limits it,
yet the Sea which lies between us, can smother nothing of the passion I have
for you, and though all the Slaves of Christendom are free, when they touch at
that Coast, I am never the less yours for that. Be not troubled to see me
break forth in gallantries so openly, the air of the Country has inspird into
me something of cruelty more then ordinary, whence it comes I am grown more
consident, and whenever I shall treat hereafter with you, expect to find me as
a Turk does a Moore. However you should not take it ill to be entertained with
Love at such a distance, and if it were but only out of curiosity, you should
be glad to see the Love Letters of Barbary; there wanted in your adventures
that, of having a servant beyond the Seas, and as you have some of all
qualities, it were but fit, you had some in all Quarters of the World. I engraved
yesterday the Characters of your name upon a mountain, not much lower then the
Stars, and whence are discovered seven Kingdoms; and to morrow I send
challenges to the Kings of Morocco and Fez, wherein I offer to maintain, that
Africa never produced any thing so rare, and so cruel as your self. That done,
Madam, my business here is at an end, but to go and see your friends, to whom I
intend to propose the marriage, which has made so much noise heretofore, and
endeavor to gain their consent, that there may be no further delay in it. For
ought I hear, they are people not very easily accessible, I shall be much
troubled to find them, I have been told, they should be at the bottom of Lybia,
and that the Lions of that quarter are less, both as to nobility and growth.
There are some young ones sold here, which are extremely handsome, I am
resolved to send you half a dozen of them instead of the Spanish Gloves, for I
know you will esteem them more, and they are cheaper. Here may be had here for
three Crowns the prettiest that can be; it is but play with them, to carry
away a man's hand or his arm, and, your self excepted, I never saw any thing
more agreeable. Be pleased to prepare Mistres Anne to converse with them, and
to give them the place of Dorinda. I shall send you them by the first sail
hence, and I would to Heaven, I could come along with them, to cast my self at
your feet! There it is, Madam, where they will have occasion to be the
cruellest creatures in the world, and think themselves the Kings of all others.
But the greatest assurance I can give that the air of Africa has instilled
some barbarousness into me, is, that I have now written three pages, and
thought to have finished my Letter without speaking of M. D. R. I asture you,
wherever I am, she is ever in my heart and remembrance, and even at this
moment, Ben che di tanta lontananza, li fo humilissima riverenza, and I am her
most humble and most dutiful servant, Branbano. While I am out of Christendom,
I dare not say any thing to Madam de C -- for Mademoiselle do R -- I believe
she will never wish me any thing the worse for that; I hope one day to be out
of her debt, for the pleasure I had in hearing the adventures of Alcidalis, by
intertaining her with my own. I shall acquaint her with things strange and
incredible, and for her Fables I shall give her History. Your Servant has
still in my mind the place his merit, and the affection he honors me with,
may justly claim. There is a Friend of yours, Madam, I love so passionately,
that I forget my duty, and withal to tell you, how much I honor and respect
him; The infinite desire I have to continue in his remembrance, has almost put
me upon an indiscretion, for without considering the motives, which might
dissuade me, there wanted but little that I had written to him, and had
resolved to begin thus.

My Lord; I could not forbear writing to you, were it only out of an humor,
to date my Letter from Ceuta. After I had viewed the places of the Kings of
Grenada, and the habitation of the Abencerrages, I was desirous to see the
Country of Rodomont, and Agramant, and be acquainted with the earth that
produced all those great men.

Che furo al tempo che passaro i Mori
D'Africa il Mar' e'n Francia nocquer tanto.
I believe, Madam, this beginning would have made his teeth water to see the
rest, which I should have continued in this manner.

If your inclinations are not changed, I am confident, my Lord, you will not
censure this curiosity, and that amidst the felicity surrounds you, there are
certain Hours when you envy the condition of a wretched exile. If I can but
get a Pass, as I hope I shall from Tetuan, and that the Alarbes who ramble
about the Country, hinder not my design, I shall have the satisfaction, within
some days, to see a City full of Turbants, a people that swears not by any
thing but Ala, and African Ladies, who have nothing barbarous but the name, and
who, notwithstanding they are burnt by the Sun, are yet fairer, and cast a
greater luster then he. It Is a Country, my Lord, where women are not fools,
cold not cruel, they are all amorous, full of fire and spirit, and, what some
will think the better of, they never go to Confession. By the pleasure I shall
have to see all these things, you may easily judge, my Lord, that it is not
always Fortune makes men happy, and that there is not any so bad, wherein
there may not be good emergencies, if a man can but happen on them. While you
are taken up with your good Fortune, and are troubled to make your advantages
of it, and to employ it well, I enjoy leisure and Liberty, wherein my
misfortune leaves me. Me thinks, now that I am deprived of France, I possess
all the earth besides, and that I ought no more to quarrel at the Destiny which
forced me thence, then people troubled with the Lethargy, should with those
that smite, and pinch them that they might awake. In stead of spending my life
among ten or twelve persons, in five or six streets, and two or three houses,
changing place now every hour, I see mountains, deserts, precipices, flowers,
and fruits, which I never had heard named, different Nations, Rivers, and Seas
I was not acquainted with. Every day I change Cities, every week Kingdoms; I
cross in a moment out of Europe into Africa, and I could with more ease find
out the source of the Nile, then I could some time have done that of Rongis. If
this condition, my Lord, admits not the enjoyments you find, in the
conversation of the only amiable persons in the world, I at least want those
hours of distraction and melancholy, which poison even to the Soul, and can,
in an hour, break the strongest heart in the world. In that state of innocence
wherein I live, I importune Heaven every day to preserve you from it, and that
it would long continue in your person, the purest generosity of our age, and so
many other excellent qualities it has bestowed on you. If after this I may
advance any particular wishes for my self, it is, that after so many wanderings,
I might have the honor to entertain you therewith, and assure you, My Lord,
that I resent, as I ought, the essential obligations I have to be, --

But Madam, for a man that should have written a Love-letter to you, methinks I
introduce many things which could not have been admitted he. You see what it
is not to be versed in it, and to have kept me so long in suspense; if you had
given me leave at the beginning to have sent you of that kind, I could at this
present write excellent ones, and should not end my Letter so simply as I do,
by telling you I am,

Madam, Your most humble and most VOITURE the
August 7. 1633.
To the Same, With diverse Lions of red Wax. LETTER XLI.
MADAM,
THis Lion having been forced, for some reasons of State, to depart Lybia with
his whole family, and some of his friends, I could not think of any place where
he might retire with more honor then near you, and that he is in some sort
fortunate in his misfortunes, if they procure him the acquaintance of so
excellent a person. He is descended in a right line from an illustrious Lion,
that about three hundred years since, reigned in the mountain Caucasus, from
one of whose grandchildren, it is affirmed here, came your
great-great-grand-father, who was the first of all the Lions of Africa, that
came into Europe. The honor he finds in a relation to you puts me in hope you
will entertain him with more mildness and compassion, then you are wont to have,
and I believe you will think it no disparagement to be a Sanctuary to
persecuted Lions. This will infinitely add to your reputation through all
Barbary, where you are already esteemed beyond any thing on that side of the
Sea, and where a day passes not but I hear some one of your actions celebrated.
If you can help them by any invention to disguise themselves under a humane
shape, you will do them a transcendent favor; for by that means they might do
much more mischief, with more impunity. But if that be a Secret you will never
communicate, you may yet sufficiently oblige them, by affording them a refuge,
and the assistance of your advice. I assure you, Madam, they are accounted the
cruellest and the most savage of all the Country, which I conceive you will be
extremely satisfied with. There are among the rest some whelps, who, by reason
of their infancy, can only kill children, and worry sheep. But I believe in
time, they will prove good ones, and arrive to the virtue of their
forefathers. At least, I am confident, they shall find nothing about you that
shall make them degenerate or abate their courage, and that they shall be as
well brought up, as if they were lodged in the shady Forests of Africa. In
this hope, and the confidence I have that you cannot let them want any thing
which your generosity might oblige you to do for them, I do now give you thanks
for the good entertainment you shall afford them, and assure you that I am,

Madam, Your most humble and most dutiful LEONARD, Governor of the

To the Same. LETTER XLII.
MADAM,
SInce my departure from Madrid, it has cost me, to get this place, the travel
of two hundred and fifty Spanish Leagues, which signify little less then five
hundred French; it is not ill gone of a man that had a pair of Legs so
intractable, that it was reproached to him he was not able to go. I have
thought all this pains well employed, when at my arrival at this place, I have
met with the Letters you were pleased to send me of the third of July. And
though I was shown at Sevil, all the riches of the Indian Fleet, and saw six
millions of Gold in one chamber, yet I may presume to say, I met not with so
great Treasures as that you sent me. You may easily imagine, what satisfaction
it was to me, to receive so many assurances of affection from all the only
amiable persons in the world. And certainly, this joy should have been greater,
then a man so disaccustom'd to have any could have born, if it had not been
moderated by the news you send me of your own indisposition. The colic could
never hitherto take in all my patience, but taking me that way, it has made a
shift to conquer it, and grief seizes the most apprehensible part of me, when
it assaults you. I am extremely cast down to see my soul divided between two
bodies so weak as yours and mine, and that I am forced to be always sick of
your miseries or my own. In fine, Madam, I perceive there must be found out for
me some more substantial remedies then the Ejacle; we shall be forced to submit
to the advice of Physicians, and must resolve rather that one Virtue then two
virtuous persons should miscarry. Charity, which is the principal, obliges us
to have a compassion on our selves, and since grief and sickness are the
effects of sin, and one of the curses which attend it, we should do all that
lies in our power to avoid it, and consequently be the more careful of our
health. You are more concerned then I to take this advice, for mine is at this
present in a better posture then it was wont to be, or the toil and agitation
of the journey has made me for a while ^esse apprehensive. If you will enter
into this course of Physic, I will expect you in England, and carry you to all
places according to the custom of the Kingdom of Logres. I came out of Madrid
contrary to the consent of all, with that little Prudence, which you know the
Philosophers of that Sect, whereof your Husband is, admit in any thing relates
to their pleasure; and in a season when the Spaniards dare hardly creep out of
their houses, I had designed to run through the greatest part of Spain, and to
spend the month of August in the hottest place of Europe. In the mean time, I
have, thanks be to God, effected my design, and now that I am gotten into
Portugal, I laugh at those who said, I went to end my days in Andaluzia. To do
you right, Madam, it is no ordinary reputation to you to have been able to fire
a man's heart so cold as mine. The Sun, which here cleaves the earth, and
scorches the Rocks, found it a hard task to warm me, and I have not met with
any inconvenience in this journey, save only one night that I had not clothes
enough about me. Three men, who came out with me, have been forced to stay by
the way. But for my part, neither heat, nor weariness, nor the
disaccommodations of the Country for Travel, have been able to stay me, and
though I have met with many beds, worse furnished then those of Villeroy, and
many chambers more inconvenient then those of Panfou, and that I have not flept
any thing, worth mentioning these three months, yet am I got hither more
vigorous and more sound then ever. Think not therefore I am the same unweildy
creature you have sometimes seen; I am quite another man, then you can imagine
me to be. I am grown six large fingers in this journey, being extremely
Sunburned, my face grown longer then it was, my teeth before close, my eyes
black, and my beard of the same color, and according to the imagination, I
have at the present of the Baron de Villeneuve, I am become more like him, then
Monsieur de Serisay. That countenance, which stood between mildness and
simplicity, is grown into a quite contrary posture, and there is nothing about
me which is not changed, save that my eyebrows do still meet, which is a
signification of a very wicked person. I hope within three or four days to try
whether I can as well bear the trouble of the Sea, as all the others, and
as soon as an English bottom, which has already taken in two thirds, shall be
fully laden, we shall God willing take the advantage of the first wind. It
must be acknowledged, there is something very humorous in my Fortune; since I,
who could not be prevayl'd with to go so far as the Exchange in the best
company in the world, have now traveled beyond Hercules, and it is above a
month since I have passed his Pillars: and whereas I was not able to endure a
gentle wind in Madam de Rambouillets closet, I am now going to challenge two
and thirty in the midst of the Ocean, and of Winter. That indeed is not the
greatest hazard, but thirty Sail of Barbary Ships continually crusing about
this coast, do more frighten those that go hence, and are more terrible then a
Tempest. I would gladly know, if there be any Astrologer, who having seen me
ten years since in St. Denis's street in my round cap, could tell me, whether I
run a great hazard of rowing in the Galleys of Algier, or being devoured by the
Fishes of the Atlantique Sea. But in case it be destined I should be taken by
the Pirates, I wish I may fall into the hands of a famous Courser, which I have
heard Mademoiselle de Rambouillet sometimes name, and whose name has something
in it, makes me have an inclination for him. If Mademoiselle de Rambouillet can
guess at him in four times, and afterward name him without laughing, I will
give her a little comb was presented to me yesterday, which had been made for
the Queen of China. However, I am not much troubled about my ransom, or that I
shall be forced to redeem my Liberty, for the Captain of the Ship has assured
me, I need not break my sleep for that, and has sworn he would fire the
ammunition first. See the excellent remedy I have, and consider if I had not
better embarked my self with an Anabaptist. But what is most remarkable, and
is a very pleasant occurrence, is, and I profess I tell you no lie, that I go
in a Ship that has no other freight then my self, and eight hundred chests of
Sugar, so that if I come to a good port, I shall arrive absolutely conserved,
and if it happen I be cast away with all this, I shall have this comfort, that
I shall die in sweet water. Judge now whether I could have met a more favorable
opportunity. All considered, I cannot but think this voyage will prove
fortunate to me. I hope the Zephyrs, which are listed among the mild spirits,
will be merciful to me, and that before this Letter comes into France, I may be
in England. I humbly beseech you, Madam, to do me the favor to assure the
former of the two persons, whom I just now mentioned, that, though I shift
places so much, she has still that in my memory she was ever wont to have. All
the objects that present themselves to me, put me in mind of her, and when ever
I see a magnificent Structure, a pleasant palace, or a gallant City, or some
great Masterpiece of Art, or Nature, I wish, and should gladly know her
opinion of it. That, wherein she was so favorable to me, raises me to a
greater satisfaction of my self, then ever I had in my life: and the value she
sets upon me, coming from so good a hand, seems to me, to be beyond any. There
could not any thing have happened more to my advantage, then to receive this
honor from a person that can so well judge of it, and of whom it may be truly
said, never Lady so well understood gallantry, and the Gallants so ill. I have
only to wish, that when this favor was done me, it had been expressed in
other terms, then saying, she gave el precio de mas galan al Re Chiquitto. It
had been, me thinks, enough, to have said only Chico: but the style of the
Gentlewoman who writ it considered, I wonder she did not make it Chiquittico,
which yet might have been done to very good purpose, and with so great a glory
as I received, 'twas fit I should be minded of my meaness. I do all lies in my
power, to justify her goodness, for I confess that as things stand, I were too
too ungrateful, if I should any way complain of her, after the honor she has
done me in writing to me. Nay even when she reproaches me with my meaness, she
raises me above all the rest, and with a sheet of Paper, makes me the greatest
man in France. The Letter I have received from her, is so excellent, and so
full of ingenuity, that after this, I know not whether I shall have time and
confidence enough to write to her. I am never so proud as when I receive her
Letters, nor ever so humble, as when I am to answer them, and consider how far
my wit is below hers. I would gladly, Madam, say some thing here of that
person, who may be ever commended, yet never enough, and I could wish there
were words as fair, and as good as she, to speak of her accordingly: but there
is no language in the world can reach that, and the utmost effort of the
imagination, can only conceive something worthy of her. I thank Madam de
Clermont, that the extraordinary heats of Andaluzia have not made me sick, and
that I have had good weather both times that I passed the streights. I beg
the continuance of her favors, and her faith, that I shall never forget such
essential obligations. I shall fully discover between this and England, how
great the affection is, she is pleased to honor me with. They say there are in
Norway a sort of people that sell winds, but I think she can bestow them; if I
have it not always a-stern, I shall quarrel with her: with her permission, I
humbly kiss the hands of Madam Atalanta' and though her Inconstancy be one of
the chiefest things I have commended in her, yet I desire her not to have any
for me. I divide a thousand thanks between her and her Sister, for the honor
of their remembrances of me. But, Madam, this is the fifth Page I have written,
without writing to you, and when you have read so many things directed to
others, not saying any thing to you, methinks it might be asked you, Why so
mealy-mouthed are you for no Cake? You know it is your fault rather then mine.
If you have a mind to any, you need but say so, you shall have all I promise
you, and consequently the shares of all the rest. However I cannot forbear
acquainting you, with the extraordinary joy I take to understand, I am wholly
in that man's heart, who you know is so much according to mine. I know well
enough, it is no place of rest, and think Africa affords not any more hot, nor
is there any Gulf in the Sea knows more agitation. Yet all hinders not, but I
am infinitely glad to be there, and think my self extreme happy, to have so
much room in the best heart of France. If besides there are only hands and feet
left, I doubt not but the hands are fair, and the feet clean, and there would
be some I should kiss with all my heart. But since he has been pleased to do
me so great a favor, I humbly entreat him, to consummate the obligation, that
he would permit you to get in further then any other, and at least allow so
much room there, as half your body will take up; for to be free with you,
Madam, I cannot be entire in any place where you are not. If he have still the
same inclination to well-doing he has had, I know he will not deny me that
favor, and that it will be no hard matter, to dispose us somwhere aside
together. I stand in very much need of such an opportunity, that so I may have
some private discourse with you, and acquaint you, so that we may not be
overheard by others, with what I feel for your sake, after what rate I love and
honor you, how insupportable your absence is to me, how delightsome your
memory, and how passionately I am,

Madam, Yours, etc

To Monsieur de Chaudebonne. LETTER XLIII.
SIR,
I Thought I should never have gotten out of this Country, and my misfortune
seemed to have blocked up the Havens of St. Lucars and Lisbon. I left Madrid
upon intelligence sent me that an English Ship should set sail from Sevil
within six weeks, and to avoid waiting there, and to come just at the time
appointed, I had gone about by Gibralter and Granada. In the mean time, besides
those six weeks, there are six other past, and yet I think it will be a month
ere she get out to Sea. The impatience of being so long in one place, forced me
to leave that, yet making account to return, to come and see this. And though
some had written to me, that it was no convenient sailing, yet I resolved to
run a course of six score leagues, and to pass la Sierra Morena twice, only
for my recreation. But, as good Fortune would have it, while I was on my way,
arrived an English Ship, wherein I shall, with Gods assistance, venture my
self. I have stayed for her these three weeks, within two days she will have
in all her lading, and will be gone with the first wind. Fortune disposes very
odly of me; after she had employed me to travel through Spain, in the month of
August, she engages me in a voyage in November. The Ship carries twenty five
Guns, is strong and well munition'd, all, I think, not too much, for there are
a many Turks upon the Coast; and in this season, I think, I shall not be so
unhappy, as not to meet with some tempest, which I may one day describe to you.
This opportunity is questionless the greatest I could hope; it is an easier
voyage hence, then from Sevil, and I would not for any thing I had staid there,
and not have taken a resolution to see Portugal. I assure you, Sir, that Dom
Manuel, and the Lady Osoria have a great Estate here, which if they could get
into, they were better accommodated then they are at Brussels. Lisbon is in my
mind one of the noblest Cities in the world, and deserves as well to be seen as
any. It consists of three mountains covered with Houses and gardens, which
have a River of three leagues breadth, for a looking-glass to see them in, and
that part of the City which is under Tagus, seems not less beautiful then that
which is on the shore. Yet I think it tedious staying here, for I have not
received a Letter since my coming, and have no account of any thing. They are
acquainted here with no other France, then the Antarctick. The greatest part of
those I see here, are men of the other world, and ordinarily, you have more
news here of Cape Vert, and Brazil, then from Paris, or Flanders: So that
though it should be some satisfaction to me, to be in the Marmalade-Country,
where I have a Mistress sweeter then it, yet all will not do, and I pray as
heartily for a departure, as if I were in Norway. Spanish adventures are
strange things; I have continued in it as chaste as a young Gentlewoman, whom I
believe you see every night, and yet notwithstanding all this continence, I am
able to show you one day Love Letters in the language of Castile, Portugal, and
Andalusia; and if a black-Moor-Lady, who lives over against me, could write, I
should show you some in that of Guinny: but I hope the winds will blow over all
these affections, and bring me to a place, where I have others more solid, and
more settled. I leave you, who alone make up the greatest part of them, to judge
with what impatience I desire that happiness. And I dare further assure you, I
shall never quit Mistress with so much pleasure, as when I come to wait on you
again; and I, who had ever secured my self from the droopings, disturbances,
and discontents of Love, do now meet with them all in Friendship. Sir, I think
you will credit me, and be easily persuaded, that a man on whom you have
conferred so many good things, and whom you have taught a many more, cannot
want the resentment he ought to have thereof. Constancy and Gratitude are two
Virtues I have learned of you, which I cannot better employ then toward you:
and when, out of an extraordinary generosity, I shall have paid you twice over
what I owe you, yet were I not quite discharged, and I should be still endebted
to you for that very generosity, since I had acquired it through your
acquaintance. It is not therefore my intention to be discharged from a person
to whom I take so much pleasure to be beholding; and besides that my
inclination and my reason direct me to you, I shall gladly entertain any thing,
whereby I am infinitely obliged ever to be,

Sir, Yours, etc.
Lisbon, October. 22. 1633.
To Monsieur -- LETTER. XLIV.
SIR,
TO satisfy you that I think your excuse very allowable, I shall also make use
of it; it is more requisite for me then for you, and you should not think it
strange, that I, who have always less wit, and at this present, less time
then you, should allege it in my necessity. You will easily be persuaded when
you understand, that it is reported this day, we shall be gone within five: so
that I must buy a Bed, Quilts, Coverlets, a little flock of sheep, twenty Cowes
and Oxen, fifty Pullets, and a certain number of such Cats as they keep in
Lockers; for the Captain will not find the Passengers entertainment. Besides
all this, I am to write to Sevil, to Madrid, to Flanders, to France, to
Friends, to Merchants, to Ministers, (of State) to my female acquaintances and
Mistresses, and what troubles me above all, I have every day to answer a
Love-letter written in Portuguez, which I profess, I can neither read nor
understand. Judge now, whether ever man was so overwhelmed with business, and
if I can hope to return you a Letter that shall requite yours, when I cannot do
it with all the assistance of leisure. It has brought with it all the
consolation, which a fair-condition'd and a good friend is capable of, and has
in my opinion, wrought in me a wonderful effect, having shaken off the
melancholy I was in, by reason of not hearing from my Father and Friends in
France. I wonder I receive nothing by the Ordinary. Though I tell you of a
departure within five days, yet forbear not to write to me, for, as you know,
the days of this Country are not of four and twenty hours, and those of Spain
are not much longer then they are at Norway, I could wish the Knight of the
round-Table were in an humor to come hither, for I know not what more
magnificent title to give him; and it must be confessed no man can be more
ingenious then you to find him excellent titles, and certainly he can never
meet with a better opportunity. Besides that the Ships at St. Lucars are
farther off by four and twenty Leagues, I believe it will be fifteen days ere
they be gone, and so he may triumph over diverse nations, and after he shall
have set on fire so many Castilian Beauties, melt down the Portughezes.
Certainly if I were so wise as not to love any one of those I see not, I could
never have had a better time in all my life, then the three months last past,
absolutely dis-entangled from all trouble, and business, and hearing no news,
but what you were from time to time pleased to afford me. The true Secret to
gain health and cheerfulness, is, that the body be in motion, and the mind in
rest; this is a benefit of Travel: but commonly it happens quite contrary; when
we think to repose our selves, we take most pains. The trot of a jadish mule is
not so tedious, as the expectation of Carnero in the Secretaries walk, and the
least business ill managed, afflicts more then ill weather, or an ill way.
Assure your self therefore, that I extremely like the design you have to
undeceive your self as to fortune, and to forsake her as a dangerous Mistress;
her caresses and her malice are equally to be feared, one way or other she
destroies all her Servants, and those who look on her favors as real
advantages, are much more mistaken then those who take an egg for an
Oyster-shell. If I had not ended the sentence with that jest, methinks I should
have been too serious for a man that is not wont to be such, and besides is in
haste. When you have a mind to this retirement, I will wait on you, and we will
get into some place, where we will call every beast as we please our selves; we
will, like Adam, give all things new names, and when we shall go contrary to
all other men, and call that ill which they call good, it may be we shall be in
the right. But till that come to pass, and while I am in the world, I beg your
utmost diligence to continue me in the friendship of these Gentlemen. There
comes not a commendation from the Count de Maure, which I value not at a
million; number the Maravedis the Fleet may amount to, and reflect on the
wealth you have sent me. If the Count Stufe has the same fortune with you, as
he has with me, he should have ruined you long since; for I cannot make my
party good against him, but he has got ground even to my very Soul. It Is true,
you are concerned in this loss, since it is the taking away of what is yours,
from one that is wholly devoted to your Service, and is, more then any man,

Sir, Yours, etc
Lisbon. Oct. 15. 1633
To Monsieur -- LETTER XLV.
SIR,
I Do not certainly know who you are, but I am satisfied, the Letter I have
received must needs come from a person of more then ordinary Virtue, and I may
well expect one day great assistances from you, if what you say be true; that
you know better how to serve me then to write. If you be the same I imagine,
the good office could not come from any hand whence I should have more highly
valued it; and I am extremely elevated to see so much goodness in a person, in
whom I had before observed all other excellent endowments. As you have in this
done me a greater honor then I could have expected* so let me assure you. Sir,
that I acknowledge it beyond any thing you can imagine, and that I am as
generous to resent your favor, as you have been to do it. I think you are so
well opinion'd of me as to believe it, and you who by the bare communication of
your acquaintance, take in the hearts of all those that see you, cannot doubt
but you are extremely beloved by those whom you so particularly oblige thereto.
But, Sir, amongst all the afflictions you have gained, I dare profess, there
is not any attended with more respect and esteem then mine, and that I am, as
indeed I ought, more then any man,

Sir, Yours, etc
Lisbon. Oct 22. 1633.
To my Lord Marquess de Montausier, who was since killed in La Valteline.
LETTER. XLVI.
SIR,
I Have read your Letter with all the content and satisfaction that could be
expected by any one from a person so costive as to writing, and withal so
deserving. Methinks now there is not any thing which I may not promise my self
from your Friendship, since you have for my sake taken a little pains, and you
could never have given me a greater assurance you will make good those words
you have sent me, then that you have written them. Only I cannot but be
troubled to think, that amidst all these expressions of tenderness, there is
some occasion for which you could with me hanged. To be free with yon, Sir,
methinks it speaks some flaw in the affection you bear me, and I think, without
standing much on punctilio's, I ought to take it ill. However I run so much
hazard of it otherwise, and I wish with so much passion, that you had all your
merits can pretend to; that if there wanted nothing else to gain a Kingdom, I
deal sincerely with you, I think I should be as willing you should have it, as
you can be your self. I should more easily pardon Fortune that affront, then
what she puts upon you, in not granting what you might justly claim, and
denying you the title she has bestowed on Monsieur du Bellay. But since the
business sticks not there, and that it is possible I may have a hundred Crowns
of Martyrdom, yet you not get one of Soveraignety, another course must be
taken, and without hazarding the lives of your friends, you must owe this
honor to none but your self. I assure you, that while I ramble through so many
Kingdoms, I ever think of you, and shall endeavou to lay some plot which you
may one day put in execution. Not long since, I saws even Kingdoms at one
sight, whereof there were four in Africa, which I wished yours, and which it is
a great pity you should suffer to continue in the hands of the Moors. But if
you like not the air of Barbary, there is news come that the Island of Madera
is upon some thoughts of revolting, and that it will bestow it self on the
first that shall maintain it against the Tyranny of the Spaniards. Imagine with
your self. I pray you, the pleasure there is in having a Kingdom of Sugar, and
if it be not likely our conversation there will be full of sweetness. How great
and powerful soever the charms and engagement of Paris may be, yet, if I
mistake you not, they cannot divert you from laying both hands on such an
opportunity; and that if any thing stays you, it must be the inconveniences of
Travel, and the trouble it is to rise betimes in the morning. But, Sir,
Conquerours cannot alwayly till eleven of the clock; Crowns are not gained
without toil; nay even those that are made of Laurels and Myrtles are bought
at a dear rate; and Glory expects that her Suitors should suffer for her. I
must needs confess, it is almost a miracle to me, that Fame should not have
br^ught some tidings of you, before I had the honor to receive them from your
self; and me thinks I am farther then I thought I could have gone, when I
consider I am in a Country where you are not known. Suffer not a reputation so
just as yours, to admit any limits, nor stop at the bottom of the Pyrenean
mountains, over which that of so many others has flown; come your self and
make it is way, and if the Gazette says nothing of you, let History do it. As
for that, which some would needs oblige you to take ill from me, which is, that
I had given you the quality of a Squire; I assure you, Sir, you had no great
reason to be offended at it. I shall make it appear to you, that Amadis de
Gaul, under the title of the Squire of the Sea, accomplished his noblest
adventures; and that Amadis of Greece, while he was yet called the Squire of
the burning Sword, killed a great Lion, and relieved King Magadan: but these
are artifices of the Gentlewoman you know, who having sworn my ruin, is
troubled to see me under the protection of one of the bravest men on earth. It
will therefore be hard for her to force me out of yours; for I profess to you,
Sir, (and this I speak more seriously then all the rest) it shall ever be my
endeavor, by all sorts of devoits and humble services, to deserve the honor
of your affection. Methinks it were a great want of judgment, generosity, and
virtue, not to love perfectly a person in whom all these are in so high a
degree, and therefore I, who extremely esteem these qualities wherever I find
them, must needs acknowledge them particularly in you, where they are associated
with so many other graces, and attended by so much Civility. Be therefore, I
beseech you, assured, that as I understand you better then any man, so shall I
ever have a greater honor for you, and while I am worth any thing, shall never
be other then,

My Lord, Your, etc
Lisbon. Oct. 22. 1633.
To my Lord Marquess de Pisany. LETTER XLVII.
My LORD,
IF I have any esteem for the two Letters you have so much commended, it is
that they have procured me the honor to receive one of yours; the very sight
whereof confirmed me in the judgment I had long since made of you, that you
should one day raise a jealousy in the Lady your Sister and me, and deprive us
of the reputation of writing well, to which, you laid aside, we might have
pretended. But since so many other ways invite you to honor, be pleased to
allow us the other, and propose not to your self a thing so difficult, as to
imitate in all things your noble Father, who not satisfied with the reputation
of one of the stoutest men in France, would needs add to it, that of writing
and speaking better then any other. If you are so resolved, my Lord, no doubt
but you may arrive to it as well as he; but, beside the abundance of pains it
will cost you, you neglect an opportunity to oblige us, and to give us an
extraordinary confidence of your affection, by slighting, for our sakes, a
glory whereof you might claim so great a part. There are others more solid, and
more worthy you, whereto you should aspire. But if nevertheless you think
there is nothing so inconsiderable as that a virtuous man should despise it,
and that glory is that only, whereof he ought not to be liberal, I must
confess, I have nothing to object against so just an apprehension. The
affection your noble Sister has for you, I know to be such, that I am
confident she will soon pardon you the wrong you may happily do her herein. And
for my part, I shall suffer my self to be overcome, since it will be by you; and
for the glory you shall take from me, I will participate of yours, as much as
may amount to that of,

My Lord, Yours, etc
Lisbon. Oct. 22. 1633.
To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. LETTER. XLVIII.
MADAM,
IT is a great pity you do not take pleasure in doing good oftener, since that
when you undertake it, none can effect it with so much obligation as you do. I
have received, as I ought, the intentions you had to put a complement upon me,
and you have not only eased me much of my misfortune, but have put me in some
doubt whether I should call it so; and telling me the goodness you have for me
shall last no longer then my unhappiness, you have almost forced me into a
wish it may never end. See Madam, what powerful charms you lay on me; two
things so opposite as your presence and your absence, and whereof one is
certainly one of the greatest goods, and the other one of the greatest ills in
the world; you have, by the bare pronouncing of three words, so changed that,
that I know not which is the good, which the ill, and consequently, whether of
them I should rather wish. However, since I must needs be tormented one way or
other, I had rather suffer near you; and how hard-natur'd soever you may be,
methinks you cannot do me a greater injury then that of not seeing you. I must
confess Madam, I fear you beyond what you can imagine, and more then any thing
in the world. But if the respect I owe you, permits me to express my self so,
I love you much more then I fear you. Though you frighten me a little
sometimes, yet I cannot but be pleased to see you under all the shapes into
which you put your self; and if you should be changed once a week into a
Dragon, yet even in that condition, should I be in love even with your scales
and your claws. According to the prodigies I find in your person, I believe
this Metamorphosis may one day happen, and where you tell me that three days
in a month you are not to be conversed with, methinks it signifies some
disposition thereto. I am of Monsieur de -- C opinion, that you will come to
some strange end, and I hope time will at length show us what we should think
of you. In the mean time, be as you will, it must be confessed you are a most
amiable creature, and while you shall continue under the shape of a
Gentlewoman, the world shall not offord another so accomplished, or so much to
be esteemed as you, nor any man, who can be, as much as I am,

Madam, Yours, etc.
Madam, I humbly beseech you to still your Dwarf with a Complement instead of
an Answer to the challenge he has sent me, which is, I will have nothing to do
with any that relate to you, and for his Mistress's sake and his own, I
infinitely esteem him, and desire his Friendship.


Lisbon. Oct. 22. 1633.
To Monsieur Gourdon at London. LETTER XLIX.
Sir,
I Have had more leisure then I could have wished, to send you what you desired
of me at my coming away. The winds are so far from carrying away my promise,
that they have given me occasion to keep it. They have staid me here already
eight days, which I should have thought very long and tedious, if I had not
brought from London imaginations that should last longer then that. I assure
you, you are much concerned therein, and that the best I have had, have been
employed on you, or the things I have seen by your means. You will happily guess
hence that I speak not of the Tower, nor yet of the Lions which you brought me
to the sight of; In one Person you have shown me more treasures then there are
there, and withal more Lions and more Leopards. It will not be hard for you to
judge that I speak of the Countess of Carlisle; for there is not any other of
whom may be said so much good, and so much ill. How dangerous soever it may be
to think of her, yet have I not been able to forbear, and to be sincere with
you, I would not give that representation which I have of her in my mind for
any thing, though the most perfect I have seen in the world. She is, I must
confess, a person full of enchantment, and there were not any other under
Heaven should command so much affection as she, did she but know what it is,
and carry about her the sensitive Soul as well as the rational. But considering
the conditions we know her to be of, we can say no more of her, then that she
is the most amiable of all those things that are not good, and the most
delightful poison that ever Nature produced. I stand in such an awe of her wit,
that it had almost diverted me from sending you these Verses; for I know she
can judge what is good, what ill in any thing; and that all the Goodness which
should have been in her will, is diverted into her Judgment. But it matters not
much if she condemn them. I dare not wish them better, since they were made
before I had the honor of her acquaintance; and I should be much troubled to
have prais^d or disprais'd any one to perfection, for I reserve both for her.
For your part, Sir, I trouble you not with excuses, but such as are allowable;
on the contrary, I conceive you very much in my debt, and ought very much to
acknowledge it, that I am overcome to send you such as are not. What ever they
are, I dare assure you they are the first I ever writ twice. If you knew to
what a height of sloth I am arrived, you would acknowledge my compliance
herein, no small argument both of the power you have over me, and how
passionately I desire to be,

Sir, Yours, etc.
Dover, Dec. 4. 1633.
To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. LETTER L.
MADAM,
BE your Letter ever so full of threatening, yet can I not but consider the
excellency of it, and admire with what artifice you join Beauty and Terror
together. As the skins of Serpents presents us with Gold and azure, so you
would enamel the most poisonous expressions with the livelyest colors of
Eloquence; and when I read them, I cannot but be delighted with the same things
I am frightened at. You begin very soon to make good your promise to me, that I
was not to expect your favor any longer than while I wanted that of Fortune.
Now that she seems to have rocked me into a little rest, you will needs
disturb it, and thereby show me, that, though I have escaped Seas and Pirates,
yet am I not safe, and that you are more to be feared then all; yet could I not
believe, Madam, that my avoiding a quarrel with your Dwarf, should engage me
in one with you, or oblige me to answer a Challenge, being guilty of no other
affront then that of returning a Complement. But if so be you think I have not
acquitted my self as to that, what you call contempt, you might have termed
respect and fear; and conclude that the same Creature who disarmed Monsieur de
M -- of his sword, might very well cause my pen to fall out of my hand. Nay
though he had some cause to complain, yet were you not obliged to protect him
against me; and if you wish me ill for his sake, I may safely say you have
quarreled with me upon the most trivial account in the world. But if you are
resolved to persecute me, all my excuses will not be able to divert you, and
a^l I wonder at, is, that you would trouble your self to find out any pretense
to do it. It signifies nothing to me that I have escaped so many dangers; the
place where you are, will be a perpetua^ Algiers to me; and though I am at
Brussels, yet never was I nearer Captivity or Shipwreck. However, Madam, I
would not have you imagine the flames of those living creatures you threaten me
with, to be that which puts me into any fear. It is long since I am proof
against such accidents, and, whatever you may say, I fear Death more from your
hands then from your eyes. Of all the passages of your Letter, which I admire
in all things, I have made a particular remarque at the exclamation you make,
speaking what pleasure it had been to you, if I had been taken by the Pirates.
It speaks certainly an excessive goodness in you, to wish me for two or three
years in a Turkish Galley, only that there might be greater dive^s^ty in my
Travels. The excellent curiosity of hearing from me how I had dressed the
Camels in Barbary, and with what constancy I had suffered Lashing with Lathes.
By your manner of speaking of it, I cannot but believe you would have been glad
I had been spitted on a stake for half an hour, to know what kind of torment it
is, and how a man finds himself after it. But what is most remarquable, is,
that you make these wishes, after you have as you say, reassumed the form of a
young Lady, and had acquired more mildness and humanity. There is as little
justice in all this, as in the Quarrel you would have with me for Alcidalis. Be
your self judge, Madam, whether being upon the same seas, and engaged in the
same dangers as he, I could forget the troubles I was in my self, to relate
those he had run through; and being orewhelm'd with my own misfortunes, I
should make it my Business to write his: And yet I have ^one it in the midst of
all my distraction; I have written above a hundred theets of his History, and I
have been careful of his life, at a time when, I assure you, I was not much of
my own. And yet, Madam, I would not have you judge by this how diligent I am to
please my female* acquaintances. When I shall have rendered you all services
imaginable, these appearances would not discover to you the least part of that
passion I have for any concernment of yours. If you would know it well,
consider the cause thereof, rather then the effects. But your imagination,
though admirable in it self, is here too narrow, and if the world can afford
any thing too great for your mind, and such as it cannot comprehend, it is the
respect, the affection and the esteem it has begotten in mine. Being equally
forward to acknowledge the obligations I receive from the other excellent
persons, you may well believe that the Letter I have received with yours,
brought me as well an infinite joy, as an extraordinary honor. You know best
of any one, how far I have adored the merits of him that writ it, and he may
put you in mind that in the time of the Civil wars between you two, I have
sometimes quitted your part to take his. But this last goodness, has found
something of new acquest in my heart; and since I have received it, I crave
your pardon, if there are some intervals wherein I love him beyond any person
in the world. But Madam, that you may not think that all the favors I receive
from him, are derived to me, through your procuration, I am to tell you, that
upon another occasion, he has not long since done me a good office, you being
nothing concerned in it. Which though it were not of the kind that I take most
pleasure to receive, as being such as has given me fresh occasion to reflect
on my cross Fortune, yet I take it as a great honor to owe him those
obligations which I should be ashamed any other, and am glad to receive any
expression soever of his Generosity. He shall swear to you, when you mention it
to him, he k^ows not what you mean, and me thinks I now see him do it; but you
know his inclination and his humor who never forgot a good turn to be done,
and can never remember it when it is. Since the honor your affection casts
upon me is the chiefest consideration that has engaged me in his favors, I
humbly beg your assistance Madam, to render him the acknowledgements I ought,
and to requite him, at least proportionably to my present condition. I kiss a
thousand times, the feet of that incomparable person, who would needs with her
own hand superscribe the Letter you sent me, and with four or five words make a
Present inestimabl, which before was but too precious. You have justly called
her the greatest Beauty and best woman in the world, since that at such a
distance she can raise up those that are cast down. I wish, she, that has so
great an influence over her, may one day find all the happiness which such a
System of Goodness, Beauty, and Virtue may claim, though I see this wish is of
a vast extent. They say the star which I sometimes called the Day Star is
greater and more admired then ever, and that it shines and twinckles through
all France. Though its rays reach not the obscurity wherein we are, its
reputation does, and, as I hear, the Sun comes short of its brightness. I am
glad the Intelligence it is moved by, has lost nothing of its force nor its
light, and that there is not any thing but Madam de Bourbon's wit can bring it
in^o question whether her Beauty be the most accomplished thing in the world.
The manner of her complaints, as I have met with it in a Letter of yours, I
think hugely pleasant; the troth is, the many traverses I have had, may well
raise a compassion in her, in her, I say, who is so well acquainted with my
weakness, and knows that from the Swathingband I have not had to this present,
one day of rest. It has been also disturbed by the discourse at the bottom of
your Letter, directed to King Chiquitto. In Astaranax's Hell I have met with my
own, and have wandered in it three days and three nights, yet could not see at
all. I am extremely troubled at it, for above all things, I would have had King
Georgia's Comb, and it is above two years that I have longed ^or it. Nor are
you to believe you have gotten that I proposed to you; the Queen of China's
Combs are not so easily come by; you must first be pleased to send in writing
the name of the Pi^are, and tell me sincerely whether you named him without
laughing, for there lies all the difficulty: But since you pretend so much to
Divination, be pleased to imagine Madam, all I should add, if I durst make
this Letter any longer. Guess how much I now love you beyond what I did two
years since, and how passionately I am,

Madam, Yours, etc
Brussels, Jan. 6. 1634.
To my Lord Cardinal de la Vallette. LETTER. LI.
MY LORD,
I Cannot but imagine, when you writ the Letter you have been pleased to honor
me with, it was your opinion, that he esteem I have ever had for you, had
gained you some reputation in the world; that upon all occasions, I had given
you extraordinary assurances of the honor of my Friendship; and that in
consequence thereof, I had lent you 2000. Crowns upon a Business of great
importance, and at a time when your credit lay extremely at stake. At least
according to the rate that you thank me, and speak of your self and me; I have
some ground to think, that not minding what you did, you mistook one for the
other, and unawares put your self in my place. Otherwise my Lord, you had not
written as you have, unless it be, happily, that not conceiving there can be any
greater good in the world then to do it to others, you think your self obliged
to those who give you occasion to oblige them, and imagine you have received
the good offices which you have done. If it be so, I must need confess, there
is not any man you are so much obliged to as my self, and that I deserve all
those returns you afford me, since I have given you greater occasions then any
man, to exercise your Generosity, and to do those actions of Goodness, which
certainly are to be esteemed beyond all the wealth you have, or can ever bestow
on me. Amidst the great number of good offices I have received from you, and so
many favors you have been pleased to shed on me, I assure your Lordship, there
is not any I more highly esteem then the Letter you have honored me with. But
if amidst the many things I have with so much satisfaction observed therein,
there be any passage has entertained me with more pleasure then ordinary, be
pleased to give me leave to tell you, it is that where I conceive you speak of
these two persons which at this day make up the most inestimable part of the
world, and to whom, if they be not compared one to another, there is not any
thing under Heaven that may. When ever I do but think my self in their
remembrances, there ensues for that moment a cessation of all my sufferings;
and when I represent to my self the faces of the one or the other, me thinks
that of my Fortune is changed, and that imagination forces out of my mind the
obscurity it is clouded with, and fills it with light. But a greater happiness
is, that being so far from ever hoping to merit the honor of their good
inclin^tions, I cannot but think my self much interessed therein, and am so
happy as to believe what you tell me as to that particular. I am well
acquainted with one, My Lord, who were not so easily persuaded, were he in my
place, and who, after so great a distance for two years, would not live in so
much tranquillity, and so great confidence. According to the satisfaction this
faith affords me, be you judge, whether I am to be much bemoaned, and if there
be not a many whom the world calls happy, are much less such then I: Were it
not for this, I would not certainly ward that distraction which presents it
self here of all sides, nor oppose the melancholy of Monsieur de C -- which I
am fain to beat up perpetually, and which, to tell you truly, is greater then
is imagined. Besides that, he is got into an humor to let his beard grow,
which already reaches his girdle; he is fallen into a tone much more severe
then ever, and sounds somewhat like Astolfos Horn; unless it be on some
discourse concerning the immortality of the Soul, or the Chief Good; or to
carve up some of the most important Questions of Moral Philosophy; he can
hardly be gotten to open his mouth. If Democritus should revive,
notwithstanding his great Philosophy, he would not endure him, because of his
Laughing humor: He has undertaken to reform Zeno's doctrine, as being too
mild, and he will institute a Sect of Stoics Recollects. So that, My Lord, you
desire not any thing advantageous for the Nations, over which you wish him
Governor --

To Monsieur Godeau, since Bishop of Grass. LETTER. LII.
SIR,
YOu ought to have allowed me some time to recover our Language, before I
should be obliged to write to you, it being not handsome, that when I had been
so long a stranger, and am now but just come out of Barbary, I should direct
Letters to one of the most eloquent of all France. This consideration
occasioned my s^lence hitherto; but though I avoided answering your challenges,
I cannot but make some return to your civilities, and notwithstanding all my
evasions, you have found some other means to bring me to reason. My condition
indeed is such, that it is much more honorable for you to have reduced me
after this manner, then to have taken me in by force. It had been no great
reputation to you to overthrow a man already cast down, and on whom Fortune
has bestowed so many blows, that the least can force him to the ground. The
obscurity whereinto she has cast us, admits not of any art or defense; it
would happily fall out otherwise, if not quite contrary to what you say, if you
had set before my eyes the Sum you speak of, and as dejected as you see me, I
might be confident enough to fight you, if that light were equally divided
between us. It Is a greater advantage to have that of your side, then all the
heavens beside. All the beauties that shine through whatever you do, proceed
only from hers, and they are her rays which produce in you so many flowers. To
do you justice, I have never thought any thing so pleasant, as those which are
the productions of your mind. I have seen some of them on the borders of the
Ocean, and in places where Nature could not force out a pass. I have received
Posies made of them, that have even in deserts entertained me with the
deliciousness of Italy and Greece. Though they had traveled four hundred
Leagues, neither time, nor travel, had taken away any thing of their Luster, as
being indeed such as are called immortal, and so different from whatever
derives its being from the earth, that it is with much justice you have offered
them to Heaven. and they ought not to be bestowed any where but on Altars. Take
this Sir, as my sincere judgment of them; and when my curiosity, as you tell
me, had translated me out of the ancient world to search out some rarity, I
have not met with any thing can pretend so much to it as your Works. Africa was
not able to present me with any thing more new, or more extraordinary; when I
read them under the shade of its palms, I wished them you all, and at the same
time that I looked on my self as one that had gone beyond Hercules, I found my
self far behind you. What might have raised emulation in another mind, filled
mine with esteem and affection, you then took that place you demand now, and
accomplished at that time what you think you have yet to begin. Being so well
acquainted with you, it is hard for me to represent to my self such an image as
you would force upon me, or to imagine you so inconsiderable as you make your
self. I cannot apprehend Heaven should crowd so many things into so little
room. When I measure you according to my imagination, I cannot afford you less
then seven or eight Cubits, nor represent your Stature other then that of those
men who were begotten by Angels. Yet I shall not be sorry it should be as you
would have me believe; amongst the advantages I shall receive by your means, I
hope you will make our Stature famous; that shall be henceforth thought the
richest, and you will lift us up above those who think themselves higher then
we. The richest Essences are put into the smallest Viols, and nature seems
pleased to infuse the more precious Souls into the least bodies, and the more
or less celestial they are, greater or lesser is the mixture of earth. She
enchaces the brightest Souls, as Goldsmiths dispose their more precious Stones,
who employ as little Gold as they can about them, and no more then is requisite
to fasten them. You will undeceive mankind as to that gross error, of
esteeming those most, who weigh most: and my lownes, which has been cast in my
dish so often by Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, shall be my Elogie with her. On
the other side, I think the affection, which you say she has for you justly
bestowed; as also that of five or six other the most excellent person the world
affords. But I wonder you make it an argument to persuade me to give you mine,
and that you should think to gain it by the same reasons which should make you
loose it; you must certainly be extremely confident of my goodness, to think I
can love a man who enjoyes all my estate, and has obtained the forfeiture of
it. And yet I shall be so just, that it shall not hinder me, and I doubt not
but you are the like so far that I fear not we shall fall out for that; they
may very well have given you my place, yet so as you should not thrust me out,
nor indeed may it be said it was great if it could not contain us both. For my
part, I shall do all that lies in my power, that I may not be troublesome to
you, and shall so dispose of my self there, as that I may do you no violence.
Since therefore so powerful a concernment is not able to separate me from
yours, you may believe there never shall be any thing that can do it, and that
I am, at all Essaies,

Sir, Yours, etc.
Brussels, Feb. 3. 1634.
To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. LETTER. LIII.
MADAM,
CAR being of so great importance in our Language, I am extremely pleased at
the resentment you have of the injury is like to be done it; and I can
entertain no great hopes of the Academie you tell me of; since it intends to
establish it self by so great a violence. At a time wherein Fortune acts
Tragoedies in most parts of Europe, I find nothing deserves so much pity, as
when I see people ready to banish and prosecute a Word which has done such
faithful service to this Monarchy, and which amidst all the disturbance of the
Kingdom, has continued constantly a faithful Subject. For my part, I cannot
apprehend what reasons they could allege against a Word which marches always
in the front of Reason, and knows no other employment then to introduce it. I
cannot see upon what account they would take away from CAR what belongs to it
for to bestow it on POURCE-QUE, nor why they will needs express that in three
words, which they may with three Letters? What is more to be feared, Madam, is,
that this injustice connived at, will beget others; here will be no difficulty
made to set upon MAIS, and I know not whether S I will be safe. Insomuch that
having taken away all the words of connection, the wits will reduce us to the
language of Angels; or if that may not be, they will oblige us to speak only by
signs. I must confess there is nothing more certain then what you say, that
there can be no greater argument of the uncertaintie of humane affairs. Who
should have told me some years since, that I should have outlived CAR? I had
thought he had promised me a life longer then that of the Patriarks. In the
mean time it comes to pass, that having lived 1100 years in force and credit,
after it had been employed in the Treaties of greatest consequence, and been
honorably serviceable in our Kings Counsels, it falls into sudden disgrace,
and is threatened with a violent end, I have now no more to expect then the time
when I shall hear those sad exclamations which shall say, The Grand CAR is
dead, whose death is of much greater consequence then that of the grand Cham,
or the grand Pan. I know, if one of the greatest Wits of the Age be consulted
hereupon, one I extremely honor, he will tell you that this Noveltie deserves
a heavy censure, that we ought to make use of the CAR of our Forefathers, as
well as of their Land and Sun, and that we ought not to cast off a word that
has been in the mouth of Charlemaign and St. Lewis: But you Madam are
particularly obliged to take it into your protection, since the greatest force
and beauty of our Language is in yours, you ought to have a supreme power
therein, and appoint words to live or die, as you please. Nor do I doubt, but
you have delivered this out of the danger it was in, and by enclosing it in
your Letter, you have given it Sanctuary, and a place of glory, where neither
time nor envy can ever assault it. Amidst all this, I must acknowledge I was
extremely surprised to see you so fantastic in your good actions, in that you
Madam, who without any compassion could have seen the destruction of a hundred
men, could not see the death of a poor Syllable. If you had been so tender of
me as you have of CAR, I had been happy in spite of my ill-fortune; poverty,
banishment, and grief, could hardly have fastened on me; and if you had not
been able to rid me of these evils, you might at least have rid me of the
resentme^t thereof. When I was in hope to receive some comfort from your
Letter, I find it more concerned for CAR then for me, and that his banishment
troubled you more then ours. I confess, Madam, you do well to defend him, but
you ought to be as careful of me as of him, that it may not be reproached unto
you, that you forsake your friends for a word. You make no answer to any thing
I writ to you of; to those things that concern me, you have nothing to say. In
three or four Pages you can hardly take occasion to remember me once, and the
reason is CAR -- I beseech you consider me the more for it another time, and
when you shall undertake the protection of the persecuted, remember I am of the
number. To oblige you to do me this favor, I shall ever make use of him, and I
assure you, you owe it me, CAR I am,

Madam, Yours, etc

To the Same. LETTER LIVE.
MADAM,
THough I had presented you with as many pearls as the Poets have made Aurora
weep, and where I have only given you a little piece of Earth, bestowed on you
the whole Mass, you could not have been more magnificent in your return of
thanks. The great Mogul's vine might be bought with the least of your words,
and all the precious stones it is burdened with, cannot boast so great a
Luster, and so much light as the things you write. This beginning, Madam, is
very glittering, and those, who at any rate will needs write high words, would
be glad to begin thus that which they call a handsome Letter. But the Messenger
allows me not the time; besides that I have diligently read that of your Lady
Mother's and your own, I am resolved not to be any further engaged with them.
To deal truly with you, there cannot be any thing more gallant or more
handsome, then what I received from her, and the miracle is, that a person that
writes but once in four years, acquites her self so well, as if she made it her
constant study, and had all that time minded nothing else. I must now expect to
be more and more acquainted with the mira^les of your house, but I must needs
withal acknowledge my astonishment For your part, Madam, I am particularly to
admire, that being able to dance so well, you are as excellent at writing, and
carry the garland at the same time for three things which seldom lodge
together, being the best danccr, the best sleeper, and the most eloquent young
Lady in the world. But I am extremely pleased that you have engaged Monsieur
Maigne into the Morrice-dance; this humor I am as much taken with as any of
yours, and take my wo^d, we will never dance it unless he make one. You are
further to know, that Monsieur de Chaudebonne is so deeply melancholy that he
cannot shake the Bells well, and I think I should be my self much troubled to
dance it well in your absence, being as I am,

Madam, Yours, etc

To the Same. LETTER. LV.
MADAM,
NOw that your Letters are more to be admired then ever, I confess, I should
be much troubled to want them. Having since my receipt of your last, lost al
hope of writing any that are good; it must needs be a great satisfaction to me
to receive such; nor is it any more then justice you should restore me to that
honor which you make me loose otherwise. The great opinion I have long since
conceived of your wit, had prepared me without surprizal, for a sight of all
these miracles, and I was satisfied nothing could proceed from it I should
wonder at, unless it produced things mean and ordinary. But I must confess it
has attained a degree of perfection beyond any thing I could imagine, and that
I was never able to imagine what you have since discovered. I assure you,
Madam, I speak without flattery, and my indignation is not so far spent, as
that I should be drawn into that humor. You are now gotten so much beyond your
self, as you were before beyond all others; and the most inconsiderable Letter
you now write, exceeds Zelidas and Al^idalis; nay though there were put with
them into the scale both their Kingdoms. In the very height of my anger, I
have not made any complaints against you that were not accompanied with your
praises; and one reason that now obliges me to a reconciliation, is a fear I am
in, that if I should express any thing of displeasure, it would be thought an
effect of envy rather then of a just resentment. In the mean time, your heart
knows whether I have not cause, and without speaking any more of it, it is
there I would have you make me satisfaction; besides that having been
tongue-ty'd so long, I would not break forth* immediately into outcries. I
only entreat you to consider, what kind of creature I should have been, having
at the same time lost all hope of returning into France, and the comfort of
your remembrances and Letters. One of these misfortunes was enough to crush me,
but I am miraculously kept up, by reason they are come together, and that the
one encourages me to support the other. When after this expression of your ill
inclinations toward me, I reflected on the multitude of evil Fortune delivered
me from, by hindering me from falling into your hands; methinks proportionably
to that, perpetual banishment was no hard measure, and that at least I should
die here of a death less cruel. But Madam, this comfort is not so good but
that I stand in need of some other, for I assure you that Monsieur de -- is not
so sad as I am, and that cloudy black melancholy wherein you have sometimes
seen me, was but the shadow of what I now struggle with. I humbly beseech y^u
dissipate it, and if possible, find out words to conjure away these clouds. But
who doubts your power to do it, and who knows not that your wit defies all
impossibility? To that then I recommend my self, and since the least
imaginable, and most extraordinary things are easy to it, let it render me
capable of some enjoyment here, and make me live till such time as I shall tell
you, how much I am, beyond whatever you believe,

Madam, Yours, etc

To the Same. LETTER LVI.
MADAM,
I Wonder not at all if you laughed your belly full when you writ me the
strange report that flies up and down of me, that I have neither goodness nor
Friendship: for to be free with you, never was any thing advanced equally
ridiculous, and you had as much reason to entertain it with any credit as if
you had been told that Monsieur de Chaudebonne flies along the high way, or
has married Monsieur de (...) Gentleman's daughter. For my part, I only admire
that such a false reporr and a calumny so ill grounded, should spread so far,
and infect three Provinces, and you must needs acknowledge that the raiser of
it, whoever it be, must be the most mischieveous and most dangerous person in
the world. I shall make a strict enquiry after him, and if I discover any
thing, assure your self I shall find a way to be revenged, though it were a
person as amiable and as dreadful as your self. Your L^dy Mother, does certanly
an action suitable to her ordinary Goodness, in not permitting such an impiety
to be spoken of upon her ground, but let her only forbid the mention of it in
her chamber and closet, for I know some confident and resolute enough to
attempt it. For poor Madam de Chalais whom you expose like a sheep to my rage,
is innocent as to this crime; she has erred only through simplicity, and I
should rather complain against her Mistress, should I quarrel with other then
the Authors of this importune: I do seriously think it very strange, that she,
who is well acquainted with the charms of ease, and the enjoyment there is in
doing nothing, should call me an ungratesul man, for no other reason but
because I let her alone, and trouble her not with such Letters as she should
heartily wish she had never received, when they come to be answered. Though I
trouble not my self to take any notice of it, she has still the place in my
inclinations she ought to have; she is according to her own desire at the
bottom of my heart, in the most retired part of it, where she enjoys quiet
without noise. I do indeed love and honor her as perfectly as she deserves,
and when ever* I read any thing that is pleasant, eat any thing that is good,
or digest it any thing well, I think on her, and wish her the like. But to the
business Madam, you sent us a piece of news a while since, whereto I made no
answer, because then I was somewhat vexed, and it is such, as, next to what you
write of the report, I have thought as strange as any thing I ever heard.
Though I am as much as any man acquainted with the excellencies of my Lady
Marchioness -- yet I cannot sufficiently admire, that, at a time when she
cares not for any man living but her Cook and her Doctor, clad in the root, as
we have seen her, and hooded with three table-napkins, she should conquer a
heart so hard to be taken in, as I imagine that of the Marquess de la --
should be, and send a Lover to sigh for her in the deserts of Thebais. The
young Squire you tell me of would do well to follow him, or if he has no mind
to undertake so great a journey, let him turn Hermit at Mont Valerien. I deal
plainly, instead of making those demands you advance on his behalf, it were
better he held his peace, and would not speak for these seven years: However,
Madam, since it is your pleasure, I will answer them. To the first, why being
clad in blew he seems to be clad in green, is one of the subtillest Questions I
ever read of in any science; and for my part, I see not whence it should
proceed, unle^s it be that the Squire, who was wont for some years never to get
up before one of the clock, and not to be dressed before three, is now become
more sloathful, and is not seen before candlelight. However it be I am of
opinion that at all adventures he put on green, to see whether it will appear
he is not clad in ble^. To the second, which is, to know whether he should
choose either to take la Motte, or deliver me into the hands of the Sarazins; I
find, abating all consideration of my own interest, that the latter attempt;
besides that it is more just, is much the more difficult, and consequently the
more glorious. There are 25000. ^oot and 6000. horse charged to guard me with
as much care as they would Guelderland, and Anwerpe; which yet he should not
much stick at. Hector le Brun defeated without any assistance thirty thousand
men in Northumberland at an time, and I think he was not so valiant as the
other. Let him not fear there will be a want of Laurels here for him; the
fairest that Europe affords are gathered in this Country. For my own part, I
promise him the trouble of disposing, and making them into Crowns; but besides
the Sarrazins of the male there are others of the female sex he must encounter,
for these will be loath I should be carried hence; and therefore the report
which you say is so rife of me in three Provinces, never came yet into any of
the seventeen. I am not thought so mischievous here, as where you are; and it
is thought, that though I knew not sufficiently how to love, I am yet my self
amiable enough. But Madam, I must confess I derive no comfort thence, and think
my self very unfortunate, if, among the many in France for whom I have a
particular adoration, there be not some one so well opinion'd of me as to
believe my heart is made as it should be; that I can have a constant honor for
what ever deserves it, and an infinite love for what is infinitely amiable. I
know not as to your part, what you think of it, but I am confident there is not
any one has less reason to doubt it, or that I am, less then I ought, or you
can wish,

Madam, Yours, etc.
Your Lady Mother will be ever the best and discreetest Woman in the world; she
could not have promised me any thing should please me better, then the
Galliard-dancing which she says will institute at my return. But you should
have said, the Galliard-Feast, you corrupt the Text; this has made me reflect
on the time past, and consider how different it was from this. Then when I lay
upon straw I thought my self upon three Quilts, and now though I had a dozen
under me, I should imagine my self laid upon thorns. See Madam what a condition
the most easeful Gallant of Brussels is in. But he who called me so in a Letter
to you, knows not all my afflictions, and imagines not how much my soul is
troubled that I am far from all that love me. You know how this is to be
understood, and what rank, as to that point, those two admirable persons hold,
which is such as no other ought to be admitted into it. All that come out of
France hither speak of them with admiration, and tell miracles of their
goodness and beauty. I humbly beseech you, Madam, to employ your interest to
preserve me a place in their remembrances. The Person to whom you know I owe so
many obligations, adds daily now-ones to the old, and not many days since
honored me with his recommendations in a Letter to the Count de Brion. I
acknowledge it, as I am obliged to do, and though I had no more goodness and
Friendship, then is reported, yet shall I never want the resentment I ought to
have of the honors and good offices he has been pleased to do me; but I fear
he may become too serious, which I beseech you to reform.



To the Same. LETTER. LVII.
MADAM,
THough you assured me that the Isle of France was not any of the three
rebellious Provinces, yet I suspect some of the Islanders of the female sex,
and there is particularly one I wish in my power that I might inflict that
punishment on her she deserves. Though they were innocent as to any crime save
that of an easy inclination to believe what is injurious to me, I should find
them guilty enough, and be not a little troubled to have offended so much
against them. I have had much a do to apprehend what you say of the Raven, and
the King of England's Son; but if I mistake not, it is one of the wickedst
devices in the world; you never did any thing against me I took so hainously,
and I shall never forget it till I am revenged. But to what height is the
persecution arrived, and what may I not expect now that your Lady Mother seems
to declare against me? I was extremely astonished when I discovered her
writing, and found she abused both me and my faithful Friend* And yet I cannot
believe she did this out of her own inclination, and it must needs be that you
forced her to write it with a poniard at her throat. All this, Madam, put
together, raise in me an extreme rage, but the kindness I received from you
has appeased me. I have found in Monsieur de Chaudebonne's Letter the sugar
you thought to have put into mine, and have tasted it with the greatest
pleasure I ought. I must confess we have not so good here; send me of it often,
I beseech you, I shall convert it into good temparament, and contrary to the
tenet of Physicians, That all sweet things turn to choler, it shall allay
mine, which is at this time much stirred. But to speak truly, it is horrid
impiety to abuse a poor child who would take the pains to learn French for my
sake, and who had the wit to make choice of me above al those that are here. In
the mean time I dare answer, you that very suddenly she shall writ after
another manner, and within three months she will be in a condition to revenge
her self. In those days, when Madam de -- used the words Fleering, and
pitiful, and though she might not say Sad, her writing was much at this rate,
and yet now her wit is cried up every where, and coppies of her Lette^s are
dispersed thus far. ^ut to satisfy you as to the Question, you press me to
answer sincerely and conscientiously, I tell you, Madam, truly and sincerely,
that I do not think there is any person ever thought that it was for my
reputation I had sent the Love-letter you have seen; and were I yet to choose,
I had rather have made a Letter of that kind, then such a judgment as that.
But I ought not to be so f^ee in my opinion of any thing, not knowing of whom I
speak, when I had been snapp'd so as I have in what I have said of some who can
remember what they did in their cradles. I must confess I thought it would be
laughed at, nay that it ought, but since you and Monsieur de la -- have said it,
freely recant what I said, and shall take heed how I offend persons that
remember things at such a distance --

To the Same. LETTER. LVIII.
Madam,
WEre you not the most amiable person in the world, you would be certainly the
most abominable, as being guilty of a certain implacability which were
insupportable in any other. You demand peace after the rate that others grant
it, and to decide a quarrel, you use words that might beget a war. I know not
how I came to dishonor my self so much; give over your snarling, let me hear
from you every week. This certainly is a strange humility, and an excellent
method to exercise the Christian Virtues. You command me further not to take
any thing amiss from five and twenty years to five and twenty years, as if
your favors were not to be expected, but when those of Heaven are open, and
that there is requisite a Jubilee to absolve those whom you have offended. Thus
far, Madam, had I proceeded, when I received your second Letter, which has
appeased me very much, by acquainting me that you desire not I should be hanged
unless you were present. It is certainly an infallible argument of the good
inclinations and the great tenderness you have for me, that you wish not this
accident should befall me, unless you had also the satisfaction to see it. When
I had so long implored the assistance of your wit to find out words that might
allay my unhappiness, you could not have be thought you of better. For know,
nothing could more encourage me to continue at Brussels then to tell me they
wish me hanged at Paris, so that this place which I have hitherto looked on as
a prison, I must now consider as a sanctuary against your persecutions. I
cannot easily cre^it what you tell me of Madam de -- nor that she should take
your part against me. If she have, Fortune is more righteous then either of
you, by hindering her Letters to come into my hands. To be free with you, it is
much to be lamented, that you have spoild so good a nature, and I shall be more
troubled that you have corrupted her Innocence, then to see that you have
condemned mine. However it be, assure your selves, you cannot take any
resolutions against me which are not unjust, and which I shall not one day make
you both repent. This, Madam, is not spoken out of Vainglory, but of that
confidence which ordinarily accompani^s such as deal uprightly, and is the
effect of a good conscience. Were I conscious but of the least default, and had
any way deserved your menaces, I should not have these good intervals which you
see I sometimes have, and instead of curing others of the Spleen I should die of
it my self. If I have cured your Mother of that misery, I shall willingly
undergo what other soever may befall my self. The assurance I have of the honor
of her remembrances, and the affliction it is to me that I cannot see her;
divide my happiness and my misery, and I wonder not so much, that she wishes to
see me above any one, since I believe not any man can be more pleasant then my
self, when I am but near her. That Philosophical Friend of ours whom you have
so opportunely remembered with his little twinkling eyes, had them almost
started out when I read to him that passage of your Letter. To say truth,
Zeno's soul would have been startled at such an emergency, and that of Monsieur
Mignon afflicted and cast down. Philosophy, which has remedies for all other
misfortunes, knows not any to qualify the least loss may happen to a man in
the esteem of Madam Rambouill^t. For how great an Enemy soever it may be to the
passions, yet I cannot disapprove what may be had for so rare a person, not
think it much a man should do that for her sake, which she would have done for
Virtue's. I know not Madam, whether she can as easily instruct me not to love
you; but what likelihood is there I should ever learn it, when Monsieur de
Chaudebonne is my Tutor therein? I do not, I must confess, much hope it, but
am resolved, what misfortune soever it may procure me, ever to remain,

Madam, Yours, etc.
Brussels. June 30. 1634.
To the Same. LETTER LIX.
MADAM,
I am extremely troubled that you can give me no greater hope of peace, and
that you are never at a loss, as to wit, so much as when you are to do me some
good. For knowing it, as I do, capable of all things, I must needs think the
default rather to be in your will, and while I shall find you so little
favorable to me, I shall have cause to believe you are not so good as you
pretend to be. I fear me the assurance your Brother gives of your Justice, will
prove rather an argument of your Tyranny, which once strengthened takes away
the liberty even of complaint. Were he as far from you as I am, he would happily
be of my opinion, and were I in his place, it may be I should be of his. In the
mean time, Madam, whether it be an absolute peace or only a Truce that you
afford me, I am glad to make my advantage of it, I have already performed one
of the conditions on which you give it me; M.D. having proposed another way to
me how to write to her, I could not but make use of it, though I was much
desirous my Letter should have passed through your hands, for I hoped it might
have been bettered thereby, and was resolved earnestly to entreat you to
correct it. It Is not above four days since it was sent, Monsieur Frotta who is
yet here, having with much solicitation, taken charge of it, For Alcidalis, I
shall not leave him, till I have brought him into Africa, which I hope will be
very suddenly, for we see Land already. But Madam, I cannot make him happy till
I am become such my self; I cannot bring him to see Zelida till I have met with
Monsieur Mandat; and it must be another spirit then what I have at present, to
express his joy, and his good fortune. To be free with you, next to his Story,
what you relate to me concerning Martha, has pleased me as much as any I ever
heard; but it is but the beginning thereof, her Fortune shall not stop there,
nor would I swear that we shall not one day see her Queen of Mauritania. All
which notwithstanding I despair not but she may be hanged, but it will not be
so soon. I am infinitely glad for what she has procured you from the Duchess
of Savoy, and that honors attend you from all parts of the world. I could also
have easily gotten you one of the Mustachoes of the King of Morocco, and a
handful of the beard, and two of the grinding teeth of the King of Fez. But
since the death of his Majesty of Sweden, I conceived you would no longer
hazard your Friendship among that sort of people, which obliges me to be more
reserved; for I remember you have often blamed me for engaging you always to
Lovers, such as you care not for. If I am discreet for your concernments,
Madam, I must be such for my own; what opportunity soever Fortune may favor me
with, I shall have a care not to be trapann'd by her, and I shall live longer
then I expected, if the Prophecy of the sage Enchantresse prove true. I humbly
beseech her to believe, she cannot more justly assume that title with any one
then with me; to say truth, whatever she does, enchants me, I have spent a
whole day in reading the four lines she has written to me. I shall take her
advice, and avoid Gradafilea, as I would Scylla and Charybdis. Give me leave to
return my most humble thanks to my Lord Cardinal de la Valette, for the
remembrance he has honored me with in a Letter to the Count de Brion; as also
to tell you how far I am troubled at the indisposition of Mademoiselle Paulet.
Her favor which you tell me should not last above twenty four hours, will put
me into one for many days, nor shall I shake it off, till I have had other
news. M. d'A. would not pardon me the freedom which you will, if she saw how
ineffectuall her advice proves, and that I cannot avoid speaking of other
persons in your Letters. She would utterly despair of any good of me, and
would, with much more reason then ever, conclude me defective as to gallantry;
but though she place you above all this world affords, if she knew what rank
you have in my inclinations, I assure you, she would find me as much as might
be desired,

Madam, Yours, etc.
March 3.
To my Lord Marquess of Sourdeac, at London. LETTER LX.
MY LORD,
THough the crosseness of my Fortune should have hardened me for all sorts of
Afflictions, yet can I not digest that of not receiving something from you: and
me thinks the want of your Letters is a misfortune able to shake the constancy
of a Virtuous man. I have with much impatience, these many days expected that
you would honor me with an answer of the last I writ to you and which I put
into the hand of your noble Lady. But now my patience is quite spent, and I can
no longer adjourn an humble suite that you would put me out of pain, and
acquaint me by Letter what accident has hitherto deprived me of that
happiness. You see my Lord, what assurance I have in your words, and how great
confidence I repose in your goodness, since I dare beg so boldly, a favor I
can never deserved, if you had not promised it me, and which I press you to
pay me with as much rigor as if it were a just debt, though it be only an
effect of your indulgence and liberality. And since you have ever expressed so
much inclination to that Virtue, I think you will not be a little pleased to
see, that, in spite of Fortune you can still practice it, and that it is in
your power to do him a Courtesy who desires it of you. All I can assure you,
is, that it shall be well employed, and duly acknowledged, and that you shall
not in any thing make a greater demonstration of your Goodness, then by
assuring me of the honor of your affection, and giving me leave to pass every
where under the quality of

My Lord, Your, etc.
Brussels, Aug. 25, 1634.
To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. LETTER LXI.
Madam,
I Have not passed one Hour of the day wherein I read not the Letter you writ
to me at midnight, and though I am not wont to be much pleased with the
courtesies are done me at those hours, yet I have entertained this with more
satisfaction then can be expressed. Having considered it well, I have found it
not to proceed from one asleep, and am confirmed in the judgment I sometimes
made of you, that at that time your mind is more vigilant, more clear, and more
vigorous than at any other. While I would find out the reason of it, I shall
not admit the least suspicion of any ill of you, nor take notice as a strange
thing, that you keep Robin-good-fellows hours. I am more inclind' to believe,
your understanding knows no night, and being, as it is, a spring of Light, the
obscurity which makes others dull and heavy, cannot hurt it; for when all
things else are covered with it, that breaks forth with greater luster, the
shadow of the Earth being as unable to reach it as the stars. Though I
expressed my self in terms yet fuller of Hyperbole's, I humbly beseech you to
conceive me far from speaking so much good of it as I have received from it.
The choice it furnished you with of three or four words, which render your last
Letter more obliging then all the rest, has raised in me unhop'd for
enjoyments, and forced on me a joy I make some difficulty to entertain, as
being such as I ought not to be capable of but in your presence. But, Madam, be
pleased to consider the extent of your Empire, at the very moment that you writ
and wished our misfortunes at an end the Elbenes departed hence to find out
some remedy therein, the Heavens began to clear up, and gave us greater
likelihood then ever. Which since it is so, and that in you to do good and to
wish it, is the same thing, I humbly beg the continuance of your good desires
for us. I can easily imagine that sufficient to raise some fortunate emergency;
your good fortune will qualify the malignity of ours, and you can contribute
more then any one to that accommodation, which so many are engaged to bring
about. But Madam, be pleased it may be suddenly, for, to deal truly with you,
I am almost out of my self to see the Miracles that are at Paris. I do not
think the Lady you mention to Monsieur de Chaudebonne can discover the
greatest, when the ape, who was taught to play on the Guitarhe, could also sing
to it. I know where there are things far more extraordinary, and where I may
see greater wonders; besides that, as to my own particular, I shall show you
one beyond all, which is the change of my humor, which I promise you, shall be
if not as noble, equally constant as yours. Fear not therefore Madam, that a
Melancholy which you dissipate at such a distance, can ever come near you, and
trouble not your self for the loss of my Letters, when you shall have me; I
shall make you acknowledge I am better then they, and find I have not put my
best thoughts into writing. In a word, I dare assure you, that unless it be in
abundance of gray hairs, there has happened no change in me which is not for
the better; though I doubt not but those will fall with the cares that begat
them, and questionless I shall become quite another man then what I am, when I
shall be able to tell you my self with how great passion I honor you, and how
much I am,

Madam, Yours, etc.
Brussels Oct. 15. 1634.
To the Same. LETTER LXIL
MADAM,
I Know not who those Abencerrages are whom you prefer before me, but I
conceive they were no more born in Granada then I was. The greatest advantage
happily they have over me, is, that they are neet you, and that all my crime, is,
that I am at so great a distance. You have indeed reason to believe me guilty
of some enormous offense, since Heaven punishes it so heavily, nor do I wonder
much you should condemn me thereupon, nor that you should be deaf to the
reasons of a man that makes his defense so far off. It has been the custom of
all Gentle-women both Moors and Christians to do so. Yet I should wish, that
while you deprive me of your Friendship, you would not endeavor my dishonor,
and that you would not take so much pains to accuse me, only to clear your
self. You might with more humanity follow the example of Madam -- and
Mademoiselle -- the former without alleging any reason in the world, broke off
all correspondence with me on a sudden, conceiving that in time things would
come to that pass. The other has forsaken me but lately; but as without
dishonor, so without noise, and growing silent through pure weariness of
talking, speaks no more of me, neither good nor ill. But however, Madam, if
there be that little remainder of Justice in your mind as to think that Friends
are not to be forsaken without some pretense, I wonder you could bethink you of
no better, since you are so fortunate as to invention, and have ever dressed up
your Fables with so much probability. Besides Madam, you have not judged so
favorably as you ought of the Letters you have seen of mine, if you think that
Monsieur Mandat has received the more excellent. My judgment of yours is
otherwise, and, though I knew nothing of those you writ to others, I durst
swear you never writ better. It must be a Goodness great as mine to speak after
his manner, and I am the only man can celebrate the Satyrs are written against
me. To be serious, a man that undergoes ill so mildly, deserves Good should be
done him, and it should be some affliction to you to treat with so much rigor
a person that takes it with so much patience, and who is, with so much
constancy,

Madam, Yours, etc

To the Same. LETTER. LXIII.
MADAM,
I Should have torn this Letter after I had received yours, if I had credit
enough for what you write to me; but I am so accustomed not to receive any
thing but what is ill, that I must now expect nothing else, Peace it self being
suspected when it is offered by you. I wish heartily there were some mark of
reconciliation between us, as there is between Heaven and Mankind, and that you
know some means how I might be as much assured of your promises as I am afraid
of your Threats. I look on it as a good omen, that Mademois^le -- who had a
while since forsaken me has renewed her correspondence with me; me thinks she
is your Rainbow, and like that in the Heavens, appears after the Tempest. It
was never seen while Heaven was incensed against me, and while it thundered and
lightened. The truth is, the season was so tempestuous, that I had given over
all thoughts of remedy and given my self for lost. Being in this posture,
Madam, you may imagine with what joy I opened my eyes to those beams which you
darted on me through so much obscurity; but I must confess I dare not be
overconfident. I know you many times condescend to a reconciliation, that you
may take a greater pleasure to fall out again. I am afraid the light you show
me should be a false one, and that this light is but the flash of the Lighting,
and the surprisal of the Blow which happily it will not belong ere I feel. If it
be otherwise; and that it is a true peace you grant me, I entertain it which
such a heart as you would desire, and with what conditions and Qualifications
you are pleased to accompany it with. But Madam I must have this proviso in,
that you would acknowledge my Innocence, and confess that you did not so much
as suspect me to be guilty of those crimes, which you pretended to accuse me
of. Till this be granted, and you have made me full satisfaction, I cannot
answer your demand concerning Chocolate, nor speak of Comedies, when my mind is
full of Tragedies: Yet I could not avoid laughing, when I read what you say,
that Monsieur de R is as fierce and full of blows as My Lord Amadis. Your
Eloquence is not so high flown as to raise any wonder in me, for I have ever
foreseen it. That which I am more surpised with, is, that you are become so
infinitely pleasant. You may say what you please of Madam de S -- I cannot
entertain the least suspicion of her fidelity. They are considerable elogies of
her Servant, that he is handsome, young, and a Gascon; but when all is done,
you shall find she will be simple enough not to forsake me for him. It is ten
years since, I have known by experience how she has treated the handsome and
the young; and for the Gascon, it is a quality you will not number among those
that shall pretend to any love from her, if you call to mind I have heretofore
told you that she said of one, that he was either a Gascon or Picard. I am not
much taken with his finding of epris in her Anagramme, I have found prise,
which happens somewhat mischievously. To come to the worst, Madam, I can find
here, when I please my self, a Mistress handsome as the Infanta Briana,
amorous as Mademoiselle Arlande, and strong and fleshy as Madam Gradafilea. I
speak seriously, one of the stoutest Whenches in all the 17. Provinces longs to
be acquainted with me. But Monsieur de Chaudebonne advises me not to hazard my
self with her. In the interim, I make this Letter too long, where I thought to
have said but one word to you, and Mademoiselle d'A -- would think it guilty of
very little gallantry since I speak of so many persons in it besides your self.
But Madam, how infinitely should I be obliged if you would but afford me a
handsome Letter for her! If you deny me this favor grant me at least another I
beg of you, to let me know what condition I am in with you, and whether you
have prolonged the four years you had assigned me to live. You shall dispose of
me as you please; but to be just, you ought to own more humanity toward me,
for I am infinitely,

Your, etc.
The poor rogue will be well in time, he is almost recovered already. I humbly
thank the sage Enchantresse who has furnished me with the adventure of
Astaranax; I think there never was any thing so dreadful as her Hell should be,
and I imagine I see there Cerberus, the three Furies and all their Snakes, in
one only person. But what part does poor -- act amongst this damned crew?



To the same. LETTER LXIV.
MADAM,
BEing so infinitely obliged, as I am to Madame de C -- I should be ashamed,
not to have mentioned her; but in a Letter wherein I said nothing of your
Lady-Mother, me thinks I might be pardoned a forgetfulness of all the World. I
believe it was she writ the four lines in Spanish, of King Chiquito: I am not
well acquainted with her hand; but I know the ordinary air of her writing, is
so Spritely and so particular in her, that a man cannot be deceived in it, as
being such as n^ne can imitate. For what concerns you, Madame, I now tell you
softly, and in a meaner style then the beginning of this Letter, and
consequently the more to be credited, that I look on all; I receive from you as
so many Miracles. They are much beyond those for which I admired you so much
heretofore, and which I thought the noblest in the World; and though I am not
much guilty of envy, I should be much troubled, there were any man in France
could write as well as you. Mademoiselle Paulet is not pleased to honor me
with a Letter; The large Letters I writ to her out of Spain, I perceive have
tired her: I shall easily reform that, and it will be much more easy for me, to
avoid over-writing to her, then over-loving her. The only man of whom I have
said nothing, seems to be only he of whom I never should, it being more
necessary, I should give him some assurance of my discretion, then my
affection: My speaking so often of those that are about him, will satisfy him,
that it is not out of forgetfulness; that he is only unmentioned, and that he
can never entertain that opinion of me, as that I could forget a person, whom I
ought to honor and serve beyond all the World, upon so many different
accounts: But I know not why he says, we shall have so many disputes about the
Spanish; unless it be that having always had the advantage of me in all
those, we have had together heretofore, and what pleasure it is to dispute and
to overcome, he will needs prepare that entertainment for me against my return
by challenging me on a subject, wherein I have all the advantage that may be. I
presume, Madmae, on your pardon, For all I have added in this Letter, since it
concerns such as you love no less then your self. Be pleased further to give me
leave to tell your Brother, that I love him as much now, as when I bid him
Adieu; and that I am his most humble and most dutiful Servant. I once more
Madame kiss your hands for the honor, I receive by your writing to me. I am
not so much joy'd to be here my self as to find your Letter here; but if you
can condescend to so much goodness for me; I should wish they were somewhat
less eloquent, so they were more passionate. I speak seriously, you frighten
me, and when I see your mind so high-flown, me thinks it is impossible, I
should ever reach it, or have any place therein. Among so many fair Words, let
there be some good ones. Rid me of this fear; for to deal truly with you, I
stand in much need of, and in some sort deserve something, of your care.

To my Lord the Duke of Bellegarde. LETTER. LXV.
My Lord,
MR de Chaudebonne is guilty of the boldness, I take to write to you, as being
the only comfort he could give me in the affliction, he sees me almost
orewhelmed with: It Is true, my my Lord, the trouble I take not to have found
you here, I number among the greatest, I have met with in this Country. I
prepared my self for this banishment, the more out of some hopes I might spend
it in your Company, and doubted not to find France wherever you were; But this
would have been too great a comfort for a man destined to unhappiness, nor is
Fortune ever so favorable to those she persecutes. In the interim my Lord, I
look on it as a good presage, that she is pleased, we should be at some
reasonable distance from you; and have some faith, she will be reconciled with
us; if she once afford us the happiness of your presence. For to be ingenuous,
My Lord, I cannot imagine she has absolutely forsaken you, and there needs no
more then her sex to argue, she cannot have you; and that she will shortly
see you again. But though you want her, you are not without that extraordinary
prudence, and height of courage, which attends you every where, and which you
have not long since so nobly expressed, that I question whether those
unfortunate years have not been more advantageous to you then others. I could
easily, My Lord, spin out this discourse to a great length; but I would not be
thought indiscreet, in the management of the freedom is allowed me --

To my Lord Cardinal de la Valette. LETTER. LXVI.
My Lord,
I would gladly know how long it is since you questioned, whether the four last
Books of the Aeneids were written by Virgil or not, and whether Terence be the
true Author of Phormio. I should not ask so confidently; but you know that in
Triumphs Soldiers are wont to jest with their Commanders, and that the joy of a
Victory permits that freedom, which without it might not be assumed. Confess
therefore freely, how long it is since you have thought on little Erminia in
the Verses of Catullus, or those of Monsieur Godeau. But, My Lord, though you
had forgotten all the rest, you should ever be mindful of his Benedicite; for
no man had ever so much cause to say it as you, or was so highly obliged to
render thanks to the Lord of Hoasts: To do you right, the Conduct and Fortune
whereby you have secured us, is one of the greatest Miracles ever were seen in
War; and all the circumstances so extravagant; that I should put them into the
Chapter of Apparent falsities, were there not so many witnesses, and that I am
satisfied nothing of Miracle can happen to you, which ought not to be believed.
The joy wherewith all you love here are filled at this news, is a thing beyond
all representation: But can you imagine, My Lord, that those Persons who were
heretofore ravished at your singing and Poetry, must needs be now infinitely
satisfied, when they hear it said that you raise sieges, take Cities and defeat
Armies, and that the greatest hope of good success in our Affairs lies in you.
I assure you, this is entertained here with the greatest resentment you could
wish, and, which is more then you think; your Arms gain Victories, more
desirable then all those you can have beyond the Rhine. How amibitious soever
you may be, that consideration should engage you to return, for assure your
self, My Lord, a Battle is not now the noblest thing that may be gained, and
you will acknowledge your self, that there may be a Rose or a Shoe-String, fit
to be preferred before nine Imperial Ensigns. I am

My Lord, Your, etc.
Paris, Oct. 23. 1635.
To the same. LETTER LXVII.
My Lord,
I Have shown Monsr. de St. H -- Monsr. de St. R -- and Monsr. de St. Q -- that
passage of your Letter where you speak of my Lord's menial Servants; I am to
acquaint you, that they have taken it very ill, and am consident, that Mr des
Ousches, to whom I have not yet communicated it, will be of the same opinion.
So that, were I to arm my self against your menaces, you may easily judge, I
shall not want Friends, and that my writing to you now proceeds not so much
from fear, as from a sincere Affection, and a natural inclination, I have to
obey you; Besides those I have named, this place affords a many other gallant
Persons, such as it were a little more dangerous to quarrel with; who take it
not well, I should take pains for your diversion, and think it unreasonable,
you should take any, wanting their presence. And truly, my Lord, since your
absence smothers all their enjoyments, it were but just, you should with no
other then that of seeing them again; and that in the mean time you would not
admit any divertisement. I can assure you, that whatever is taken here at this
time, hinders them not from thinking on you, and making continual wishes for
your return. The cold and snows of the Mountains of Alsatia benumb them, and
make them tremble even in the greatest Assemblies; and the fear of the ambushes
of the Cravates perpetually Alarms them in the midst of Paris. But what is most
remarkable, and which will happily seem incredible to you, is that I have
observed M. de B -- and M. de R -- melancholy in the midst of the Bal, and that
upon your account, and sighing in the height of the Music. What judgment, My
Lord, or what advantage you will make of it; I know not, but for my part, let
them do what they can hereafter, I am confident they shall never be able to
give you a higher expression of their affection. Taking out the other day the
last Letter, you honored me with, and reading that passage where you tell me,
that you were upon your departure; instead of saying into Alsatia, I read
Thracia. Iron-armes, who, you know, is not wont to be easily moved at any thing
grew as pale, as a clout, and said, full of amazement, into Thracia Sr. and
another who stood by, and is a little better acquainted with the Globe then the
other, could not but be a little disturbed. I would gladly entertain your
Lordship, with something concerning your Spouse; but I know not what to say of
her, for whatever shall be said of her will be incredible, and there is not any
thing in her, exceeds not the limits of description. Whatever you have observed
in her, that might raise love or admiration, is augmented hourly, and there are
daily discovered in her new Treasures of beauty, wit and generosity. But with
all I dare assure you, she has in your absence behaved herself, with all the
circumspection you could wish. I know there is a certain report, which
questionless has raised in you some jealousy; for I am not ignorant of the
humors of your Africans; and it is true, there is a young gallant of a good
family, and who may one day come to a good estate, who waits upon her often;
but I assure you, that all this notwithstanding, she has no other
apprehensions then those of a most discreet, and most reserved Woman, and such
as you your self may have instilled into her. To be free with you, my Lord, if
your heart be not grown brawny among the Swedes, the remembrance of all these
Persons might raise in you a great desire of returning, and how strong soever
the charms of Fame may be, you should not think them stronger then theirs.
Hasten therefore your return as much as you can, and for a while at least; let
them be the objects of your ambition; for though Fortune attended you with
victory even to Prague, I do not conceive you really in her favor, while she
keeps you at a distance hence. There are no Conquests beyond the Rhine, not
beyond Danuhius, can absolutely satisfy you; and all Germany cannot balance
the suburbs of one City, that is on this side. I am,

My Lord, Your, etc

To the Same. LETTER LXVIII.
MY LORD,
YOu think it seems, there is no more to do, then to write, and speak as
slightly of it, as may be expected from a man that has nothing else to do,
then to command twelve thousand men, and oppose thirty; but if you were taken
up with the sight and consideration of three or four Persons that are here, you
would find abundance of other employment for your thoughts. Were you in my
place, you would think time as precious as I do; I would to Heaven you were,
that it might be seen how well you would come off, with the assistance of that
Conduct, which you are so much celebrated for, and that miraculous prudence,
whereby you have escaped so many other dangers. For I am to acquaint your
Lordship, that when you have put a period to the War, you are now engaged in,
you will be drawn into another more dangerous one here, you shall deal with an
Adversary more gallant, and more stubborn then the German; and you, who have
delivered so many millions of Souls, will have much a do to escape your self.
There is no retreat to be thought on, and there needs no more to make a total
rout, then the very sight of them. There is among the rest, a certain
Iron-arme, the most terrible Creature the Sun this day beholds. There is no
armor can keep off his blows, he crushes whatsoever he but touches, nor are
all the cruelties of the Croates comparable to his. I doubt not, but your
Lordship knows whom I speak of, and that you have had some engagements with
them already; but conceive not, you shall find them such as you left them.
Their forces are increased very much lately, and their power is come to that
height that they are grown irresistible; there passes not a day, but they get
something, though they venture for it to the gates of Paris, they take, they
kill, they plunder all wherever they come; and while you are employed to defend
the Frontiers, they set the heart of the Kingdom on fire. Ye^ I would not this
should frighten you from returning, but having known no fear in all those
engagements, wherein any other would entertain not any in these; for though
they put all to the Sword, yet they may happily afford you Quarter, and if you
fall into their hands, they will treat you with as much mildness, as may be
expected by a Prisoner of your quality. By as much as I can learn, they hope to
see you in that condition, for me thinks they should not be so much over-joyed
at your Victories, as I perceive they are, if they thought not they would
augment the Glory of theirs; but they will be transported to see at their feet
the Reducer of Galas; and ^ole^ the World know that he who has been the
Buckler of all France, was not able to ward off their blows: On the other side,
I know they are excessively impatient of your return, and am confident, France
affords not another man, whose Company they are more desirous of. I send you
this intelligence, My Lord, that you may accordingly provide to make your party
good; or at least, not to be so much ena^mou^'d of the tittle of a Conqueror
as not to expect to lose it here. For my part, happen what will, I must
confess I wish you here; for I shall not much enjoy my self, till I have the
honor to see you, and to entertain you, at your own f^re side with the cares,
the disquiets, and the Alarms you have given to all those that love you. I am,

My Lord, Your, etc

To the Same. LETTER. LXIX.
My Lord,
YOu must needs admit something of mortification amidst your Triumphs, in that
having always the satisfaction to entertain the Children of Mars, you have a
minutes patience for the entertainment of a Child of the Muses. We cannot at
Paris endure, you should live so pleasantly at Ments; and not being able to
hinder your enjoyments, yet we endeavor what we can to interrupt them. Yet
should I not have presumed it, had I not been commanded by a certain Lady, who
will not be denied any thing, and whom even those, to whom Armies and their
Generals submit, would make no great difficulty to obey. I assure your Lordship
that, when ever I imagine a sight of you with eight or ten great Commanders
about you, I much pity Terence, Virgil, and my self, and am extremely troubled
for those who here are so ambitious of your frequent remembrances; and yet I am
confident there is no bastion about the place where you are, so inconsiderable,
which you care not for more then you do for me: However, it is not for me to
murmr. I considered there were a many others, who had greater reason to
quarrel, nor was I desirous to be at difference with a man, who they say, has
the disposal of all the Marshal de la Forces Troops. But now that I am forced
to this confidence, and that there are some here, who will maintain what I
write; I shall presume to tell you, that it is a very sad thing, that your
affection, which not long since was divided among the most excellent Persons in
the World, is now become the pillage of a sort of Soldiers. I can hardly
contain my self, nay, I am at a loss of all discretion, when I think that the
place which the most adorable Creature in the World had in your heart is now
taken up, for the Quarters of Colonel Ebron; that Madam de C -- and Madam de R
-- have theirs taken up by some Commissary or Major, and that you have bestowed
mine on some wretched Lanspresado. This consideration, my Lord, puts us all
here into an inexpressible sadness; there is but one person has a greater
constancy then the rest, and would persuade us not to believe, you can be
guilty of so great an injustice. She I speak of is a Gentlewoman of --
fair-hair'd, of a very clear complexion, more cheerful, and more beautiful then
the fair weather of this season; and indeed such, as you shall not find three
so handsome in all the Country of M^ssin. She has Eyes wherein all the light
in the World seems to unite and center, a complexion that darkens all things, a
mouth which all those of the World beside cannot sufficiently commend, as being
full of attraction and charms, and is never shut or opened, but with the keys
of wit and judgment. By the description I make of her, you will easily
conclude her a beauty, far different from that of Queen Epicharis; but if she
be not so much an Egyptian as she, yet has she as good a Talent as to
stealing as the other. For in her very infancy, she robbed snow and Jvory of
their whiteness, and Pearls of their luster and clearness, she took beauty and
light from the Star^s, and yet there passes not a day but she gets some ray
from the Sun, and is not ashamed to deck herself with it before all the World.
Not long since, in an assembly at the Louvre, she took away the grace and the
luster from all the Ladies, nay from the Diamonds that covered them, and spared
not even the Jewels of the Crown on the Queen's head; but took from them what
was most beautiful, and most glittering. In the mean time, though all the World
perceives her violence, none opposes it, she does what she pleases without any
fear of punishment, and though there are those at Paris, who take Dukes and
Peers the next day after they are married; yet are there not any will presume
to lay hold on her: But though she have a cruelty for all the World; yet me
thinks she has a great mildness for what concerns you; she has commanded me
to tell you, she has not those distrusts of you which others have, and in
requital thereof she desires you to send her six triumphant Arches, of those
are left of your entrance; four dozen of public acclamations, and the Poetical
works of the Landgrave of Hesse. I advise you to answer her desire exactly, and
above all things, to hold a fair correspondence with her; for if she once
endeavor to do you a mischief, your Lifeguard, and your Troop, will not
secure your person. Mets is not a place strong enough to shelter you from her
power: But, my Lord, I consider not that I entertain you too long amidst the
great affairs you have, and that if I should make my Letter any longer, I fear
you would put off the reading of it, till this peace were concluded. I should
indeed be much troubled you did not see the end of it, since what concerns me
most, is that there you should not find the most sincere professions I make to
you, That of all those whom you have so much obliged, there cannot be any, with
more zeal and respect then I am,

My Lord, Yours, etc

To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, with a dozen fancies of English Riband, for a
Discretion he had lost to her. LETTER. LXX.
To apprehend the wit and humor of this Letter, note the French word, Galen,
is ambiguous, signifying either a Fancy, or knot of riband, and a Gallant; and
that a Discretion is a Wager, which lost it is referred to the Discretion of the
Looser to pay what he pleases; there having been nothing named before.
MADAM,
SInce Discretion is one of the principal qualities of a Gallant, I conceive
that when I send you a dozen, I am much more then out of your debt. Be not
afraid to entertain so great a number, though you would never yet receive one;
for I assure you, you may be confident of these, as such as shall not divulge
the favors you do them: How glorious soever it may be to receive of yours, yet
has it been no small matter to have found so many of this humor, in a time
when they are all so full of vanity; which indeed occasioned so long a journey
as to fetch them from beyond the Sea. I need not tell you, Madam, that they are
not the first of that Country, that have been well entertained in France. But
these certainly are the most fortunate that ever came thence, and if you but
give them a reception, they need not envy those who have waited on Princesses
and Queens. For, to do you right, Madam, the Earth affords not any thing above
you, and whoever were placed in your mind might presume to be in the highest
place in the world. I speak confidently for a man that pays a Discretion; but
be pleased to consider, that one Love-letter is little enough for a dozen
Gallants, and that those for whom I write, at least, those of their Country,
have such a strange way to express themselves, that they seem to discourse of
Love, when they do but complement. Take it not amiss, that, being their
Secretary, I have in some sort imitated their style, and be assured, that had I
been only to speak for my self, I should have been content to tell you, Madam,
that I am, with all manner of respect.

Yours, etc

To the Same. LETTER. LXXI.
MADAM,
I could never believe it possible that the receipt of a Letter from you should
add to my affliction, nor that you could ever have sent me such bad news, as
that you might not comfort me up at the same time. I thought my unhappiness at
such a point as could not admit of any addition, and that since you were able
sometimes to strengthen my patience to endure the absence of your Lady-Mother
and your own, there could not be any misfortune which you would not have
encouraged me to suffer. But give me leave to tell you, that I have found the
contrary in the affliction, I have for the death of Madam Aubry, which has
been heavy enough to crush me, and wanted not much of spending the remainders
of my patience. You may easily judge, Madam, what an excessive grief it must
needs be to me to have lost a friend so good, so considerable and so
accomplished as she, and one that having always given me so many expressions
of her affection, would needs do something when she had not many hours to
continue here. But though I reflected not on my own concernments; yet could I
not but infinitely regret a person by whom you were infinitely loved, and who,
among many particular endowments, had that of knowing you as much as may be,
and esteeming you above all things. Yet I must confess, that if this
disturbance can admit any remission, it is, to reflect on the constancy she
expressed; and the fortitude wherewith she has suffered a thing whereof the
name would make her tremble at any time. I am extremely comforted to
understand, that at her death, she had those qualities which only she wanted
in her life, and that she so opportunely found courage and resolution. When I
consider it seriously, it is somewhat against my conscience to bemoane her, and
me thinks it speaks an over-interessed affection, to be sad because she has
left us to better her condition, and is gone into the other World to find that
quiet she could never meet with in this. I very heartily entertain the
exhortations yo give me thereupon, which is, often to con a lesson so
profitable and necessary, and to prepare my self for the like one day, I know
how to make my advantage of your remonstrances, and this is not the first time
that I must acknowledge my reformation their effect. The miseries we have run
through all this while is no small preparation for it; There Is no better
lecture to instruct a man how to die well, then not to take much pleasure in
living. But if it be not impossible for the hopes that Fortune proposes to
prove effectual; if after so many unhappy years, we may presume to expect some
few fair days, be pleased to give me leave, Madam, to entertain thoughts more
divertive then those of death; and if it be true that we are likely shortly to
see one another; let me not yet fall out with my life. Where you say that you
think me destined to great things, you give so great security of my life and
give so happy a presage of the adventures that shall happen to me, that I
shall not be sorry it continue yet a while. For my part, if destiny does
promise me any thing that is good, I assure you, I will do my utmost to get it.
I will contribute all I can thereto, that your Prophesies may be fulfilled. In
the mean time, I humbly beseech you to be consident, that of all the favors I
can beg of Fortune, what I most passionately desire, is, that she would do for
you what she ought, and for my self only afford me the means to acquaint you
with the passion, obliges me to be so much.

Madam Your, etc.
Madam, give me leave to return my most humble thanks to my Lady Marchioness
for the honor of her Remembrances, by sending me word that she admires me;
but her silence teaches me how I ought to reverence her.



To the Same. LETTER LXXII.
I cannot for a Brevet ow you less then a Letter, and how fair soever the
Words I put in it may be, they will not be so rich as those of the Parchment
you have procured for me; since those of that amount to ten thousand Crowns.
Monsieur de Puy-Laurens has dispatched it to me with all the care and
diligence that could be expected. I had indeed some suspicion, that he, who
has in his time done so great things for the Ladies, would not be awanting on
this occasion, to serve the most accomplished of all, and was confident the
most excellent mouth in the World could not have been opened ineffectually upon
my account; This good fortune having once happened to me, I imagine there is
not any but may, and me thinks the least I can expect is to be rich, since it
is your desire I should be happy. In the mean time, though I am not much taken
up with the things that relate to my own settlement; yet I must confess I have
entertained this with extraordinary joy, and should think my self
over-interessed in this occur^ence; were it not, that what I consider of
greatest importance in this favor, is that I owe it your procurement. And
certainly, those who place riches among things indifferent, would not rank your
good inclinations among them; and for my part, I think it unjust to number
amongst the goods of Fortune, a benefit that virtue has obtained for me. I
conceive, Madam, I may without any Indecorum call you so, and if I am not
mis-inform'd of your proceedings, you may with much more right take that name,
then tha^ you go under: At least this may be affirmed, she never appeared so
glorious to the World as she does in you, and those who have known her
heretofore, and said, she would raise in all men a love of her, if she were
but seen naked, would have found her more powerfully attractive clothed with
your person. And certainly when I consider that conflux of Miracles, and that
diversity of favors heaven has shower'd on you, me thinks, that for which I
now send you my acknowledgements, is the least you ever did me. The place you
sometimes give me leave to take in your closet, I prefer before that you have
gotten for me, and I think you cannot lay a greater obligation on me, then that
of your sight and company. And yet, Madam, it is not impossible; but that the
last you have done me is more to be esteemed then it appears; and since it is
not yet known on whom you have bestowed me, it may be the courtesy will prove
greater then you have imagined; for happily you have made a present of me to a
Mistress, who shall deserve the addresses of all the World, one that shall have
a great, noble, and liberal soul, a high and generous heart, a person
accomplished, full of attractions and charms, and shall have for all men those
secret allurements, which every one finds in her whom he particularly loves.
She will have, it may be, a wit beyond all imagination, full of fire and flame
bright and pure, as that of the Angels; will be seen in all excellent learning;
acquainted with three or four Languages; understand the Situation of the earth
as that of little Luxembourg; know the motions of the Heavens, the names and
places of all the Stars, and when all is done, not any among them so bright, so
clear, or so strongly i^fluenc'd as her self. You will give me leave, Madam, to
wish it may happen so, as also to make vows for it, since I can make more
advantageous ones for the good of France then you; besides the hope I have,
that mine may be answered when those of others shall not, endeavor not
therefore, I beseech you, ever to divert me from this wish; for I am,

Madam, Yours, etc

To the same. LETTER. LXXIII.
MADAM,
SInce my addresses to you are in an honorable way, I think there is no
gallantry, which I may not safely practice, and that having p^e^ented you with
verses, I may well send you posies. It Is a present which the Gods have deigned
to receive from men, and since Flowers are the purest and noblest productions
of the Earth; I think there is not any to whom they may be with more justice
offered then to you; at least you ought to love them for this consideration,
that there is not one among them, whose beauty is not attended by some virtue,
and that they will not be touched, not even by Kings nor Princes. But though
they are the Daughters of the Sun and Aurora, and dispute for luster with
Pearls and Diamonds, I am confident they will loose their brightness as soon as
they come near you; and you discover, that the beauties of the Earth are not
comparable to those of Heaven. I doubt not, Madam, but you will give me leave
to call yours so, nor that you, who in all things represent Heaven, will deny
it the honor of having alone produced so excellent a person. It were too great
an advantage to the things below, to rank you among them, and since we are
commanded to despise them; there is much reason to believe you are not of them,
since Madam, you are the object of the esteem and affection of all that see
you, and have never cast your Eye on any rational soul, which you have not
gained. I see what consequence you may draw hence, if you think me endu'd with
one; but Madam, I humbly entreat you to believe, the greatest effect you have
caused in it, is that of admiration, and that I am in all manner of respect,

Madam, Yours, etc

To Monsieur -- After the re-taking of Corbie, from the Spanjards by the Kings
Forces. LETTER. LXXIV.
SIR,
I Must needs acknowledge, I love to be revenged, and that after I had suffered
you, for two months together to laugh at the good hopes I had of your affairs,
had heard you condemn the conduct thereof by the events, and seen you triumph
for the victories of our Enemies, I am not a little glad, to acquaint you that
we have re-taken Corbie. This news will no question, startle you as well as all
Europe, and you will think it strange, that those people, whom you think so
circumspect, and who have particularly this advantage over us, to keep well
what they have once gotten, have sufferred a place to be re-taken on which it
was imagined all the brun't of the War would have fallen, and which being kept
or re-taken, should for this year have disposed the reward, and honor of arms
to one side or other. In the mean time we are the Masters of it, those who were
cast into it, were glad the King gave them liberty to be gone, and have
cheerfully left the Bastions they had raised, and under which it was thought
they would have been interred. Consider then, I pray, the issue of that
expedition, which has made so much noise. It is three years since the Enemy
hatched this design, and threatened us with this Tempest. Spain and Germany had
done all that lay in their power toward it; the Emperor had sent his ablest
Commanders, and his best Cavalry; the Army of Flanders had contributed their
best Troops. Of these is formed an Army of 25000 Horse, 15000 Foot, and 40
pieces. This cloud great with thunder and lightning is disburthen'd on Picardy,
which it finds unprovided, our Armies being engaged elsewhere. They presently
take in la Capelle, and le Castelct; they set upon, and ^n nine days, take
Corbie. Now are they Masters of the River, they cross it; they overrun all
that lies between Sum, and Oize, and while no body opposes them, courageously
keep the Field, put our peasants to the sword, and burn our Villages. But upon
the first news they received, that Monsieur was advancing toward them with an
Army, and that the King was not far behind him, they retreat, fortify
themselves behind Corbie, and understanding they were marching toward them
with all expedition, our Conquerours quit their entrenchments. These valiant
and warlike people, and who you say are born to command others* fly before an
Army which they gave out consisted only of our Coachmen and Lacquayes; and
those people that should have broke through France to the Pyrenaean Mountains,
who threatened to sack Paris, and breaking into our Lady's Church, should have
taken away the Colors gotten at the Battle of Avein, give us leave to draw
lines about a place of so great importance, time to raise Forts, and soon after
to storm and take it, while they were content to be only spectators. You see
the consequence of Picolom^ni's bravadoes, who sent his Trumpetters, one while
to tell us, that he wished us more powder; another, that a supply of Horse was
coming to us, and when we were furnished with both, he took good care not to
stay for us. So that, Sir, besides la Capelle, and le Castelet, places of no
consideration, all the business of that great and victorious Army has been to
take Corbie, to return it again, and to put it into the Kings hands with a
Counterscarp, three Bastions, and three half Moons, which it had not before. If
they had taken ten other places, with the same success, o^r Frontiers were in a
better condition; as likely to have been better fortified by t^em, then those
who hitherto have had Commission to do it. Do you think the re-taking of
Amiens, was any thing of greater importance, or more glorious then this? At
that time the Forces of the Nation were not otherwise diverted, all were joined
together upon that design, and all France was engaged before one place. Here on
the contrary, we were forced to take this in the heat of a many other Affairs,
which took us up of all sides, in a time when the State seemed to be absolutely
exhausted, and in a season wherein, besides the men, we had also the Heavens to
fight with. And whereas before Amiens the Spaniards got an Army together but
five months after that siege to force us to raise it, they had one of 40000 at
Corbie before this War was laid. I am confident, if this accident make you not
a good Frenchman, it will at least raise in you an indignation against the
Spaniards, and will exasperate you against a sort of people that have so little
manhood, and can make so little benefit of their advantages. In the mean time,
those who out of dis-affection to the Governor, hate their own Country, and to
ruin one man could wish all France destroyed; laughed at all the preparations
we made to prevent that surprise. When the Troops we raised here had taken
their march toward Picardy, they said, they were only Victims sent to be
sacrificed, to our Enemies; that that Army would moulder away with the first
Rains, and that the Soldiers being raw and undisciplined would run away at the
first of the Spanish Troops. Even afterward, when those ^roops wherewith we
were threatened were retreated, and that a design was laid to block up Corbie,
the resolution was thought irrational. They said, it was impossible, but that
the Spaniards should have furnished it with all things necessary, having had
two months time to do it; and that we might consume before that place many
millions of Gold, and many thousands of men, to recover it happily in three
years. But when it was resolved, it should be assaulted in the midst of
November, there was not any one that cried not out. The best affected
acknowledged* there was some precipitation in the business, and there w^ need
not others who plainly said, that out of a fear that our men should not die fast
enough through misery and want of bread, they would needs have them drowned in
their own Trenches. For my part; though I was not to learn the inconvenienc^s,
that attend sieges undertaken in that season, yet I suspended my judgment. I
thought those who sat at the helm, had seen the same things which I did, nay
much more then I saw; that they would not inconsiderately engage in the
besieging of a place, on which all Christendom had it is eyes; and therefore as
soon as I was assured that it was assaulted, I was in a manner confident it
would be taken. For, to speak impartially, we have sometimes observed my Lord
Cardinal himself mistaken in those things which he has entrusted to the
conduct of others; but in the enterprises whereof he would see the execution
himself, and which he has encouraged with his presence, we have never known
him miscarry. I therefore was satisfied, that he would over-master all
difficulties, and that he, who had taken Rochel in spite of the Ocean, would
easily reduce Corbie notwithstanding the Rains and the Winter: But since it
comes so pertinently in my way to speak of him, and that it is three months
since I durst presume to do it; give me leave now, and take it not ill, if
amidst the remission this news has wrought in your Spirits, I take my time to
tell you what I think.

I am not of their opinion; who endeavoring, as you say, to convert Eloges
into Briefs, scrue up all my Lord Cardinal's Actions into Miracles; celebrate
his praises beyond what those of men might or ought to aspire to, and out of a
desire of having too great things believed of him, advance those that are
incredible. But neither am I guilty of that malicious baseness, as to hate a
man because he is above all others, nor am I carried away with the torrent of
general hatreds and affections, which I know to be many times unjust. I
consider him with a judgment, which passion forces not to bend either way, and
I look on him with the same eyes that Posterity shall. But when within two
hundred years, those who come after us, shall find in our History, that the
Cardinal of Richelieu has dismantled Rochel, overthrown Heresy, and by one
single Treaty, as it were with a Trammel, taken in thirty or forty of it is
Cities at a cast; when they shall understand that in the time of his Ministry,
the English were beaten and broken, Pignerol conquered, Casal relieved, all
Lorraine joined to this Crown, the greatest part of Alsatia reduced under our
power, the Spaniards defeated at Veillane and Avoin, and shall observe that
while he had the steerage of our affairs, France had not a neighbor, of whom
it got not either places or ^attails; if they have any French blood left in
their Veins, or any love for the glory of their Country, can these things be
possibly read and not raise in them an affection for him, and in your
judgment, will they love or esteem him the less; because in his time that
Revenue of the Hostel de Ville was paid some what later then it should have
been, or that there were some new Officers thrust into the Exchecquer? All
great things cost dear, great attempts prove too violent, and strong remedies
weaken; but if we are to look on States as immortal, and to consider the future
advantages as present, if we cast up a right* we shall find this man who they
say has ruined France, has saved it many millions, by the bare reducing of
Rochel, which for these two thousand years, in all minorities of Kings, all
discontents of Grandees, and all opportunities of revolt; would have been sure
to rebel, and consequently obliged us to eternal expense. This Kingdom had but
two kinds of Enemies, that it had need fear, the Huguenots and the Spaniards.
My Lord Cardinal coming to the helm of affairs, designs the ruin of both. Could
he attempt any thing more glorious, or more advantageous? He has effected one,
and has not yet accomplished the other; but if he had failed in the former,
those who now cry out, that it was a precipitate resolution, unseasonable and
beyond our force to think to break, and give a check to that of Spain, as we
yet find by experience, would they not also have condemned the design of
destroying the Huguenots, would they not have said, that it was to no purpose
to reassume an enterprise, wherein three of our Kings had mis-carried, of
which the late King durst not think on? And would they not have concluded, as
falsely as they now do in the other business, that the thing was not feisible,
because it had not been done? But let us consider, I pray, whether it may be
attributed to him or to Fortune, that he has not effected that design. Let us
consider what course he took to do it, and what Engines he set on work. Let us
see whether he wanted much of overturning the great Tree of the House of
Austria, and if he shak'd not to the very Roots that trunk, which with two of
it is boughs covers the North and the East, and ore-shadowes the rest of the
Earth. He went under the Pole to find out the Heroes, who seemed to be destined
to put the axe to it, and lay it on the ground. He was the Spirit that animated
that thunder, which has filled Germany with fire and lightning, the noise
whereof has been heard all over the World: But when this Tempest was blown
over, and that Fortune had diverted the stroke, did he sit down content? Did he
not afterward put the Empire into greater hazard, then it had been by the loss
of the Battles of Leipsic and Lutzen? His policy and his intrigues got us
presently an Army of 40000 men, in the very bowels of Germany, with a General
who had all the qualities requisite to work a change of State. But if the King
of Sweden would hazard himself beyond what a person of his designs and quality
should, and if the Duke of Fridland's design was discovered, because not put
timely in execution; could he charm the bullet that took away the former in
the midst of his Victory, or make the latter invulnerable to the thrusts of a
Partisan? And if after all this, to bring all things to a total ruin, those who
commanded the Army of our Allies before Norlinghen gave Battle at an
unseasonable time, was it in my Lord Cardinal's power, being 200 leagues off,
to change that resolution, and stop the precipitation of those, who for an
Empire (for that was the prize of that Victory,) would not expect three days?
You see then that to secure the House of Austria, and to divert his designs,
which are now thought so temerarious, Fortune was forced to do three miracles,
that is, to bring about three great accidents, which in all likelihood should
not have happened; the death of the King of Sweden, that of the Duke of
Fridland, and the loss of the Battle of Norlinghen. You will tell me that he
ought not to quarrel with Fortune, for crossing him herein, since she has
been such a faithful Servant of his in all other; that it was she by whose
assistance he took places before they were besieged, who has made him a
fortunate Commander of Armies without experience; who has as it were always
led him by the hand, and delivered him out of those precipices into which he
was fallen, and in a word, who has made him appear valiant, wise, and
circumspect. Let us consider him in the displeasure of Fortune, and see whether
he were defective as to wisdom conduct, or courage. Our affairs were not over
successful in Italy, and as it is the fate of France, to gain Battles and loose
Armies, ours was extremely weakened since our late Victory over the Spaniards.
We were not much more fortunate before Dole, where the continuance of the siege
gave us occasion to expect no good success of it, when intelligence came that
the Enemy was gotten into Picardy, that he had immediately taken la Capelle, le
Castelet, and Corbie, and these three places which should have found them work
for diverse months, had hardly kept them eight days. All is a fire even to the
banks of the River Oise; we could see from our suburbs the smoke of the Towns
they burnt us; all take alarm, and the Metropolis of the Kingdom is in
disturbance. Upon this, news comes from Burgundy that the siege of Dole was
raised; and from Xain^onge that 15000 peasants are revolted and keep the Field,
and that it was much feared Poicto and Guyenne might follow their example; Ill
news come one in the neck of another, Heaven is all overcast, the tempest falls
on us of all sides, and there appears not from any the least beam of good
Fortune. Amidst all this obscurity, was not my Lord Cardinal as well sighted as
before, did he loose fight of the North Star in all this Tempest; has he not
held the rudder with one hand, and the compass with the other; has he got
into the skiff to save himself, and when the great Vessel, he was in, seemed
near a wrack, has he not been as willing to perish with it as any other? Is it
Fortune that led him out of this Labyrinth, or was it his own prudence,
constancy and magnamity? Our enemies are not fifteen Leagues from Paris, and
his are within it. Every day discovers some plots laid to ruin him. France and
Spain, conspire, as a man may say, against him alone. Amidst all this, what
face has that man put upon it, who they say was startled at the least ill
success, and who had caused Haure de Grace, to be fortified to cast himself
into it, upon the first frown of Fortune? Yet all has not forced him to step
back; his thoughts were taken up with the hazards of the State, and not his
own, and all the change could be seen in him, in all this time, was, that where
before he was not wont to go abroad without a Guard of two hundred, he is now
content with the attendance of five or six Gentlemen. It must certainly be
acknowledged, that an adversity born with so much courage and gallantry is to
be preferred before much prosperity and Victory; I thought him not so
victor^ous the day he entered Rochel, as he seemed to me then, and the journeys
he made from his own House to the Arsenal, I look on as more glorious for him,
then those he made beyond the Mountains, and which brought along with them
Pignerol and Suze. Open therefore your eyes, I beseech you, to so much light,
envy not any longer a man who can with so much Fortune be revenged of his
enemies, and cease to wish him ill, who can turn it to his glory, and bear it
with so much courage. Forsake your party before it forsake you; nor are they a
small number, of those that were disaffected to my Lord Cardinal, that are
converted by the last Miracle he did. And if the War shall end, as there is
some ground to hope, it will not be long ere he reduce all the rest. Being wise
as he is, so much experience must needs have taught him what is best; and he
will direct all his designs to render this State the most flourishing of any,
after he has made it the most terrible. He will bethink him of an Ambition
more noble then any other, and which no man reflects on; which is, to become
the best and best-belov'd man in the Nation, and not the most powerful and most
feared. He knows that the noblest and most ancient Conquests are those of
Hearts and affections. That Lautel is a fruitless plant, which affords at best
but a shade, and is not to be compared to the fruits and harvests, which are
the Crowns of Peace. He sees that it merits not so much elogy to add a hundred
Leagues to the Frontiers of a Kingdom, as to take off one penny of the Tax; and
that there is less reputation and true glory, to defeat 100000 men, then to
settle and secure twenty millions. So that this great Intelligence who has
hitherto been employed, in finding out ways to defray the charges of the War,
in raising men and money, in taking of Cities and gaining Battails, will be
henceforth taken up wholly in introducing and settling peace, wealth, and
abundance. The same head that was delivered of Pallas armed, shall restore her
with her Olive, peaceable, mild and knowing, and attended by all those Arts
which ordinarily accompany her. We shall have no more new Edicts; but such as
tend to the regulation of Luxury, and settling Commerce: Those great vessels
that were built to carry our Arms beyond the streights, shall be employed in
convoying our Merchants, and keeping the Sea open, where we shall have no War
but with Pirates. Then shall my Lord Cardinal's enemies have nothing to say
against him, as they have hitherto been unable to do any thing. The Citizens of
Paris shall be his Guards, and he will find how much more pleasant it is to
hear his praises in the mouth of the people then in that of Poets. Prevent that
time I conjure you, and delay not your being one of his Friends till you are
forced to it. But if you will needs persist in your opinion, it is not my
endeavor to force you out of it; but withal be not so unjust, as to take it
amiss that I have maintained mine; and I promise you, I will patiently read
whatever you shall write to me, when the Spaniards shall have once more
re-taken Corbie. I am,

Sir, Yours, etc
Paris, Dec. 24. 1636.
To Madam -- LETTER. LXXV.
MADAM,
SInce yesterday has seemed longer to me then the three last months, wherein I
had not seen you, and that there is not any one here will be troubled with my
Letters, give me leave to write to you, and to tell you that I never was so
deeply in love. Three or four things of those you said to me that day have so
taken up my thoughts, that I have not been able to apprehend any of those have
been told me since. Besides, what you seemingly granted me, and which you did
merely to oblige me, is like to prove my ruin, and I find by experience that
when it was your intention to give me liberty, you cast me into Prison. This
makes a brighter fire then the aromatic wood you had prepared for me, and it
must be granted the flame of it is very pleasant since I am taken with it, even
when I am devoured thereby. I do not therefore beg any relief from you in the
condition I am in, I wish not any remedies that should quench it; but would
rather embrace those that should augment it. My only suit to you is, that I may
burn in your presence, and since I must be consumed, that it may be near you,
that you may not want my Ashes. Those of a Lover so full of respect, so
reasonable, and indifferent as to his own concernments, deserve to be
preserved, and you cannot in justice deny that favor to a man, who takes so
much pleasure to die for your sake.

Madam, when I took pen in hand I thought only to have asked you whether you
would go to morrow to the Comedy des petites Saintot; but I c^uld not but write
this to you, which if I am not mistaken, signifies little less then a
love-Letter, though you have not been wont to receive any such, from any of
your forty three Servants. I entreat you to read this heartily: If you can
avoid going abroad to morrow, you will extremely oblige me. But if you must
needs be at the Comedy, deny me not your pity, and when you shall behold the
several deaths there represented, reflect on those I shall at the same time
fuffer for you.

To Madam de Saintot. LETTER. LXXVI.
Madam,
WHile you thought only to have discovered a little piece of gallantry, you
have written the gallant^st Letter in the World: Though I am a great
Counselor, yet am I extremely puzzled to answer it, and must confess you
understand the case better then I. I was already satisfied you had still the
same great wit I have ever admired in you, and that of all things you had
forgotten only me. But I must withal acknowledge, that I could not have
imagined you had learned to write so well since I saw you last, or that I
should ever have seen any thing from you more excellent, or such as I should
have been more taken with, then what I had before. This done, fear not but I
shall do all that lies in my power to put off the suit you mention, and though
you have sometime commenced one very roundly against me; yet I shall not take
this occasion to revenge my self. But are you not a wicked Woman to come, and
disturb me thus? I was in the sweetest slumber in the World, and I question
whether I shall while I live sleep so well again. I am extremely distracted
that you come not to day to the Academy; for you may easily guess for whose
sake I came. I shall use all my interest, that they may send a deputation to
entreat your presence. But if you would but give me leave, to show your Letter
there, it were enough to raise the wishes of all for your Company. Farewell; I
am yours sworn, etc.

A NOTE from Madam de Saintot, to Monsieur de Voiture.
I Have promised you for a Servant to two fair Ladies of my Friends. I am
confident you will not think the enterprise too difficult, and withal that you
will make good my word, as soon as you shall have seen them.

De Voiture's Answer. LETTER LXXVII.
I Would gladly see, as soon as possibly you can, that which I love, for, to
speak freely; I am almost out of all patience to do it; and since you have
obliged me to love, be it also your care that I may be loved. My thoughts have
been taken up all this night with the two persons you know; I write this
love-Letter to one of them, I beseech you give it her of the two whom you think
I love best. In requital of all the good Offices you shall do me, I assure you,
you shall ever dispose of my affections, which shall never be addressed to any
one so much as your self, till I shall be satisfied, that it is your absolute
will they should be otherwise.

To an unknown Mistress. LETTER. LXXVIII.
Madam,
THere never was any inclination so extraordinary or so extravagant, as what I
have for you. I am absolutely unacquainted with you, and to my best
remembrance, I never, in all my life so much as heard you named; However, be
assured I love you, and that it is now a day since I have suffered upon your
account. Though I never saw your face, yet I think it handsome, and I am taken
with your disposition, though I never heard any thing said of it. I am
extremely pleased with all your actions, and I imagine in you something I know
not what, which makes me passionately in love with I know not whom. Sometimes I
imagine you of a fair complexion sometimes of a brown, one while tall another,
low, now with a hawke's nose, anon, with a thick and short one. Under all these
shapes, into which put you, I think you still the most amiable thing in the
World; and though I am uncertain what kind of beauty yours is, I durst swear it
is the most taking of any. If your acquaintance with me being little, your
affection be proportionable, I am engaged to love and the Stars. But that you
may not be deceived, and imagining to find me a tall flaxen* hair'd man, be
surprised when you see me, I shall, as near as I can, give you a Character of
my self. My stature is two or three fingers below the meanest; my head is
handsome enough, well stored with gray hairs, I am of a gentle aspect though my
eyes are a little mis-placed, and have a countenance simple enough for a
Country-fellow. But to make amends for all this, one of your Friends will tell
you, that I am the best company in the World, and to love in five or six places
at a time; there is not any he, can do it with as much fidelity as my self. If
you can bear with all this, I shall offer you mine upon the first sight I have
of you; in the interim you shall be the object of my thoughts, though I know
not whom I think on, and when it shall be asked me for whom I sigh, you need
not fear I shall discover you, and be withal assured, I shall never say any
thing of you.

To Madam de Saintot. LETTER LXXIX.
I Am extremely troubled, that I cannot walk with you; for Mademoiselle la
Princess, and Mademoiselle de la Trimoville, commanded me yesterday, to wait
on them to Ruel. Since you take the same walk every day, do me the honor,
tomorrow or the next day, which you offer me now; in requital whereof you shall
dispose of me as you please; which you cannot do more freely then you do, when
you bestow me thus on whom you please. You must needs keep something that is
excellent for your self when you make such presents to your Friends: but if
they are handsome, as you say they are, turn me over to one of them; and let me
not be divided. Could that be done, I would have it done now, that so I might
go to Ruel, and wait on you two, and I assure your self you should have the
better half. The advice you give me, will make me grow weary of Mademoiselle --
Madam -- and Mademoiselle, -- be pleased to present my most humble Services, to
the Ladies on whom you have bestowed me. I wish Madam -- were one, for, I was
infinitely taken with her the other day. But consider, I p^ay, how much I am at
your devotion. Though I know them not, yet am I not without some inclination
for them, and though I have never loved two persons at the same time, yet I see
I shall do any thing you shall impose on me.

To Monsieur Arnaud, under the name of the sage Icas. LETTER LXXX.
SIR,
THough I were ignorant of your being a great Magician, and having the science
of commanding Spirits, yet the power you have over mine, and the Charms I find
in what you have written to me, would have convinced me there might be somewhat
supernatural in you. With the assistance of your Characters, I have seen in a
little piece of paper, Temples and Goddesses, and you have shown me in your
Letter as in an enchanted Glass all the persons I love. Above all, I have
observed with much delight, the Piece wherein you represent, amidst the shades,
the brightest light of our ag^, and let me know the affection is born me by a
Person, who can not at this day be equaled, no not by any that you know,
though you are acquainted with what is past, and to come. But Sir, let me
entreat you, who can discover what is most hidden, and need only say, speak
Spirits, erect a figure to know what is become of that Creature, and do me the
favor to let me have what you shall learn of him. It is certainly a curiosity
fit to be satisfied, and I promise you not to reveal the Secret, for I shall in
that, as in all other things, obey your commands, so to express my self,

Your, etc

To my Lady Marchioness de Rambouillet. LETTER. LXXXI.
Madam,
WIthout citing either sacred or profane History, whatever you write is
excellent. I lay up the least Notes that fall from your hands, as I would the
leaves of a Sybil, and I study therein that height of Eloquence, which all the
World seeks after, and would be but necessary to speak worthily of you. And if
it be true, as you say, that I have done it, and it be possible ehat I have
given you your due praise, I may presume to have performed the hardest thing in
the World, and which, as much as lay in my power, was most in my wishes. For I
assure you, Madam, I have not endeavored any thing more possionately, then to
acquaint the World with two the greatest examples that ever were of an
accomplished virtue, and a perfect affection, by letting it know how much you
are esteemed, and how much I am,

Madam, Your, etc

To my Lord Cardinal de la Valette. LETTER. LXXXII.
MY LORD,
I Saw diverse reasons not to expect any Letters from you so soon, and easily
inferred that a person who had so many things to do, could not write much. I
was content to hear your name, and Victories cried up here every week, and to
buy all the news I could learn of you. But certainly it was time you did me the
honor I have received, the insolence of some people beginning to grow
insupportable to me, who presumptuously gave out that the time of their
Prophesies was come, and that I should shortly be ranked among them as a
private person. Nay there wanted not those who took this occasion to tempt my
fidelity. You cannot easily believe, my Lord, what advantages I have been
proffered, to induce me to quit your party this winter, and to let out my
claws against you twice a week. And yet though these offers have been made by
the most enchanting mouth in the world, yet have I slighted them with that
constancy I am obliged to have for a man of whom I have received all things,
and whom I find otherwise so much to my humor that though he had ever hated
me, yet could I not but respect and serve him. So that though I have at Paris
those engagements, which they never want who aspire not to the conduct of
Armies, and are not capable of those high passions, which at this present take
up the better part of your soul; yet am I ready to take my leave of all here
when ever you shall command me, and shall quit, to wayt on you, a person that
is young, sprightly, and black. To do this I only want a handsome pretense, and
if your enemies, as I believe, will needs have their walls between you and
them, and oblige you to a siege, I shall not fail to be with you; besides that,
not to flatter you, I had rather be besieger then besieged, and the Spaniards
are gotten so near Paris, that though I did not leave it for your sake I should
for my own; All the Bridges near it are broken down, they are ready every hour
to draw up the chains, and at the same time when we are terrible on the banks
of the Rhine, we are not our selves safe on those of the Seine. Amidst the
trouble this disorder causes in me, I must confess, my Lord, it is some
comfort to me, to see that at a time when our affairs are declining on every
side they prosper on yours; and while our Army in Picardy shrinks into its
Garrisons, that we have in Burgundy moulders away in its Trenches, and that we
are not much more fortunate in Italy, you have seized Galas in his Trenches,
you take places while he looks on, and may be only called the Conqueror and
the Victorious. In a word, not to represent things otherwise then they are all
the progress we have made this year is due to your conduct.

Te copias, te consilium, and tuos
Praebente Divos.
Be pleased therefore, my Lord, to command me to come and share in your
prosperity, and to wayt on our good Fortune in that place only where it^now is.
Besides that without any great pretense to valor, the exploits of Monsieur de
Simpleferre suffer me not to sleep, and I have fastened to the hilt of my sword
three of the little Flemmish Lady's Letters, which I entend to thrust into the
body of some Germane. Sed quid ag^? Cum mihi fit incertum tranquillo, ne fis
animo, an ut in bello, in aliqua majuscula cura negotione versere, labor
longius. Cum igitur mihi erit exploratum te libenter esse visurum, scribam ad
te pluribus. I have not much stuck to put in this, because it is Cicero's, and
shall thrust as much Latin as I can into my Letters, since you tell me you
read nothing else in them, for truly, it were great pity you should lose
yours. But if you are so unfortunate as to forget it, I promise you my
endeavors to recover it this winter, I will acquaint you with the most
excellent passages of Virgil, Horace, and Torence; I will explain the most
difficult, and will show you the secret graces, and the most undiscovered
beauties of those Autho^s. In a word I shall return you all you have lent me,
etc.

My Lord, since the writing of this Letter comes a Messenger, who has brought
news of your being at Colmar; I assure you this news has caused greater
rejoicing in the Court then all the Bals either prepared or preparing; and
particularly seven or eight persons are infinitely elevated at it. The absence
of Friends may indeed be born with, when they do such things as you do, and
there is not any one of those who have greatest affection for you that could
rather have wished you here. To be free with you, my Lord, it is a glorious
action to relieve the Kings A^lyes in spite of winter and enemies, and that
you, who bear no part in the public rejoycings, are he only who justifies,
and gives us occasion to celebrate them.

To the Same LETTER LXXXIII.
My Lord,
I Know no reason you have to quarrel with me, unless it be, that having your
arms ready you could fall out with all the world, and foreseeing that the
Spaniards will not find you work long, you seek out occasions of new
differences. It Is a hard thing to be a Conqueror and just at the same time,
and I perceive Fortitude and Justice, are two virtues seldom lodge together in
the same inn. It is not many days since I writ you a letter so large that I
thought you would not have found no leisure to read it, and I do not find my
self guilty of having slipped any occasion I had to discharge my duty. Though I
should not, my Lord, consider the infinite obligations I owe you, and were not
to give some account of my self to the person of most honor I have ever known,
yet could I not avoid writing to you, as being loath to give any cause of
discontent to a man who at present is the most to be feared of any in France.
Under pretense, that you have a many things lie on your hands, that you do the
business of a Labourer, a Soldier and a General, while you are employed about
the fortifying of a Camp, and the taking of a City, to see order and justice
observed in an Army, and to make disciplinable a Nation that had never yet been
so; you imagine that all others are at leisure, and that none but your self
takes any pains. In the mean time, I assure you, that if I had nothing else to
do here, then to hearken to those that tell news of you, and return it to
others that enquire, I should not be much less employed then you are, and have
very little time to write to you. Some who in other years were content with
two or three hours discourse of you, spend now six in speaking of you, without
the least weariness. Those who are dissatisfied with the Government, and those
who are for it, are equally inquisitive to know what you do, and there are not
any to whom you are indifferent but those to whom France is such. While I write
this, my Lord, I hear the Treaty with Landrecis is concluded, and that you are
to march into it next Sunday. I praise God, and rejoice with you, that you have
convinced strangers it is not impossible, but that we may take some of their
places, and that you have dissolved the enchantment which had hindered us from
it for so many years. Lovain, Valentia, and Dole, had persuaded our enemies
that we should never get any thing of them, and that the most we could do was
to recover what they had taken from us. The most inconsiderable places seemed
to become impregnable assoo as we came before them; our Armies, which did well
enough upon all other occasions, were ruined and absolutely disheartened as soon
as they were engaged in a siege, and how great and victorious soever your
Fortune has been, yet was there no ditch so shallow, no work so weak but gave
it some check. In fine, my Lord, you have exchanged that ill destiny, you have
satisfied those that would have sent you back to Dole that they mistook you.
You have, as I may say, made your Cannon be heard as far as Brussels, and the
noise has made the Cardinal Infant to retreat as far as Gaunt, instead of
advancing to the relief of a place, which you were going to take from him. But
what I look on as most considerable in this Action, is, the Order, diligence,
and security wherewith it was done. The very day you opened your Trenches, it
might have been said Landrecis was ours, and though Picolomini and all his
Forces, which were such a terror to us the last year, had brought along with
them thither all the power of the Empire, they could not have taken it out of
your hands. We were not wont to take that course for the reducing of places,
and it may be said, that the first siege you laid was the first regular one
that has been seen in France. --

M -- has been very earnest with me to go along with him, but I have excused
my self pretending affairs of great consequence, which I made him believe I had
to do here. The affairs of so great consequence is a siege: I have laid to a
place that is very pleasant, and excellently well situated. I have drawn my
lines of circumvallation about it, after the way of Holland and yours, and
Picolomini should not hinder me from taking it. Things being carried on so far
it would have troubled me extremely to raise the siege, for that, among
Conquerours, such as we are, is a thing insupportable.

July 3. 1634.
To my Lord Marquess de Pisany. LETTER. LXXXIV.
MY LORD,
I Am very glad you are become the hardest man in the World, and that neither
labor, watching, diseases, nor the lead and steel of the Spaniards can do you
any injury; I could not believe that a man bred with Ptisan and Barley-water,
could have such a hard skin, nor indeed that there were any Characters that
could produce such an effect. However this may happen, I am confident it cannot
be natural, and yet I shall not be troubled at it, for I would rather see you a
Sorcerer, then in the condition of poor Attiehy or Grinville; how well soever
you might be embalmed. To be free with you, what cause soever there be of
death; me thinks there is still something of lowness in being dead. Avoid it
before, my Lord, as much as you can, and I beseech you, hasten your return, for
I can be no longer without your company; and it is in this principally that I
am persuaded you use charms, that I, who am very indifferent as to those that
are absent, have perpetual desires for you, and have something to say to you on
all occasions. At least those, wherein I wish you are, as inviting and less
dangerous then those, wherein you are daily engaged. If you will then be
advised by me, take a good Horse between your Legs, and be as glad to return
to Paris, as you were to leave it. As soon as I shall hear of your being there,
I promise you to shake hands with Tours, Blois, and Richelieu; Monsieur and
Madam de Combalet, and the Lady your Sister, to come and wait on you, with the
fincere Professions of my being,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Richelieu, Oct. 7. 1637.
To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, with this Inscription, To the Infanta Fortune,
at the Palace of the Perilques. LETTER. LXXXV.
MADAM,
WE are come to this place, and have not met with any adventure worth the
relating to you, and the (...) shall write our History shall have nothing to
say as (...) that the fifth, we came to Saumur. Yesterday, it is true, (...) a
River, we perceived coming toward us four huge Bulls, which to my
fellow-Travellers seemed enchanted; but for my part, I am satisfied they were
not, because they suffered us to pass without disturbance, and did not shoot
fire at their Nostrils. The day before we would have taken away a Traveller's
Purse and his Horse, according to the custom of the Kingdoms of Logres, yet we
did not; for, as we perceived, the man took it as an injury, and thought it as
ill handling as if we should have robbed him. In a word, you cannot imagine how
much Knight-errantry is decayed, we have passed above ten Bridges that were not
guarded by any body, and wherever we have been entertained, they were easily
entrea^ed to take our money; which Master Lac, and I could have wished
otherwise. We speak of nothing all the way but loves, and do all that lies in
our power to reduce the age of Uterpendragon; but we find other people little
inclined that way, and I can hardly express to you how scarce Adventures are.
The two best I have met with, are, that two days since I had a Letter from the
resolute Infanta, and that I have opened another, which I think the han^somest
I ever saw; it is in my judgment the most perfect production of Fortune, and
since she is at your disposal in all things, we shall have cause to complain
of you, if we be not one day happy; for to be free with you, I think it is in
your power, and that you need no more then wish it. We are resolved to be your
Knights through this War; and to do such feats of arms, as shall raise a
jealousy in Dom Falanges d'Astre. In the mean time we shall not fail to send
you the Giants, we shall subdue by the way; and it is proportionably to those
that I would be thought,

Madam, Yours, etc

To the Same. LETTER. LXXXVI.
MADAM,
I Have traveled so far that I am come into a Country where there is no talk of
War, Spaniards, Germans, Edicts, subsidies or loanes from the people, and where
there are no entertainments but those of Love, Bals, and Comedies. This will
give you occasion to think that I am gotten very far, happily, that I am beyond
Popocampesche; or that Fortune has brought me into the invisible Island of
Alcidiana. In the mean time, the place where this is, is not at so great
distance from you; it is a City seated on the banks of the Loirc, where the Cher
^isburthens it self into that River; the Inhabitants speak a kind of Touraine
French, and are in stature and complexion; somewhat like those of France. But
to be serious with you, I assure you Madam, that since the expulsion of the
Moors out of Granade, there has not been known any Gallantry ^r magnificence
comparable to what is seen here; and Tours which has been called the Garden of
France, might be now, the Paradise of the Earth. There passes not a day wherein
there are not Music, Bals and Banquets, whatever is delicious is here in
abundance; the sweet Orenges come from all parts, and the Bon-Chrestien-Pears
have not left the Country. The Highwayes from Paris hither are all strewn,
with Violons, Musicians and Dancers, cloth of Silver, Embrodery, and Engines,
which come thronging into this City. Yesterday about seven at night, came i^ by
Torchlight six Chariots, full of Loves, Laughters, Allurements, Attractions,
and Invitations, who were got together from all parts of the World, to come to
this Assembly. Nay it is reported that some of them are come from the bottom
of Norway, as you may imagine by the wether it has made; whence a many that
are here believe there is not one left in the World; but that they are all come
hither. And yet Madam, I doubt not but that those you were wont to converse
with, have stayed behind, for amongst the many that are here, I have not met
with any one of yours, nor indeed^ any of that kind. This arrival has wrought
strange effects al over the City; the air of it is become more serene and more
mild, all men are fallen in love, all the Women become handsome, and the Lady
President whom you ^aw at Richelieu, is now one of the gallantest Women in
France. But Madam, what is very strange, and what happily you will think
incredible, is, that amidst all these entertainments, the day is extreme
burdensome to me, and from morning to night, I know not what either to say or
do wih so many loves. There Is not one fallen to my share, and of so many
Beauties, there is not any one I dare pretend to; So that while the gallants
that are here, are elevated with their Fortunes, and make resolutions to live
here eternally, I heartily wish my self at your fire side with Mademoiselle
d'Inton, or to see you, at least; through a Glasse-window, with your
Lady-Mother. I know not whether I should attribute this to the two Grains, she
gave me at parting, or to something else; but I never was guilty of such
passionate wishes to see you both, as conceiving no happiness desirable
without it. I humble beseech you, Madam, to second my wishes thereof, and to be
assured, that beyond all those who desire it, I am infinitely,

Madam, Yours, etc.
Tours. Jan. 8. 1638.
To the Same. LETTER. LXXXVII.
MADAM,
YOu are not to expect any Letters from me at present, but such as are tedious
and importunate; and yet I cannot forbear writing to you. But you will Pardon
me, if I endeavor my own diversion thus, since I have no other means to do it;
for my present humor considered, that I should divert my self with
Mademoiselle des Caudreaux, or with Mademoiselle Chesneau, I do not think it
can fall into your imagination, or that you can believe there is any thing
here, which might keep me one day from being (...) saddest man in the World.
Among the many afflictions I struggle with the trouble I am in for your health
lies very heavy upon me, this last misfortune having rendered me so fearful,
that, of one that feared nothing, I am become one that is frightened with any
thing; and think I shall never see again, what is once got out of my sight. The
more endeared any one is to me, the greater likelihood me thinks there is that
I should lose him. Which if so, Madam, be pleased to consider what fear I
should be in for you, and if I may not conceive that, if Fortune were to do me,
a worse turn then she has lately done me, it must be that she will have some
design upon you. I am extremely impatient to get once out of these fears, and
this place, to have some enjoyment of my self near you, after so great
sufferings, or at least some little rest after so much disturbance. I am,

Madam, Your, etc

To my Lady Marchioness de Sable. LETTER. LXXXVIII.
MADAM,
I Wish I had not so soon had the sight of the Letters, you sent to
Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, and to -- For it was my hope, that preventing your
writing, and venturing my stock voluntarily in that Trade, I should have given
you so signal an expression of my affection, as what I have received from you
of yours. But what you have written to me is so obliging, that I must confess,
I dare not pretend to any worthiness to answer it, and that the sloathfullest
person in the World being in my condition, would do as much as I do. Certainly,
Madam, those who will not allow you to have the tenderness you ought, must
needs acknowledge, that if you are not the most amorous person in the World;
yet are you the most obliging. True friendship has not more kindness then
there is in your words; and all even appearances of affection become you so
well, that the most perfect souls cannot but be satisfied therewith. Yet can I
not but imagine there is some charm in them for me, and though (...) know you
have in the adulterations of friendship the Secret that Monsieur -- has for
Rubies, and that when you please, you can give a little paste the luster of a
precious stone; yet am I confident that what you have made with me is very
substantial, and that there is not any thing more true, or more firm: For my
part, I may safely say, that I have ever honored and loved you beyond any
other whatsoever, but nothing comparably to what I do now; and I dare not
burden this Letter with the sentiments I have for you, least, if it mis-carry,
it should be taken for a love-Letter. I do not think that passion can pretend
to greater sensibility and tenderness, then what I daily feel in my self for
you. Yet I cannot personate the agitations of extravagant Lovers, nor put out
my tongue like Iscaron. But certain it is that since I left you, I am troubled
with such fits of melancholy as almost distract me, insomuch that all the
World wonders at it, nay in some hours of the day, Father Tranquillus and the
little Jesuit, would make no difficulty to exorcise me, for if I have known any
divertisement, it has been to entertain all people with discourse of you. It
was discovered that I had been at your House, and at Loudun, so that to see me
proved a general curiosity, and I was examined as one returned from Heaven or
Hell. I told them, Madam, that you were as handsome as you were four years
since. But when I would have told them that you were grown a greater wit, they
thought I related things incredible, and there I lost all credit: And yet it
cannot be denied but miracles are done in you, which never were in any, for the
World never afforded any one that gained beauty by the small Pox, and was
refined by a Country conversation. Mademoiselle de Rambouillet was extremely
pleased with your Letter, I took it for one of the best you ever writ, and was
not a little glad to see what was so much to my advantage so excellently well
written. What assurance soever I had my self of your affection; yet is it a
pleasure to me to see your liberality of it toward others, and confess that
effeminate vanity, you say I am guilty of, was moved at it. Adieu Madam, after
five Pages, I am loath to give you over, as being,

Your, etc.
Madam, be pleased to let me know whether you have observed, that, that, as
being, wherewith I have concluded my Letter, be one of those conclusions
whereof we have had some discourse.



To my Lord Cardinal de la Valette. LETTER LXXXIX.
My Lord,
ARe you not still troubled that you suspected not that those of Verceil wanted
powder, or that, wanting it; they were not able to make good the place, or that
you have, with eight or nine thousand, forced twenty thousand into very good
Works? certainly you make no great use of your reason, if that vexation find
you work still; were you in hopes to do things impossible, that you are not
satisfied that you have done all that might be? Your Lordship will pardon me if
I tell you so much, but certainly, it suits not well with a grave person to be
so disordered for a thing, wherein he has not failed; and me thinks it takes
away much from the merit of a man's duty, when he is not satisfied that he has
done it. You brought a handful of people to the relief of a place besieged by a
numerous Army; you found the lines drawn about it, and all the works in such a
posture, as that it was thought you could not have gotten a single man into the
City, to give them any intelligence, and yet contrary to the hopes and opinions
of all the World, you have gotten in eighteen hundred. Could any thing be done
more resolutely, better designed, or more fortunately executed? It was you that
brought things to that pass, Fortune has done the rest, and if she has done
ill, why should you torment your self so much? Accustom not your self, I
beseech you to so much familiarity with her, but as well in good success as in
the contrary, distinguish between what she has done, and what you have. Hence
it will happen, that you will never have any either too high or too low
thoughts of your self. If you will needs be accountable for all events, and
cannot be satisfied; but when all, your own wishes can suggest, comes to pass,
you must certainly wage a War upon very hate conditions, and expect Fortune
should do as much for you as she did for Alexander, and somewhat more then
she has done for Caesar. Besides, you are ungrateful to your own, if you
quarrel with her about this last accident, and it is a kind of injustice to
think it a great misfortune to have missed a great prosperity. You, in the
mean time, talk as if, through your own owersight, you had lost ten Battles and
a hundred Cities, and you seem to be enraged at the loss of a place, which in
the opinion of all the World was given over from the beginning. The taking of
Verceil has much prejudiced the Kings affairs, but your reputation suffers not
at all in it. If the relief you have put into it, has not proved effectual, it
deserves never the less praise, nay in the height of your prosperity, you
never did any thing more gallant, more resolute, or more extraordinary. Take
then more moderate resolutions, then those you seem to have, and being not in a
capacity to frighten your Enemies, do not your friends. You, who have taught me
all I know, are not to learn, that Prudence is a general virtue, which winds it
self into all the rest, and that where she is not, Fortitude loses it is name
and nature.

To morrow or the day after, I shall do your complements to the person you tell
me of; the last time I saw her, she spoke extremely of you, and protested to
me, that upon your account, she took no great joy for the taking of Verceil;
for though all the World was satisfied you were not in any fault, yet she knew
it troubled you, and had a greater affection for you, then to entertain any joy
for a thing, whereat you were afflicted. No doubt but she loves you
infinitely, if I am not mistaken, and there is another does it more then
infinitely,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Paris, Aug. 7. 1638.
To Monsieur Costart. LETTER. XC.
Sir,
I Shall for this time observe that Imperatoriam brevitatem, you tell me of,
for I am upon my departure to St German's, which is the reason I shall have,
but a word to say to you. Yet shall not this cause me to be (...), according to
your Theophrastus; In the entertainments we make together, or rather those you
give me, I am only to say Grace, Tantum laudare paratus.


To tell you truly what Nations were the first introducers of Polygamy, I
profess I am not able, nor do I trouble my self about it, Tros, Rutulusve
fuit, nullo discrimine habebo.


However it be, I shall give you more credit then H^rodotus, who says that in
the Indies, there are a sort of Ants, less then Dogs, but somewhat bigger
then Foxes; this is the Text, at least of the book which I have: But I know not
whether my Herodotus be the same with yours.

But to the purpose; you have put me into a great disorder about Theocritus,
with whom I was the best satisfied in the World. But to return to the other of
whom we spoke of, tell me what he means when he says that Venus sent the
Women's difease among the Scythians, who had profaned her Temple at Ascalon.

Your verse of Athenaeus, that Wine is the great Horse of the Poets, is very
pleasant: but, be ingenuous, did you not endeavor to make it an Alexandrian
Verse? (...) with (...) I am pleased with, and alludes very fortunately to the
French Phrase, to baek the great Horse, as you have ingeniously observed. But
that great Horse often casts his Rider, and it may be said of him, that he
bites and kicks.

For the Edentulum of Plautus, I concur with you, that his meaning is not, that
it does not bite, for it were a fault, but that it is a facetious manner of
speaking, to express it is age, that is, it is perfection.

What would you have me to do with Ulpian, who calls the Christians Impostors,
idem Trebatio and Papiniano videbatur. We may be overthrown by the Digests, but
the Code is much of our side.

The Sentence out of Pliny I like well, rerum naturae nasquam, etc. When I saw
the Elephant, I said, that he seemed a Creature rudely cast by Nature, and that
there was greater artifice in a fly.

But it is well remembered; I think I shall take a great journey, the King has
bestowed on me that of Florence, to acquaint the great Duke with the news of
the Queen's lying in. This must needs be advantageous to me, and in some sort,
pleasant; but I am withal troubled that it will deprive me a while of the
happiness, of seeing you and your Letters, for I believe you will be at Paris
before I return. I am in doubt whether I shall stay here till you answer this
Letter, yet fail not to write, for a thousand things may happen to stay me, or
hinder my departure. However I take my leave of you, and beseech you to be
assured of my heartiest affection, and that I never met with any happiness in
this World, which I esteemed so highly, or that I enjoy my self so much in as
your friendship.

But I pray forget not to dash out those -- Monsieur's, which you scatter up
and down your Letters ad populum Phaleras, or else I will put one in every line.

Vis le Sent coli, volebam amare,
Sed si te colo sexte, non amabo.
That is to say, I shall be so much the less,

Your, etc.
Paris, Aug. 25. 1639.
To the Same. LETTER. XCI.
Male est Cornifici tuo Catullo,
Male est m^hercule and laboriose.
SEriously Sir, I was never so much disordered as I am at the present; in the
mean time you write nothing but extravagances, and are as gamesome and free, as
if we were still in our youthful Studies, and were not troubled at any thing in
the world. Instead of saying something to me relating to my affliction, and
giving me your judgment of it, (for it requires as much matter of conjecture
as any the obscurest passage in Tacitus,) you quote to me Lampridius, and
Athenaeus, quam inepte, and at a time when I am disputing in my self, whether I
am in Madam -- 's favor or not, and that it is become a Problem, you come and
entertain me with Pharaoh. When we returned together from Arcueil, if I had
held you in discourse with the Kings of Egypt, consider how well you would
have taken it, and what attention you would have given me. And yet I must
confess, I could not but with much satisfaction read over all you writ. What
you tell me of -- has made me laugh.

Ti^yosque vultu
Risit invito.
Your Patruissime I am hugely taken with, so Plautus is frequent in such
unhappy fooleries; but, certainly, sometimes his expressions are very
excellent; and thus I reconcile Horace and Cicero, one says he is an unhappy
Bouffon, the other, that he is passim refertus Urbanis dictis. I read in him
the other day, of an old man, who having surpised one near the place, where he
had hid his Treasure, searched him, made him show his right hand, then his
left, and finding nothing, says, cedo tertiam. This is a pleasant personation
of a suspectful old man, who imagines a man may have a third hand to rob him. I
cannot express the extraordinary satisfaction you give me by writing to me as
you do. I find more matter of study in your Letters, then all the books in the
World, and more excellent things.

For those Gentlemen of Quintus Metellus Celer, I have no acquaintance with
them; you tell me they were taken for Indians, for my part, I think they were
for Cockscombs. On the other side, you talk of the Winds as learnedly as
Columbus would; it is easily perceived you took it all verbatim out of some
book, for I dare swear, that you never knew till now what a Rhombus of wind is:
and as to the straight of Vegas, I cannot be too confident of your knowledge of
it.

For ought I perceive (...) signifies basiare and amare; kissing and loving
convertuntur. But I am satisfied, that -- is opposite to that passage of
Aristenetus.

Your Shepherd, his Sheep, and Hercules, I am mightily taken with, nay the
Ass is a noble creature as you make it speak. Let me know whether you found
the humor in Aesop's Fables. The application of the fable I think dangerous,
and go you and preach it at Ruel. But as to our sheep, Hercules would find them
good meat, might he have enough of them. The Argonauts as they sailed to
Colchos, left him in an Island; diverse reasons are given for it; some say, it
was because he broke all the oars in rowing: Others that he was too heavy;
some, that the Argonants were affaird, he should have carried away all the
glory himself; and others, that it was by reason of his gluttony. I remember I
have read in a Greek Poet, I mean, Greek and Latin, that is Ears moved as he
did eat, and because it seems very pleasant to me, I have preserved the Verses,
which are these, Illum si edentem videris, strepunt genae,
Intus sonat guttur, sonat maxilla, dens
Stridet caninus, sibilant nares, movet
Aures, solent armenta sicut, haud minus.


I am so sorry I did not observe you, when you fed on the Cinnamon Biscuit, at
Gentilly, for certainly your ears were in motion.

I find your Translation of the Greek into French verse very good; but be
ingenuous, how often did you invocate Apollo for it.

The expression of Achillus Tatius, that the Peacock's tail is a meadow of
Feathers, is handsome, but happily a little too confident, and I think Tertullian
more fortunate, who after he had said many things of the Ornaments of the
Peacock, adds, nunquam ipsa, semper alia, and si semper ipsa quando alia,
toties denique, mutanda, quoties movenda.

I am content Vlpian should be guilt since you will have it so, as also
Papinianus; for they will do nothing but breed contention. But if will take my
advice, Trebatius shall be pardoned, for the Apothegme I have from you of his,
consultus a quodam an nux pinea pomum esset, respondit, si in Vatinium missurus
es, pomum eret. Farewell Sir, I am unfeignedly,

Yours, etc

To the Same. LETTER. XCII.
SIR,
WHen I had Sheep to buy, and Love Letters to write in Castilian and Portughez,
my hands were not so full of business as they are now. I am to take my leave of
the King and Monsieur; I am to solicit Monsieur de Bulion for an Order; and
get my money out of the Excheaquer: I must bid all my friends adieu, and for
all this I have but three days. In the mean time I lay all aside to divert my
self by writing to you, for me thinks nothing conserns me so much, and that
this voyage would not prove very fortunate to me, if I began it so ominously as
to be gone hence without bidding you Farewell. I know not whether this
embarcation will prove fortunate, but I never left France with so much good
will, and I think it a pleasure to go and challenge upon the Mediterranean, the
two and thirty winds which you know I sometime defied upon the Ocean. But now
it comes into my mind, you make thirty five, you that pretend so much to
Navigation, with your Rhombus and the straights of Vegas.

Heu quio nam tanti turbarunt Aethera venti.
Those who have compassed the World never were acquainted with above thirty
two, the other three are yours, I could not believe there were so many. But
that which I think most insupportable in you, is the Greek wind, and the
ability you pretend to above me to know where a Grave, or a Circumflex ought to
be placed. It was well said, thou shall neither add not take away on Jota; but
it is not meant of Accents. And yet because I have ommitted one, you blow as if
you had gained a great Victory. Oventum horribilem! when you abused poor
Philomela so much, and next to Terea, handled her worse then ever any did, I
crow'd not so much, though you were not so excusable for that as I am for this.

But goodness! how partinently have you told me of your Duriter... and the rest
of that passage! certainly I must needs love you well, that I can without envy
read whatever you write to me, and take so much pleasure to find you more witty
then my self. To be free with you, the greatest affliction my departure hence
causes me, is that I shall hear no more from you; Me thinks the Figgs, the
Grapes, the Mellons of Italy, nay the Present the great Duke shall make me,
cannot balance the loss I am at for your Letters. But you would rather. I
should praise you for your Poetry, then for your prose. For Aristotle says,
that of all Artisans the Poet is the most in love with his own work. Your
Poetical labors are certainly admirable, and let me dye if you make not as
good Verses as Cicero.

To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. LETTER. XCIII.
MADAM,
I Cannot absolutely say that I am come to Turin, for I have brought but half
my self with me. You think my meaning is that I have left the other with you,
you are mistaken, it is, that of a hundred and four pound, that I weighed at my
coming out of Paris, I now weigh but fifty two. I am out of flesh and fallen
away extremely, and this alteration considered, I think the Marquess of Pisany,
and I shall not know one another at our next meeting. The fever stayed me a
day at Roan, I thought my self surely laid up, and expected a sickness of some
continuance. What troubled me most, was, that I imagined you would hardly
believe it proceeded from the grief I took at my parting from you, and would
attribute it to my riding Post. And indeed that was not improbable, and what
confirmed this opinion, is, that questionless, the three last Horses I rid on,
had hurt very much that part of the body which you know Brunel showed Marphisa;
and what was more dangerous, I had such an excessive heat, that if I had been
Governor of Monsieur le Dauphin, I could not have been fitter for it, then I
was the four first days. I mentioned it to a great Person in Roan, who being
as I was told Apothecary, brought me something that gave me much ease. I pray
let my Lady Duchess know as much, since that I have not had any hurt, save
that of not seeing you; but for that there is no remedy, Mercurial Salt cannot
cure it. I am here ever since yesterday in the afternoon, I have not seen my
Lady Duchess yet, by reason that yesterday the Duke was thought to lie dying,
to day I shall see her: to morrow I shall go hence for the Army, and I hope the
next day about noon, I shall see my Lord Cardinal de la Valette, and your
Brother. I doubt not, Madam, but you will be glad of this occasion, and will
not take it ill I should be sensible of this joy in your absence. When I say in
your absence, I include also that of Madam la Princess, Mademoiselle de
Bourbon, my Lady Duchess of Aiguiblon, my Lady Marchioness de Sable, Madam du
Vigean, and my Lady Marchioness your Mother, whom I should have named first,
though there are Princesses and Dutchesses in the number. You cannot believe
how much I am troubled at the sickness of Mademoiselle de Liancourt; if she be
any thing recovered, and cured of her -- be pleased, Madam, to let me know so
much at Rome; for that will oblige me to take a journey thither, and I shall
see all things there with much more ease and satisfaction. But it were an
extraordinary one to me, might I but tell you here how much I am,

Madam, Yours, etc.
Turin, Sept. 1. 1638.
To the Same. LETTER. XCIV.
MADAM,
I Wish you had seen what condition I was in this day in a Glass; you had found
me among the most horrid Mountains in the World, in the midst of a dozen or
fifteen men, the most dreadful to look on that might be, whereof the most
innocent had killed fifteen or twenty others. They were all black as Devils,
their hair grown down to the midst of their bodies, every one had two or three
cuts over the face, an arquebuse on his shoulder, and two Pistols and two
Daggers at his Girdle. These are the Bandits that live in the Mountains of
Piedmont and Genua, you would certainly have been afraid Madam, to see me among
those Gentlemen, and would have thought they had been going to cut my Throat.
For fear of robbing I had entreated their Company, having written to their
Captain the night before, to come and expect me in my way, which he has done,
so that I have got off for three Pistols. But above all, I wish you had seen
what faces my Nephew and my man put on it, who thought no less then that I had
led them to the Shambles. Having dismissed them, I came into two places where
there were Spanish Garrisons, and there certainly I was in greater hazard then
before: being examined, I said I was a Savoyard, and to pass for such, I spoke
as near as I could like M. de -- upon my bad accent I was permitted to pass.
Consider whether I shall ever make any excellent discourses that will stand me
in so much steed, and if it had not been very impertinent at that time, that,
under pretense of my being of the Academy, I should have pumped my self for the
best French. Thence I came to Savone where I found the Sea somewhat more rough
then was suitable to the small vessel I had taken, and yet, God be praised I am
come safely hither. Consider Madam, what a many haza^ds; I have run through in
one day. In a word, I have escaped the Bandits, the Spaniards and the Sea, all
which have not done me so much hurt, as you do, and it is for your sake that I
run the greatest hazard I am like to meet with in this voyage. You think I do
but jest; but, may I die, if I can any longer stave off the affliction, it is
to me not to see your Mother and your self. I must indeed confess, that at the
first I was in some doubt whether it were you or the Post Horses that hurt me;
but now it is six days since I have ridden, and yet feel no less weariness.
This convinces me that my torment proceeds from my distance from you, and that
my greatest weariness is that of not seeing you; and this is so certain, that
if I had no other business here, than what I have to do at Florence, I think I
should immediately return hence, and not have the courage to go any further,
had I not an affair of yours to solicit at Rome. Be then pleased to think your
self obliged to me for this; for I assure you, there is much more in it then I
tell you, and that I am, as much as I ought to be,

Madam, Yours, etc

To my Lady Marchioness de Rambouillet. LETTER. XCV.
Madam,
I Have upon your account seen le Valentin, and that with much more curiosity
then ever I saw any thing, and since you expect a description of it, I shall
give it as exactly as I can possible. But you may be pleased to consider, that
when I have executed that Commission and the other, which I am to do at Rome, I
have done for you the two most difficult things to me in the World, that is, to
speak of Edifices and affairs. Le Valentin, Madam, since there must be a
Valentin in it, is a house within a quarter of a League of Turin, seated in a
Meadow, upon the Po. As you come into it, the first thing you meet with, may I
perish if I know, what you come to first: I think it is a Lodge; no, no, it is
a Portal, no, I am mistaken it is a Lodge. I profess, I know not whether it be a
Portal or a Lodge. Not an hour since I had all as perfect as might be, and now
my memory has played the jade. I shall take better notice at my return, and
not fail to give you a punctual account of it. I am,

Madam, Yours, etc
Genua, Oct. 7. 1638.
To Monsieur Costart. LETTER XCVI.
SIR.
I Was yesterday lodged in one of the noblest palaces in the World; I had for
my Lodgings, a spacious Hall, two Antichambers, and one other Chamber hanged
with Tapistry interwoven with Gold, and was attended by twenty or thirty
Officers; and to day, I am in one of the most wretched Inns that ever I was at
in my life, and have only one man to wait upon me. To balance so great a
change of Fortune, and to raise my self to as great happiness to day as I was
in yesterday, I called for Pen, Ink and Paper, purposely to write to you. May I
perish, if amidst the honors I received suitable to the Person I then
represented, and the entertainments I was treated with, I have been as much
pleased as I am at the present! Besides the delight, I take to entertain you, I
am otherwise not a little glad to let you know, that it was not the advantage I
made of the exchange of your Letters for mine, that caustd me to hold that
correspondence, since that even now, when I cannot hope for any answer from
you, I yet take a certain pleasure to write to you, and to assure you of my
readiness to serve you. It is, I assure you, as great as you deserve, and the
affection you have for me may claim. I hope within three weeks to leave Rome,
and if I meet with a Vessel, to take shipping for Marseilles. You that are so
well acquainted with the winds, if you have any command over them, be pleased
to lock them all up at that time, praeter Japyga. But for that, there is no
great danger, if he be somewhat high; I matter not for a little roughness of
the Sea, so I may make the more speed, for I am in haste to be at Paris, and to
see you there. I am,

Your, etc.
Rome, Nov. 15. 1638.
To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. LETTER. XCVII.
Madam,
I Must crave my Lady your Mother's Pardon, I never was so weary of Rome. There
passes not a day but I see something (...) that is admirable, some Master pieces
of the best Masters that ever were, Gardens where the Spring is at this
present: Edifices which the World cannot parallel, and ruins more noble then
even those. And yet all this cannot shake off sadness, nor hinder that even
while I see them, I wish my self hence. The most excellent pieces of painting,
Sculpture and etching of An^llus Praxiteles, and of Papardelle please me not. I
should wonder at this, did I not know the reason of it, that is, that who has
been accustomed to see you, cannot well enjoy himself when he does not. To deal
truly with you, Madam, I have the same consideration of you as of my health; I
never know your true value till I have lost you, and though, when you are
present, I observe not that moderation which might gain me a good constitution
with you, yet as soon as you are once gone, I make a thousand wishes for you. I
acknowledge the World affords not any thing more precious, and find by
experience that all the delicacies of the Earth are bitter and unpleasant
without you. I took more pleasure to see with you two or three Walk at Ruel,
then I have had to see all the Vineyards at Rome, or should to see the Capitol
though in it is former magnificence, and that Jupiter Capitolinus were there in
person. But that you may know I am not in jest, but in very good earnest, as
ill as I am; about eight days since taking a walk in the morning with the
Chevalier de Jars, I had fallen down all along had he not received me in his
arms, and the next day in the evening I swounded in my Lady d'Estree's Chamber.
The Doctors tell me they are melancholy vapors, and that these accidents are
not to be slighted. For my part, seeing they took me two days together, and
that I was in danger of something worse, I have neither played the Fool nor
Madman, have taken the Antimony, which I had from Monsieur Nerli. In a word,
it has given me great case, and I intend to take four dozes with me, which I
shall entreat my Lady Duchess of Aiguillon to take, for there is no Ripope
near so effectual, and this must be used till he who has bestowed it on me,
have found out the Aurum potabile, which he pretends to do once within a year.
I hope to leave this City within these eight days. You will wonder, Madam, I
should -- continue so long in a place which I seem to be so weary of; but I
have been stayed here hitherto by some occasions I shall acquaint you with, and
which I could not avoid. But I assure you once more, I never was in so much
disorder, nor ever had so great a desire to see you. Be pleased I humbly
beseech you, to believe me, and assure your self, of my being, much beyond what
I can express,

Madam, Your, etc.
Rome, Nov. 25. 1638.
To my Lord Bishop of de Lisieux. LETTER. XCVIII.
My Lord,
I Would very gladly have been my self the Bearer of the enclosed, and have
give my humble thanks for the favor of your recommendations of me to the
person who sends it. Besides that having gone through my devotions at Rome, I
would try whether I might not advantage my self more at Lisiex, where I may
learn to gain those Pardons I have received from the Pope. I believe this
journey would prove more advantageous to me, then what I have lately taken; f^r
my Lord, there is nothing so certain, as that I never see you but I am better
for some days, and never come near you, but I feel my good Angel resuming new
Forces, and disposing of me with more assurance. It is long since I am
convinced in my thoughts, that if God has decreed my conversion, he will make
use of no other means then that of your discourses, and your example; and that
if he should send a voice from Heaven to call me home again, it shall come
through your mouth. Hence it is, that me thinks the will I have to serve you,
in some sort, sanctifies me, and that I cannot be absolutely profane, when I
have so much respect and affection for so reverend a person. I must at least
attribute it to you, that I am guilty of one rational passion among so many
that are not such, and that I am not so absolutely irregular; but there is one
part of my Soul untainted. Though I do not find it the best employments I
might, and am a very ill Husband thereof; yet I doubt not, but I have secured
for ever the part you have in it, nor can I ever forfeit or engage the place
you have therein. It is great enough, my Lord, to save one day, all the rest,
and I despair not but shortly it will be wholly your own. You daily purchase
something in it, and want not much of having an interest there greater then
that of all the World besides. Be pleased to make all your own, and be as proud
of the acquest, as if it were that of some unbelieving Country, whereof you had
been designed to destroy the Idols. I am in some hopes it will so come to
pass, and reflecting on the great favors you have done, and confident, that
you cannot be mistaken, I look on all the good you have said of me as a
Prophecy, and believe I shall be such hereafter, as you assured Cardinal
Barbelin I was then. I cannot well express the noble entertainment he made me
upon your recommendation, and the affection he seems to have for whatever you
concern your self in. You are, my Lord, almost as well known in Italy as in
France, and certainly, I have not met with any thing at Rome, whereby I have
been so much edified, as the esteem and passion I found there for you. But
above all, Cardinal Barberin seems to be your absolute friend, and to have for
your virtue that affection and respect, which you shed into the hearts of all
those who follow your example. He has burdened me with some thing particular
to you from him, which I reserve till I have the honor to see you, and be in a
capacity to essure you my self, that I am, beyond any,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Paris, Jan. 15. 1639.
To Monsieur de Lyonne, at Rome. LETTER. XCIX.
Sir,
THough you have caused me the most restless hours I have had in all my
journey, and have treated me at Rome worse then any, yet assure your self I
have not seen any man, I so much desire to see again, or have greater
inclinations to serve. It seldom happens, that he who ruins a man gains his
friendships; you have had that good Fortune with me, and your Genius has in
all things such an influence over nine, that I have not been able to make my
party good either way; but that while you have gotten my money, you have withal
gained my heart, and made your self Master of my affections. And if I am so
happy as to have any place in yours, that gain takes away the sense of all my
losses, and makes me think my self the gainer in what has past between us.
Your acquaintance, though it has cost me very dear, has not stood me in more
then it is worth, and I should not stick to give as much to find such another in
Paris. This granted, Sir, you may be assured, I shall do any thing that may
secure the honor I esteem so much, and that I shall not easily lose a friend,
I have purchased at so dear a rate. I have done all you desired in the business
you writ to me about, and shall be as dutiful to you in all your other
Commands; for I am, with the greatest earnestness and affection I ought,

Yours, etc.
Paris. Feb. 7. 1639.
To my Lord Cardinal de la Valette. LETTER. C.
My Lord,
IF you but reflect on the passion you saw I sometime had for Renaut, and
Roger, you cannot doubt of that. I now have for your concernments, since you do
in your shirt what they could but do with enchanted arms. Were you a Fairy,
you could not hazard your self more freely then you have done, as having
carried Valor to it is uttermost limits, and to the highest point, they could
have done, who can pretend to no other Virtue. I must needs acknowledge my
Lord, that if the War had been ended by this last performance, whereof you have
been the principal cause, and that you had no more to do, then to come and
Triumph, I should be extremely elevated at what is reported of you here, and
with much satisfaction sit down to write your History. But when I consider that
there are other occasions wherein you may run the same hazards, and that I am
not assured of what shall happen at the end of the Book, I cannot without some
disturbance participate of that glory which all the World gives you, and the
fear of what is to come takes away much of the enjoyments of things present. I
leave therefore to those, who have not so great affection for you as I have,
and to whom you are not so necessary as to me, to employment of celebrating
your praises. For my part, all I can do at the present, is, humbly to beseech
you to be more tender of the most Illustrious person of this age, and not to
rely so much on Fortitude as to injure Justice. This will advise you not to
hazard so freely the wealth of all the World, and be so careless of a Life,
wherein all the excellent* and virtuous are concerned, and which is more
considerable to France, then the whole Country you defend. I am,

My Lord, Your, etc

To My Lord -- LETTER. CI.
My Lord,
THough you had left Paris, upon some design, or something relating to your
enjoyments or your Glory, I think it would nevertheless have caused me some
trouble, and raise in me a quarrel with your concernments; but the cause of
your departure being so unfortunate and strange as it is, I may say, there
could not any thing have happened of so great affliction to me, nor could
Fortune have done what I should think more unjust, or more insupportable, since
it has disturbed the enjoyments of all here, and that a many, who are not so
much obliged to you as I am, are sensible of that disaster, I hope, my Lord,
you will do me the honor, not to doubt, but I have the greatest resentment I
ought, and that it was not necessary I should acquaint you with so much by
writing. However I thought it my duty to make this acknowledgement, and I
expect to find some ease in assuring you there is not any one can be more
tender of your enjoyments, or with greater sincerity,

My Lords, Your, etc

To Monsieur -- LETTER. CII.
Sir,
YOu had done better to have danced a Coranto less, and sent me a Letter, and
the time of one of your Galliards had been better spent in writing to me. It
has been reported here, that in the same Ball, you began it thirty times over,
't was indeed well danced for a great Commander, and a man that would pretend
to some trouble that he had left Paris. If you continue thus, I now wash my
hands of all your affairs; and find that the Ladies of Lorraine are more
obliged to send you fruits then those of the Court. I know not, Sir, how you
understand it, nor what advantage you find in it; but for my part, me thinks,
to dance at Mets is not to dance in cadence, and I dare swear it affords not
twenty more amiable and greater Beauties then three or four here; who sometimes
speak of you, and who take it not well, you should mind your enjoyments so much
in their absence. But if you are grown so great a dancer, and cannot by any
means forbear it, they entreat you not to dance Galliards altogether; but to
call for some graver dances, as your Brawl's and Pavines. I thought it my duty,
Sir, to give you this advice, you may take it as you please; but for my part, I
shall ever be,

Sir, Your, etc

To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. LETTER. CIII.
MADAM,
YHE news of the raising of the Siege at Thurin, was to me the most welcome
that ever I received. And yet it was some trouble to me, to lose thereby an
opportunity to express the real affection I have for my Lord Cardinal de la
Valette; for I was resolved to get into the Town, and bring him some
encouragement, by the news I should tell him of you. The Count de Guiche, whom
I acquainted with my design, told me, that the ordinary reward of such as were
surpised in such attempts, was hanging, yet was I nothing startled, and being
fortified by some Reasons of Mademoiselle de la Trimouille, in case I should
have come to the Wheel in Italy, I thought it no great matter to be hanged
there. But it had been a pleasant spectacle, if the Cardinal de la Valette,
walking on the Walls should have known me upon the Ladder. The troth on it is,
wanting your presence, a man would not stick to hang himself for a half penny,
and feeling a great weight on his stomach, it were better be strangled then
endure it. You, Madam, who have never wanted your self, or felt the grief which
attends a separation from the most amiable person in the World, cannot imagine
the misery of it. But if you please, I will tell you how it comes to pass: The
first day, a man is extremely drowsy, the second stupify'd, the third
extravagant; and then, when he begins to come to himself again, and to
apprehend things, he sighs out, whence come you? O sighs here, and sighs
there; come, come, take your money, it is the saddest thing in the World. Fear
not the mis-carriage of this, for there is no interruption. But in case this
Packet be surpised, this is to certify Prince Thomas, the Marquess of
Leganez, and all those to whom these presents shall come, that no heed is to be
given to me, that all I speak is in jest, and that it is but ordinary with me
to write thus extravagantly. They may give it what credit they please, and yet
there is nothing so certain, as that I am beyond all that may be said,

Madam, Yours, etc.
Grenoble.
To Madam la Princess. LETTER. CIV.
MADAM,
UNless I had been nayl'd to Paris, nothing could have hindered me from going
this day to Poissy; for whatever I may have said to another Princess, there is
not any in the World, whom I would more gladly see then you. But you know
Madam, that as one Nail drives out another, so was it necessary the Passion I
had for you should give way to a later, that has fastened on me, and which if
it be not the stronger, is yet at the present more importunate. I know not
whether you will apprehend this, which seems to be left as a Riddle; but I
assure you I have a fundamental reason not to stir hence, which yet I dare not
lean on, and whereof I think it not convenient to discover to you any more. I
have a long time deliberated in my self whether I ought to go, and there is a
great controversy between my heart and another part, which I name not; but to
be short, Madam: I must confess, that which in all reason should have been the
lowest is highest, and that I have preferred before all things, that which
according to the course of nature ought to be behind. I dare profess to you,
however, that in my posture I considered, I could do no otherwise, and that
your self, who are the most considerable Person in the World, and do all things
in Order, would have done no less then I have, had you been in my place, My
Prayers to Heaven are, you never may; for in the condition I am in, there is
none good for me, as being every where, as if I sat upon Thorns. I can make a
shift to go a little a foot, but a Horse is a torment to me, a Coach is too
rough, nay I find some inconvenience even in the Sedans of Monsieur
Souscarriere. I am,

Madam, Yours, etc.
Paris, Aug. 5. 1639.
To Mon^ieur Chapelain. LETTER. CV.
Sir,
I Shall satisfy your desire, but whether for your own sake or Monsieur de
Balzac's that I do it, I know not, nor indeed could I resolve that Question
though I should study it till tomorrow. The authority you have over me is so
equally divided between you both, that, if at the same time one should command
me to eat, the other to drink, I should be starved, at least according to the
Philosophers, for, I should never find any reason to comply, with the one
rather then with the other. But, as good Fortune will have it, you agree so
well together, that you will never lay contrary commands upon me, and join
interests, so that whenever I shall do what I am commanded, I shall satisfy
both. I am troubled at your Nail, and pity you much; but, for ought I can
perceive, it is nothing in comparison of that I have; mine, est latus clavus,

-- Cum lato purpura clavo.
And if you had such another on your nose, it would cover all your face: I am
still extremely troubled with it. It excuses me that I wait not on you, for
that you may know the truth of it, it has jus lati^clavi, I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
August. 10. 1639.
To Madam -- LETTER. CVI.
MADAM,
THE Letter you so much desire to see is not worth one line of that wherewith
you demand it. But are you, who pretended to so much devotion yesterday,
nothing troubled in mind at the writing of such things in the Passion-week, and
do you not perceive the consequences and effects they may produce? I had
cleared and disburthen'd my conscience, and had thereupon resolved not to see
you again; but your Letter has put me into my former disorder, and with your
Pearls and your four thousand Livers, I am corrupted as well as the other. I
never thought, you should ever have been put to these shifts to reduce a
Servant, nor that such things should prevail any thing with me, and to tell you
truly, it is the first time I ever was dazzled with wealth, or tempted with
money. And indeed, it must be confessed, the Pearls never had such a luster as
you have given them in your Letter, and your four thousand Livers, as you
employ them, may well be valew'd at above three hundred thousand. You are
certainly an incomprehensible person, and I cannot but wonder, how without the
reading of Herodotus, or making use of the Saturnales, you have been able to
write such excellent Letters. For my part, Madam, I begin to imagine you have
deceived us; I doubt not but you know the source of the Nile; for that, whence
you derive all the things you say, is much harder to find and more unknown. In
a word, what ever your Porter may say, my Lady Marchioness de Sable, is not the
most accomplished person in the World; there are more charms in a corner of
your eye; then in all the Earth besides, and all the words that are used in
magic, have not the operation which those you write have.

To Madam -- LETTER. CVII.
MADAM,
NO doubt but some one of the Fairies to whom you say, you recommend your
Letters after they are written, has laid hands on that you have sent me. It
must certainly needshave been one of the most knowing among them, and one that
is as well acquainted with the Court as the Winds. I do not believe the
Kingdom of them can afford many, able to do as much; and am of opinion that
the same who inspires you when you speak, has for this time assisted you to
write. Besides the Gentillesses I have observed, and the visible beauties that
shine in it, there is something else, that smites the heart as well as the
Phant'sy, and a certain secret virtue, that produces extraordinary effects. I
had no sooner read it over, ere I found myself freed from all my
smis-fortunes, and as if all absence, all desires, all fears, had been banished
this World, my Soul was immediately in an absolute calm. This, Madam, I cannot
believe possible to be done; but by the science of Fairyships, for to love you
as I do, and to be satisfied without seeing you, cannot certainly be a natural
effect. However it be, I am obliged to you for having put me into the condition
I am in, and since I was not to expect any satisfaction from Reason, you have
done well to apply charms. All my fear is, they will not last long, I distrust
the joy I feel, when I am ignorant of the cause of it; and am afraid the same
fate may happen to me, as to dead bodies forced out of their graves, which
having only a Magical animation are actuated but for a while, and fall down
suddenly, when the enchantment is once dissolved. Suffer not my case to be the
same; and since I am re-animated by your words, and that your Letters are
certain Characters, which while I have about me, I cannot dye, be it your care
to renew them daily, and let me have at least an artificial subsistence, till I
see you again, and that your presence inspire me with real life. The relation
you have given me of your adventures, is, I must needs acknowledge, very
pleasant, since it gives me occasion to derive a certain pleasure from the very
inconveniences you have run through. I beseech you, continue me the account of
all your Fortunes, and as you have acquainted me with what has happened to you
in the Woods; so let me know also those you have when you shall lodge in the
City. But you have very handsomely taken occasion to make it appear that you
know the --

To my Lady Marchioness de Sable. LETTER. CVIII.
Madam,
HOw excellent soever the Letters of Monsieur de la Mesnardiere may be, yet
Mademoiselle de Chalais, and I could not think our selves satisfied with the
bare receipt of them only by this return, especially when all the news they
brought us, was that you had caught a very great cold. But what is more
strange, is, that I, who ever quarrel with you for being too scrupul^us in
point of health, am at the present fallen into the same humor for what
concerns you, and more troubled for your cold then a quotidian fever I should
have had. It Is true, I have now occasion enough to be troubled at it, since
that thereupon depends your journey, and upon your journey all my joy. For, I
assure you, Madam, I am resolved not to entertain any if you come not, and must
expect to be the happiest or the unhappiest man in the World according to the
resolution you shall take. I dare also tell you that you shall not want your
part of the satisfaction we intend you, and that infallibly you will find
greater diversion and mirth here, and consequently more health. But till you do
come, it would be an extraordinary kindness, would you but send Mademoiselle --
and Mademoiselle de -- before, that in this interim, I might have some one to
discourse withal of you, and with whose conversation I might elude my
impatience.

--
It Is very confidently done, to dash out four lines together when a man writes
to a Marchioness. But you know better then any one, of what consequence it is
that should be allowed, and how advantageous these blottings are to humane
Society. I write not -- for I am vexed that she sent me nothing the last time,
I send you a Bourriche of Fancies, which I humbly beseech you to put into the
hands of her confident: Let her dispose of them as she pleases, and keep them
herself, if she think she cannot present them to -- without giving suspicion
to her Mother. But I entreat her to pick out the best, and to present them to
you, from herself, I would say, from me, if I durst, and were not confident,
that you are not much taken with presents of that nature. I send them also some
images, because it now comes into my mind that I had promised them some. I have
nothing to acquaint you with as to your friend, the poor less, is, if I am not
mistaken, in a very sad condition; Her Husband is never a minute absent from
her; he is a perpetual torment to her, nor is her Mother less troublesome; in
a word, never was any one so little married, nor so much. Madam, hasten to the
sight of this -- spectacle, I am,

Yours, etc

To Madam -- LETTER. CIX.
MADAM,
THough I am utterly out of all hope of acquitting my self of those
obligations, which your civilities have forced upon me, yet should I be
troubled they were any less; and though I think my self unworthy all the
honors you shed on me, yet can I not but derive thence an extraordinary
satisfaction. Had I no other acquaintance with you then that I knew your
conditions and quality, I ought to look on the honor of your Letters and
commands, as the greatest I am capable of. But it having been the pleasure of
Fortune, I know not by what contrivances, that, being at a great distance from
you; I should know you as particularly as those who are about you, I must
confess, Madam, it is a satisfaction beyond all expression, and that I feel my
self troubled with a little vanity, that I should receive so great favors from
a person, who I have long since thought the most accomplished of the age, and
in whom I know may be found all the perfections that command affection and
esteem. Were I so inconsiderable in the World as never to have heard any thing
of this; yet were it easy for me to judge by your Letters, that France affords
not any thing comparable to your wit and civility; nay expressions so
transcendent and so full of obligation as those you have given me, would almost
make me imagine there were something in it extraordinary. I cannot, Madam, but
acknowledge them such, that from whomsoever they came, I should have been
extremely surpised thereat; but certainly, the person, from whom they are
sent, renders them yet much more considerable, and the hand that writ them,
inspires them with a force and virtue, which they could not derive elsewhere.
If after this my heartiest services -- attend A -- it will be no great miracle,
you have obliged me thereto so much, that it is impossible I should do
otherwise, since you have not left me the least pretense or shadow of merit. I
wish, Madam, that instead of recommending to me a person, for whom I had
already a great esteem and affection, you had in three words commanded me
something that were difficult, and whereto I should have had some reluctance,
that so you might, in some degree, have discovered how far I am at your
devotion; and that it is not your extraordinary kindnesses, nor yet that manner
of writing whereby you gain the hearts of all that read your Letters, which
oblige me to obey you, but the respects I have for so many admirable endowments
as you are furnished with, and the inclinations, wherewith I am,

Madam, Your, etc

To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. LETTER CX.
Madam,
I Am the only man that is yet dead of the Disea^e of your absence, nor do I
much fear to tell it you plainly, because I believe you will not be much
troubled at it. Nevertheless, if you will have the naked truth, when there is no
danger to tell it you, I was, you know, a very jocund Bachelor, and unless it
were, that I was extremely given to contestation, and was as obstinate as your
self, my other imperfections were excusable. You are then to understand, Madam,
that since last Wednesday which was the day of your departure, I have neither
eaten nor opened either my mouth or my eyes, and indeed all that is wanting is
that I am still above ground, that is unburied. I would needs have that last
Ceremony delayed a while, for these reasons; in the first place, because I have
ever had an aversion thereto, and next, I should not take it well the report of
my death should be spread abroad so soon, and therefore I put the best face I
can on it, that men might still be in doubt; for if they consider that, it
happened to me just in the nick of your departure, we shall never avoid coming
into the ballad called The good year, which is now so much in vogue. Were I
again in the World, one of the things I should be extremely troubled at, is,
the little discretion that many have in advancing and abetting all manner of
Stories. These that are a live, are not in my opinion, impertinent in any thing
so much as this, nay it is hateful even to us that are dead. But, Madam, take
heed you do not laugh when you read this, for certainly, it is a kind of
impiety to abuse the dead, and were you in my condition, you would not take it
well to be so dealt with. I therefore conjure you to pity me; and since you
cannot do any thing else for me; have a care of my Soul, for I assure you, it
is in extraordinary Torments. When we were separated, she took immediately the
road to Chartres, and thence straight to la Mothe, and now while you read this
Letter she is at your Elbow, and will be this night in your Chamber, and if
you think it not importunate, give you five or six outcries. I believe you
would be much pleased with the noise, for it is not unlike that of the Angels
of the Lower House; while she torments herself, and makes such a hellish Stir,
that you will think the House ready to turn upside down. I was once in a mind
to send you the Body by the Carrier, as also that of the Marshal de Fervaque's
Lady, but it is in such a pitiful condition, that it would have been all to
pieces ere it had been with you; besides that I was afraid the heat might have
spoiled it. You will honor me extremely, if you please to tell the two
excellent Princesses with whom you are, and I desire them to call to mind, that
while I lived, I was their incomparably humble Servant, and that I cannot shake
off that passion, even after death; for the condition I am in, I profess I
have the same honor and respects for them as ever. I shall not only presume to
affirm, that there is not among the dead any one so much their Servant as I am,
but will make it good; there is not among the living any more at their devotion
then I am, or that can be more then I am,

Madam, Yours, etc

To Monsieur Chapelain. LETTER. CXI.
SIR,
THough it were only out of some design upon your own reputation, or that you
would cast so much honor upon me, you should write to me often, for your great
wit, which is admirable in all things, is never more fortunate then in the
Letters I receive from you. If you would but present each of your Judges with
the like, you needed no other recommendation, and they would be convinced there
were no more to be done in your case, then to do justice to the most virtuous
man in the World. I shall do what you command me, with all the earnestness I
can, and all the passion you may claim; and therefore fear not I shall forget
it: my Will is not over confident of my memory in things of that consequence,
but perpetually represents to me what I have to do, till it be done. What
business soever I may have, I place yours amongst the first of my Agenda, sed
tu inter acta refer, and pro certo habe, me in hac re, and in omnibus, omne
officium, studium, curam, and diligentiam tibi praestiturum. I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
I humbly desire you to return my thanks to Monsieur de la Mote, but with an
eloquence worthy of your self and him.


Apr. 3. 1640.
To My Lord Marquess de Montausier: LETTER. CXII.
My Lord,
SInce your are designed to dispose of those of our family to Reason and their
duty, it were but sit you took the same course with me as the rest, and made me
a more virtuous man then I have been as well as my Nephews. It does certainly
very much argue my defect as to that point, since I have not hitherto returned
you my thanks for what courtezies you had done both them and me. But in a word,
my Lord, without putting me into Prison, and without obliging me to fast, you
have forced me, as well as the other, to do what I ought, and have shown your
self so resolute to engage me, though I was unworthy of it; that,
notwithstanding my negligence, it is impossible I should not express my
^esentment thereof, and to return you the humblest thanks you may justly claim.
I presume you will pardon me my fault, since I acknowledge it with so much
ingenuity. And certainly, my Lord, considering the reputation of cruelty that
lies upon you, it corc^rns you very much to do such a signal act of mercy, as
that is, and to pardon a man laden with so much guilt as I am. I beg it of you
upon the account of Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, and if it be Lawful to add any
thing thereto, I conjure you, by the extraordinary passion wherewith I am,

My Lords, Your, etc

To my Lord Marquess de Pisany. LETTER CXIII.
MADAM,
YOu had persuaded me, that ere I should have continued here quite three weeks,
I should spend my time very pleasantly, and it is now above six since I came
hither, and see not any effect of your prediction. I humbly beseech you, make
good your word, by affording me the satisfaction you promised, which you must
send me from the place where you are, since I cannot meet with any here. I have
done you that service at my coming hither, that you are obliged not to deny me
this assistance, for you are to know that I have given you a resurrection in
the opinion of all the World, and that you have not any friends or kindred
here, who thought you not dead ever since Autumn last. If your Lordship does
think this service of any consequence, and deserves acknowledgement, it will be
your fault if you do not as much for me, and restore me to life, which I cannot
absolutely say, I have in this place. To do this miracle there needs no more
then a Letter from you, with an assurance that you continue me the honor of
your affection. If what you expressed to me at my departure be not quite lost,
you will not deny me this favor, especially having in your necessity so
excellent a Secretary as him you are wont to make use of. I have understood you
did me the honor to drink my health; but as it is now, there are requisite
stronger remedies then that to restore it, and it is only from you that I can
expect any. But from the reflection I make on the love, you have for whatever
belongs to you, and the protection I have sometimes seen you afford your
subjects, I raise a confidence that you will not forsake me, who am as much
your vassal as if I had been born in your Town of Essars, and withal do put
particularly profess my self,

My Lord, Your, etc

To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. LETTER. CXIV.
Madam,
IT must needs be acknowledged that I am remarkable for the sincerity of my
friendship; it is a grief to me that I see you not, as if it were a loss of
great consequence to me, and me thinks, I spend not my time so well here, as
when I have the honor to be near you. Amiens, in your absence, seems less
pleasant to me then Paris, and though I can every day visit Ladies that speak
the Language of Picardy excellently well, yet I do not think my self ever the
happier for it. The conversation of my Lord Duke de C -- Monsieur de T -- and
Monsieur de -- whom I meet here often, affords me no entertainment at all.
Sometimes I think it very tedious to continue three hours together in the Kings
Chamber, nay I find no diversion in the Society of Monsieur Libero, Monsieur
Compiegne, and twenty more excellent persons, I have no acquaintance with, who
very much celebrate my parts, and tell me they have seen of my works. I have
seen the King play at Hoc all this afternoon, and yet find not the least
remission of my Spirits; and though I go constantly thrice a week a
Fox-hunting, I find no great sport in it, though there be in the company a
hundred Dogs, and as many Horns, which together make a hideous noise, such as
whereof the terror would break your tender Ears. To be short, Madam, the
Recreations of the greatest Prince in the World divert me not, and when I want
your sight, I am insensible even of the enjoyments of the Court. You are,
certainly, very ungrateful, if you render me not the like; but suspicious
wretch that I am, I fear me you take your pleasure sometimes with the Princess
and Mademoiselle de Bourbon; nay happily since your coming to Grosbois, you have
not so much as wished your self five or six times at Amiens. If it be so, you
may recompense it with this favor, that you will be pleased to persuade their
Highnesses, to honor me with some few remembrances, that I may not be thought
the less considerable by them, for being in a place, where I see the King and
my Lord Cardinal twice every day. And yet, Madam, you are not to expect ever
the more news from me, for I have not any to acquaint you with, My Lord Fabert
came hither yesterday m^rning, and went away at one in the afternoon with
Orders to our Generals. He told me that Monsieur Arnault has played the Devil
with his hinder feet in a battle, that happened near l'Esle, and that the
Marshal de Breze has written it to the King, as I hear by Monsieur de
Chavigny. It Is reported here that our Armies are returning, and that we shall
not return so soon: I pray be pleased to chide a little at it, and honor me so
far, as to believe me sincerely, and as much as you can desire,

Madam, Your, etc.
Amiens, Sept. 10. 1640.
To my Lord Cardinal Mazarin. LETTER. CXV.
My Lord,
BY a Letter from Madam de V. I have understood the favor your Eminence was
pleased to do me, and with what extraordinary kindness, and what assurances of
good inclinations you have thought fit to grant me -- since then my Lord, I may
thence infer, that amidst the affairs of greatest consequence, your E.
condescends to a remembrance of your most inconsiderable Servants, and that
while you are employed in the highest things, you neglect not the lowest, I
have a certain confidence, you will excuse the boldness I take, to return you
my most humble thanks, and that you will be pleased to take the pains to read
the profession I make; that, besides the respects and veneration which we all
owe a person, who has, and does still add to the Glory of this State, I shall
through all the actions of my life, ever own, a most particular inclination, to
express my self,

My Lord, Your, etc

To my Lady Duchess of Savoy. LETTER CXVI.
Madam,
AFter so many consolatory Letters as there has been, but too much occasion to
write to your Royal Highness, I should be very loath to let slip an occasion to
write you one of congratulation. These come to you so seldom, that I think
they must needs be very welcome when they do; and were there nothing else to
recomend them, certainly the novelty should make them acceptable. It is long
since, Madam, that I have expected what now begins to appear, and thought, the
misfortune of the most accomplished and most amiable Princess that ever was,
too great a disorder in the World to last long. How great soever the Malice and
envy of Fortune seemed to be toward you, and what fate soever might cross
your affairs, yet was I still guilty of an imagination that so much goodness,
generosity and constancy, and so many Divine qualities as your R. H. is
furnished with, could not be long unfortunate, and that, at length, Heaven
would be forced to do some miracle for a person on whom it had bestowed so
many. There is much reason to believe, Madam, that that of the taking of Turin
will be seconded by a many others, and that the great success which has
happened in your Dominions is a certain Politic Symptom that there will be a
change of all things, and such a general settlement as naturally ought to be.
But what you should the more rejoice at in this happy revolution, is, that,
there is nothing so certain as that your concernment therein, multiplies the joy
of all here, and that your R. H. is so well beloved, that the more generous
part of the Court, do as much rejoice for the interest you have in this
prosperity, as for the advantage accrews to the Crown of France, and the great
acquests of Glory which his Majesty's Armies have made thereby. I doubt not,
Madam, but your R. H. is satisfied, that amidst the public joy, I have some
particular matter of rejoicing, whereof no other can be equally sensible: if
you but honor me so much as to reflect on the extraordinary passion I have for
whatever you are concerned in, and the inclination, and obligation wherewith I
am,

Madam, Your, etc.
Paris, Oct. 4. 1640.
To Mademoiselle Servant one of the Ladies of Honor, to her Royal Highness.
LETTER. CXVII.
Madam,
I Am so well acquainted with your Eloquence, that I humbly beg your assistance
to render the acknowledgements, I ought, to the most excellent and most
generous Princess in the World. I am certainly even orewhelm'd with her
favors, and must confess, there is not any thing below Heaven so full of charm
or so amiable as the Mistress you, (I thought to have said we) serve, and
iudeed there is not any thing I would not contemn, that I might use that
expression. The first time I ever heard her, I was presently of opinion, that
of all the understandings in the World, there was not a greater then hers; but
the tenderness she is pleased to have for me, I am astonished at above all
things; and cannot sufficiently admire, that at the same time, when she is
burdened with highest thoughts, she can also entertain those that are so low,
and that a mind which ordinarily is soaring about the loftiest things, can be
guilty of so great condescensions. As to the balls, have been given me this
morning, they have wrought a wonderful effect in me; and were it not that they
had touched the hand of her Royal Highness, I see not whence the miracle should
proceed. I did but kiss the Paper wherein they were, and I find my self very
much better, I shall henceforth look on it as an antidote against all kinds of
misfortunes, and unless it be one, I know not any which so pleasant a remedy
cannot cure me of. That you may not put your self to too nice a scrutiny to
find out my meaning, I were better explain it, and tell you, that it is the
grief I take that I cannot see her enough, and am destined to live at a great
distance from the only person that deserves to be waited on. If you consider it
strictly, this misfortune is greater then all the rest, and it is very hard
for a man to be tender of his honor, and not to take it so much to heart, as
to dye of it.

To the Count de Guiche. LETTER. CXVIII.
My Lord,
THough it must be thought an ordinary thing to see you do glorious actions,
and that it is fifteen years that you have been talked of at this rate, yet can
I not avoid being extremely surpised, when I hear of any new performances of
your Valor, and your Reputation being so precious to me, as it is, I am
extremely pleased that from time to time it is renewed and multiplied daily.
Those who are guilty of the greatest ambitions of honor would be satisfied,
with what you have acquired within these late years, and would sit still with
the esteem you are in with all the World. But, for ought I can see, My Lord,
you set no limits to your self as to this point, and as if you were jealous of
the glory you have already acquired, and what you have done heretofore, you
seem every year to exceed your self, and to do something beyond your former
achievements. For my part, what passion soever I may have for your past
actions, I shall not besorry they should be Eclipsed by those you are yet to
effect, and that your exploits in Flanders should darken all you have performed
in France, Germany, and Italy. All my fear is, that these great aspirations at
Glory, should carry you beyond your due bounds as to matter of hazard, and
accordingly, what you did in the last Battle wherein the Marshal de la
Meilleray defeated the Enemy, as it affords me much cause of rejoicing, so does
it at the same time put me into some fear. The expressions you there made of
your conduct, and your courage find matter if general admiration here; and
indeed, my Lord, if we consult Romances, we shall hardly find any thing more
noble, or more worthy celebration. But yet, give me leave to tell you, that,
since the invention of enchanted Arms is lost; and the custom, that Hero's
should be invulnerable absolutely abolished, a man is not allowed to do such
actions as these often in his life; and Fortune, who has delivered you for
this time, is but bad security for the future. Be pleased therefore to consider
that Fortitude has it is extremes as well as all the other Virtues, and that,
as they are, so it also ought to admit the attendance of Prudence. This, if
seriously consulted, will not permit a Ma^shal of the Field, and a Master de
Camp of the Guard should become a Voluntier and a Forlorn, so as to expose to
all hazards, a person of your concernment, and to venture so cheap a commodity
of so great Value. I know not, my Lord, whether you will take this freedom of
mine in good part; but I am certain, you cannot say I interpose in a business
wherein I am nothing concerned, and will find there is not any more then I am,
if you make any r^flection on the passion, wherewith I have ever been,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Paris, Oct. 6. 1640.
To my Lord Marquess de Pisany. LETTER. CXIX.
My Lord,
WEre it possible I could be so ungrateful as to forget you, yet the noise you
make at the present is so great, that it were a very hard matter I should not
call you to mind, and use all the endeavors I could to preserve my self in the
esteem of a person, of whom I hear all the World speak with so much advantage.
I have been extremely glad to hear what honor you have gained in the last
engagement before Arras, and though I am long since acquainted with the
qualifications of your heart, and mind, and have ever had that opinion of you
which all others have now, yet must I confess my weakness; me thinks the
general esteem wherein you now are, adds something to the inclinations I have
to honor you, and I feel in my self a certain vanity of passion for a man
burdened with the applause and acclamations of all the World. The satisfaction
it is to me would certainly be absolute, were it not disturbed by the fear I am
in to lose you. But I know how dangerous a virtue Fortitude is; and it is the
common report, that you are as ill a Husband of your person, as you are of all
things else. This, my Lord, puts me into perpetual alarms, and the fate which
hangs on me to lose the best, and most valuable of my friends, puts me into so
much the greater apprehension for you. To allay this, all I have, is a secret
confidence in your good Fortune; my heart tells me that you have a great
journey yet to go, and a many things to do, and that the friendship you are
pleased to honor me with will be more Fortunate to me, then that of some
others. I wish it both for your sake and my own, and that with all my Soul; as
also that I may be happy enough one day to demonstrate to you, how much and how
passionately I am,

Your, etc.

To Monsieur de Serisantes, Resident for the King with the Queen of Sweden.
LETTER. CXX.
SIR,
YOur little Ode I look on as a great work, and makes me conc^ive, that, though
you there mention your debauches, you are sometimes sober at Stockholm. The
fruits of Greece and Italy are not fairer then those you bring forth under the
North, nor can I but wonder how the Muses were able to follow you thither. You
may safely brag that you have carried them further then ever Ovid did; nor
indeed did ever man show them so many Countries as you have. But if you derive
these Enthusiasmes from the Wine, my advice is, that you always venture to
drink at the same rate, -- Dulce periculum est,
O Lenaec, se qui Deum
Cingentem viridi tempora pampino.


And you may say, Bacchum in remotis carmina rupibus
Vidi docentem --


Sir, I am not able to tell you, how infinitely I was pleas^d to find Oil of
Jasmine, Spanish Gloves, and English Ribands, in Latin Verses. To do you but
justice, all from the beginning to the end is admirably pleasant, Insigne
recens, adhuc
Indictum ore alio,


But since I understand not Latin the best in the World, be pleased to explain
your self, as to those words, m^ntis and acerbus dolor. It puzzles me very
much. I shall not pretend to any concernment in your secrets, any further then
you give me leave; but take it not ill, if I do in your interests, since I am
most sincerely,

Sir, Your, etc.
Paris, Dec. 15. 1640.
To Monsieur de Maison-blanche, at Constantinople. LETTER. CXXI.
Sir,
YOu would certainly do very ill to turn Turk; for I assure you, you have
abundance of Friends in Christendom, and your reputation is here so great, that
were your condition mine, I should rather come away thence, and enjoy the
fruits of it, then command forty thousand Ianizaries, marry the Grand
Seigneur's Daughter, and be strangled a while after. I know not what kind of
B^auties you have in Asia, but I assure you, five or six of the handsomest
Ladies in all Europe are fallen in love with you, and provided you are nothing
diminished, whereas you meet there with Maids that entreat you to buy them, you
shall sell your self here at what rate you please. To deal freely with you,
your Letters never made so much noise in London, as they do now in Paris; the
General discourse is of them, all desire them; and if the Grand Seignor knew
how considerable you are among the Christians, he would dispose of you for your
life into one of the Towers of the Black-Sea. Madam, the Princess asked me the
other day, whether you were really so great a Wit as was reported; not above
four days before Mademoiselle de Bourbon put the same question to me; and
there is not any but is astonished at the noise, you at the present, make in the
world. For, to deal truly with you, your Physiognomy discovers not all that is
excel^ent in you; and it is a miracle, that, by your looks you were once taken
for an Ingeneer. It would never be guessed at by your nose what you are worth,
and to esteem you proportionably to your merits, presupposes a conversation and
acquaintance with you such as I have, or never to have seen you, or known you
but by your Letters. They are, no question, pleasant beyond all imagination:
and I am never thought such by those who have any affection for me, unless I
bring along with me some one of them. But particularly, Monsieur and Madam de
Rambouillet, the young Lady their Daughter, and the Marquess of Pasany, are
ravished with them, and accordingly have an extraordinary esteem and abundance
of respects for pou. Be it therefore your care to preserve them by writing to
me as often, and as pleasantly as you can: this you will find no hard task, the
place where you are, will furnish yon with new things, though it were for these
ten years. I wish it were so easy for me to entertain you, and that by
describing our Garments, Actions, manner of life, our food, the fashions and
Beauties of our women; I could write such Letters as you would take any delight
to read. But, unless it be the Ceremonies of our Religion; I believe you have
not forgot any thing that is done here: so that all I have further to say to
you, is, that I honor you perfectly, and love you heartily; and that you know
it as well as my self. For, if I should relate to you after what manner we
relieved Casal, and how we took Arras and Turin; What entertainment could it
find you who are accustomed to your Armies of three hundred thousand men; and
who have yet the taking of Babylon fresh in your memory? I shall therefore tell
you but one thing, which yet you will be astonished at; The Prince of Or^nge is
now ^^aten every year five or six times, and the Count Harcourt does those
things now, which the late King of Sweden, were he a live, would envy him for.
Farewell Sir, what ever may happen, continue your affection to me, and honor me
so much as to assure your self, that I am, as far as I ought, and withal manner
of passion,

Sir, Your, etc.

To Monsieur de Chavigny. LETTER. CXXII.
SIR,
YOu may hereby perceive how cons^derable the Interest and reputation I have
with you is. Monsieur Esprit, who is coming to Court with a Letter of
recommendation to you from M -- thought it not unnecessary to be further
recommended by me; and I, who am a little given to vanity, have chosen rather
to undertake it, then to tell him I durst not. Sir, you may assure your self he
is one of the best natured men in the World, one whose mind and Soul are of a
makin^, such as you would wish, of a free disposition, very discreet, very
learned, a great Divine and a good Philosopher, with all these qualifications
he is not one of those that contemn wealth, and out of a confidence that he
should make very good use hereof, he would not take it amiss if he could get
an Abbacy, to obtain which Madam d'Aig^illon writes in his behalf to my Lord
Cardinal. This will ly upon his Eminence to do; but upon you to find him noble
entertainment, and that is all he expects. After the Character I have given you
of him, I think it very unnecessary to add the humble supplication I make to
you on his behalf, nor can I give you any reason why I do, but that it is his
desire, and that I am wont to do any thing he would have me. But, Sir, having
acquainted you with his Interests, I conceive it is according to the rules of
friendship, I should be mindful of my own, and most humbly beg your confidence,
that I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
Paris, Jun. 2. 1641.
To the Count de Guiche. LETTER. CXXIII.
My Lord,
AFter the finishing of one great siege and two small ones, and an abode of
fifteen days in Flanders without Equipage, do you not think it an
extraordinary refreshment to go and besiege Bapaume, and to begin a fresh in
the Month of September, as if nothing had been done all the year before? Me
thinks the Knights heretofore had a much easier time of it, then those that
live in these days, for as to those the breaking of four or five Lances in a
week, and now and then a brush of fighting, or happily a combat, was the main of
their work. All the time besides they took their progresses in fair Forests
and Flowery Meadows, and most commonly with a young Lady or two: and from
Perion King of the Gauls, to the last of the race of Amalis, I do not remember
I have read of so much as one troubled with drawing lines of Circumvallation,
or giving Orders for a Trench. Fortune, My Lord, is certainly the greatest
Cheat in the World! Many times, when she Loads men with honors and
employments, she makes them very unhappy presents, and ordinarily sells us at
very dear rates what she seems to give us. For, in fine, without any
consideration of the hazard of Iron and Lead, (a thing not worth the speaking
of,) but supposing you always fought under enchanted Arms, yet can you not
avoid it; but the War must cut of the best part of your best days: it has
robbed you of six Months of this year, nay from you, whom it has been pleased
to perserve a live, it has taken away within these fifteen years, above the
one half of your life. And yet, my Lord, it must be acknowledged, that those
who pursue it with so much glory as you do, must certainly find great
enjoyments in it, and doub^ess, this general consent of a whole people with
that of the more excellent, and more virtuous, to raise one man above all the
rest, is a thing of so much insinuation, that there is no generous Soul which
is not surpised with it, nor no hardship which that does not represent as
supportable. For my part, my Lord, (who pretend to have been acquainted with
the inconveniences of War, as well as your self,) I must needs confess your
Reputation comforts me for your absence, and what pleasure soever it may be to
hear you speak, yet I prefer before it that of hearing you spoken of. However I
cannot but wish your sudden coming hither, to enjoy the fruits of the Glory you
have acquired, that after so many hard marches as you have had, you may take
the pleasure all this Winter, (what weather soever it be,) to go twice or
thrice a week from Paris to Ruel, and from Ruel to Paris. Then shall I have the
leisure to tell you what Alarms I have been in for your sake, and acquaint you
with the affection, wherewith I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Paris, Oct. 15. 1641.
To the same. Upon his promotion to the charge of Marshal of France. This
Letter was written eight days after the precedent. LETTER. CXXIV.
My Lord,
OF all that I said to you prejudicial to War, I now make my recantation, and
since the honor you have received is derived from it, all controversy between
me and it, is absolutely decided. I have indeed long since been of opinion that
so great valor and Services, in a man of your quality, and a person so much in
the respects of all the World, could not but meet with sudden rewards and
acknowledgemets. But there being a vast difference between the things that are
to be, and the things that effectually are, I could not but be extremely glad
to hear that, that had been done for you which needs must; and this news I was
as sensible of, and as much surprised at, as if I had not expected it. It is
out of all Question, my Lord, that the principal recompense of your actions is
the reputation they have gained you; but yet, it should be no slender
satisfaction to you, to ascend at your age, to the highest degree that the
Fortune of War can raise men to. But, if on the other side, you consider how
many dangers you have run through to arrive to this, what hazards you have been
put to, and how many gallant men you saw fall, who yet run the same race with
you; you will think your self somewhat obliged to Fortune that has preserved
you thus long, and has not opposed your virtue. Among the many reasons I have
to congratulate your happiness, there is one particular satisfaction which you
cannot have your self, and which truly, at least in my opinion, surpasses all
the rest; to discover by the unforced and unsuspected judgments of all the
World, that your glory is free from all envy, and to see, there is not any one
who is not as glad of your prosperity as if he were concerned in it. The
public rejoicing at this particular good Fortune of yours, is to me a presage
that it will be seconded by a many more, which it may produce; and I hope you
will shortly add, to the honor you have received from the King, that
reputation, which ^ou only can, and which indeed is the most solid and most
real. I think you doubt not but I heartily wish it, since you know how much I
am, a thousand ways, obliged to be, with all manner of respect and passion,

My Lord, Your, etc.

To Monsieur Costart. LETTER. CXXV.
Sir,
There Is not any thing in your Letter, I am not extremely pleased with; but was
not without jealousy, able to read the enjoyments you took upon the Banks of
the River of Cha^ente; in so much that I who, upon all other occasions, am as
glad of your advantages as if they were my own, and who have not the least
envious thought for your reputation, your learning nor your wit, cannot but
envy your having eight days conversation with Monsieur de Balzac. I doubt not,
but you knew how to make your advantages of that happiness, for of all the men
I know, you are he that can best do it.

and Deorum
Muneribus sapienter uti.
You may enterpret that Sapienter as you please, either in it is proper
signification or the Metaphorical; for if a man entertains Balzac with good
discourses, it is supposed it cannot be done without good Dinners, and I doubt
not, but you have an admirable Palate for the one as well as the other.
Monsieur de Balzac is no l^sse eloquent at a Banquet then he is in his Books.
He is Magister dicendi and caenandi. He has a certain science of making good
cheer, which he deserves to be no less esteemed for th^n his Rhetoric; and
among other things, he has found out a kind of Broth, which I value beyond
Pliny's Panegyric, or the longest Oration in all Isocrates. All this has been
extremely well bestowed on you, for it is not enough to say that you are
sapiens, but you are, as Eni^^ expresses it, sapienti potens. I say not but you
may be as good in the other sense, nec enim sequitur, and cui cor sapiat, ei
non sapiat palatus. This I must tell you we are obliged to Cicero for, least
you might think, that Palatus came from me. Your Gout certainly never came so
much wished for, as when you were there, and it is a question to me whether
your health ever did you so great service; that very courtesy is such as should
work a reconconciliation between you and it, or at least deserves you should
not mince it into a fluxion, and be so modest as not to call it by it is own
name. But be ingenuous, have you not done as that Coelius did, sanas liniendo,
obligandoque plantas incedensque gradu laborioso? For to deal freely with you,
a Gout that takes you so seasonably, and stays you eight days, to enjoy your
self, to feed on Figs and Musk-melons, I cannot but entertain a little jealousy
of. On the other side I cannot by any means, take it well you should grow so
familiar with the Master of the house, and that he should profess so much
friendship to you, as he pretends in all the Letters he writes hither. All that
I was able to do, was to give way to Monsieur Chapelain, and suffer my self to
be named the second.

Non jam prima peto Mnestaeus, nequ^ vincere c^rto,
Quanquam O! --
But I will never consent to be third. Sir, do you observe that Quanquam, O! it
is spoken in my Spirit with greater indignation and bitterness then in Virgil.
Look therefore to your self both you, and he, and the other, and behave your
selves very gingerly. For, in a word I know not whether I shall be able to
endure all this, and whether it will not make me bankrupt as to all patience.
Certainly there is not any thing could ^aise so much jealousy in me, as as the
friendship of Monsieur de Balzac; he is one of the two men in the World, with
whom I would gladly spend the remainder of my life, you may easily judge who
the other is. Not to mention his wit, which is beyond any thing may be said of
it, there is not under Heaven a better Friend, a better man, a more sociable, a
more pleasant or a more generous; Vir (for me thinks I can express it better
in Latin) facillimis, jucundissimis, suavissimis moribus, summae integritatis,
humanitatis, fidei, liberalissimus, cruditissimus, urbanissimus, in omni genere
officij ornatissimus. The Friendship, which we mutually preserve, without any
mention of it in writing one to another; and the confidence we have one of
another is a thing rare and singular; but above all things, of very great
example in the World, and whence, a many well disposed people, who destroy
themselves with the writing of ill Letters, should learn to be quiet, and give
others leave to be so.

What you say of building about Balzac, as about Chil^y, I very much approve
of, and it were certainly very seasonable; but we wits are not the greatest
Builders, and lay our foundation for it, upon these Verses of Horace,

Aedificare casas, plaust^llo adju^gere mures
Siquem delectet barbatum, insania ver^et.
At least, Monsieur de Gombaut, Monsieur de l'Estoille, and my self, are
resolved not to build at all, till the time come, that stones dispose
themselves one upon another, at the sound of the Ha^pe. I know not, whether
Apollo be fallen out with the Trade and has given it over, because he was so
ill paid for the Walls of Troy; but me thinks his favorites are not much
add^cted to it, and their Genius directs them to other things much different
from sumptuous Edifices. I therefore thank you for your hill; but I were none
of the wisest to go and build in a place, where I have already a fair house
ready built. I have be thought my self, that that passage, Nulli potest
facilius esse loqui, quam rerum naturae pingere, etc. Was the younger Pliny's,
and thought it very pleasant that you durst not name him to me. But in your
judgment, is it not better said, Nulli potest facilius esse loqui, quam rerum
naturae facere? For, in the first place there is more opposition between loqui
and facere, then between loqui and pingere, which is something of more grace.
In the next, it is an expression of greater height, Nulli facilius est loqui,
quam rerum naturae fac^re: It is not so easily for any one to say, as for
Nature to do; then to say, It is not so easy for any one to say as for Nature
to paint. Will you not acknowledge this to be something flat and of a low
Spirit, to refuse a word which presents it self, and is withal the better, and
to keep a great Stir to find out another that is not so good, and farther from
the sense? He is one of those eloquent blades, of whom Quintilian says, Illis
sordent omnia quae narturae dictavit. And in another place, Quid quod nihil jam
proprium placet, dum parum creditur disertum quod and alias dixisset. He
thought to have been very much refined with his pingere, and has spoild all.
While I write this I consider with my self, how finely I were surpised if this
passage belong to the elder Pliny. But if it be, his be the loss, I will not
retract what I have said, why does he speak like his Nephew? Non sapit patruum
in that passage, even he, who in comparison of the other is wont to be patruus
Patruissimus, as Platu^us or T^rence says. Which of the two is it? I think the
former.

I would gladly know where that Tree grows who bore the Roses you sent me.
Certainly neither Poestum, nor Egypt, nor Greece, nor Italy ever brought forth
the like. It may very well be your self, Tu Cinnomomum, Tu Rosa. You look as if
you thought this taken out of the Song of Songs, when it is Plautus's. I can
hardly imagine those Verses should be the work of any modern wit; but if they
are, I should be much troubled, they were any other then yours or Monsieur de
Balzac's. Whoever is the Author, he may very well be proved of them, and those
Roses are certainly ^orth a many Laurels. But I beseech you, let me know whose
they are dirmi amine, mea Rosa, mea voluptas. With your Roses, you have also
sent thorns, when you propose to me the two passages, you would have me
explicate. In the first place, as to that of salust, we are to consider that
Hunting, was a commendable exercise among the Scythians, the Numidians, nay the
Grecians themselves, and particularly the Loc^demonians; but I do not remember
I have seen any thing to prove that among the Romans, it was the exercise of
the more virtuous or better sort. For, Agriculture, it is to be distinguished
according to Time. In old Rome, consular men, and such as had been Dictators,
returned from the management of the Commonwealth to the Plough-tail, which was
the ordinary employment or calling of the Papirij, the Manlij and the Decij.
But they had no sooner tasted the delciacies of Asia and Greece, ere they gave
it over; and you may easily judge that a sort of people, who had the hair drawn
off their Arms and thighs with certain Pincers, who cured and perfumed
themselves, were far enough from goading of Oxen. If I am not mistaken, it is
in the lives of the Gracchi that I have read, that one of the reasons which
moved one of them to advance and Legem agrariam, was, that having traveled
through Italy, he had not met with any at work in the Fields about Husbandry,
but only Slaves, where before they were all Citizens of Rome. Now, if it was so
then, it may be easily judged that in salust's time, it was yet more ordinary
to see Slaves employed in Tillage; Whence it comes, that Hunting and
Agriculture, which are Quaestuosae Arts, are by him called Servilia Officia,
quae aut a servis exercebantur, aut exer^cri poterant.

For the other, I think, that where Ausonius says, arguetur rectius Seneca quam
praedicabitur, non erudijsse indolem Neronis, sed armasse saevitiam; he does
not mean that Seneca had ever incited Nero to be cruel; but that instead of
commending him for having taught his Disciple Philosophy enough, to make him
merciful, he is to be reproved for having taught him too must sublety and
Rhetoric to maintain his cruelty: so that armare, in that place, is not
understood of ^ffensive but defensive Arms. And accordingly, I think Tacitus
says, that when that virtuous man had killed his own Mother ('it was a terrible
Storke) Seneca assisted him to write to the Senate upon that occasion, and to
find out pretenses to palliate the horrid action whom he had committed. This
passage obliged me to read over the whole Oration of Ausonius, which had I not
done, I should not have presumed to meddle with it, and while I have all the
best Authors by heart, I would not willingly read a line of the others. Good
God! what jargon they speak; after what rate they write; and how is a man that
is accustomed to Cicero, astonished when he finds himself among such people!

Of all the Letters I have received from you, I have not thought any better
writ or more pleasant then the last; but the passage I am most pleased with,
is, that where you speak of the Abbot of Lauardin. There commendations, which
he desires you to present me with from him, satisfy me, that, either he is
extremely civil, or sufficiently well opinion'd of me, and whether of the two
it be, it matters not, I am infinitely pleased at it, either for his interest
or my own. Sir, let me beg your favor so far as to let him know from me, that
I receive the honor he does me, withal the respects and acknowledgements,
which a person of his merit and quality may justly claim; but withal, that I
cannot sit down with the receipt of Civilities, that I aim at something more,
and have a great design to gain one day the happiness of his Friendship.

I was not so much amazed to hear the Nuns of Loudun speak Latin, as I was to
see you rip so much Italian. A man cannot discover by your citations, but that
you understand it. But I hope I shall be revenged when I hear you pronounce it;
for, ordinarily the Italian learned in Poiton has not the accent extremely
Roman, and therefore do what you can, sapiet Poitavinitatem.

Your, quod mirere, in the passage of Tacitus, speaking of the recreation of
the Germans, is well observed and well understood. But it is considerable what
St Ambrose says upon it, I know not by what hazard I come to know it. F^runt
Hunnos, says he, cum sine legibus vivant, aleaesolius legibus obedire, in
procinctu ludere tesseras simul and arma portare, in victoria sua captivos
fieri.

Your ballismos, I also like very well, as also the Medal of Vigenere. But will
you believe that Cordonniers, are so said, de ce qu'ils donnent des cors,
because they give Horns? I persuaded a good honest man the other day that it
was a true Etymology.

I should sooner forget a thousand Mistresses then Monsieur de Chives, and
Monsieur Girard, par nobile fratrum, nay I should as soon forget you. If you
hold any correspondence with them, I beseech you do me the favor assure them,
that I am still their most humble Servant, with as much passion as ever, and
that I entreat them not to have a greater, affection for you then they have for
me, and not to be guilty of an infidelity toward me such as that of Monsieur
de Balzac, by forsaking me, to entertain new faces. Farewell, Sir, and be ever
assured, I shall not love or esteem any thing as I do you. I am, most sincerely,

Sir, Your, etc.

To the Same. LETTER. CXXVI
Sir,
I Was once resolved, for a while to break off the correspondence that is
between us, as making a conscience, in a season when a man should do penance,
to come to those great entertainments you make me: but after I had endured
much, I was convinced, I was not able to be without it. I su'd for a
dispensation to receive your Letters, and have obtained it. For your part, you
may without any scruple receive what I send you, as having hardly so much as to
entertain you with a light Collation. Insteod of those mullos trilibres you
presented me withal, I can only return Tiberinos Catillones, which only like
the banker of Tiber, and feed on the slime of the Latin Country;

Postquam exhaustum est nostrum mare.
Nay for this time I shall hardly find as many as will make up a dish, and
therefore I shall only treat you with pulse.

Impune te pascent Olivae,
Te cicoreaea, levesque malvae.
You must be content to make the best cheer you can with it, I can do no more;
I cannot command those Parks, nor those Champians which are designed for your
hunting, Hortulus hic, etc.

Unde epulum possis solis dare Pythagoreis.
You cannot but remember that Coecilius Atreus cucurbitarum, I shall be forced
to do the like; for, to tell you truly, my stock is quite Exhausted; and, Mihi
omne penu ex fundis amicorum hic affertur.


For you Piscinarians, (so Cicero, writing to Atticus, calls certain rich men
of his time, Quantum Piscenarij mihi invideant, alias ad te scribam,) for you I
say, it is an easy matter to treat your friends, you are not put to such shifts
to do it as we, Nec seta longo quaerit in mari praedam.
You have your Fish Ponds ever full;
Piscina Rhombum pascit, and lupos vernas,
You need no more then whistle,
Natat ad magistrum delicata murena.


It is impossible to take you unprovided, you I say, who have Penus Varius, or
Varia, if you would have it so, or Varium, or Penum or Penu, ('it is a pleasant
Knave, that, he is of all genders, and shifts himself out of one declension
into another, and when he pleases, is undeclinable,) I am one of those, quibus
sunt verba fine penu and pecunia. Think it not strange, I should be astonished,
--

To the same. LETTER. CXXVII.
SIR,
YOu now see what it is to entertain your friends at great Feasts, there needs
no other reason you should not expect any returns of them. And to put me to
greater troubles, you bring along with you Monsieur de Balzac, the most
delicate, and the most humorous person in the world, qua munditia, qua
elegantia hominem? Your Diet I knew, and you were sufficiently acquainted with
my Table; but it cannot entertain so great a stranger.

-- Ingentem non sustinet umbram.
To speak freely, when I look on you both, I cannot but think on Jupiter and
Mercury, when they came to embrace poor Philemon, (be this however spoken
without any offense to either, for all comparisons are odious) and in effect,
that good man had not more reason to be troubled then I have. It is certainly a
cruelty in you to have engaged me to this, and that a more then Neronical
cruelty, Indicebat familiaribus coenas, quorum uni mellita quadragies H. S.
constiterunt, alteri pluris aliquanto rosaria. To tell you the truth, that is
it has diverted me all this while; I have often said to my self, -- Nunquam ne
reponam?


But I forbore both upon your account and his: Cupio enim magnifice accipcre
summos viros.
Ut rem mihi esse reantur,


In fine, after a tedious search without finding any thing, me thinks it might
have been said to me as to that other, Nunquid adolescens melius dicere vis
quam potes? or otherwise, Quid multum cupias cum sit tibi gobio tantum.
In loculis? --


I am therefore resol'd to do what I can, and desire you to be satisfied with
it, -- Rebusque veni non asper egenis.


You must accomodate your selves to my exigencies, I can do more; I am not
Master of those great Parks, nor yet of those Champions which lie open to your
Game, nor yet those vast Seas where you fish, for all you say, Hotulus hic
puteu^que brevis, nec test movendus.


I am, I must confess, ashamed to discover my wants and poverty; and yet though
I am poor, I cannot shake off Ambition.

-- Hic vivimur ambiaiosa
Paupertate. --
I wish with all my heart, I could

Ad Palatinas acipensera mittere mensas,
Or entertain you at such a Supper as he was, before whom, duo millia
lectissimorum piscium, septem avium apposita traduntur. But tell me I pray, do
you gentlemen of Poitou, feed much upon Acipensers? I have sent to enquire for
some here, and the Fishmongers know not the name. And yet it was a kind of Fish
very much heretofore esteemed at Rome; Huic tantus olim habebatur honos, says
Macrobius, (did you imagine I had read Macrobius?) Ut a coronatis ministris,
and cum tibiis in convivium soleret ferri. That indeed was an extraordinary
privilege for a Fish. C. Duillius, had almost such another, Caium Duillium,
qui primus Poenos dasse devicerat, redeuntem a coena senem saepe videbam puer,
delectabatur cereo funali and tibicine, quae fibi null exemplo privatus
sumpserat; tantum licentiae dabat gloria. It was not I that saw him in that
magnificence, 'twas Cato the Censor; and Cicero, who tells the Story, had, I
doubt not, very great respects for this Fish, and fed on it heartily: For, in
his Tusculane Questions, he remembers himself of it, and names it above all
others for a delicate bit. Si quem igitur tuorum afflictum merore videris, huic
acipenserem potius quam aliquem soc^^ticum libellum dabis? In the mean time,
there is not a word more of it. Hence you may judge what the glory of humane
things amounts to, and what account is to be made thereof afterward, -- I
demens and saevos curre per Alps,
Ut pueris placeas, and declamatio fias.


However it be (that same, however it be, is a little far fetched, for it
relates to my telling you that I had nothing to treat you with all.) I shall
entertain you as well as I can, and will say with that other, vide audaciam,
etiam Hirtio coenam dedi sine pavone. In another place he tells one who
bragged, that he would find him as poor cheer, as I shall you, Si perseveras me
ad matris tue coenam vocare, feram id quoque, volo enim videre animum, qui mihi
audeat ista quae scribis apponere, aut etiam polypum, Miniani Jovis similem;
creed mihi non audebis: ante meum adventum, fama ad te de mea lautitia veniet,
eam extimeoces. Make me, I beseech you, understand what Beast is meant by that
Polypum Miniani Jovis. I profess, since you have faild me of your Letters, I
know nothing at all. As for the Promulsis, it is tolerable hitherto, but you
are not satisfied with that only; Non enim vir es qui soleas promulside
confici, integram famem ad ovum affers. Let us then fall to other meat.

As to our quarrel against those who make not their Reverence^s long enough, I
do not think them to be blamed so much, and the reason is, that the truest and
most effectual, consist chiefly in small things; as in certain Gestures,
certain motions of the body and countenance, whereby, without being as it were
perceived, they work their effect.

Componit furtim, subsequiturque decor
That Furtim me thinks, signifies as much, as also what the Spaniards call el
no se que, they are so small that a man knows not well what it is. Nor shall
you need to trouble your self any further about their Husbands: Why would you
invalidate marriages of so long standing? The Gods, as you said upon another
occasion make up others much different. The world is full of such marriages,
have they not married pain upon pleasure, sufferings to glory, Heaven to earth;
and Mademoiselle -- to her Husband, Sic visum veneri cui placet impares
Formas atque animos sub juga ahenea,
Saevo mittere cum joco.


I know not whether I told you that we had given over writing one to another,
and that I had been informed that she made heavy complaints against me: She is
in the City, and I have given her a visit. Our enterview was somewhat like that
of Dido and Aeneas, when they met in Hell. I did all lay in my power to pacify
her, I told her, verus mihi nuntius ergo, and per sidera juro, and nec credere
quivi.

Illa solo fines oculos aver satenere,
Nec magis incepto vultum sermon moveri,
Quam si dura silex, aut stet Marpesia cautes.
As to sleep, he is not so ill a Husband as you make him, and that Grace, I know
not you call her, could not be better disposed in order to her quiet and case,
He is as gentle as a Lamb, the most patient of all the Gods, -- Placidissime
somne Deorum,
Pax animi, quem cura fugit.


And were it not that there are no Gates to his Lodging, he were a very good
match: You may see in Lucian the description of his City, and how he was
accommodated: Though all he could do, were to restore the complexion, enliven
the over-wearied eyes, and embellish the Ladies, do you not think it enough to
get into their favor? He is a Distiller of Poppy, and Mandragoras, and well
skilled in Fucus's, that are, doubtless, incomparably beyond all the white and
red in Spain, no usava afeytes Dorinda, y assidesperto con los que el suemo le
avia dado. Learn a little Spanish though it were for nothing else but that you
might not plaugue us so much with your Italian. Nor indeed is he so heavy as
you think him.

Tum levis aethereis delapsus somnus ab astris,
Nor could he have gotten so many children if he had been so weak.

Tum pater e populo natorum mill suorum.
Nay though he were as cold as you conceive him, do you place but a small
succor in all those dreams which he drives before him as it were with a wand,
and disposes of as he pleases? Have you forgot that expression of Fleur
D'espine? --

Se non sogni questi
Ch'io dorma semper, e may non mi desti.
And that other, Proh Venus and tenera volucer cum matre Cupi^o,
Gaudia quanta tuli, quam me manifesta libido
Contigit --


Do you make no account of this, and do you not think an honest woman may be
satisfied with it? As to what you say, that the Graces ought never to sleep; go
and visit some of your Ladies the next day after a Call, when they have sat up
all night, and then give me your opinion as to that point. For your somno
mollior herba, and your morbida, Domine Magister noster! I think you neither
understood the Latin, nor the Italian, for the one signifies to sleep upon,
and morbido signifies no more then polite, smooth, lene, properly effeminate.

Your Emperor Lampridius I look on as a sober, rational man; and if
Heliogabalus had made a score of such Ordinances as those, I should place him
next to Titus and Trajan. I wonder you should forget that other of Tiberius,
Asellio sabino H. S. ducenta donavit pro Dialogo, in quo boleti, and ficedulae,
and Ostreae, and turdi certamen induxerat. Were not those Emperors? I am
extremely troubled at the loss of that Dialogue, and would you not have bin
glad to see a discourse between an Oyster and a Mushrome? That Asellius was
certainly an excellent person, and had I known him I would with all my heart
have given him a Demicaster.

The Stones I sent you in their natural shapes you have excellently cut, and
admirably wrought: They are become in your hands precious, and you have made
them one of your best Dishes of your Banquet; Fecisti ut lapidi illi panes
flerent. Without Saturn's stomach, or the Moons teeth, I have made a shift to
eat very heartily of them, and with great satisfaction. That Is a kind of meat,
quam nemo coquus hactenus in jus rocaverat; but you make such sawces, as would
persuade a man to eat pebblestones. I could not believe that that Story came
from such grave Authors. This granted, I am not an Infidel as to that, that the
stories should sometimes hear the sound of the Harp, besides that at this day
we believe, that walls have ears.

I must needs confess I have a greater esteem for Ausonius then I had, you have
made me see him in his Luster, by showing him me in his Poetry. He was no
question a very excellent person, and I doubt not but his Oration had been very
good, had he turned it into verse. Those you have furnished me with of his; I
am acquainted with a sort of men like him, who go very ill a foot, and can do
miracles on Horseback: but I wish those men would do only what they are best
at, and that Cicero had never writ in verse not Ausonius in Prose.

Do you expect I should now speak of the other Banquet, whereof I had my part,
Ut Nasidieni juvit me caena beati,


That is to say, how I find my self after the good entertainment of Monsieur de
Balzac? I shall answer you, Ut nunquam in vita fuerit melius. Lucullus Apollo,
no, not that of Delphos could have been so magnificent; the least Dish is to be
preferred before the Dodecatheon of Augustus, you know, Cum primum istorum
conduxis mensa choragum,
Sexque Deos vidit Mallia sexque deas.


Which deserves no great admiration. It is of such a Feast as this, that it may
be said I lauri de Permesso, e di Parnaso
Andorno a coronar la Gelatina.


That man is certainly admirable in what ever he does.

I ever and anon meet with some Verses of his, which are doubtless much beyond
what I thought this age could have produced, such as might raise a jealousy, I
say not in Lucca, or Clandian, but even in Lucretius and Virgil. But be pleased
to ask him, upon what grounds he believes that I have gotten the explication of
the passage of Ausonius out of his bowels, and why he ranks me among those, qui
plus ex jecore alieno sapiunt quam ex suo.

I am therefore to conceive that I know nothing but by a reminiscence of those
things which my soul learned heretofore in his conversation. His Dish of Wind,
as well as yours of Stone, I am infinitely taken with, and certainly it had
been excellent food in the Island of Ruac, a place I know not whether you are
acquainted with. It is an Island where the Inhabitants live only by wind, and
where the sick take no other Physic then those unwholesome blasts that come in
at some hole made in the place where they lie. You are certainly excellent
Cooks, you season all things so well, that there is not any thing might not be
eaten out of your hands, and which you would not make a man swallow down
pleasantly. You can give, Cuerpo a los vientos, y a las piedras alma.


This is a Verse of Louys de Gongora, one whom you are not acquainted with: I
am very much pleased to understand the alliance between the Athenians and
Boreas, as also that there was a Norwegian of a Citizen of Athens* he me thinks
might have called himself Citizen of the world, with as much right as that
other who bragged so much of it. But indeed the Athenians had there met with a
very turbulent Cockney. I did not, I must confess, believe, that the Sea was a
Tear like that of his who had a better stomach to digest stones, then I have.
He shed it no doubt when he was turned out and bound in chains by his Son. Do
you think (at least if the story be true) that it may be said of Saturn, as
well as of poor Pallas's Horse, Guttis humectat grandibus ora.


The truth is, they played him very unhandsome tricks; but it has happened
well for mankind, that as he was extremely given to melancholy, so he could
not weep much, for if he had shed but three tears what should have become of
us, omnia pontus erant. It might be said on this occasion, that he wept
bitterly; but tell me I pray, if you can, Did he weep both the Sea and the fish
in it?

-- Immania Cete,
Tritonesque citos, Pontique exercitus omnes.
I had forget to give you an account of your passage of Seneca Valde me torfit
illa podagra, adeoque impliciti videntur hi pedes, ut ad illos utrosque dextros
explicandos, nullum dextrum pedem habeam. Unless it be his meaning, that the
Gout turned the left foot, which ought to be inward, outward; and that being so
turned on the same side as the right foot, he says, utrosque dextros. But it
could not be meant that the right foot was turned to the left side, for then he
had said utrosque Sinistros. It is certainly very hard to be understood; if you
can find any better explication, -- Si quid dextro pede concipis.


Let me know it.

I have heard of your sickness, but with much disturbance, though I knew it not
till it was over, and was astonished to understand the danger I was in, when I
knew nothing of it. Dear Sir, I beseech you rest satisfied, this World wants
that I should value love or esteem more then I do you. May I perish, if ever I
am so pleased with my own thoughts, as when I think (which I do often,) that
Fortune will find out some way that we may spend the remainder of our days
together, and that I may have you, in serijs ^ocisque, amicum omnium horarum. I
profess there is not any thing I wish so much, and that I am and ever shall be
your Servant, with as much passion, as when I saw you every morning. I make
this profession to you on the eve of a journey of six months, which I am to
take, for I go hence with the King for Catalonia.

Be pleased therefore to forbear writing till you hear of his Majesty's return.
I should be much more impatient to come back, if I thought to find you here in
the Summer. I advise you to do all you can, that it may be so. Qui been latuit,
been vixit, is a precept you have nothing to do with; let alone

Panaque Sylvanumque senem Nymphasque sorores,
You are a debtor to the Public, and it were but fit such a man as you were
known to all the World, omnis autem peregrinatio, you know, obscura est. Hasten
therefore your return, I beseech you once more, and as soon as your term shall
be expired, let me find you here, or M -- or some -- and take heed; ne quid
temporis addatur ad hanc provincialem molestiam. I send you a Book, which
Mademoiselle de Courmay presents you with. Farewell Sir, be pleased to continue
me in your affection and remembrances, and assure your self I shall be while I
live, and most sincerely,

Your, etc.
Your infoelix Theseus, I look on as an extreme happy man, and am almost
confident that Hercules did not deliver him out of Hell more fortunately, or
more gloriously then you do.


Paris, Jan. 24. 1643.
To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. LETTER. CXXVIII.
Madam,
HAd I been without my -- I should certainly have been extremely troubled to be
deprived the honor of your sight, and I believe I should have thought on you
more heartily then ever I did, for to tell you truth; I felt my self extremely
disposed thereto, and never was so much afflicted at a departure from you. But
it is beyond your faith, Madam, what strange diversion -- afford a man, and
what an excellent remedy they are against a great passion; one while a Horse
falls lame, another, a wheel is broken, sometimes they are lodged for a whole
night in a Bogg, and I profess all can be done with them, is that they make a
man think three or four times a day on her, whom he thinks his best friend. But
now that we shall travel more gently, and are to embarque upon the Rhosne, I
shall discharge my duty of thinking on you better, and if I am not mistaken, I
shall come to Avignon the most passionate man in the World. For your part,
Madam, who take no greater journeys then from your own house to the suburbs of
St Germain, and are not troubled with such ill ways as we are, you are not by
any means to be excused, if you honor me not so much as to think on me
sometimes, since, I must needs tell you, yon are more obliged to do it then
ever, and if you are not often in my thoughts; it is, when you are, with so
much sincerity and such resentments, as wherewith I am confident you would be
satisfied. Besides, who knows but I do often reflect on you, and that I express
my self thus modestly, because I dare not tell you all? In this uncertainty, I
humbly desire you, Madam, to believe only what Monsieur Arnaud shall acquaint
you with, for I have ordered him to explain my intentions to you, and to tell
you, since it is his profession to make Orispianes, how much I am, and after
what manner,

Madam, Yours, etc.
The Resolution my Lord Cardinal had taken to go upon the Rhosne is changed,
upon this account, that walking the day before yesterday upon the Quay, he saw
a Boat full of Soldiers, very near being cast away, some, who leaped out the
Boat into the water, being drowned; which his Eminence has no great mind to
be, because it would prove prejudicial to the designs he has upon the
Roussillon.


Lions, Feb. 23. 1642.
To the same. LETTER. CXXIX.
Madam,
I Wish you had seen me the other day, that you might have known what condition
I was in from Vienna to Valentia. The day was newly delivered of the Sun, nor
was he but weakly able to guild the Mountain-tops, when we were gotten upon
the Rhosne. It was one of those fair days, which Apollo does sometimes adorn
himself withal, and which are never seen at Paris, but in the height of Summer.
Those who were of my company, entertained themselves one while with the sight
of the Mountains of Dauphine, which were some ten or twelve Leagues on the left
hand, all covered with Snow, another, the Hills on both sides the Rhosne laden
with Vines, and Valleys as far as sight could reach, burdened with Trees which
were green and flourishing. For my part, while all were thus employed, I got up
alone upon the Cabin of boughs which covered our Vessel, and while they were
admiring at the things that were about them, I began to consider what I had
left behind. I fixed my right Elbow on the covering of our Bark, which
supported my head, the left hand being carelessely stretched out, wherein was a
Book which I had taken only as a pretense for my retirement. I looked earnestly
on the River, which yet I saw not. There fell immediately tears of no small
bulk from my eyes, my sighs were so violent, as if they brought some part of
my Soul out along with them; and ever and anon there slipped from me certain
words, pronounced with so much disorder and confusion, that those who were
about me could not well hear them, and which I shall acquaint you with when you
please. What I now write to you, would have been capable of more advantage and
ornament, if I could have put it into verse, for I profess to you, the Nymphs
of the Waters were troubled at my affliction, the God of the River had a
compassion for me; but all this cannot be well expressed in prose. The result
is, that I remained seven hours in that posture, without moving either hand or
foot. I wish, Madam, you had but seen me thus in any exercise of Religion; it
would have raised no small devotion in you, in so much that the Master of our
Vessel said, he had in his time, carried ten thousand men from Lions to
Beaucaire, but had never seen any that seemed to be so much out of his senses.
Having dressed up this fine story, it just now comes into my mind, that you
will happily imagine there is not a word true of it, and that what I have said is
merely matter of invention to fill up a Letter. Though it were really so,
Madam, yet am I still excusable, for to deal freely with you, a man is many
times much at a loss what to say, nor can I conceive, how, without some such
inventions as these persons, who hold not any correspondence either as to love
or affairs, can often write one to another; and yet to be ingenuous with you,
all I have told you, of my resvery, my sighing, and my sadness, is punctually
true. Only as to the resentment which the Nymphs, and the God of the Rhosne had
thereof, I am not over confident; I spent a whole morning in these thoughts
without the least remission. During that time, I must confess, I thought three
or four times on Mademoiselle -- the rest I wholly bestowed on the Lady your
Mother, and your self. I had promised you, that if we went by water, I should
come out of your debt as to that point; and indeed I have done so much, that if
I fall into the same posture again, the Sun that first shines on me in
Languedoc will inflame me into extravagance. It is already so hot in Avignon,
that we can hardly endure it. The Spring has overtaken us already, there is
every where abundance of Fleas and Violets; I wish you both with all my heart,
for Madam, as I shall be glad, you should not sleep too much in my absence, so
can I not but wish you whatever I see that is handsome and beautiful, and
remain,

Madam, Yours, etc.
It was certainly a rare sight the last night, to see the streets of Avignon
full of Candles, Lanterns and Torches, at all the Windows, to see my Lord
Cardinal, who made his entrance at seven at night. It was as light as at
Midday, and if the Pope had come hither himself, he could not have been more
nobly received. They gave him thousands of benedictions, a commodity the people
of this Country is extremely liberal of, because it is a Papal Territory. The
Jews of Avignon are very well, Monsieur the Vice-Legat full and sat enough, and
the Count d'Alais somewhat more then he.


Avignon, Shrove Monday 1642.
To my Lord President de Maisons. LETTER. CXXX.
My Lord,
IT is too great a goodness in you to take the pains to write to me, and to
treat me with so much civility, as if I were not before the most obliged man in
the World to you. I beseech you, and that most humbly and most earnestly not to
take trouble on your self any more. You have not for the most part much to
acquaint me with; but for my part, besides the obligation of my duty to write
to you, the occurrences which from time to time happen here furnish me with
something to say to you. Nevertheless, my Lord, I must needs confess, I was
infinitely satisfied with the last Letter you were pleased to send me; and when
ever you have such pleasant news to tell me, I dare not refuse the honor you
do me in the communication thereof. I am extremely glad of the great
acquaintance and friendship you have, since my departure, made with
Mademoiselle de Rambouillet, I understand it no more by your Letters then by
hers: she never writes to me, but she mentions you, and that with all the
affection and esteem due to you. I cannot, my Lord, but acknowledge it an
extraordinary satisfaction to me, that you and Madam de Rambouillet pity me
for the indiscretion I was guilty of, and it shall be a remembrancer to me for
the future, besides the solemn protestation I lately made to the same purpose
to Monsieur de Chavigny. I am also to be glad, that you have had the reputation
to keep Madam -- fifteen days, and what is more, to cut off all access from
others; all I have to quarrel at, is, that you do not dispose of her, till that
now she is in a mind to be reformed, and in the state of repentance. However I
advise you, not to let fall your suit; for, time, Fortune, and the addresses of
a person of Honor may work a great change in Affairs? Having once spoken of
those things, I conceive your Lordship will find no great pleasure in any news
I can entertain you with hence; but to avoid importunity, I shall tell you all
in a word, which is no more then that I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Narbonne, May 10. 1642.
To the same. LETTER. CXXXI.
My Lord,
IT is certainly an excess of kindness in you to give me thanks for any thing,
who shall never be able to do enough for you, and should be still in your debt,
though I had hazarded my life a hundred times in your service. For this
kindness, my Lord, and the proffer you are pleased to make me, I return you
thousands of most humble acknowledgements, and am extremely elevated to see,
that, amidst affairs as well of the greatest as least consequence, you take all
occasions to give me assurances of the friendship you are pleased to honor me
with. Though I have played almost to dotage and extravagance, yet have I kept
so much wit about me as to reserve money enough to clear me from this place, and
am troubled at nothing so much, as that I have given you so ill an assignation,
and put into your hands a Creditor little better then my self. On the other
side my Lord, I cannot express the extraordinary joy, I take at the great
friendship you have made with the whole Family of Rambouillet: Mademoiselle de
Rambouillet never writes to me, but she sends me some thing concerning you,
expressing the great esteem she has for you, and that you may be better
satisfied with the sentiments my Lord Marquess of Pisany has for you, I send
you a scrip of the least Letter he writ to me; For, Monsieur de Charigny, you
are certainly obliged to have many respects for him, he is ready upon all
occasions to speak of you, with all the esteem and affection imaginable; he
acquaints all his friends with your friendship toward him, and promises it to
those, whom, as the dearest, he has the greatest inclinations to oblige. He
told me the other day, that you had written him the handsomest, and most
obliging Letter in the World, but being engaged in Company, he had not the
leisure to show it me. Three days since he took his journey hence toward the
Army, to be present at the Ceremony of the Order, which the King granted
yesterday to the Prince of Mourgues, and returns to morrow. Of the Kings return
there is not any certainty: I shall, my Lord, in that business take the
greatest care I can, as I would in all things you command me. The hopes of
taking in Perpignan so soon, are very much remitted, they now give out it will
not be before the 25th of the next month. Monsieur de Turene told me he would
lay two hundred pieces, that it would be taken before June were past. Whenever
Monsieur de Chavigny goes to the Army, he lodges at Monsieur des Noyers, it is
now the greatest friendship in the World, but withal the most real and most
sincere, I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
Narbonne, May 22. 1642.
To Monsieur Chapelain. LETTER. CXXXII.
SIR,
THough I am well furnished with confidence, yet dare I not return to Paris
without sending you an answer, and am indeed ashamed I have been so long in
your debt as to that part of my duty: but I must withal freely tell you, that,
foreseeing I should have occasion to write to you, to acquaint you with what
judgment should be made of the Verses you sent, I delayed it as long as I
could, out of a design to save my self a Letter. If you are but just, you must
not think it strange, that a man should be a little fearful when he is to write
to a Doctor as you are: and certainly, when I do but reflect, that it is to the
most judicious person of our age, the maker of the Imperial Crown, the
Metamorphoser of Lionne, and the Father of the Maid, that I write, my hair
stands up, and makes me look like a Hedgehog; but when, on the other side, I
consider that this Letter is directed to the most indulgent of mankind, to the
excuser of all faults, the commender of all labors, to a dove, to a Lamb; my
hair lies down as smooth and as flat, as the feathers of a drowned Chicken, and
I fear you not so much as the wagging of a st^aw. I shall therefore tell you,
Sir, gentle as you are, that the Verses of Monsieur de Balzac, have not yet
been seen by my Lord Cardinal.

O Coelum, O Terras, O Maria Neptuni!
Will you cry out. Is this the account is made of the Sons of Jupiter? Is this
a treatment befitting the greatest wit in the world?

Frange miser calamos vigilataque praelia dele.
You have indeed reason to say all this; but you are to believe that a many
other things were to be thought on all this journey, and that if Apollo, whom
you know, had come in person to Narbonne, with all his light and luster about
him, he would have been received but in the quality of Chyrurgion. I have spoke
of it a hundred times to Monsieur de Chavigny, who ever answered me, that for
Monsieur de Balzac's sake, it must be reserved for a time, when the spirits of
his Eminency were less distracted with affairs, and more fit to entertain
things of that nature. He has commanded me to entreat you on his behalf to
return the greatest acknowledgments possible to our friend, for the Epigrams he
made for him, wherewith he is infinitely satisfied; to say truth, they are the
handsomest in the world. As for the Verses directed to my Lord Cardinal, they
are absolutely Virgilian, with a little more Enthusiasme then the Author is
wont to have; and for my part, had I both my Arms broken on the Wheel, I should
take a pleasure to hear them. If it be any shame, that he, for whom they were
made, has not yet seen them, the greatest part of it will fall on Monsieur de
la Victoire, whose care it principally was. For my part, I have contributed
thereto all the care and affection I ought, and abating all thoughts of the
powerfulness of your recommendation, and the passion I have to serve Monsieur
de Balzac, I should I profess, have solicited with no less ardency, for a man
risen out of the bottom of Sweden, that should have sent hither what you have.
All the offense I have committed, is, that I have not written to you sooner;
but you have pardoned me far greater, and consequently will this, since I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
Avignon, June 11. 1642.
To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. LETTER. CXXXIII.
MADAM,
There Is nothing so certain as that I should have an extraordinary affection
for you, if I should never see you again, for it being but two Months since I
left you, it is double to what it was, and increases daily so much, that If I
see you not suddenly, I question not but it will defy all limits. To say
truth, besides the satisfaction it is to have spent some time without any
contestation with you, and passed over a Lent without any dispute about the
Almond-milk; your Letters, Madam, have, I must needs confess, contributed much
to make me judge more favorably of you, and think you more amiable. The two
you have honored me with, have raised in me new matter of astonishment; and as
if I never had been acquainted with your perfections, and that every one, to
speak freely, has some little indignation at the reading of those things,
which he might have written; yet I have, I assure you, been extremely pleased
with them; they have dispelled all my afflictions, they have in a manner cut'd
me of all misfortunes, and have infused into me a joy which I could not have
expected here but by enchantment or miracle. Of both which there is so much in
what ever you write, that I wonder not at all that they have wrought this
effect in me, but only that they have enflamed with an extraordinary impatience
to see you again, since there is not any man, who had the advantages of his wit
and senses, and knew you to be so mischeivous as I do, but would rather desire
to be always at a distance of two hundred Leagues from you, were it only but
to receive of your Letters. It should, on the other side, be your wish, that I
sat down content with this honor, and that I came not near you; for,
doubtless, being far from you, the services I do you are greater, and you ought
to consider them accordingly. And certainly when I reflect on all those I have
done you since I left Paris; all the discourse I had concerning you with
Monsieur de Roussillon; the assurance I gave of your affection to the Count d'
Aleix, the professions I made to his Lady, that she was one of those Persons
for whom you had the greatest honor and respects; the miracles I related of
you to Madam de Saint Simon, and the expressions wherewith I assured the Lords
Deputies of Marscilles, of the good inclinations you had for them and their
City, methinks the main end of my traveling up and down the world, is to
procure you Servants, to keep up your correspondecies, and to dilate your
reputation. Meeting yesterday with my Lord President F -- in the Kings Chamber,
he fell into discourse of your excellencies; I told him, that he was very much
in your liking, and that it was long since that I had discovered your
particular inclination for him. He is handsome, and believed it, and I assure
you, Madam, as also Monsieur de Chaveroche that if ever you have any business
in the Parliament of Grenoble, the first President will be your infallible
friend. I am infinitely pleased to see what you acquaint me with of the
Mistresses of my Lord Marquess of St. M -- It is, I must confess, a great joy
to me, and to be absolutely a person of Honor; it was but fit he should enter
into that kind of life. To say truth, to fasten any thing on his mind, that
should possess the place of that person which was there, it were little enough
to thrustin seven at a time, and yet he will have much a do in seven others, to
find all those perfections he admired in one. In the mean time, I cannot but
think it strange, and to deal freely with you, cannot understand a possibility
that a man can love seven persons at a time; for my part, I could never, when I
was most prodigal of my love, go beyond six, and it must certainly be very
infamous to love seven. But, Madam, since I perceive he is so much addicted to
talking, and I grown so melancholy, I believe, for my part; that our souls were
changed when he embraced me last, that I took my leave of him, for ever since I
have been in perpetual disquiet, always wished my self out of the places where
I was; nay, me thinks I have loved Mademoiselle du Vig^an, more then ordinary.
I know not whether this proceeds from the honor she has done me in her
remembrances, or from a necessity there is, that an affection so well grounded
should increase daily: but I could wish, that where he has hitherto loved the
gentlest nature in the world, he had made his addresses to that other you know,
who expects, when any one has declared himself for her service, that he
persevere and dye in it, were it only to see what would have been the issue of
it. And certainly, it were but expedient, that for the advantage and
edification of all the world besides, an unconstant man should be punished once
in his life. I call him unconstant, though he has done nothing but what was
desired of him; but it should not have been in his power to do it, and both for
his reputation sake, and the respects I have for him, I wish he had died
rather. But we shall one day see these Gallants unmercifully dealt with in the
other world. For my part, who am a sinner as well as others, I have been
miraculously converted, and dare affirm, that my soul is in Paradise as to that
point. But Madam, what is it that you tell me of the Marriage of Mademoiselle
de V -- and the Count de G -- and where has fortune been ransacking for these
two persons to join them together? I have much joy to wish for that of
Mademoiselle de G -- and the Count de F -- there is a friend of ours who will be
very -- at that Wedding, and I am sorry I cannot be at it my self. All the news
is, that those of Colioure capitulate; you will find by the Letter I send you,
that I forgot not the delivery of yours to Madam de Lesdiguieres. I have been
now writing these four hours; is it not in your judgment, time that I should
tell you that I am,

Madam, Your, etc

To Monsieur Esprit. LETTER. CXXXVI.
SIR,
IT may be said of your letter, as of the Sun's chariot; could you have
imagined that the chariot of the Sun, and your letter, had any thing common?
Materiam superabat opus. --


To tell you truth, I could not have believed it possible that the Countess de
T -- should have found me so much pleasure, that M. la V.D -- could have been
so pleasant, or that any good could have been made of Madam de C -- when in the
mean time, you have dressed them up so, as that I have been extremely pleased
to see them all, and you have embalmed these bodies so well, that I should not
be much more taken with the most young, and most healthy. Hence it may be
inferred, that a good workman does miracles in all kinds of matter, and this
which, next to the first matter, was the most naked, and the most indigent of
all, has received from you so excellent a form, that you have made it, as it
were another compositum. It is only you can make Mercury of any kind of wood;
this, whereof any other but your self, could have made nothing but ashes, is so
well disposed, and employed with so much industry, that Cedar and Calambon is
not comparable to it. You Swallows have a miraculous faculty, with a little
earth and straw, (for you know Et mire luteum garrula fingit opus.
) to do such things as are not less to be admired then the Masterpieces of the
most regular Architecture. A hop certainly would in your hands become a rose,
-- Qaeicquid calcaveris hic rosa fiet.

One Swallow such as you are is enough to make a Summer. But assure your self I
honor you as much as if you were an Eagle, or, if you please, an Austrich and
am,

Your, etc.
Nismes. June. 17. 1642.
To Monsieur Costart. LETTER. CXXXV.
Sir,
COnsider I pray, whether I deal not favorably and ingenuously with you, since
so specious a pretense as that of a great journey performed with so much
precipitation, (for we are come in six days from Paris to Grenoble by Coach,)
hinders me not from giving you an answer? I received your last Letter a quarter
of an hour before my departure; I rejoice at your prosperities as much as if
they were my own, and while I am unfortunate in whatever I desire, I think my
self fortunate, when you are so. For I cannot say that Fortune is absolutely my
enemy, since she is your friend, and I forgive her all the mischief she has
done me, in requital of the favor she does you. You will be astonished at
what I shall tell you, and truly I am ashamed to tell you; M -- is more
unmerciful to me then ever, more cruel then she was in her Letters; and what
is lamentable and shameful both, this resistance enflames me, and I am fallen
more deeply in love with her then ever you knew me.

O indignum facinus, nunc ego and
Illam Scelestam esse, and me miserum sentio;
Et taedet, and amore ardeo, and prudens, sciens,
Vivus, vidensque pereo, nec quid agam scio.
It is one of the reasons moved me to undertake this journey, ut defatiger; but
I fear me I shall have the same Fortune with that other. Do you, who are more
discreet, and better acquainted with her, give me some advice in this case, and
let me know, whether you conceive she will persist in the resolution which
she seems to have taken. But deal freely with me, and in such an adventure as
this, use not your ordinary compliance; It will happily prove a kind of remedy to
me, to be persuaded that there is not any. You are obliged above all others to
deliver me out of this disturbance, for besides that your affection to me ought
to be greater then any man's, you are, in some sort, the cause of all the
afflictions I groan under at the present, as who first brought me to the sight
of her, Te, cum tua
Monstratione magnum perdat Jupiter.


I speak it not in good earnest, but me thought it came very pat to my purpose.
As to the word wherein you desire my judgment, I can say as little to it as
you, though I reflected on it by the way as we came. That, it is true, does not
signify much, for my thoughts were wholly taken up with her. Farewell, get my
heart from her as soon as you can, that you may have it wholly to your self,
or, if she must keep it, that it may be with some justice, I am,

Sir, Your, etc

To the same. LETTER. CXXXVI.
Domine,
NOt to dissemble with you, all your Latin cannot exempt you from simplicity,
and it is easily discovered in you that the greatest Clarks are not always the
most polite. I was strangely reconciled with M -- within one quarter of an hour
after our meeting; we had hardly exchanged two or three reproaches, but we
embraced one another more heartily then ever. Love sneez'd above two hundred
several times that day, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left,
which brought him into a cold he has been troubled with these three weeks. She
gave me, mill, deinde centum, deinde mill altera, deinde secunda centum. See
now what you get by citing so unseasonably those two Epigrams; for to tell you
truth, I conceive her very handsome about the nose, and am of the judgment of
her neighbors; Sic meos, amores? There ought not such strict notice be taken
of what falls from Lovers in their passion, and though Phaedria, coming upon
the Stage, speaks of Meretricum contumelias, yet in the next scene, he would
soon quarrel with his ears, that should affirm Thais was not a very honest
woman. Had you forgot your Publius Mimus, Amantium irae, and that other, who
putting things in their order, says, injuriae, suspectiones, inimicitiae,
induciae, bellum, and then at last, pax rursum? According to the knowledge we
have of your simplicity, and the opinion which I know you have of that fierce
and impersuasible Nature, we concluded you would be cajoli'd thereby, and that
you would write a Letter that should find us abundance of good sport, but to
the end that you might oblige her, and pretend a regret for having endeavored
to get away the heart from her. I assure you, I had much ado to persuade her
to be guilty of that treachery toward you. This is the reason, that you have
not received oftener from her, and she has purposely forborne, because you
should not take her in a ly twice. But we must do you that right as to
acknowledge, that if you are defective as to judgment, you have, to balance
it, a great wit; I am infinitely taken with your Letter. There are some
applications the most fortunate in the World, or to say the better, the most
ingenious, particularly that di boni, and that fundi calamitas, but, quod me
capere oportuerat, haec intercipit, how do you understand it, by your
explication of hem alterum? I approve it not, for Gnatho being in all
probability elder then Thraso, or at least coaetaneous, what likelihood is
there he would say, that it should seem that Thraso had made the other; haud
ita jussi: it is an equivocation upon recte jocularium in malum, visu dignum. I
shall see Monsieur de -- since you command me to do it, for that makes me more
considerable then if I were a Bishop. I admire the expression of Monsieur
Pauquet; I have often told you that his wit went beyond yours. To deal freely
with you, I believe he dictates your Letters; I wish he would also my answers.
But tell me, whence came that Hemistick, I never read it, and cannot imagine it
was ever applied on any occasion, but the wheat that grew on the Bastions of
Rochel, I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
Paris, Aug. 4.
To my Lord Marquess de Roquelaure. LETTER. CXXXVII.
My Lord,
I know not what advantage I shall make of the honor of your friendship, but
it has cost me already very dear; there passes not a Campaign, wherein for
your sake, I endure not many sad days, and that the hazards you are engaged
in, cause me not abundance of affliction, when, in the mean time, I have a
great joy to see, that, by a strange extravagance of Fortune, you find a way to
purchase glory in the worsted side, and that in those engagements, which are in
a manner unfortunate to all others, you make your self famous. Things well
considered, you cannot in my judgment, with any justice quarrel with Fortune,
for, if she be not on your side, she takes you into that whereof she is, and
at the end of all fights, I find you among the Victorious. For my part, I am
more jealous of your liberty then your glory, and must confess my self not at
all troubled for your imprisonment, and reflecting on what has happened, I
have a greater affection for you, when you are among the Spaniards, then if you
were of our side. I wish, my Lord, you may receive from them, all the good
entertainment that your merits may claim, and I do not in the least doubt but
you shall; for, besides what is due to your condition, there are those
excellencies in your person, which in three days gain the hearts of all that
come near you, and I make no difficulty, but the enemies who have taken you,
are by this time your friends. I would gladly, were I permitted, come and bear
you Company with them, for assure your self, my Lord, there is not any thing I
would not heartily do, to demonstrate to you, how sensible I am of the honor
you do me every where, by the public acknowledgements you make of the
affection you have for me; and neither Paeris, nor the Court, cannot afford me
greater enjoyments, then what I should find with you, and to assure you, that I
am, with extraordinary passion*

My Lord, Your, etc

To my Lord Marquess de St Maigrin. LETTER CXXXVIII.
My Lord,
I Have been three whole days in suspense whether you were alive or not, with
what affliction, you may easily imagine. Amidst this alarm, I received, as very
good news, that of your imprisonment, and I could not be much troubled at the
loss of your liberty, when I had been so much in doubt of that of your life.
Nor indeed, my Lord, can I not but acknowledge, that if your destiny had been
in my hands, you should have had no other then what you have: and as I should
have been extremely afflicted that you had been found among the dead, so should
I not have been well pleased you had clearly escaped. Fortune has pitched on
the mean I desired, and I believe I jump with your thoughts of it; for I
conceive you would not have enjoyed your self much in a liberty, which you must
have purchased by a retreat. When I am got to Paris, if you please to send for
me by a Drum, as one of your menial Servants, I shall not disown the
relation, but be ready to wait on you; I am extremely impatient for the
relation of your Adventures, and now I think you are at leisure to make it. I
wish, with all the passion that may be, you may always meet with good ones,
and if, having six or seven Mistresses to grieve for, you have any time to
spare, to think on me, I humbly beseech only to honor me so far, as to
remember that, I am,

My Lord, Your, etc

To Mon^ieur de Chavigny. LETTER CXXXIX.
Sir,
I Profess it is out of pure considerations of friendship that I write to you,
and that I cannot but tell you, that I languish away here, for want of your
company. After I had made such haste to get out of Italy, I grow wearier of
Paris then ever I was of Turin, and having very excellent accommodations of
Lodging in Crequi-House, it happens often that I wish the Chamber of la Grave,
and that of Novalaize, nay sometimes, my own bed at la Souchiere I took more
pleasure, the day, that the wind and rain put my nose into a pleasant posture,
then I do now in the fairest days of all: and to tell you all in a word, I
should be content to entertain M -- four hours every night, conditionally I
might enjoy you but one half hour in the day. Seriously, Sir, I cannot imagine
otherwise of my self then that I am fallen into a Pit, whence forty fadome of
Rope will hardly get me out; nor is there any but you that can do it, and
therefore till you are returned, I shall continue there crying and roaring
after a sad manner. There passes not a day over my head, wherein I make not
some addition to the affection I bear you, and whether it be that I have more
leisure to reflect on my self, and consider the obligations I ow you, or that
conversing with other men, I make greater discoveries of the extraordinary
difference there is between you and them, I have greater respects for you then
when I was upon my journey, when yet I had greater for you then for my self.
You will pardon me, that I tell you this with so much freedom, and not think
it strange, that speaking with much passion, I express my self the less
considerately. Notwithstanding all this liberty, I have in my Soul the humblest
respect I ought to have for you, and that, honoring you sincerely,
proportionably to your merits, I am, beyond what I can express, and as much as
I can be,

Sir, Your, etc

To my Lord President de Maisons. LETTER. CXXXX.
My Lord,
MAdam de Marsilly is persuaded that I have some credit with you, and I am
guilty of so much vanity as not to tell her she is mistaken. She is a person
very well beloved, and esteemed by all the Court, and has a great influence
over the Parliament. If she have good success in one business wherein she
has chosen you for Judge, and shall be satisfied that I have contributed any
thing thereto, you cannot imagine what abundance of reputation this will raise
me in the World, and what esteem with all the virtuous and more considerable
sort of people. I propose no more, to gain what just favor you can do, but my
own interests, for I know, my Lord, that I need not mention any thing of yours,
since that without it I durst promise you her friendship. That indeed is a
bribe might corrupt the most upright Judges in the World, and is a temptation
proportionable to your great Virtue; but you gain it justly, since she
demands nothing but justice of you. It Is a thing I may also claim of you, which
yet amounts to no more then the continuance of the affection you have formerly
borne me, if you are but satisfied of my being,

My Lord, Your, etc

To my Lord Duke d'Anguien, upon the success of the Battle of Rocroy, M DC
XLIII. LETTER CXLI.
My Lord,
SInce I am now far from your Highness, and that you cannot put me on any
employment, I am resolved to give you an account of all the thoughts I have had
of you of a long time, and which I durst not trouble your acquaintance withal,
for fear of slipping into the inconveniences, wherein I had observed those
entangled, who had presumed upon the like freedom with you. But, my Lord, the
things you do are too great to admit of silence, and it were very unjust you
should think to do such Actions, and that there should be no more said of them.
If you but knew how all at Paris are broke loose into discourse concerning you,
I am consident it would make you blush, and you would be withal astonished to
see with how little respect, and less fear to displease you, all the World
talks of what you have done. To be free with you, my Lord, I know not what your
thoughts run upon, and it was certainly an excess of confidence, and an
extraordinary violence in you, to have, at your age, baffled two or three old
chieftains, whom you should have respected though it were but for their
Antiquity; brought the poor Count de Fontain to be meat for worms, though one
of the bravest men in all Flanders, and whom the Prince of Or^nge durst never
meddle with; taken 16 pieces of Canon that belonged to a Prince who is Uncle to
the King and Brother to the Queen, one with whom you never had the least
difference, and defeated the best Troops of Spain, after they had with so much
mildness given you passage. I know not what Father Meusnier will say of it, but
all this is disconsonant to good manners, and contains, in my judgment, much
matter of Confession. I had indeed often heard that you were guilty of an
inconvincible obstinacy, and that it was not safe to dispute any thing with
you; but I must confess I should not have believed, it could have arrived to
this height; for if you continue thus, you will become insupportable to all
Europe, so far will the Emperor and the King of Spain be from being able to
oppose you. But, my Lord, not to meddle at all with matters of Conscience, and
to mind only those of Policy, I congratulate your Highness, the gaining of the
greatest Victory, and of greatest consequence of any has happened in this age,
and that without being important, you do those actions that are such in so high
a degree. France, whom you have cleared from those storms it stood in fear of,
is astonished to see you, at the entrance of your life, do an action such as
wherewith Caesar would have been glad to crown all his, and which returns to
your royal Ancestors more luster then you had derived from them. You now
verify, my Lord, what was heretofore said, that Virtue comes to the Caesar's
before it is time; for you, who are a true Caesar in disposition and science, a
Caesar in diligence, in vigilance, in courage Caesar, and per omnes casus
Caesar, have eluded the judgments, and exceeded the hopes of all men; you have
discovered that experience is only requisite for ordinary Souls, that Heroical
Virtue is acquired by other ways, that it knows no degrees, and that the
Masterpieces of Heaven are in their perfection, even from their beginnings.
Having done this, you may easily imagine what entertaiment and caresses you are
to expect from the Grandees of the Court; and how the Ladies are transported to
understand, that he whom they have seen triumph in the Bals, does the same
thing amidst Armies, and that the handsomest head in France is the best and
best settled. There Is not any, even to Monsieur de Beaumont, but speak
favorably of you; all those who were revolted against you; and complained that
you were still mistaken, acknowledge that for this time you are in the right,
and seeing the great number of Enemies you have defeated, there is not any one
who fears not to be of it. Give me leave, O Caesar! to be thus free with you,
receive the Elogies which are due to you, and permit that we render to Caesar
the things that are Caesar's.

To my Lord Marquess de Montausier, Prisoner in Germany. LETTER. CXLII.
My LORD,
YOu would not be troubled that you were taken, if you knew how much you are
bemoaned. There is certainly less pleasure in being at Paris then to be there
wished for as you are, the affliction which all of quality are in for you,
being to be preferred before the noblest liberty in the world. If you cannot at
the present be convinced of this truth (for in the condition you are in, you
look as if you could not understand reason) I shall one day clear it up to you
here, and make you acknowledge, that you ought not to number among your
misfortunes, an accent that raises you the affection and respects of all the
most amiable persons in France. In this general sentiment of all the world, I
do not, my Lord, think it to much purpose to trouble you at present with my
own; for what probability is there you should afford me any consideration among
Princesses, Princes, Ministers of State, and great Ladies, and particularly
among the young Ladies, who are much to be preferred before the others, the
Ministers, Princes and Princesses? When you have bestowed your thougets some
considerable time on all those persons, I humbly beseech you to believe, that
the world affords not another who concerns himself more in your good and bad
fortunes, then I do, or can be with greater passion.

My Lord, Your. etc.

To the Same. LETTER CXLIII.
My LORD,
THough I am the most confident man in the world of your friendship; and that
the freedom which shines through all your actions, removes all distrust of your
affection, in those to whom you had promised it; yet can I not but be extremely
satisfied when ever you assure me of your love, as thinking all the security
can be given me for a thing whence I derive so much pleasure, and advantage
little enough: The satisfaction I took in the reading of your Letter, is the
greatest I have had ever since I left Paris; and unless it be the
acknowledgments you therein make me, there is not any thing I am not infinitely
sensible of. I am therefore to assure you^ Lordship that I receive daily new
satisfactions, that I have at length suffered my self to be overcome by your
favor, and have lost that hardness of heart, that had too long, made a
separation between us. Though I make some difficulty to reflect on that time;
yet I must needs acknowledge it is some pleasure to me, to remember it, so to
multiply my joy by comparing it with this; nay (I hope I am not too free in
what I say) there are some intervals, wherein I cannot wish it should have
fallen out otherwise. For besides that the enjoyment of a Good is the greater,
by as much as as there was a fear of loosing it, and that the friendships,
which after some interruption are renewed, have something of ardency, and
eagerness, which those that are constant, and of a long standing have not; this
misunderstanding has given me occasion to receive a signal expression of your
goodness, by letting me know with what mildness and affection you have
entertained me as soon as I came near you: At l^ast this advantage I am
confident to make of it, that, having once discovered what fault I committed in
the ill management of the honor of your respects, and found by experience, how
hard it is for me to be without them: I shall, for the future, arm my self
against all failings of that nature, and shall not suffer any thing whatsoever
to divert me from being,

My Lord, Your, etc.

To my Lord Duke d'Anguien, when he passed the Rhine with those Troops, which
were to join the Marshal de Guebriant. MDCXLIII.
For the understanding of this Letter, you are to note, that before my Lord
Dukes departure from Paris, being among a company of Ladies, with whom he
conversed very familiarly, they diverted themselves with diverse little
recreations, and particularly that of the Fishes, wherein the duke was the
Pike. The Author making also one in the sport, under the name of the Carpe,
took occasion thence to write to him this piece of ingenious Raillery.

LETTER CXLIV.
GOod morrow Gossip Pike, good morrow Gossip. I was indeed in a manner
persuaded that the waters of the Rhine could not stop you, and knowing your
strength, and what pleasure you take in swimming in the deep waters, I was
satisfied you would not be startled at those you have now passed; but that you
would do it with as much glory, as you had accomplssh'd so many other
adventures: I am nevertheless to rejoice that you have done it much more
fortunately then we did conceive you would, as also, that without the loss of a
single Scale, to you or yours, the bare noise of your name, has dispersed
whatever should have opposed you. Though you have been hitherto excellent in
all the Sawces have been made for you; yet must it be acknowledged that the
Sauce of Germany gives you a noble taste, and that the Laurel which is put into
it, makes you taste admirably well. The Emperors people, who thought to have
fried you, and eaten you without salt, have indeed done it all backward; and
there is certainly some pleasure to see, that those, who made it their brags
that they would make good the Rhine, are not over confident of keeping
Danubius. D^-Fish, how to do you bestir your self: there is no water so
troubled, so deep or so swift, which you dare not venture your self headlong
into; Indeed Gossip, it must needs be confessed, you have satisfied the Proverb
that says, young flesh, and old fish; for though you are but a young Pike, you
have a certain consistency which the oldest Sturgeons have not, and you perform
such things as they durst not attempt. Nor indeed can you imagine what extent
your reputation is of; there are no Ponds, no Springs, no Brooks, no Rivers, no
Seas, where your victories are not celebrated; no standing water where you are
not thought upon; no running water where your noise is not heard, your name
pierces to the Center of the Sea, and swims on the superficies of the Waters,
and the Ocean, which limits all the world, does not your glory. The other day
my Gossip Turbot, my Gossip Gurnard, my self, and some other fresh water fish,
supped together at my Gossip Smelts, where was brought us up at the second
course, an ancient Salmon, who had compassed the world more then once, was then
newly come from the West Indies, and had been taken in France for a spy, as he
followed a Bark laden with salt. He told us there were not any abysses so deep,
where you were not known and feared, and that the Whales of the Atlantic Sea,
sweated again, and were nothing but water all over, as soon as they had but
heard you named. He would have continued his relation, but the scalding-Broth
he was in prevented it, so that he could not without much difficulty express
himself. The same intelligence, in a manner, was brought us by a shoal of fresh
Herings that came from the coasts of Norway. These assured us that the Sea of
that Country was frozen this year two Months before the ordinary time, out of
a fear, the news that was brought thither by certain she Mackarels, of your
advancing toward the North, had caused there; and had told us that the great
Fishes, who, you know, devour the small, were afraid you would serve them as
they did others; that the greatest part of them retired under the Bear, out of
an opinion you would not come thither; that all both great and small were in
alarm and disturbance, and particularly certain Congres, who already roared
out, as if they had been flead alive, and made the Rivers echo again. To do
you right, Gossip, you are certainly a terrible Pike, and under the correction
of the Hippotames, the Sea wolves, nay, and the Dolphins too, the greatest and
most considerable Inhabitants of the Ocean, are but poor Crabs in comparison of
you, and if your proceedings prove proportionable to your beginnings, you will
swallow up both the Sea and the Fishes. In the mean time, your glory being at
such a point that it cannot ascend higher, or dilate it self further, it is, in
my judgment high time, you should, after so much toil and weariness, come and
refresh your self in the waters of the Sein, and remind your enjoyments with
abundance of pretty Tenches, handsome Perches, and honest Trouts, who expect
you here with no small impatience. But how great soever the passion they have
for you may be, it is not comparable to mine, nor approches the desires I have
of being in a capacity to express my self, to my wishes,

Your most humble, and most The CARP.

To my Lord Marquess of Pisany, who lost all his money and baggage at play, at
the siege of Thionville.
LETTER CXLVI.
My LORD,
IF I am not misinformed, whoever should affirm you were much troubled with
horse flesh at the siege of Thionville' would do you no small injury; the Devil
a horse had you to keep there. I have been also told, that you, considering
with your self that many Armies have been heretofore lost, through their
Baggage, have fairly rid your self of all yours; and that, having often read
in the Roman Histories (See the fruits of great reading!) that the greatest
services their Cavallerie ever did, were when they voluntarily alighted, and
rushed on foot into the brunt of the most doubtful Battles; you have
accordingly resolved your Horses should not be near you, and have taken such an
excellent course, that you have not so much as one left.

The eminent Person foots it now --
You will happily find it somewhat inconvenient; but certainly, it must be
acknowledged, there is no small honor in it, that you may say as well as Bias,
(Bias an old Gentleman you are well acquainted with!) that you carry all you
own about you. We do not mean thereby, a quantity of unnecessary
accommodations, nor a number of Horses, nor yet any great abundance of Gold and
Silver; but honesty, generosity, magnanimity, constancy in dangers, obstinacy
in dispute, a contempt of foreign languages, ignorance of false dice, and an
unheard of indifference for the loss of frail and perishable goods. These
qualities are peculiar and essential to you, such as neither Time nor Fortune
can deprive you of. And whereas Euripides, who was, as you know, or know not,
one of the gravest Authors of all Greece, writes in one of his Tragedies, that
money was one of the evils that came out of Pandora's box, and, it may be, the
most pernicious; I cannot but admire in you, as a divine quality, the
incompatibility there is between you and it, and look on it as an excellent
qualification of a great and transcendent soul, the antipathy it has against
that corrupter of Reason, the venom of minds, and the author of so many
disorders, injuries, and violences. But yet my Lord, I should wish your Virtue
were not so high-flowne, that there were some correspondence between you and
this enemy of mankind, and that you would make such a peace with him as we do
with the great Turk, out of considerations of policy, and Commerce. Since then
a man cannot well be without it, and imagining that as I played for you at
Narbonne, so have you for me at Thionville. I sent you a hundred pistolls,
being somewhat more or less than what you are out upon my account, and that
they may not have the same fate as the others, I shall entreat you not to foul
your hands with them, but to put them into those of the French, for whose
encouragement I principally send them you.

To my Lord D' Avaux Sur-intendant of the Finances, and Plenipotentiary for the
peace. LETTER CXLVII.
My LORD,
YOu would not be a little pleased with your departure hence, if you knew how
extremely you are regretted here. It is not certainly near so great a pleasure
to be at Paris, as to be wished there as you are; and though you were now as
much in love with it as ever, yet the general complaints of all the Virtuous
might raise in you a certain satisfaction that you a^e not here. When I reflect
on your life, my Lord, methinks that great person whom his indulgent Fortune
surnamed the Taker of Cities, deserved not the title with as much justice as
you; for if it be true that there is no better way to reduce them then by
taking in the hearts of the Citizens, the World never knew such another
Poliorcetes, and we may number Hambrough, Coppenhagen, Stockholme, Paris,
Venice and Rome it self among your Conquests. You cannot easily believe what
sadness this place has put on for your departure. For my own part, my Lord, I
am so disordered at it, that nothing affords me the least diversion. To do you
right; in what other person could I meet with such an excess of wit,
knowledge, and virtue? Where could I meet with such excellent discourses, a
conversation so advantageous, and such noble entertainment? Since your
departure, here I could never meet with any meat which were not too much
salted, nor any man which were not too little; Omnia aut insulsa aut salsa
nimis. I cannot meet with any thing my palate quarrels not at, nec convivium
ullum, and nec conviva ullus placet. Of this Attick salt, whereof I have eaten
above a Bushel with you, and which, as Quintilian says, Quandam facit audiendi
sitim, Paris cannot show so much as one corn. Non est in tanto corpore mica
salis.
To be free with you my Lord; it proves very unfortunately for me to have met
you here more experienced, more knowing, and more virtuous then ever, and
withal in a capacity and willing to honor and oblige me. I now dearly buy
the four thousand Livers pension you have bestowed on me; and if you stay
longabroad, I cannot acknowledge my self obliged by your presence. Vah
quenquamne hominem in animo instituere, au^ parare quod sit charius quam ipse
est sibi. But I presume too much on your goodness by entertaining you so long.
Yet must I needs tell you before I make an end, that the Queen received your
Cabinet very kindly, and esteems it according to its worth; and has
commanded me to return you her thanks. For four or five days after there came
not either Princess or Duchess to her to whom she showed it not. She showed
it particula^ly to Mademoiselle La Princess, to whom she spoke exceeding great
things of you. It is but j^st, my Lord, I should tell you, who laid the
foundations of my Fortune, and bu^lt it up to this happiness, that the Queen,
has been pleased to allow me the pension of 1000. Crowns which she had
promised me since your being here, and has charged it on the Abbie of Conches,
whereof she has approved the resignation which the Abbot has made of it to
one of the children of Monsieur de Maisons. I am

My Lord, Your, etc.
Paris, Dec. 13. 1643.
To Monsieur Costart. LETTER CXLVIII.
SIR,
I Must not take it ill that you should be as sloathful as I; but because you
were not wont to be so, and that it is long since I received any letter from
you, I fear me the last I sent came not to your hands, in which I answered all
your expressions of Poiton, and gave you my judgment of the passages out of
Salust and Ausonius. If you desire for the future as much time to return your
answers as I am wont to take, I have nothing to say against it, and yet
methinks it is not just that you and I should be subject to the same Rule,
since we are

Nec cantare pares, nec respondere parati.
The other day, ^ communicated that passage of Terence, He^ alterum, to
Monsieur de Chavigny, and told him that you had proposed it to me, as also the
exposition you made of it, and that for my part I could not subscribe thereto.
The next day, he told me, that he thought there should be an interrogation, Ex
homine hunc natum dicas? Do you think him the issue of a man, would you not
take him rather for a beast? For my part, I can find no fault with it, only
am in some doubt, how a man supposed to be alone, can use interrogation, as if
he spoke to a third person. Be pleased to send me your opinion of it, for I
told him I would acquaint you with his, and we shall both expect your answer.
You may also consult with Monsieur de Balzac about it: I shall show Monsieur de
Chavigny both your answer and his, if you send it me. I repeated to him the
other day the Verses Monsieur de Balzac made for Monsieur Guye^, he was
extremely taken with them, and expressed an extraordinary esteem and
affection for him, commending his Wit, his Humor, his Works, his Broaths, for
he tells me he has eaten of them. He is certainly a man of a transcendent
wit, and passionatlie loves all those that have any; and it may be, he will
satisfy our friend that he remembers him when he least thinks on it. Farewell
Sir, I am

Your, etc.
Paris, Nov. 22.
To Monsieur de Chaveroche. LETTER CXLIX.
SIR,
KNowing what lechery you have for a Lawsuit, and what love for me, I
conceive I shall make a request to you which you will not take amiss, when I
make the heartiest entreaties I can, that you would take the trouble upon you
of informing your self of a Business of my sisters, to direct her with your
advice, and assist her with your credit. I recommend her to you as one of whom
I have the greatest confidence in the world, and whom I think the best able to
advise her in this occasion. I believe Mademoiselle de Rambouillet will not
spare any solicitation for both of you, for I now make her business yours,
and if you will be serious in it as I hope you will, I doubt not but the issue
will be such as is expected. For requital, I promise never to call you Hog
again, and will bestow on you the first Chapel whereof I shall have the
disposal. For to tell you that this obligation will add any thing to the
passion I have to serve you, were to abuse you, since it is certain, that I am
long since as much as possibly I can be

Sir, Yours, etc.
Once more, SIR, let me entreat you to do miracles in this Business.



To my Lady Marchioness de Vardes. LETTER CL.
MADAME,
YOu may easily perceive, that we are in a great disorder here, insomuch that
we know not where to reassume our duty when we have not done any for so long
time, and that to a person to whom there are so many obligations due as I owe
you, and who may justly claim so much respect, address and affection. I have
for these many months been in labor for an excuse for my default, and should
take great pains to write you a handsome Letter, wherein I would prove by 20.
or 30. reasons, that I have made none. But I must confess I have not yet found
out so much as one; nay I am of opinion that all the wits and all the eloquence
of our Academy could do no more, it being that which only your own and that of
my Lord Marquess can effect. To you both therefore, Madame, I address my
self, to beseech you to tell me freely what a man in my condition might say. I
am confident you would be much puzzelled as well as I. But if you want
invention to cover my fault, be pleased to have goodness enough to pardon it.
You cannot by any thing else give a greater demonstration of what I daily say
of you, viz. that between this and heaven there are not two other persons, so
good, so familiar, and so generous. Nevertheless be pleased to believe, that
it is long since, I have had a remorse for my offense, and endeavor what I can
to get out of it; so that to make the best of it, I am blameable only for the
first month, for as to all the time since, I was disheartened by that shame
and confusion, which must needs attend a person of Honor guilty of such a base
Delinquency. If all this prevail not with you, I know Madame how otherwise to
satisfy you, that is, within three days I shall put my self into your power,
bound hand and foot, that you may punish me according to my demerits, and make
me such an example, as shall terrify all future ingratitude; for, in a word
Madame, I will not live any longer in your displeasure, there being no hazard,
which I should not gladly embrace to express my self, MADAME,

Yours, etc

To my Lady Marchioness de Rambouillet. LETTER CLI.
MADAME,
I Had much reason to be well opinioned of my own way to Valenton; that other,
which they would persuade me was so direct, that I could not go out of the way
if I would, proved such that I missed it but thrice yesterday, though I would
not have done it. Being gotten to the walls of Brevane, instead of turning on
the right hand, I took the left, and went as straight as an arrow to a village,
which stood out of my way two large Leagues. I know not how it came to pass;
but my imagination was extremely troubled with Mademoiselle d'Angenes, and
Mademoiselle de St. Megrin, and methought they were like two false fires
keeping still before me, and ^nlightned me, but to my destruction. However,
Madame, I do not desire they should hear any thing of it; for I was in no small
fear they would have done me a greater mischief once before, and therefore my
endeavor is to have nothing to do with such people, and to endure anything
rather then incur their displeasure. But so it is, that I am got hither as
safely as if I had your Lacquay with me. I have not met with any wolves in my
way, nor any of those hazards which you were afraid I should, nor indeed any
misfortune, but what is happened through the means of the persons I left about
you. I assure you, Madam, this day shall not pass, without a many wishes to
see the Griffon-Horse and you, and wait on you in the walk you intend to take.
I am

MADAME Yours, etc

To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. LETTER CLII.
MADAME,
Whoever shall love any thing as highly as I do you, must not pretend to any
rest; I was ever against your journey, but believed withal the greatest hurt
it could have procured was to cause me the greatest affliction in the world,
and whereas I was sufficiently disordered that I had not the honor of seeing
you, the News which is come hither from Merlou, has distracted me much more.
Though this Accident produced no worse effect then the dissolution of such
excellent company, yet were it sad enough, nay such as for which I should
hardly admit any comfort. Methinks it is long since the Small pox has been
guilty of so great an insolence, and that since it durst not do your Mothers
face any injury, it should also have been as tender of her pleasure and
diversion. The rejoycings which I heard were among you, took away much of my
afflictions here, nor durst I presume to be sad in a time when it was reported
you danced every day. But now I have not the happiness of one pleasant
thought, and I assure you that the young Ladies du Vigean, were never so weary
of their Garret or any other place, as I am now of Paris. But Madam be pleased
to consider the excess of my discontent, I had resolved to go in three days
to Blois on horseback, which signifies little less then that I should cast my
self headlong into the river. It is uncertain whether I shall ever return;
however, honor me with the constancy of your love whether I am alive or dead,
and remember that I either was or am

MADAME Yours, etc

To the same. LETTER CLIII.
MADAME,
IT is to be be admired that you should complain of solitude, when you have
carried away with you what ever was excelle^^ and desirable in Paris, and to
expect comfort from us when you have not left us any. Were I but near that
admirable Princess with whom you are, I should send you such Letters ^s you
desire of me, and from her most inconsiderable either words or actions I would
take occasion to dispell the thickest melancholy. If you find so little
diversion where you are, it must needs be, that the Accident at Merlo^ has
quite altered her from what she was, and that her sisters having the small pox,
has made a greater change in her then her own. In the mean time, Madame, take
it from me, that most of the houses in Paris are now Countrey-houses as well as
yours; and certainly a many which have not so good company. But if a person
that enjoyes not her self with Mademoiselle de Bourbon, can be pleased with any
other news concerning M. de la G. I can furnish you, for she is in a manner all
the acquaintance I have here, and I have as many of her excellent expressions
of you as will fill up two large sheets of paper. She is cettainly a notable
Lady, and the most accomplished, and the most pleasant of any alive. Consider
Madame, whether much diversion can be expected from me at a time, when I am
capable of so little my self; and whether you think not fit I should go to
Blo^s as soon as I can, and that I should say no more to you then that I am

MADAME Yours, etc

To M. de B. M. de B. and M.C. LETTER CLIV.
LADIES,
YOu are certainly very tyrannical to come and disturb me ^o unseasonably as
you do, and it must be that you are destined to be my Tormentors, since that
the very favors you do me turn to my disadvantage, and that I never receive
any good from you, which is not seconded by some greater mischief. Not long
since I would have given any thing in the world for such a Letter as I have now
received, and now it is come in a time when there is not any thing I would not
part with not to have received it. For your particular, Madame, I am sorry that
I am forced to make this acknowledgment of the honor you have been pleased to
do me, but the Ladies who are with you are so presumptuous, that I doubt not
but they will atttribute to themselves the Civilities I direct not to them; and
therefore if I treat you with more roughnes then I could wish, you may blame
your compani^* Give me then leave to tell you all, that the discontents you
gave me at parting had that influence on my mind, that to tell you truly, there
was nothing of you left there; at least you did not those disorders you were
wont to do. This distance I took with a great patience, and expected your
return with no less tranquillity; I began to consider, the world was ^urnished
with something besides you, which yet were amiable: methought that though you
were returned, I could be without your sight three or four months, and yet not
die; and, not to dissemble with you, the hatred I had for you was greater then
the affection. While I enjoyed my self in the memory of so great a
reformation; your Letter comes and pulls down in a moment all that my reason
had built up in a long time, and with much trouble you have, by some magical
practice, changed my inclinations with a certain number of words, nay the very
character of the things you have written to me, has made me quite another man
then what I was. I should be much more astonished at this miracle, were I not
satisfied that persons who are guilty of so many may also do some, and knew
not otherwise by experience, that in whatever comes from you, there are certain
poisons, and those secret charms, which a man cannot possibly elude. In the
mean time, know, nothing could have happened more mischievouslie for me then
that half-favour you did me; which is so powerful, as to stifle my
indignation, but not absolutely to appease me: so that the condition I am
inconsidered, I know not whether side to take, and can neither resolve to hate
you as I ought, nor love you as I would. This causes such a distraction in me,
that I cannot expressey ^m resentments thereof, nor judge which side I should
take: all I can say, is, that I am sufficient lie desirous to see you again,
and yet am afraid, I am not weak enough to fall again into your hands. If this
happen, treat me better then you have done; for, the effect of so many
disobligations will prove sad at last; and to deal sincerely with you, it
were pity I should not be, with the same passion as ever,

LADIES, Yours, etc

To the Lady Abbess -- to thank her for a Cat she had sent him. LETTER CLV.
MADAME,
I Was already so much yours, that I thought you satisfied there needed no
presents to gain me, or that you should lay a plot to catch me, as a Mouse,
with your Cat. And yet I must confess your liberality hath^raised in me some
new affection, and that if there were any thing in my inclinations which you
could not command, the Cat you sent me, has made a shift to take it, and make
it absolutely yours. It is certainly the handsomest and most familiar of the
kind that ever was: the best Cats in Spain are, compared to this, but
Burnt-tailes, nay even Rominagrobis himself ( Rominagrobis Madame, you know is
the Prince of the Cats) could not have a handsomer look, nor mind his interest
better then this does. All I have to except against her, is, that she is very
hard to keep, and of a Cat bred up in a Monastery, she brooks her restraint
very heavilie. A window cannot be opened, but she offers to leap out at it; she
had twenty times leapt over the walls had she been suffered, and there is no
secular Cat, more wild, or more given to liberty then she. But I hope the good
entertainment I make her will prevail with her to stay; she feeds altogether on
Cheese and Biskets. It may be she was not so well kept before, for I think the
Ladies -- suffer not the Cats to be much acquainted with the Cheese, the
Austeritie of the Convent not happily permitting they should make such good
cheer. She begins to be very familiar, she had yesterday almost carried away
one of my hands as I played with her. She is certainly one of the prettiest
Beasts in the world; there is not one in the house that carries not her marks.
But how amiable soever she may be as to her own person, yet is it upon your
account that I esteem her, and and I shall affect her so much for your sake,
that I hope to change the Proverb, and that it shall be henceforth said, Love
me, love my Cat. If you second this present with the Raven you have promised
me, and will send within some days Poncette in a pannier, you may boast that
you have bestowed on me all the beasts I care for, and obliged me to be while I
live,

MADAME, Yours, etc

To Monsieur de Mauvoy to thank him for the Terra sigillata he had sent him.
LETTER CLVI.
SIR,
THis is the first homage I do you for the Earth I hold of you, and I could
wish, that while I do it, I were able to express how sensible I am of the
tenderness and affection wherewith you have obliged me. You have indeed
verified the common saying, that the gift derives its worth from the Giver; you
have set such a value on what you have bestowed on me, and sent it covered with
so many flowers, and so much civilitie, that you have made it precious, and you
have found out^a way to make me a great present, when you give me a thing of no
great value. But certainly I, who was never yet owner of so much as an inch of
ground, am not a little obliged to you, in that by your means I begin to have
some, and that you have first crossed that ill destiny, whose pleasure it
seemed to be that I should never have had any. All I can tell you is, that what
you have put into my hands shall not be barren, it has already produced in me
all the acknowledgements that a Civilitie so accomplished as yours might claim,
this obligation having added something to the passion wherewith I already was

Yours, etc

To my Lady Marchioness de Rambouillet. LETTER CLVII.
MADAM.
IT is to be admired that you having those endowments which might justify you
in a defiance of all the World, are yet the most obliging person that may be,
and have so great a goodness for me, as if you saw in my heart all the
inclinations I have to honor and to serve you. Assure your self Madam, that
your name is written there in such Characters as cannot ever be defaced, and
how far soever you may be hence as to ground, my memory knows nothing
present but you. I should be extremely disordered, Madam, that I cannot
represent unto you with what joy and respect I have received the honor you
were pleased to do me, did I not believe a mind extraordinary as yours could
guess at my thoughts. Be pleased then to imagine, Madam, what resentments one
may have, who is the most grateful of mankind, and has the greatest
inclinations in the World to honor you. This comes somewhat near what I feel,
yet it is but part of that passion wherewith I am

Your, etc.

To my Lord the Count d'Alais. LETTER CLVIII.
My LORD.
IF your affliction be of public concernment, and such as wherein all the
Virtuous in France share with you, I think you satisfied that my resentments of
it are not ordinary, whom your goodnesses oblige above any other, to
participate of whatever you are interessed in. I know my Lord with what
constancy you endure it, but that takes nothing from the trouble it costs me,
so that what should comfort me adds to my disturbance. The more I reflect on
the courage, constancy, and greatness of soul wherewith you bear this
thunderclap of Fortune, the more am I afflicted that we have lost a Prince, in
whom all those qualities should in all probability have been revived, and in
whose person I doubted not but we should one day see again those Virtues, which
I fear me we shall not find any where but in your self. I wish, my Lord, we
may there enjoy them long; that Fortune who has so unmercifuly lopped off this
branch, may spare the body, and have some respect for a head so dear and so
precious as yours. This wish, I assure you, is as much upon the account of
France as my own, who am with all manner of respect and passion,

My LORD Your, etc.

To my Lord Marshal de Grammont upon his Fathers death. LETTER CLIX.
My LORD.
THere has happened a strange thing about the cause of your affliction, in
that being a person that has as hearty friends as any man, I have not met
with any that bemoaned you, and that the most considerable part of France,
having concerned themselves so much in the reputation you have lately gained,
there is not any will interesse themselves in your misfortune. I know not what
account they will give for it, nor what excuse they can allege that they have
so little compassion for you. For my part, my Lord, who am acquainted with your
very soul, and know how exactlie you discharge all the duties of friendship, I
am satisfied, that you are extremely troubled, and knowing how good a Brother,
Kinsman, and Friend you are, I am confident you are as good a Son; and that,
having lost a Father, who has been regretted even by those who knew him not,
your affliction must needs be extraordinary. This is the more commendable in
you, by how much men in these times are little troubled with such resentments.
This tenderness of soul is as much to be celebrated, as the constancy you
have expressed in the greatest hazards, and that in an age which affords so few
examples of good Nature you are cast down for a loss which makes you one of
the richest men in France. This certainly deserves admiration, and indeed
darkens all your Atcheivements. But as even the best things are not free from
excess, so your grief which hitherto has been just, were not such should it
continue any longer. It were an indecorum for a man whom France looks on as one
of its Heroes, to afflict himself as other men; and it were not to have a
sufficient esteem of Virtue and Renown, to persist in landnesse in a time when
you do such glorious actions, and receive the acclamations of all the World. I
have heard the Queen loud and open in your praises; wherein also a person much
in her esteem was no less liberal; your reputation increases daily, and your
wealth is never the less. For they say that in money and poultry you will be
henceforth thought very considerable. If with all this you cannot be satisfied,
there is a friend of mine will have much more reason then ever to cry out -- The
truth is, my Lord, it were too much, and I should have something to quarrel at
my self, though otherwise I cannot disapprove any thing you do, as being most
passionately, nay implicitly

My Lord Your, etc.

To Mademoiselle de Rambouillet. LETTER CLX.
MADAM,
I Minded not much what I did, when after I had had the confidence to chide a
long time, I grew friends with you the day before your departure, and it gave
me occasion to reflect on what you have told me often, that I have no great
judgment: you can hardly imagine what trouble and disorder that peace has
cost me, and what advantage it were to me to be again at odds with you. I
never thought any absence so long as this which does but begin. I now feel all
those things I w^i^ to you formerly; methinks you have carried Paris, and
France, and all the World along with you to Rouen. Be pleased to consider,
Madam, you who have always laughed at me, when ever I said that nothing was
more prejudicial to me then watching, what disquiets, disturbances, and pains I
had avoided, if on Friday the seventh of April, I had gone to bed at midnight,
and how much I am obliged to wish I had been fast asleep the two last hours I
spent with you. It Is certainly an odd destiny which will, neither when I am far
from you, nor when near you, allow me any rest, Ni sen ti ni con tigo
Puede vivir el mundo.


And yet having often had the experience of both, I find the affliction it is
not to see you the most piercing of any, and that you never do me greater hurt
then when you are not near me.

May 16. 1644.
To the Same. LETTER CLXI.
MADAM,
THough what you tell me were true, that this journey had raised some goodness
in you, yet it discovers a great unnaturalness in you, to acquaint me with so
much, and by that means add to the affliction it is to me to be far from
you: for if I wish you present with all your cruelties, what trouble must it be
to me not to see you, if I thought you furnished with some kindness, when it
is the only quality I have ever thought wanting in you? But I am not so easily
drawn in, nor indeed is the thing so probable, as that it should be believed
upon your word. The scratch you gave me as you passed by is to me a
demonstration that you have not left all your shrewishness at Rouen, and that
you have not parted with all your humors, since you take so much pleasure to
persecute me. This considered, Madam, I must needs tell you I should have been
glad to have been at your interview with the Sea, to see what face you put on
it, what you thought, one of the other' and what happned on the day that the
two most unruly things in World met together. If conformity beget affection,
there should have passed a great friendshp between you, for when I consider its
calmes, tempests and roughness, it banks, shelves, and rocks, the losses and
advantages it brings the world: how admirable and incomprehensible it is, fair
to those that look on it, and dreadful to those that are at the mercy of it;
that it is irresistible, untameable, bitter, unmerciful, and insolent, methinks
you are as like one another as two drops of water, and all the good and ill
that may be said of that may be also affirmed of you. There is only this
difference Madam, that that, though it be vast and great, has its limits, and
you have none, and all those that know your disposition hold that it has
neither bottom nor channel. And I pray what Abyss has furnished you with
that deluge of Letters you have sent hither, which are all so excellent and so
admirable, and such as any one of them would ask as much time to write as that
of your absence amounts to? What other imagination would not be drained to
afford so much as should gain so many people, solicit so many Judges, and
write to so many persons? The Sea indeed has done you a courtesy, and it is
an argument of your good intelligence, that Madam de Guise was directed so
opportunelie to Rouen; and to make the Romance a little more famous, Fortune
has done well to bring thither also a person so considerable as you are. Do
you not think that all the adventures of a Country would be delayed till you
were there? There is some thing extraordinary in it.

El dia que tu nanciste
Grandes Sennales avia.
And I question not, when you die, but I shall find your death in the Gazette.
As for the Gargouille, I must confess, Madam, I know not what it means. I have
read the Relations of Ferdinand Mendez Pinto, and those of the Spaniards, and
the Portughezes of the East and West Indies, but do not remember I ever met
with that word in any of them; I humbly beg your better information. It Is
certainly a great pity, you wandered not up and down the World, you would
inform us otherwise then all other Travelers do. I wish I had as pleasant
things to entertain you with as those we have received from you. But since
your departure hence, Paris affords not so much news as Rouen. This also
confirms that the place is better for the Person. Your Lady Mother is in
health; Monsieur A. -- plays the Devil with his hinder feet, now that he has
his elbowes at liberty with Monsieur de St Megrin, ever since the death of my
Lord Duke. He is become so handsome, so bright, that it is almost a miracle I
saw your noble Brother yesterday. Monsieur de Chastenay came hither two days
since. This if I am not mistaken is all I have to say to you. I humbly kiss
your hands, and am much more passionatelie then you can believe,

Madam, Yours, etc
Paris, May 30. 1644.
To Monsieur de Chantelou. LETTER CLXII.
Sir,
I Could not send this Lacquaie to Paris without taking occasion to return you
my most humble thanks for the honor you have been pleased to do me, though I
have neither leisure nor invention enough to answer a letter so excellent as
that of yours, which is such, as it had raised in me no small jealousy, if it
had been writ by another: But loving you as I do my self, or, to go a little
higher, as I do Mademoiselle -- and as much as Mademoiselle -- does you, I must
needs be glad to find your writing proportionable to your speaking, singing,
dancing, vaulting, and indeed your excellency in all things. All I have to
object to you is that you give me no account of Mademoiselle de Chantelou, nor
of Mademoiselle de Mommor. In a person of so much judgment as you pretend to,
it is certainly a horrid default; you will pardon my freedom, and allow it in a
person who admires you in all things else, and most passionatelie is,

Yours, etc

To my Lord de'Avaux. LETTER CLXIII.
My LORD,
THough I received no letters from you, yet the receipt of your kindnesses were
enough to engage me to write to you; and methinks the least I can do is to give
you words for your money. Were it at my own choice, I know the value of things
so well, that I had rather give you money so it might but procure words from
you; but since it is your pleasure it should be o^herwise, I think it better
for both it should be so, Permittoque ipsis expendere Numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris.
When I have rendered you the most humble acknowledgements I owe you, I think,
my Lord, I shall have very little else to trouble you with: Neque enim te
credo in stomacho ridere posse, and amidst the disturbances and melancholy you
struggle with, I conceive there is no entertainment for such letters as I am
wont to write to you. Now to speak to you of your division, methinks is not
very seasonable. Quid enim aut me ostentem qui si vitam pro tua dignitate
profundam, nullam partem videar meritorum tuorum assecutus? aut de aliorum
injuriis querar? quod sine summo dolor facere non possum. When I shall
understand that you have put on more cheerfulness, assured me that the Tempest
is over, that it (...) fair weather, and that it raines not, then shall I
reassume that kind of writing Cicero calls genus literarum jocosum. In the
mean time I must acquaint you with one thing whence you may derive no small
comfort. It is, that in the differences there are between you and -- unless it
be some persons that have a dependence on him, all the World is of your side,
and that that benevolent aspect which has raised the general love of all to
you does in this occurrence incline the whole Court and the City to favor
you. I hope the presence of Monsieur de Longueville will produce a better face
of things at Munster. At least the Scene is like to be changed, and new Actors
will come upon the Stage and those excellent: Alter ab integro Seclorum
nascitur ordo,
Jam venit and Virgo --
Were it not that you have assured me of my ignorance in Astrology and my
unaquaintance with the Stars, I should give you some Predictions; for I see a
blazing-Star, which promises many things, and must cause great alterations. At
least, my Lord, you shall have no cause to complain any more of West-phalia as
of a barbarous Country, and where the Graces and Muses can find no
entertainment. Is it not now that it may be said -- Quoquo vestigia figis,
Componit furtim, subsequiturque Venus?
How excellent is that furtim, if you consider it well! But what intrigues are
there between you and Father Chauaroche, is he not a good honest fellow, that
minds his Religion well, commendable as to Manners, a good Wit, and a great
judgment? He writes miracles here of you, with a certain extravagance of
passion, and has as great an affection for you as the Parson of St. Nicholas.
In the mean time, I owe heaven thanks, that amidst so many occasions of
afflictions, your health and your cheerful humor have constantly kept you
company. I wish you the continuance of both, and my self in a capacity to let
the World know how much I am,

My LORD, Your, etc.
Paris, Apr. 1. 1645.
To my Lord Marshall de Schomberg. LETTER CLXIV.
MY LORD,
IS ^t that you were afraid what you were to write to me should smell of the
oil, that you had sent me your letter without doing me the honor of writing
particularly to me. And yet that which I have received since from you, I look
on as the better part of your present. Without that, operam and oleum
perdideras, and you might have sent me all the Olives of Languedoc, and yet not
have made your peace with me. If you think, my Lord, that I concern my self too
much, you will find that it is not for things of small consequence, and if you
consider well what value I set on the things you write, you will not think it
strange that I so passionately desire your letters, as what I cannot be
without. The last I received brought me rest, joy, and health. All these had
shaken hands with me ever since your departure hence; I hope your return will
put me into a perfect good constitution, and restore me to my Wits and
strength, which I must not expect without you. Till this good fortune happens,
my only diversion is to discourse of you in all places, at all times, and upon
all occasions. Upon what terms, my Lord, I leave you to imagine; but it is ever
among persons who are over-joyed to hear me, and who will be able to acquaint
you, in case you doubt of it, that among the many who take a pleasure to speak
well of you, there is not any does it more heartily then my self, or is more
passionately,

MY LORD, Your, etc.
Paris. April 7. 1645.
To the same. LETTER CLXV.
MY LORD;
HAd you been here, you had dashed out one part of these verses, and would have
made me correct the other; nor do I send them you, but to let you see how
destitute I am of all good advice, nay of all wit, when I have not the honor
to be near you. Be pleased to imagine by that, My Lord, what wishes I make for
your return, as being one that takes not much pleasure in being a fool nor yet
in seeming such, and if it concern me not much to desire you should stay no
longer in Languedoc. Those whose hearts you have carried away with you, are not
at such a loss as I am for your absence, nor expect you with more impatience
then I po. Yet I meet one person, who i^ all places and on all occasions gives
wonderful expressions of an extraordinary affection for you. But, my Lord,
you have made me such a courtier and so confident, that notwithstanding all
these fair appearances, I think my affection toward you exceeds that of any
other, and, to reform somewhat that freedom of speaking, that I am with most
respect and zeal,

My LORD, Yours, etc
Paris. April 27. 1645.
To Monsieur Costart. LETTER CLXVI.
QVuid igitur faciam? eamne infecta pace ultro ad eam veniens? Would you give
me this advice? an potius ita me comparem. I shall forbear the rest for your
sake. Without jesting, Sir, I stand in great need of your assistance at this
present, and wish you here to mind me from time to time of hei noster, but you
have not courage enough to give such bold advice, I must take it of my self. To
be free with you, this Lady is too angry, Non est sana puella, nee rogare
qualis sit
solet haec imago nasum.


It may be she will not be so cruel at Paris as at -- she is more considerable
there then here; if I may trust your information, Hanc provincia narrat esse
bellam.


But your writing to me at the time you did was the best thing you ever did,
for if you had delayed it but two days longer, I should have been as angry
with you as I am with her, and was resolved to have written to you in the style
you know. And, to deal plainly with you, I am not well satisfied with those
you have written; there cannot be any more abrubt or indifferent. Unless it be
that you have assured me of your health, what do they contain that is pleasant.

Qua solatus es allocutione?
All I am pleased with is, that I conceive you spend your time very merrily,
since you can afford me so little of it; but are you not the happiest man in
the world, that when you least expected it, Fortune has forced three weeks or
a month on you. --

Adeone hominem venustum esse aut felicem
quam tu ut scies?
What do you think of that venustum? I think he there means him qui habet
Venerem propitiam, for the other signification is not very pertinent. Farewell
Sir, be assured I am assolutelie yours, and as much as you can desire.

Yours, etc
Paris. Aprili 30.
To my Lord d'Avaux. LETTER CLXVII.
MY LORD,
YOu cannot imagine what a troublesome thing it is to be ever writing to a man
that returns no answer; I should as willingly talk to deaf man or a wall, and
yet they say walls have ears; but when I am not answered, I think I am not
heard. I have been above these six weeks a writing a Letter to you, cannot do
it.

But he who knows not what to say
His silence cannot well betray.
It may well be applied to me, what Vibbius Crispus, vir ingenii jucundi and
elegantis, said to a young man who was troubled for an Exordium for an Oration
he had made, Nunquid, inquit, adolescens melius dicere vis quam potes? for to
be ingenuous, I would not write any thing to you nisi perfectum ingenio,
elaboratum industria, nihil nisi ex intimo artificio depromptum. Yet Cicero,
who was a great Master of words, and of whom I have borrowed the l^st recited,
was troubled as well as I in such occasions, and me scripto aliquo lacesses,
says he to one of his friends, Ego enim melius respondere scio quam provocare.
However, my Lord, according to the common saying, he that is bound paies, and I
think also, he that paies is bound, and that it is my duty, some way or other
to find you entertainment since I am paid for it. Yet were it a great
liberality in you, who study the virtue so much, if, to the obligation you
have already cast on me, you would add that of writing to me sometimes. For I
profess, it is only you can inspire me with wit, and methinks I am at a
greater loss of it then ever, since I have have not had the honor to see and
hear you. If you pretend your being a Plenipotentiary to exempt you from
answering; Papinianus had the charge of all the affairs of the Roman Empire,
and yet I can show a hundred places, in great books, Papinianus respondit, and
respondit Papinianus. They were the most politic and the most experienced that
were wont to answer; and thence comes responsa sapientum, and prudentum
responsa. Even the Oracles themselves, (and you can be no more) gave answers;
nay even things inanimate do sometimes endeavor to make some answer, Answers
are forced from Waters Woods and Rocks.


Three words which you may say, will afford me matter of writing for many
leaves.

Nardi parvus onyx eliciet cadum.
This will cost you no time, or if it do, there needs only that time and Wit
you spend in the evenings with your servants. Your Lordship will pardon my
importunity, for, to deal freely with you, I have an infinite desire to hear
from you, and if your Letters were to be had for money, your four thousand
franks had been long since spent, and so I should have returned all I had
received from you. We have had much ado to be paid this year, and yet I have
made a shift to get mine. By what Monsieur de Bailleul often tells me, I
infer he expects some acknowledgement from you. I beseech you when you write
to him, though sometimes you are also to seek what to say to him, present him
with something, that he may know you are sensible of the service he has done
you. Monsieur de -- will be shortly with you; his wife, an excellent and lovely
creature, is hghly in the Queens favor. Be pleased to give him occasion to
speak well of you at his return. I am in no ordinary favor with the King, and
not in disgrace with the Queen. But now I grow tediou, and it is a question
whether I transgress not on your leisure, I humbly kiss your hands, and
remain.

MY LORD, Your, etc.

To Monsieur d'Emery controller General of the Finances. LETTER CLXVIII.
SIR,
THough you were unwilling I should speak of your other Leters, yet must you
needs give me leave to celebrate that you writ to Monsieur d'Arses upon my
account, and to tell you that France affords but very few that could do the
like. And particularly that passage where you say thar to contract my Business
you will advance your money, methinks is one of the neatest expressions I ever
read, and how modest soever you may be, yet you will acknowledge that to offer
twenty eight thousand franks, for a friend is a noble kind of expression, and
that there are very few can make use of that style, and can express themselves
after that manner. At least, Sir, give me leave to tell you, that had it been
debated among all the Wits of the Academy, it would not have been resolved to
write after that manner, and that among the many excellent humors we light on,
there is not any like tha^. It is, to speak seriously, a most noble and most
high --

To my Lord Duke d' Anguien. LETTER CLXIX.
MY LORD,
IF I have seemed backward in the congratulation of a success which has cost
you the loss of the Marquess of Pisany, you will not, I hope, think it
strange, and doubt not of your Highnesses pardon, if upon this occasion I have
been more taken up with grief then joy. It is no article of my faith, my Lord,
who would cheerfullie sacrifice my life to your service, that those who have
lost theirs in it have misspent them, but could heartily wish my self in
their condition, rather then be so unhappy as to be obliged to weep in one of
your Victories. In the mean time my Lord, since I have to encounter one of the
saddest afflictions could fall upon me, it is no small alleviation that you
have so fortunately and so gloriously trampled on so many hazards, and that
heaven has been pleased to be tender of a person to whom I might address all
the respect and zeal, which I may have vowed to all those I shall or may ever
loose* My prayers to it my Lord, are, that it would be more careful of your
life then you are your self, and start me out some occasion to satisfy your
Highness how much, and how passionatelie I am,

Your, etc

To my Lord Marshall de Grammont, LETTER CLXX.
MY LORD,
THe grief I took at the death of the Marquess of Pisany which is the greatest
I ever had to deal with, took away nothing of my affl^ction for your
imprisonment, but since, at a time when I thought my self incapable of joy, the
news of your Liberty has found it reception. It is indeed some comfort to me
amidst so much disturbance, to see that all my passions are not unfortunate,
and that Fortune is not so cruel as to take away all the persons that are
dearest ^o me. I were yet to learn, my Lord, one of the best qualities that you
own, and how much, above all men, you are capable of a true and perfect
friendship, if I were not satisfied that you were as sensible of that
misfortune as my self. And though you should have been long since hardened to
accidents of this nature, and accustomed to lose the friends you most esteem;
yet I am confident the loss of this has extremely troubled you, and that you
will ackowledge you never made any that you ought to put on more sorrow for.
For my part, who was acquainted with the very secrets of his heart, and know
the greatest esteem he had for any thing in the world was for you, I should
neglect my duty to his memory, and frustrate the intentions I have ever to
observe his inclinations, and the designs he had, if, upon his account, I
should not force my self into your service more then ever, and add somewhat to
the affection wherewith I have ever honored you. Of this, my Lord, I question
the possibility, but it is my duty to do what I can toward it, and withal
to profess, that if the passion I have for you cannot admit any augmentation,
it shall never decrease, and that I shall ever be

MY LORD Yours, etc

To Monsieur de Chantelou. LETTER CLXXI.
SIR,
A Mistress and a suit at Law will certainly find a man too much business at
a time; but if you had pleased to take the Lawsuit into your care, and
recommend the Mistress to me, though I am infinitely pleased with all your
commands, I must confess I should have entertained it more willingly. I have
employed one to speak to your Counsel, and he has promised that your business
shall not be moved this Parliament. I conceive Sir, that I have in this given
you the greatest assurance of my obedience that I possibly can; for being
extremely desirous to see you again, and withal infinitelie-jealous of the
Lady that detaines you, you could not have desired any thing of me which I
should have been more more unwilling to satisfy you in, then that I should my
self order things so, that you might be longer hence, and have two months time
to stay with her. Having obeyed you in this, you cannot doubt, but that I shall
ever be, upon all occasions,

SIR, Your, etc.
July 6.
To the same. LETTER CLXXII.
SIR,
THat I have delaied an answer so song, I have a better excuse then I wish I
had; the ^ever and the gowt have had to do with this great wh^le, each in its
turn, nor am I yet quite rid of them. Hence you may infer that you put me
upon the emploiments are necessary for me, ^etter then I should my self: for
being now absolutely decayed, I am yet better to solicit a Cause then court a
Mistress. I wish you may soon obtain the one, and never be overthrown in the
other. I am sincerely,

SIR, Your, etc.
Paris. Aug. 21.
To the same. LETTER CLXXIII.
SIR,
YOu need net doubt but that I, who can afford you my life, would easily lend
you my name, and that I should not gladly make Monsieur -- believe me a landed
man. But Monsieur -- tells me you acquainted him not with your resolution till
it was too late, and that the house you would have bought was disposed of
before. Sir, I am sorry your affairs detain you there longer then you
expected, for assure your self we cannot be without you. One of the handsomest
of our neighbors lies sick, nor have I my health as I should. Methinks you
should for her sake hasten your return, as also for that of

SIR, Your, etc.
Paris. October. 15. 1645.
To my Lord Marshal de Schomberg. LETTER CLXXIV.
My LORD,
YOu have been pleased to honor me with I etters so excellently well penned
and so full of obligation, that I have not yet been able to answer them, least
I might appear unworthie your praises, or return you such as were not suitable
to your worth. All I can tell you of your last Letter, is, that had I ever so
little less esteem for you then I have, I should have the greatest quarrel
with you of any man in the World; but I concern my self so much in any thing
relates to you, that the vanity you take from my Letters I reassume from
yours, and am as proud of the things you write as if I were the true author
thereof. In a word, my Lord, when you doubt whether I shall remember, cricore,
or approve of your wheels, you are too distrustful of my memory and my
judgment. The common Proverb certainly that all comparisons are odious,
holds not at all in you, there is nothing more ingenious, nothing more pleasant
then those you imagine, and you who are so fortunate in them upon all occasions
cannot meet with any thing that may be compared to your own. But as excellent
things stand you not in much, so can you not esteem them to their worth. We who
are forced to travel far for them, and find them not without great trouble,
set a higher value on them, and think our selves very rich of what you regard
not at all, nay what you are ready to disclaim. It has happened indeed very
fortunately for such wits as we are, that yours has been hitherto employed,
in the commanding of Armies and government of Provinces; and that your birth
has designed you for a greater glory then that of writing well. We had been
in a strange perplexity, who can do nothing else, and dare not pretend to any
thing above it. I have heard, not without astonishment, fear, and joy, what you
have done at Montpelier; methought I saw Rodomont in the midst of Paris; for
your Lordship remembers, that he alone opposed so many people.

Non fasso, merlo, trave, areo, O balestra,
Ne c^^ che sopra'il Sarracin percote,
Ponno alentar la valorosa destra.
To tell you truly, unless it be that his feet are not so handsome as yours,
I take you to be very like him; and when you have your sword in your hand I
think you much more. But happily while you read this, your Lordship has some
other affairs of as great importance to do, and I divert you from it by an
overtedious Letter. Be pleased to let me know whether the business of Pont
Saint Esprit be at length concluded, as also what my Nephew must do, when he
shall depart, whither he shall go, and to whom he is to apply himself.
Doralice hunts me up and down, and sends for me every day to acquaint me with
something concerning you. I call him Doralice, not of any ill omen, or thinking
of any Mandricard. I am,

My LORD, Your, etc.
Paris, Aug. 5. 1645.
To my Lord Duke d' Anguien. LETTER CLXXV.
My LORD,
When I thought my self in the very depth of affliction, and burdened with as
much as any mind could possibly bear, the fear I was in for your highness,
convinces me that I might be more unhappie then I am, and that, though my
losses were extraordinary, I had yet abundance to lose. I cannot, my Lord,
express the disturbance my soul struggled with to think of the hazard you were
in, nor what darkness and disorder I imagined likely to happen in the World.
Some slender hope I had indeed, that Heaven, who seems to mind the prosperirie
of this State, would not deprive France of you so soon, and that it must
preserve a person, by whom it had decreed to do yet a many miracles. But, my
Lord, that malice of Fate which envies those who raise themselves above their
nature, and the necessity, which there is that humane affairs should decline
when they are at the highest point, gave me much reason to fear. The short and
prec^pitate successes of Gaston de Foix, the death of the Duke of Weymar in the
midst of his Triumphs, and that of the King of Sweden, who was killed as it
were between the arms of Glory and Fortune, were the perpetual entertainment of
my mind, and presented my imagination^ with none but fatal presages. In fine,
God is only pleased to threaten men, and seems to have given them this alarm,
that they might the better consider what a present he has made them of you,
and how much the Earth is concerned in you. The noblest of your Victories has
not afforded you so great joy as it were to you to know what astonishment all
took here at the news of the danger you were in, and with what eyes and tears
you have been bem^an^d. I should be very glad your Lordship knew it, that if
you fear nothing as to your self, you may be the more cautious out of a respect
to those who love you, and grow a better husband of a life, whereon those of so
many others depend. Amongst the many prayers have been made for it, be
pleased to believe there cannot any be more fervent then mine, and that of all
those who have a veneration of your Highness, I am, beyond any,

My LORD Your, etc

To my Lord Duke de la Trimoville. LETTER CLXXVI.
My LORD.
YOu are not satisfied to be ever conferring new benefits on me, but you do it
with some new insinuation, and accompany them with circumstances of so much
obligation that it must be confessed, only you know how to do it. I render
your Lordship thousands of humblest thanks for all the favors you have been
pleased to do me: I would to the acknowledgement of my Nephew, which I send
you, gladly add some public act of Gratitude, whereby the World might be
satisfied both of the obligation you have done me, and the resentment wherewith
I have received it. But since that cannot be, I humbly beseech your Lordship
to be satisfied with the security I here give you, to be while I live at your
service with all requisite fidelity, and that nothing shall make a deeper
impression in my heart and inclinations then the memory of your kindnesses.
And though I know that the judgment you make of the Verses I sent you, is too
much in my favor, yet can I not but acknowledge that I am not a little proud
of it. What you have been pleased to acquaint me with of it, and what you have
written of me to your Lady, I am more sensible of then I can express. To be
free with you, there is nothing more obliging; my interest is so inconsiderable
to me, that I prefer the honor of your approbation before all the good you
have done me, nay all that you can ever do me. In the mean time, your Lordship
will give me leave to tell you, that the praises you give me are such, and
^uched in such terms, that I should wish, rather I knew how to commend then be
commended after that rate; and should be more proud to give then receive such
praises. I shall endeavor to deserve them the best I can, and if no otherwise,
I shall at least make it my business to merit the honor of your affection, by
the singular fidelity and the extraordinary respect wherein I shall ever be,

My LORD, Your, etc

To my Lord d' Avaux. LETTER CXXLVII.
My LORD,
CAn there be any thing more high and excellent then the beginning of your
Letter? It is not certainly so honorable not to make a default, as it is to
excuse it so handsomelie. Nay this freedom of acknowledging in your self those
d^f^ults which need not any excuse, cannot proceed but from excellent grounds,
and a soul rich, liberal, and justly confident. I know not whether so
ingenuous an exordium has absolutely gained me, but it has drawn me into a
belief of all you build upon it, and I have read your Letter thrice over with
great satisfaction. I observe in it certain beauties, a certain politensse and
grace which puts me in mind of what Quintilian says, Messal^ nitidus and
candidus, and quodam modo prae se ferens in dicendo nobilitatem suam. But, with
your favor, you have not been equally ingenious in accusing me; the latter
part of your Letter is much weaker then the other, and contrary to what Cicero
says, de coelo melius objiciente crimina quam defendente, bonam sinistram
habes, malam dextram. First, if it be without any cause, or dissatisfaction
that you have not vouchsafed me an answer for so many months, and have denied
me a note of three lines, it is a proceeding, my Lord, not consonant to your
wonted goodness, especially in a time when what you have done for me seemed to
oblige you to treat me with more civilitie, that it might not be thought you
relied too much upon the kindness you had done. For in fine, though I esteem
your courtesies yet I rather wish your caresses, and if it be not possible to
be both among your servants and your friends at the same time, I doubt not but
you will honor me so much as to believe I should not be troubled about the
choice. But if it proceed from any dissatisfaction you have of me that you have
been so long silent, I cannot but be the more astonished that you should suffer
your heart to be so long burdened with a grudge against me, who from my
infancy have loved, honored and esteemed you, with such constancy and
perfection, that notwithstanding a many great and honorable friendships I
have contracted since, never any of my friends but have thought and observed,
that of all men, you were he for whom I had the greatest inclinations, and with
whom, then any, I would rather spend the rest of my life. But notwithstanding
all this, and a friendship of five and twenty years, if there be a report
which you take offense at, you think me the author of it, because it has some
relation to the interpretation I made of your riddle. And this must seem more
probable to you, then that a many that are here, or with you, such as daily
invent other Stories, should also advance this. Your Letter I was extremely
taken with, that zeal which I have in all things for you prevailed with me to
read it to two of my friends, and discover to them the conjecture I made of the
blank line. Neither they nor I thought that interpretation any way prejudicial
to you, nor can think so yet. But we must not dispute it any longer with you;
you ought to have the greatest care of your own reputation, and I commend that
modesty provided I be not thought guilty of any extravagance. If, my Lord,
the esteem you have for me proceeds only from the report that I pretend to
something of wit, and that I can sometimes write a handsome Letter, you esteem
me for the quality I think most inconsiderable. Those of my acquaintance here
honor me for my great professions of friendship, candor, faith, and
discretion. Of all which if you have not found the experience in me, you must
needs have observed the seed of them even from my youth. In a word I have much
reason to take it ill, that you have thought me so dis-circumspect, as to give
entertainment to a calumny, since you call it so, and that having thought me
guilty of it, you have not rather pardoned it me. For, to be free with you,
you have not half the love for me you should have, if you have not a remission
for a many others. Be pleased to plead my cause better another time before your
self, and to look on me as a person, who has a passion for you beyond all
example, and is absolutely,

My LORD, Your, etc

To the Same. LETTER CLXXVIII.
My LORD,
THough I were guilty of some remainders of anger toward you, the first lines
of your Letter had appeased me and reduced me to reason. I am so extremely
taken with any thing you do, and what you write to me is so full of charm,
that though I had something to object to your humor or your friendship,
as soon as I should see any thing from you, I am captivated and forced to
return to you, as a man is sometimes to court a cruel Mistress. It Is true, my
Lord, when I made you all those reproaches, and writ rabiosulas illas satis
fatuas, as Cicero says in a certain place, I was extremely incensed against
you; and to be free with you, how highly soever I may be obliged to you, I had
some reason to do it, at least, Si quid longa fides, ca^^que jura valent.


And might I not justly think it strange, that you the best, and best
Benefactor of all men, Qui largiris opes veteri fidoque sodaeli;
should deny me five or six lines? and that being prodigal of all other
things you should be over-thri^^ie of your words? And yet when I had well
considered it, I confess your good husbandry of them is to be excused, if you
value them as I do. For to one that understands them well, and knows the true
rate of things, can there be any thing so excellent, so rich and so precious?
And your last Letter only, Does it not amount to more then I could ever
expect from your Sur-intendance? Was the Attick elegance, you tell me of, ever
more pure at Athens, or Urbanitie more acceptable, or better understood at
Rome? I am infinitely pleased with your citation of Ariosto, which I had
forgotten these twenty years. And that touch, If I take up the pen against
Monsieur -- he falls out with me; if I lay it down to Monsieur Voiture, he is
mad; is it not worth a whole Volume of Letters? In a word, with what vigor,
what force, what conduct do you maintain your paradoxe, and all those of
Cicero, may they be compared to yours? I must therefore persist in my former
opinion, and grant, that a man who can write such excellent things, is much to
blame that he writes them not to some other who is able to apprehend them. Upon
such an occasion Panurgus said to Epistemon, who by specious reasons, would
maintain a thing not very probable. I understand you, and think you a good
Commonplace man, and zealous in your Cause, you entertain me here with
descriptions and Diatyposes, which I have nothing to say against. But, preach
and plead from this time till Whitsuntide, at last, you will be ashamed not to
have persuaded me to any thing. Yet I must confess your reasons have shakn me
a little; but the more prevalent, the more persuasive and the more ingenious
what you write is, the more excusable I think my self, that I have forced from
you the honor of writing to me. I am confident, my Lord, that that desire,
though attended with too much earnestness, cannot displease you; nor can you
easily entertain a bad opinion of a man, whom you cannot satisfy with a
pension of four thousand Livers, and yet is ready to fall out with you if you
afford him not your Letters. There is nothing I cannot more easily be without,
nothing I could not be more willingly deprived of, Quidvis facilius passus sim
quam hac in reme deludier.
I had seen, not many days before, others from you; one to Monsieur -- one to
the Princess, and one to Monsieur. With what spirit, what gallantry, what
grace! I am vexed I am not at the Source of all these excellent things, that I
cannot be near you, and that I cannot collect what daily falls from you. You
may believe what you please; but what advantage soever I may make by your good
Fortune, I profess I love you much more as Overseer at St. Nicholas's, then
Lord high Treasurer or Plenipotentiary. How often happens it in those narrow
lanes, you tell me of, that I think with my self, -- O ubi campi
Westphaliae!


For in a word, say what you will of the barbarousnesse of that Country, no
place can be barbarous when you are in it.

Omit mirari beatae
Fumum and opes strepitumque Romae.
The most pleasant, most beautiful, and most delightful fruits of Greece and
Italy, grow by your means, Vervecum in patria, crassoquesub aere, --


Neque miror Coelum and Terras vim suam, si ita tibi conveniat, dimittere. Good
God, what disadvantageous weapons has that man chosen, qui tecum decertare
voluit contentione scribendi!

-- Verbosa and grandis Epistola venit.
But to be more pleasant, your Letter has raised a difference between two
Ladies, about the explication of that passage where you tell me of the
inspirations happen to me at my Lady Marchionesse's bed side. Madame de
Rambouillet applies it to her self, and Madame de Sable disputes it; and that
you are obliged to the latter both for her affection and her hatred; for
there is as much obligation in the one as the other. It Is to be admired what
impression you make in the mind of all those whom you would humor, Adeone
hominem tam ven^stum and felicem.


She is extremely incensed against you and at an absolute distance, because of
the slender care you have of her, and cannot forbear railing on all occasions,
and yet must commend you at the same time; but how commend? much better then I
could. Yet I do not think fit you should write to her in order to an
accommodation; for so you would certainly fall into that silence which you
hug so much; but be pleased to write something to me concerning her. I also
beg a Complement from you to Monsieur Tubeut: if you will trouble your self
with neither, I am satisfied. Your last Letter has given me satisfaction, I
shall expect nothing from you these six months, only afford me the honor of
your remembrances, and account me ever,

MY LORD, Your, etc

To my Lord Duke d' Anguien. LETTER CLXXIX.
My LORD,
YOur Highness has not done any thing in this Campaign that required more
confidence then what I do at the present, for knowing how delicate you are, and
how few letters please you, I am resolved to write you one, though I have not
any thing that is either good or pleasant to entertain you with. May I die, if
I had not rather dispatch six men with my own hands, or be with you to hinder
a sallie of the enemies! And yet this action, my Lord, wherein there seems to
be so much courage, proceeds only from my fear. I have endeavored as much as
lay in my power to exempt my self from it, and rather then write an ordinary
Letter to you, I had resolved not to write at all, which certainly had been
the shortest and the best course. But Madame de Montausier, whom I have
consulted about it, frightened me, and told me it was no jesting matter, that
you were a man not to be so slighted, and what face soever you put on it, you
would bear me a grudge in your heart. Now my Lord, to hazard a grudge from that
heart which finds all the world discourse, I must confess I was very loath.
This fear forced away the other which held me back, and so I choose rather to
discover that want of wit which happily you thought me not guilty of, then to
give you any occasion to distrust any defect of zeal or respect of you. And
certainly, it were very strange that I, who have ever loved Achilles and
Alexander, whom I never either saw or knew, and that only for the things (...)
have read of them, should want a veneration for your Highness, of whom we
daily see so many miracles, and of whom I have received so much honor and so
many favors. Your Highness may be assured that the sentiments I have for it,
are such as they ought to be, and that I can express neither the pain nor the
pleasure. --

To the Queen of Poland. LETTER CLXXX.
MADAME,
What I look on, as most considerable, in the present Madame de Sable has
sent me, and the plot whereby your majesty got me to receive it, and made me
disobey the Queen, though innocentlie, is, the occasion it gives me to presume
to write to you, with the means I have to confirm my self in your remembrances,
under prerence of rendering your Majesty the most humble acknowledgements I owe
it. I shall therefore tell you Madame, that the most covetous man in the world,
was never more glad of any thing bestowed on him, then I have been elevated at
what I have received of your Majesty, and that I think my self more concerned
in this adventure then I thought I could ever have been. To be ingenuous, the
honor of receiving expressions of affection from one of the greatest Queens in
the world, and what I value more, the most accomplished person I ever saw, is a
concernment might take in the noblest souls, and such as to which all the
Kings on earth cannot bestow any thing proportionable. I wish Madame, all your
future liberalities may be as well bestowed, I mean, as well acknowledged, and
that among so many millions that are subject to you, some may take as much
pleasure as I do, to celebrate your praises, and make you known to all the
rest. This done, your Majesty will soon have over all your subjects that
Empire which it has hitherto had over all those rational souls that have
approached it. This Empire Madame you have had from your birth, and was yours
before you had either Scepter or Crown, and which if you give me leave to say
so, is much more estimable and more absolute, then what you have now received
from Fortune. I pray Heaven for the long continuance of both the one and the
other unto your Majesty, with all the prosperities it deserves, and that I may
once in my life be so happy as to see you in your glory, and that I may tell
you my self, with how great respect, passion, and zeal, I am,

MADAME, Your Majesty's most humble, etc.

To my Lord Duke de la Trimouille. LETTER CLXXXI.
MY LORD,
I Have found out a way to multiply your kindesses, and to order things so,
that you shall be able to bestow on me another Canonrie. My Lady Duchess of
Aiguillon, moved hapl^e by your example, would needs oblige me as you do,
having preferred my Nephew, whom you made Canon of Laval, to the grand
Vicarship of Nostre dame; which when he is possessed of, he resolves to resign
his benesice of Laval to another of my Nephews, if you shall approve it. I
hope, my Lord, that the same goodness which gran^^d the first favor, will not
deny the second, and as you have obliged me with much generosity, so in this
occurrence, do I not doubt the continuance of your good inclinations. This
latter Nephew, for whom I make this humble suit to you, is a Batchellour of
Sorbonne, s^fficientlie learned, and very studious. So that, if I mistake not
your humor, which is to esteem those that profess Letters, I conceive, that,
in the solitude of the Country, he may contribute somewhat to your
entertainment, when you would afford your mind some remission. For my own part,
my Lord, I desire nothing so much as to receive fresh obligations from a person
I honor and respect as highly as I do you. And I should heartily wish that
all the indulgence of Fortune toward me, might come through no other hands
then yours. Whether I have acknowledged or not what I hove already received
from you, I shall not say my self, but appeal to the whole Court, where there
is not one who is not acquainted with what goodness and liberality you have
been pleased to oblige me, and the public professions I make to be, upon all
occasions,

MY LORD, Your, etc

To the same. LETTER CLXXXII.
MY LORD,
I Am far from any suspicion you can ever be weary of obliging me, but am
afraid you may of my acknowledgements: I have had so many to make you lately,
that unless I should use repetitions, I see not how I could dilate my self on
a subject wherein your Goodnesses have already exhausted me. I shall therefore
only make it my humble suit to you, that you would remember the favors you
have done me, the easiness wherewith they have been obtained, the obliging
Letters wherewith you have accompanied them, and the civilitie whereby, while
you have engaged me, you have not omitted any occasion to shed on me all the
honor I was capable of. While your Lordship reflects on those things, be
pleased withal to imagine a gratitude on my side proportionable thereto, and
consider, whether a conjunction of so many obligations with the extradinary
passion I have ever had to honor you can ever dispense in me with any eclipse
of the fidelity and respects of

My LORD, Your, etc

To my Lord Duke d' Anguien, upon the taking of Dunkirk. LETTER CLXXXIII.
MY LORD,
I Believe you might fasten on the Moon with your teeth, had you but attempted
it. So far I am from being astonished at your taking of Dunkirk, when nothing
is impossible to you. All I am troubled at, is, what I shall say to your
Highness thereupon, and by what extraordinary expressions I shall be able to
represent to you what I conceive of you. The glorious condition you are in
considered, no question, my Lord, but the honor of your affection is a thing
extremely advantageous; but for us Wits, who are obliged to write to you on the
good successes that happen, it is as distractive to be put to find out words
suitable to your actions, and from time to time to dress up new panegyrieks
for you. Would you be pleased to take a defeat sometimes, or but raise a siege
from before some place, diversity might help us a little out, and we should
find something that might be handsomelie said upon the inconstancy of Fortune,
and the honor it is to suffer her disgraces courageously. But having even from
your first achievements paralleled you with Alexander, and seeing your daily
ri^ing things, the troth is, my Lord, we know not where to place either you or
our selves, and cannot find any thing to say which is not below you. Eloquence,
which magnifies the least things, cannot, with all its advantages reach the
height of those you have done; nay what in other subjects she calls call
Hyperboles, is but an indifferent manner of speaking to express our thoughts
of you. It is certainly not easily comprehensible in your Highness, that you
should add something every summer to that glory which the precedent Winters
seemed incapable of addition; and that having overgrown so great beginnings,
and afterward as great progresses, the last things you do are still the most
glorious. For my part, my Lord, I contribute that joy to your prosperities I
ought; but foresee, that what adds to your present reputation, will derogate
from what you are to expect from future ages, and that within a small time, so
many great and considerable Actions done in the neck one of another, will
render your life incredible hereafter, and will make Posterity look on your
History as a Romance. Be pleased then, my Lord, to set some limits to your
Victories, though it were only to accommodate your self to the capacity of
mankind, and not exceed their belief. Mind then for a while remission and
security, and let France, who in the midst of her triumphs is ever in alarm
for your life, peaceably enjoy the fruits of that glory you have gained her. In
the mean time, be pleased to be assured, that among so many millions do admire
you, and bless heaven for you, there cannot any do it with more joy, zeal and
veneration, then,

My LORD, Your Highnesse's most, etc.

To my Lord d' Avaux. LETTER CLXXXIV.
My LORD,
THough I were so excellently qualified, as that it might be said of you and
me, and cantare pares, yet will not any say, and respondere parati. I received
your Letter but yesterday, and I answer it to day; yours make not that haste,
but as if you lived in some remote corner of the East Indies, I have them after
the expectation of some years. For my part I admire you.

-- Vt unum
Scilicet egregii mortalem, altique silent^;
And cannot apprehend how a person who has so much advantage in speaking can
take so much pleasure to be silent. The three first lines of your Letter, and
what you say of this months being extremely spent, is beyond any thing our
Academie could do* But with what salt have you seasoned your last Course? May I
die if ever any thing took me more! Poor Monsieur de Lieure, who had been in my
thoughts these twenty years, presented himself, all his guests, and all his
house, with incredible satisfaction, and brought along with him all the
fashions of that time. It happens indeed very fortunately for the Wits, that
you have had the management of greater affairs then we, and that Claudium
Memmium ab institutis studiis deflexerit cura terrarum. How am I plagued, my
Lord, when I read what you write to me, that I am not near you, and what a
spite do I find that Fortune has done me, by disposing me at such a distance
from a person so precious, of a Wit so full of entertainment! Not to mention
the luster, pomp, and hopes here, in this only I place all happiness, Ille,
si fas est, superare Divos,
Qui sedens adversus identidem te
Spectat and audit.


My Lady Marchioness de Montausier has caused me to read several times what
you writ concerning her, and of a many Letters that have come to her from all
parts, she says nothing has been sent equally excellent. She has charged me
to tell you that she is extremely pleased that you approved of her marriage,
which she would not have thought well of, had you not confirmed it with your
consent, and that she would have asked it had you been here; but in your
absence, she inferred from the many expressions of affection, which to her
knowledge, my Lord Marquess had received from you, that you would not oppose a
thing he was desirous to effect. She and the Marquess her husband have
enjoined me to return you thousands of acknowledgements, and to assure you of
their most humble services. But, my Lord, I am very glad you have a servant who
finds all the world ^^lk, and that I am better known in strange Countries, then
Monsieur Falandre and Monsieur Coiffier, I should have sent you the (...) were
read to you, -- Namque tu solebas
Nostras esse aliquid putare nugas.


And what greater approbation could I desire then yours? But, Verebar ne te
haec deprehenderent in cura aliqua majuscula, as Cicero says: and then I
considered what that other says, Multa quidem nobis facimus mala saepe Poetae,
-- Vt cum tibi librum
Sollicito damus aut fesso. --


The general Peace will not raise more joy then all Virtuous and great Minds
have conceived at the accommodation between you and Monsieur Servient. I
believe it is as you write, and si quis est qui neminem bona fide putet redire
posse, non vestram hic perfidiam arguit, sed indicat suam. If you can procure
the continuance of it, there cannot be any thing better.

Si quidem hercle possis nihil prius neque fortius.
Thousands of most humble thanks for the care you have had of my affairs; I am
as I ought,

My LORD, Your, etc

To the same. LETTER CLXXXV.
My LORD,
SHould I receive yearlie your four thousand livers without so much as making a
great A, or putting my hands to do any thing in order to your service, you were
the likeliest man in the world to suffer it, nay you would be so pleased
meerlie because it would exempt you from affording me a few lines which your
Goodness obliges you to honor me with some times. For my part, I should be
also well satisfied, were it not something too dishonorable, besides that it
were a great ease to me. You cannot imagine, my Lord, what weariness there is
in writing to a person who answers not. I have been these three months writing
to you, and have not been able to make an end of my Letter, and when I had with
much ado, got two periods together, I am presently disturbed, and say to my
self, ah! woe is me I am got into the quagmire, as the Counselor was wont to
say, of whom you told me the story. And yet, what ever come of it I must needs
write; for to tell you truth, I am ashamed I can no better deserve your money,
it being some trouble to my conscience to enrich my self so unjustly. In the
mean time, be pleased to rest satisfied, that, notwithstanding my constant and
confident addiction to silence, my heart speaks all possible respect, passion,
and esteem for you, and I am daily confirmed in the judgment I had of you
even from my youth, which is, that the world affords few comparable to you, nor
any whom Nature has furnished with such a combination of a great soul and a
vast wit. According to that opinion, be you pleased to imagine with what
impatience I wish your return, and, if I am not as much concerned as any man in
that peace which is the expectation of all Europe. Amidst the greatest
assemblies, the highest entertainments, and the most pleasant walks, I make
perpetual wishes for your conversation, your suppers over a single Napkin, and
those turns you honored me with in your Garden. But now it comes into my
mind, by what engines did you raise that great house which appeared on a sudden
in St Avoye's street? For a thing so unexpected seems rather to have been made
pegmate aliquo quam aedificatione.

Et crescunt media pegmata celsa via.
The walls of Thebes we^e not raised with so much expedition, and if as I have
heard the stones of Citheron, came running and leaping where they were
appointed to come, and disposed themselves into their proper places, it was a
great convenience. Well, we must come to what your postillion said; You are a
strong man, you pull down a house in three days, and triduo reaedificas illam,
but Goodness! with what luster and magnificence! All the Architects, then whom
the world affords not a more jealous or a more envious generation, acknowledge
nothing can be more noble; but what takes me, is, that you do this at a
distance of two hundred leagues, and that by your Overseers. Whereas all others
who build, will needs place every stone goes into their edifices, with their
own hands, and they are ever seen confusedly with their Workmen surveying,
measuring, calling, giving orders, nasty and slovenly

Atque indecoro pulvere sordidos.
It is only you can do these things by proxy, and clearlie discover, that the
design of pacifying Christendom, is that only whith takes up all your
thoughts, since the building of a Palace cannot so much as divert them, and
that those things which wholly possess the souls of other men cannot find any
entertainment in yours. In the mean time I add my joys to yours in the name
of the Penates of Jean Jacques de Mesmes, and all the other eminent persons
your Ancestors, in the name of the Penates who were the tutelarie Deities of
Passerat, and of all the learned of that age, as also of this, that you have
reedified and adorned their ancient seat, and that Non sinis ingentem
consen^isse domum.
My hearty wishes are, that you may suddenly enjoy your self in it, and that
you may see your self.

Quam dispari domui dominaris.
But my Lord, I am come to the nineth page, having strained my wits so far,
that at last I have dressed up a Letter of a fair length. You cannot imagine
what ease I am at now; but yet you will, you cannot but imagine it. I am now
free for three or four months. I humbly kiss your hands; am going to the
Fair, and remain

My LORD, Your, etc

To Monsieur Costart. LETTER CLXXXVI.
SIR,
YOu will be extremely surpised that I should desire your assistance in a
business I have on the other side of the mountains, and that it is to be
employed against the Romans, This is not the first time, you know, that they
have disturbed their quiet who owed them nothing; but I think they were never
so unreasonable with any as they are with me, nor were so troublesome to
Hannibal as they are like to be to me, if you relieve me not. Quorsum haec? I
shall tell you. There is among them an Academie consisting of certain persons
who are called the Humorists, which signifies as much as if one should say
Fantasticks, and indeed they are such in so high a degree, that they will needs
have me matriculated among them, and have signified so much to me by a Letter
written by one of the Body. I am obliged to return them another in Latin to
give them thanks, and this is that I am troubled about. But you were no sooner
in my thoughts but I was presently at ease, for I thought my business done,
there being a man in Poitou, who has an excellent command of writing Letters
in Latin, and would not deny me such a Courtefie. Their device is, a sin
exhaling the vapors of the Sea, which are returned in sh^wers, with this
motto, out of Lucretius, Fluit agmine dulci. Be pleased to consider, if you can
find any thing to say to them, as to that, and the honor they have done me,
whereof I merit so little; in a word, do the best you can. If it come to the
worst, Monsieur Pauquet will not fail, who understands this business better
then any of us, which yet I absolutely refer to you both; for I am not able
to undertake it, and therefore be you pleased to do it, Me dulcis domina Musa
Lycimnia
Cantus, me voluit dicere lucidum.
Fulgentes oculos, and been mutuis
Fidum pectus amoribus.


Poor Lycimnia has been gone hence these eight days. I must needs acknowledge
I love her more then I do my self, but not more then I do you. I am

SIR, Yours, etc

To the same. LETTER CLXXXVI.
SIR,
I H have a great desire to come and live with you in Poitou, for I find that
you and Mousieur Pauquet are grown greater wits since your coming thither then
you were before. On the contrary, I come out of a country where mine is grown
rustie in the abode of fifteen days, as being not blessed with the sight either
of good books or your Letters, and waiting on Ladies who understand not a word
of Cicero, Virgill, or Terence. To deal truly with you, I am extremely taken
with all you write, and unless it be your absence, there is no rate I would
not buy your Letters at. When ever I casuallie meet with any thing I conceive
worth your acquaintance, I am not so much pleased at what I write to you, as
what I know you will answer thereto, and think with my self, Nardi parvus onyx
eliciet cadum.


Seriouss^e, if I thought not my self so much concerned in your reputation as
my own, I should be extremalie jealous of you; but I do not conceive it of much
consequence whether you or I be the more learned or the greater wit, my
reputation at Rome will be the same; and I put so little difference between
what is yours and mine, that I am as much pleased at your Latin as if I had
writ it my self. Methinks, there needs no more then this to qualify me for the
Academie of the Humorists, and that a man, who has such a friend as you are,
deserves entertainment every where. Quintilian says, nemo speret ut alieno
labor sit disertus, yet I hope it of you: I believe, I shall by your means, be
eloquent as often as I shall have need; and if I take some pains to preserve my
Latin, it is not so much for any use I shall make of it, as that I may
understand what you write to me, and what you do. I expect with impatience the
gleanings of the harvest you have made in Poitou, and that you would send me
the best and choic^st of what you have learned. The partnership there is
between us is extraoodinarie, confers enim rem and industriam, and I, though I
contribute nothing have my part of the profit. The civil Lawyers call this
Societatem Leoninam, which the Laws will not by any means allow. I know not
what passage you mean, to which you say I have not answered; be pleased to let
me know it, I thought I had left nothing unanswered. I almost subscribe to your
interpretation of hem alterum; but methinks it is somewhat disadvantageous to
Terence; I should be glad, for his sake, another might be sound. But as to the
Ladies, who I told you knew not a word of Cicero, pray give me your opinion of
what Salust says of Sempronia, that she was Literis Graecis ac Latinis docta;
in another place he says of Sylla, Literis Graecis atque Latinis juxta, atque
doctissime eruditus. That a woman should commit faults in her own language, if
she be not well versed in it, I nothing wonder at; but that he does observe it
in a man, and that an eminent one, I think very strange; and do you but
imagine what praise it were to the Duke of Weymar, that any one should say in
his commendation, that he were very knowing in the Germane Tongue. Farewell, I
am

Your, etc.
In reading over my Letter I observe an equivocation in the beginning. I come
out of a Country, where mine, etc, for that mine might relate to Country, and
I mean only my Wit, though I know you would not have taken the one for the
other: However I acknowledge it a fault. Vitanda inprimis ambiguitas, non haec
solum quae incertum intellectum facit, ut Chrematem audivi percussisse Demeam;
sed illa quoque, quae etiamsi turbare non potest sensum, in idem tamen verborum
vitium incidit, ut si quis dicat visum a se hominem librum scribentem. Nam
etiamse librum ab homine scribi pateat, male tamen composuerat, fecerar^^^
ambiguum, quantum in ipso fuit. I have chosen rather to write this then correct
what I had once written.


Paris. Sept. 20.
To my Lord d' Avaux. LETTER CLXXXVIII.
Myy LORD,
YOu do well indeed to quarrel at my complaints, and to say, O tu insulse,
male and moleste vivis,
Per quem non licet esse negligentem.


The excellency of your Letters sufficiently excuses the impertunitie
wherewith I beg them. This last is admirable beyond any, I must acknowledge my
self in your debt. You verify the proverb very much, that who is bound paies,
only I wonder that person, in whom there seems to be great riches, and who can
easily part with them, is so hard to be brought to it. We favorites of Apollo
cannot but wonder that one who has spent his whole life in Treaties, should
write such excellent Letters, and should be glad that you Gentlemen of Affairs
did not meddle with our Trade. And certainly it were but just you contented
your selves with the glory of having put a period to so many important
negotiations, and particularly that you are now engaged in for the disarming of
all the several Nations of Europe, and not entrench upon that poor reputation
which is gained by the disposal and Tacticks of words, and the fortune of
pleasant imaginations. It is not over-honourable for a person of your Gravity,
and concernment to the public, to contend with us for Eloquence, or make it
your business, while you are employed to reconcile the Swedes and the
Imperialists, and to balance the interests of the earth, to work an
accommodation between Consonants that clash, and to measure periods. Why in
Gods name, do you not content your self with the making of excellent and sound
dispatches, such as those of the Cardinal d' Ossat, or, if you will be guilty
of a greater ambition, those of Cardinal du Perron, but will needs trouble your
self with such as cannot but raise in us all the indignation in the world. You
will pardon me that I tell you this with some disorder; nothing but your Letter
could have put me into it, as what has dissolved the cement of all friendship.
Qui volet ingenio cedere nullus erit.

Nec jam prima peto, Mnesthaeus, neq vi^cere certo.
But I who would willingly allow you some paces before me, must need be vexed
to be left so far behind. I showed your Letter to one of my Friends, an able
understanding man, intimately acquainted with M. -- and who has an infinite
esteem of his merit. Having read it, good God, says he, how far is this man
beyond -- had I seen this Letter in any hands but yours, I should have sworn
you had writ it. It Is for your mortification, my Lord, that I repeat these last
words.

-- Et sibi Consul
Ne placeat, curru servus portatur eodem.
To give you my real thoughts of it, you never writ a handsomer, or made a
nobler discovery of your ab^lities, nor have you been insensible of it your
self, when in the conclusion you press me to acknowledge my self in your debt.
May I perish, if I am not ashamed to answer it, for to so many excellent and
noble things what can I return you?

Pro molli vi^la, pro purpureo Hyacintho,
Carduus, and foliis surget paliurus acutis.
At least, the assurances I have given your Lordshp of another man's
approbation, and the confusion you have put me into comes upon you more
directly then those of the last return. You very pleasantly shift off the
praises I gave you about the Building of Monsieur Pepin, where you tell me it
is pity I had not seen the Coaches he sent you, and that I should find you a
person of as much Honor as before, it is as handsomelie expressed as could be,
and that word must needs proceed from a Gallant spirit.

Cui been in pulivere recalcitrat:
Hence I infer you would not have suffered that more hyperbolical flattery
then any I have been guilty of, Est major Coelo, sed minor est Domino.


But it is to no great purpose for you to say, that to have a handsome house is
a thing not much considerable. L. Opimii domus, cum vulgo inviseretur a populo,
suffragata creditur domino ad Consolatum obtinendum, says Cicero. And you see
how he cries out himself pro domo sua. I must agree with you, that the Edifice
you are at work upon now, that great Temple of Peace, into which all the
several Nations of Christendom are to enter, is much more worthy your
endeavors, and is the only design fit to employ your great Mind. I am
elevated, my Lord at the News, I hear of it, and that it will have a contrary
fate to that other, Magnificentiae verae admiratio extat Templum Ephesiae
Dianae, ducentis and Viginti annis a tota Asia factum. You use a great deal
more expedition, and indeed are a much better workman. I should be extremely
desirous to be here at the return of Madame de Longueville, after the
conclusion of so happy a Peace. What you tell me of this Princess, is
handsome as her self, and I preserve it purposelie to show her one day. No
doubt but I shall judge more advantageously of you you by your own writings,
then by those of Gronovius or Jacobus Baldus which indeed are excellent, and
somewhat approach the character of the best part of Antiquity; but I find not
in them either the smoothness or wit of our ancient Author, and if you have
made any greater discoveries, you have found it only in your self. Consider, my
Lord, whether I am not happy, to find in you the perfections which your
Grandfather esteemed in Passerat, and the patronage which Passerat sound in
him. Madame de Sable, and Madame de Montausier, are ravished at some passages I
have shown them of your Letter, and would needs have copies of that concerning
Madame de Longueville. Be free, my Lord, do you think it possible, I say not,
in one single person, but in whatever the world pretends to as most handsome
and most amiable, do you, I say, think it possible, to meet with so much wit,
such graces and attractions as are in that Princess?

Number tu quae tenuit dives Achaemenes
Pinguis a^^ Phrygiae Mygdonias opes,
Permutate velis crine Lycimniae?
In the mean time be you upon your Guard; She writes wonders of you here, and
of the friendship is between you both, your correspondence with her is somewhat
dangerous.

Incedis per ignes
Suppositos cineri doloso.
But I can assure you, her goodness is proportionable to her Beauty, and the
World affords not a more high and noble soul. I had once resolved to give you a
visit this Autumn, nay had begged a journeie of the Court, for under such a
pilgrimage as that, what can come near an acknowledgement? but an unhappie
business since fallen out has detained me, such as finds me much trouble,
and keeps me in perpetual alarm, yet it is not properly a Business, but, Vna
malarum quas amor curas habet*


Think not slightlie of it, my Lord, you will not take up the first stone; but,
if I mistake not, this is the tenth page I am upon, Dii magni, horribilem and
sacrum libellum!


I had forgot my self, I crave your pardon, and am,

My LORD, Your, etc

To the Same. LETTER CLXXXIX.
VIs ergo inter nos quid possit uterque vicissim Experiamur?

I shall not hold, my Lord, the matthew is unequal; I should find my self
overreached, when I would have attempted it., -- Cynthius aurem
Vellit, and admonuit --


I shall take his advice, and be more tender of my ears, he is the God of good
Counsel. And indeed when I had considered the last things you were pleased to
honor me with I thought you greater and stronger then ordinary, and was not
at all troubled that you had outgone me, when to do it you exceeded your self.
My own Letter and the two I received from you, put me in mind of the three
lines which Protogenes and Apelles drew by way of trial of skill. The first you
sent me was admirable and worthy so great a Master, what I made upon it, could
not certainly fall from an ordinary hand, but the last, which you have now
drawn

-- Vltima linea rerum est;
It is incomparably beyond all, insomuch that I shall not presume to do any
thing after it. That I now take up the pen, is only to give you in writing
the confession I make, that as well in the business of Eloquence as that of
the Revenue, I am but your Clarke, as also to let you know once more the
advantage you have over me. I am not, I must confess, insensible of the
praises you are pleased to give me, -- Nec enim mihi cornea fibra est;


But they are such, so noble and so ingenious, that, to be free with you, I
should be much more proud to have bestowed them then to have received them, and
the same words you make use of to exalt me above all others, satisfy me that I
am infinitely below you. I wish I had here some body that were given to
exclamations, as confident and judicious as Monsieur de St. Romani, for every
line of your Letter deserves a pulchre and belle. But particularly, the
representation your Lordship has made of our Princess is so rich and noble,
that I have been more pleased with the sight of it, then happily I should have
been with hers, and you have found out a way to make an addition to those
graces which before were infinite in her, tali opere dum laudatur, haud victo
sed illustrato. This is what Pliny says of the Greek Verses which were made
for Apelles's Venus, whose work was certainly much below yours, as his
Goddess was less beautiful then yours. You have represented her with all her
attractions and charms, pinxisti and quae pingi non possunt, tonitrua,
fulgetra, fulguraque. But you will give me leave to tell you, that it is hard,
that that person should not be Mistress of a Soul where she is so well
represented, and that if you are not in love with her, you should with the
description you have made of her.

A certain face was by a Master drawn,
So lively, and in such perfection,
The Painter fell in love with what h'd done.
But that it is otherwise you give me the best reasons in the World, and do
miracles were there but faith. So many beauties and graces fill up, yet do not
disorder your imagination, and it is long since you have enjoined your eyes not
to admit any thing into your mind but the representations of the noblest
objects. How handsomelie is this expressed! but would you have me to be free
with you, I am afraid you either mistake me, or are mistaken your self.

Coecum vulnus habes, sed lato ba^^heus auro
Protegit --
That Sun of Sweden, to whom you compare her, is, if I may trust you, very
hot; and qui in sole ambulant, etiamsi non in id venerint, colorantur. I fear
me, it may be your fate.

-- Et figas in cute Solemn
It were strange, say you, that in an Assembly of Peace, there should not be
public Faith enough for my preservation, and that the Passeports of the
Emperor and the King of Spain, should not make Munster a place safe enough for
me. This, my Lord, is excellently well said, and this period is happily one of
the neatest could have been written, and deserves an exclamation, That Munster
is indeed a place of safety, but, Madam de Longueville is there, Portus ab
accessu ventorum immotus, and ingens
Ipse, sed horrificis juxta tonat Aetnaruinis.


The Fires and Snowes which this Princess casts, if you consider it, justify
the comparison between her and Aetna. It Is to much purpose then to seem so
confident, and to say, Cantabit vacuus coram latrone Viator.


The greatest part of those Singers die for fear. You who are a Cedar of
Libanus would be thought a Shrub; but were you a more inconsiderable Plant, yet
should you not escape. The eyes you are to avoid, consume all from the Cedar to
the Hyssop. In the mean time, to come to some thing more serious, I doubt not
but you are wholly taken up with the carrying on of that great Design which
you are employed in, and concerns the quiet of so many millions of men. I
hope you will put the last stone in this building, as you have done the first,
since you are -- doctus
Saxa movere sono testudinis, and prece blanda
Ducere quo velis. --


As to what you say of Monsieur d' Ossat, I am clearlie of your opinion. There
cannot be any thing more judicious, or more excellent then his dispatches: but
my meaning was, if you were not satisfied with the doing of such as his were,
and that you were desirous to write such as were full of flourishes and
eloquence, that you would imitate Cardinal du Perron, who has done some of
that kind, yet in my mind, has not been the most fortunate in the World in
it. I agree not with you so well in the judgment you make of our two Poets.
That I have not read much of the Jesuit, you guess right. I have not troubled
my self with little besides the places where he mentions you. The 26. ode of
the 8. I am much pleased at: I can say nothing against the 3. and 5. of the 9.
but in this verse, Me super ipsa nihil Niobe si obcta moveris;
that Niobe, and this manner of speaking, do you not conceive it harder then
even that petrified Niobe? Do you like that pulvereum cahos? and that comatus
olor, is it not a little too bold? besides that I think it a little too obscure
for us whose business lies in the management of the Revenue, and meddle not
with much Latin, no^ could I ever understand Mananti^^ vita Flumina praemoneo.
I think it is in the 3. of the 9. I asked Monsieur de Bailleut and Monsieur d'
Emery, and they can say as little to it themselves. But after all, as to what
opinion I should have of this and all the other Authors, I appeal to you who
are infallible, and by whose judgment mine is regulated. I have also the same
submission to make to you, as to the offense you charge me with of not writing
to Madam de Longueville. I have forborne all this while out of respect, but you
frighten me much more when you represent this Princess to me as so serious and
politic. We have here a kind of pleasure in imagining her discoursing with
Monsieur Lampadius (who I am told is ordinarily clad in violet Satin) Monsieur
Vulteius and Monsieur Salvins, and above all, that fat Hollander Dulcia barbare
L^dentem oscula quae Venus
Quinta part sui Nectaris imbuit.


I know not what discourse she can find for those Gentlemen, nor how
pertinentlie she talks; but I have often seen her here in diverse Companies,
where she has not spoke three words, nor so much as opened her mouth in a
whole afternoon. He who gives her advice to learn Dutch for her diversion
has been well laughed at by Madam de Sable, and Mademoiselle de Montausier. If
this proposition was advanced by Monsieur Vulteius, do you not think that verse
of Horace ^itlie applied to the occasion, Durus enim Vultei nimis attentusque
videris
Esse mihi. --


As to your complaint that you receive not from me above twice a year, and that
I have not strength enough to write to you twice together, I return you my most
humble thanks; these complaints I think as obliging as your praises: nec tam
molestum est accusari abs te officium meum, quam jucundum requiri. But you know
my imperfection, and lay hold on the leg that halts. Dixi me pigrum
proficiscenti ^ibi, dixi
Talibus officiis prope mancum.
Besides you know better then any man how troublesome it is to write these
Letters that have no real subject, and where a man must discourse upon the
point of a needle. I have only the end of your Letter to answer, which being
excellently handsome, nay full of flattery in the beginning and middle, has a
very uglie tail. -- atrum
Desinit in piscem.
Yet I could not but laugh at the debasement of Guillon, and it must be
confessed you remembered it very opportunelie; you are certainly to be admired
in all things, Seu tu querelas, sive geris jocos.
There cannot be any thing more serious, more grave, or more rigid then the
chidings you give. Tertius e Coelo cecidit Cato --
You represent to me the indecorum it is for a man to be old and in love; you
put ten Lustres on my head, to which you add, out of kindness, an Olympiad,
for you confound the Greek and Latin numbers to make the sum seem the
greater, nay you make no conscience to attribute something to the swiftness of
Time; you tell me of my spectacles, and it is true I have used them these six
months, and do while I write this; you abuse my beard and gray hairs, and to
that add, Tandem nequitiae fige modum tuae.
But when, say you to me, will it be time to think of a Reformation? Nonne
pudet capiti non posse pericula cano
Pellere?
Are Rheumes, the Gowt, and the Stone, fit companions to be lodged with Love,
or would you make a conjunction between all the diseases of youth and old age?
what confusion, what shame is it! Jamdudum ausculto, and cupiens tibi dicere
servus
Pauca reformido.
In the first place, my Lord,
Vltra Sauromatas fugere hinc libet --
When you are fallen into such serious reproves; had you spent your life upon
the top of a Pillar, or in the Deserts of Thebais, defy^ng the World and its
enjoyments, you could not speak more austerelie; but how can you, whom I have
seen so gallant, unless you have before done miracles, be so confident as to
declaime thus highly and severelie? I ackdowledge part of what you say against
me to be true, Parcius ista viris tamen obiicienda memento.
I was almost in a mind to add, novimus and qui te. But though you were as
much reformed as Father Gondi, and that your mind were no longer subject to
any passion, and that your eyes did, as you say, not transmit any thing to your
imagination but so as that it came not to your judgment, you would do but what
you are oliged to, in such manner that I should make no advantage of it. I may
say of you great men whom Fortune has thrust upon the Stage, to act the
highest parts, Vos O patricius sanguis, quos vivere par est
Occipiti coeco; --
especially as to your part, my Lord, whom France, Spain, Italy, and Germany
look upon, it is but just you should live so, Nos numerus sumus and fruges
consumere nati,
Sponsi Penelopae, nebulones --
In the mean time, for one word I have let slip, which is no more then that I
had some engagement here, you cry out, O coelum! O Terras! O Maria Neptuni!
when it would be inferred, that minxi in patrios cineres; or am guilty of
some enormous crime, Patrue mi patruissime nihil feci quod succenseas,
And certainly were ^ you in my place, so obscure a person as I am, and that
you were near a handsome Lady that entertained you nobly, I question much
whether your Lordship with all your austeritie would fall out with her. And
therefore I shall not be frightened at any thing you shall say, Miserorum est
neque Amori dare ludum
aut ex --
animari metuentes patruae verbera linguae,
And that, Nec turpem senectam degere, ne^ cythara carentem, which you have
taught me, how do you understand it? that I must play on the Guitarre at
threescore? much to the purpose: Lambin expounds it, that a man must be amorous
as long as he can, and he is a man of no weak judgment: But this is a huge
long Letter, Tibi ingentem epistolam impegi.
And yet, ere I conclude I must make you a thousand complements from Madam de
Sable and Madam de Montausier. I have only showed them those passages of your
Letter where you speak of Madam de Longueville. For the rest never any shall
set eye on it; though it were only for that of the ten Lustres you need not
fear I shall show it any; I am thought here to be but forty seven years of
age, I beseech you let me be no more at Munster, nay if you please, deem unum,
deem etiam duos. I had forgot to tell you that these Ladies have commanded me
to let you know, that if you speak as you write, they pity not Madame de
Longueville, and that it is not impossible to be well any where, so you be
there. I wish you were ^ensible how highly they esteem you, they are satisfied
the world affords not any other, that dares pretend to so much wit, and I told
them I knew as much five and twenty years since. But I am too tedious. -- Ne
me Crispini s^rinia Lippi
Compilasse putes, verbum non amplius addam.


Paris. Jan. 9. 1647.
To my Lady Duchess de Longueville at Munster. LETTER CLXXXX.
MADAME,
HAving hitherto forborne to write to your Highness merely out of respect, I
extremely troubled, that I am forced to it by so sad an occasion as obliges me
at the present. I doubt not, Madame, but you are infinitely troubled at the
loss of your noble Father, at a time when you received from him the greatest
expressions of his affection, and that not being accustomed to such
discourtesies of Fortune, this has extremely surprised you. But my hope is;
that what equality of mind which never suffered you to do or say any thing but
in its due measure, will guide you in this occasion, and that you will regula^e
your grief and tears, as you have done all the actions of your life. Nor indeed
Madame is it any more then just that a person so celestial as you are should
comply with the will of heaven, and, having received so much from it, be
content it should take something from you. And it seems it would needs take the
time of your absence to do it, and has permitted this misfortune to happen
when you were at a great distance, that your eyes might not be the witnesses of
that mourning which was to fill your house. My prayers to God are, that he
would restore it to joy by your sudden return thither, and that he would afford
us the Pecce, with your Highness, without which there is no living, both which
are the earnest desires of all the world, but especially of

MADAME, Your etc.

To the Prince of Conde, LETTER CXCI.
My LORD,
IT is only to discharge my duty, not to comfort you, that I presume to write
to you; I am too well acquainted with the extent and excellencies of your mind
to imagine that another can give you any reason for it which you saw not your
self before. Besides, my Lord, I think a mind employed to purchase the quiet of
all Europe is incapable of being disordered at the death of a single person how
great soever he might be; and that the constancy of your soul which has
manifested it self on all occasions, will not be wanting in this. But the
kindnesses you have ever honored me with, obliging me to conceive my self in
whatever you are, I have thought it but my duty, to let you know what
sympathy I have for your affliction, as also to renew the profession which I
have so often made, to be, with all manner of respect,

My LORD, Your etc.

To Monsieur Costart.
Who having laughed at certain fault which the Author had committed, while he
spoke Latin to an Ambassador, three days after he sent him this Epistle.

LETTER CXCII.
SI vales been est, ego autem vereor ur valeas, heri enim, si non agro, ut
certe anxio animo domum te recepisti, neque ego mehercule sine molestia eram,
quando te felicitatis meae and conscium and authorem in his aerumnis videbam
versari. Scio quam morosi sint qui amant, and quam omnibus vel minimis offens^s
obnoxii: sed si te novi, is es qui citissime sanari potes, fortassis quidem jam
haec nox and Catullus tuus tibi dedit consilium, and ut destinatus obdures,
suasit. Quomodo igitur te habeas, qua mente sis, tranquilla aut sollicita,
vigilarisne lassus, an naso tantum vigilaris? fac me certiorem. Ego mi
Costarde, tibi persuadeas velim, me a nullo plus velle amari, quam a te, and si
ita placet, mandaturum quid inimicae nostrae, quidni enim mea est si tua? ut
res suas sibi habeat. Tu quid velis vide and me ama.

Be pleased to correct this Epistle, and to tell me freely, whether, out of
the sixth form where you saw me not long since, I may not go into some higher.
I am

Your etc.

To the same. LETTER CXCIII.
Been exolvisti, mi Costarde quod mihi de te promiseram, ^e pro onyce, cadum
redditurum, and cadum quidem similem illi Sulpitiano, spes donare novas largum,
and amaraque curarum eluere efficacem. Illa enim tua Epistola, quam tu
ponderosam, ego magni ponderis nomino* nescio quomodo me invitum and renitentem
in tanta dolendi causa, gaudere compulit, and quod non tempus, non literae, non
ipsa quae poterat esse luctus satietas, fecerant; tua lepida, faceta,
lepidissima, facerissima, omnibus Atticis. Romany nostris salibus condita
fecit allocutio. There you have all my Latin at a breath, and the truth on it
is, I have not French enough to make you fully understand, as I could wish, the
true resentments I have of your care toward me, and the affection I perceive
you have for me. I have not observed any thing by your Letter, which I am not
infinitely satisfied with, and quarrel at nothing but the praises you give me;
for to be free from you, you set too high a rate upon Et crassum unguentum, and
sardo cum melle papaver.


Nay though you were taken with my Nardus, yet the rest of the Letter, if my
memory fails me not, was not much to be admired as having been written in
haste.

Quid quod olet gravius mistum diapasmate virus.
For the passage of Terence, which you tax me with passing by without saying
any thing of it, I think it was done because I would not perceive any
difficulties therein. Cato would make Thraso understand, that having often
heard that witty reply, and never learning who the Author was, he had
presently concluded it to be one of those pithie expressions which above a many
others gain reputation in process of time, and which are remembered as
Apothegmes, and does not mean, that he did not believe it because he was the
first that said it, but that before that he had looked on it as an ancient
saying; audieras? Gn. saepe, and fertur in primis. I see not what yould stick
at there. For my part, I fear me you understood it not, since you are
scrupulous about it, and that you are one of those, Qui faciunt ne
intelligendo, ut nihil intelligant.


But certainly it is in me a great presumption, nay ingratitude to speak thus
to a man who writes such excellent things to me; I must confess, I learn more
out of your Letters, then I have out of all the books I ever read, and that if
I am Magister coenae, you are Magister scholae, or, to speak better Latin,
Ludi Magister; which is as much, as Cicero said of Hirtius and Pansa; Hirtium
and Pansam habeo dicendi discipulos, coenandi magistros. But I beseech you,
give me good large Lessons, that is, write large Letters.

Parcentes ego dexteras
Odi. --
But I have not done yet, for sparge rosas, is very good again, and do not
think to excuse your self upon the dust and barrenness of Philosophy and
Theology. These sciences must needs flourish in your hands, pro carduo and pro
paliuro foliis acutis, surget mollis viola and purpureus Hyacinthus. --
Quicquid calcaveris hic rosa fiet.


You strew your flowers every where, but do not imagine I am satisfied with a
present of those of Seneca, it is as much as if you sent me Cheap Side, I would
have them up and down at random, per devia rura, and such as are more natural,
Et flores terrae quos ferunt solut^.


To be free with you, I am not much taken with that Author, I like your Latin
better then his, and have been more pleased with the things you have said of
your self, then what you have quoted out of him. But amidst the satisfaction it
is to receive of your Letters, it often happens, that the pleasure I find in
reading of them, augments the regret I have that I cannot see you, and makes me
the more sensible of the loss it is to me, not to be near a person that writes
such things, and who, were he but here, would ente^aine me with the like every
morning.

medio de font leporum,
Surgit amari aliquid, quod in ipsis floribus angat.
For Pliny I much wonder he should make such account of the saying of his
Senator, and am no less surprised that you should so much commend that of
Montagne's.

-- Nimium patienter utrumque.
I shall, for your sake forbear the rest; the sayings of Monsieur Pauquet are
much beyond any of those Gentlemen. That you have communicated to me of his,
has made me laugh heartily. I have seen all the Letters you have written
hither and to Angoulesme, and I admire them all. I cannot but tell you that the
half page where you speak to me of Monsieur de P -- seems to me to have been
written by Petronius. Farewell.

I had written this letter to you before, but understanding, by what you write
to my Lady Marchioness de Sable, that you had not received it, I have gotten
it together again as well as I could; if you now receive it twice, I am
confident you will read it but once. I am,

Your etc.

To the same. LETTER CXCIV.
SIR,
QVo me Bacchi rapis tui
Plenum, quae in nemora, aut quos agor in specus,
Velox mente nova?
What vast Countries do you show me, and what unknown worlds do you represent
to me, such as I should never have discovered! Vt mihi devio,
Ripas and vacuum nemus mirari libet!


Your great Factor awaked me to deliver me your Letter I cannot express the
astonishment I was in to find my self Master of such treasures, and to see so
many things that were new to me.

Non secus in jugis
Ex somnis stupet Evias
Hebrum prospiciens, and nive candidam
Thracem --
This certainly must needs be highly noble, after a night spent one half in
gaming, the other in sleep, to awake more knowing.

Me fabulosae Vulture in Appulo,
Ludo fatigatumque somno,
Fronde nova puerum palumbes
Texere.
Be pleased, by the way, to observe that fatigatum somno, and give me your
judgment of it. Let me not fail of the continuance of your good offices and
care of me, whereof I would have you more liberal then you were the last time.
Nec parce cadis mihi destinatis.
Treat me always alike.
Et chia vina, aut Lesbia,
Vel, quod fluentem nauseam coerceat,
Metire nobis Coecubum.


But with these Greek wines mix some of your own. I shall esteem your fancies
as highly as those of Aeschylus or Sophocles, and think not your self out of my
debt, that you have caused Monsieur Pauquet to transcribe three or four sheets
of your Collections. Methinks you have done as that Caupo of Ravenn^; you have
sent it me merum, when I desired it mixtum. But you have been extremely
fortunate in finding out the devia rura I desired, and have pleased me
infinitely. Spanish wines are too st^ong for me.

-- Generosum and molle requiro,
Quod curas abigat, quod cum spe divite manet
Invenias, animumque meum, quod verba ministret
Quod me Lucanae juvenem commendet amicae.
I am ashamed after all this to return you Villum pro vino. But what would you
have?

Nos alicam, mulsum poterit tibi mittere dives.
But amongst all the good entertainment you make me, I am surprised at the
difficulties you propose, and I can compare it to nothing, but, -- Inter
pateras and lenia pocula serpens.


After you had treated me so well, you put me upon the rack: Tu lene tormentum
ingenio admoves
Plerumque duro.


Do you not take it to be your part rather to instruct me, and clear up my
doubts, then to propose any to me? Are not you the master, and I Davus sum non
Oedipus? But my best way to come off well, is not to make any answer at all to
them; and so discover my self to be one of those of whom it is said, in
conviviis loquebantur, in tormentis tacebant. I shall only tell you, that in my
Terence* instead of rem ^i videas, censea^, I have found, rerum. Instead
therefore of answering your Questions, I will make others to you, and ask you
how you understand that passage of Quintus Curtius, who says that Alexander,
in the second battle, as I take it, that he gave Darius, engaged with Darius's
Brother in the heat of the charge, who, says he, armis and robore corporis
multum supra caeteros eminebat. Some say that armis is there put instead of
humeris; others that it signifies armor, and that the meaning of it, is, that
the magnificence of his armor, his stature and strength of body made him
remarkable beyond all others. Those who hold the former opinion say, that the
Author seemed to allude to that Hemestick of Virgill -- quam forti pectore and
armis,
that eminere will not hold in the other signification; that if he would have
represented him as remarkable for his armor, he would not have simply said
armis, but fulgore armorum. The others answer, that though eminere properly
signifies to surpass in height, yet it many times admits auother
signification, which is, to be eminent ot remarkable, so that if armis stand
there for the shoulders, the word eminebat must be taken in two several
significations: for in the ^ormer, it suits not well with robore corporis, and
to say that he was higher then all the rest by the shoulders and stength of
body, were as improper. But indeed armis is a word that cannot properly be said
but of Brutes, and is never attributed to men but by the Poets, and
consequently, it is irrational to think that Quintus Curtius, who might as
well have used humeris, should be guilty of such a strange aequivocation, as
that of putting armis. Do you take it into your consideration, and let me have
your opinion of it, for it has raised a great contestation here, and your
judgment is expected.

I am extremely in love with whatever you write to me of Bacon. But do you not
think that Horace, who said, Visum Britannos hospitibus feros,
would be much astonished to hear a Barbarian discourse after that rate?

Your aureae diei palpebrae I like hugely, and methinks amongst the great
number of Godfathers which Aurora has had, there is none has given her a more
pleasant name then Euripides. The Law of the one-eyed Lo^rian, was in my
judgment highly just, and it concerned him very much to advance it; for my
part, if to have been only bigle or squint eyed, I should have ventured very
hard for it. Do you not think that bigle comes from binus oculus, as if I
should say a double eye, which looks diverse ways.

For Lucius Neratius, had he given his boxes on the ear with a little more
choice, I should have thought his money not ill spent, and that it were one of
the most pleasant inventions of of expense that could be made.

That was certainly a great and remarkable Phlebotomie that cured Fabius
Maximus of a Fever. Do you think, that the Allobroges should afterward ever
wish him his Quartan Ague? I will send you, for the fever which they call
Semitertiana, or, if I may presume to speak g^e^k before you, Emitritaeus (I
pray do not tell your Master Monsieur Pauque^ that I have written Emitritaeus
without an h,) I say I will teach you for that kind of Fever a receipt a
hundred times easier; Inscribas chartae quod dicitur Abracadabra,
Saepius and subter repetas, mirabile dictu!
Donec in angustum redigatur littera conum.
That is to say, first Abracadabra, and under that Abracadabr, and in the third
line, Abracadab, etc. Did you never hear of this? And does it not require a
great acquaintance with Physic and the Virtues of things to find out the
propriety of that word?

The Verses of Alexander Severus have found me a great deal of excellent good
sport: you that are so well acqua^n^ed with the Greek, are you not extremely
troubled that the Original is lost? It is not unlikelie, but the Iter of Julius
Caesar and the Sicily of Augustus were of that kind. Is not Fort^n^ a mad slut
to suffer the Works of C^nna and Varius to perish; and to have preserved to
out times this Epigrame, whereof the Author when he had made it might have
said, as Horace did. Exegi monimentum aere perennius,
Quod nec imber edax aut aquilo impotens, etc.
The equivocation of Aurelian pleases me, yet could I not but pity the poor
dogs. I should have been better pleased he had sworn not to leave a cat there.

As for your Stars of the Earth, you are not the first that has put that
humor into French, or have presumed that the Stars might be called the Flowers
of the Heavens. For the Romance of the Rose says Heaven and Earth have long
since known
This envious competition;
This pregnant in her flowery pride
Thinks her, then that, more stellifi'd.
And Marino
The flowery skies, the starry earth.
But now I think on it, Lycimnius is here, but has not brought his wife with
him. She writes to me that she is very much displeased at it, that he was in
no good humor, and would not permit it. I know not what to think of her; but
that you may not be mistaken, Madam Lycimnia has a greater gift of talking and
subtlety then we. If you have met with any fair and faithful Mistress, Gaude
sort tua, me libertina, neque uno
Contenta Phryne macerat. --
Be pleased to take notice that libertina signifies in that plac^ what we call
in our language Libertine, and take heed you (...) stake not.

How infinitely am I pleased with the little Latin Sto^ie at the bottom of
your Letter, and how admirablie think it written! If your History or mine were
written so, Petronius would be no more read. Farewell Sir, and assure your self,
I wish nothing so much as to see you again, and that we walked to the Schools
together. I am sincerely

Your, etc

To the same. LETTER CXCV.
SIR,
YOu had better have let Hebrus pass by, and shall find what it is to oppose
Rivers and to hinder their currents. This is gentle, and without noise, and
glides away quietly without doing any hurt to any body; in the mean time you
declame against it, as if it had carried away -- sata laeta, boumque labores,
you speak a thousand things against the honor of it, -- and fera diluvie
quietum
Jrritas amnem. --
But you who would not pe^^it it, cum pace labentem, shall shortly see it,
Nunc lapides adesos,
Stirpesque raptas, and pecus and domos,
Volventem vna, non sine montium
Clamore, vicinaeque sylvae.
You may guess somewhat near, Sir, whether you are in my Allegory, designed
by the cattle or the mountains. But to return to what we said, Hebrus is a
very pleasant River, but not much frequented, and little known to the vulgar,
ignotus pecori, and the inhabitants of Poitou, and certainly you were ignorant
of this, Atque auro turbidus Hebrus;
nor yet knew what Pliny says, that there is gold found in the bottom of it.
But, be ingenuous, had you never heard neither, that the head and harp of
Orpheus were cast into this River, -- Caput, Hebre, lyramque
Excipis. --
Now in your own judgment, had you any reason to complain, that I should put
you on its banks? especially since it is said, Flebile nescio quid queritur
lyra.
And again -- Resp^ndent flebile ripae.
Consider the great injury I did you, it may be you had heard of all this. And
if it be true what Pausanius says, that the Nightingalls which were near
Orpheus's Tomb sang more melodioushe then the rest, do you imagine whether you
were well placed or no, and what music there must needs be? The complaint you
make against my Snowes, methinks is not much more rational, and, for ought I
see, you are not one of that delicate number, whereof Pliny says, I mean the
elder (for as to the other, I care not much to quote him) nives petunt,
poenasque montium in voluptatem vertunt, and you would not call them your
Mistresses, as this man did, Setinum, dominasque nives, densique trientes.
But though you were not of that opinion; yet should you not be so angry at
it, Aspice quam densum tacitarum vellus aquarum
Defluat in vultus Caesaris in que sinus;
Indulget tamen ille Jovi.
You should not methinks be in a worse humor then Domitian, and your Catullus
might have satisfied you, that I had not lodged you so ill, when he says, Ego
viridis algida Idae
Nive amicta loca colam.
Are you to learn, that, dedit nivem sicut lanam, and that this is it that
preserves the tendrest flowers from the smartnesse of the Winter? Certainly,
since you are not to be always incensed and ^xasperated, you have I must
confess sent me the fairest in the World, and that of all sorts. Et quas Ossa
tulit, quasque altus Pelion herbas
Othrisque and Pindus, and Pindo major Olympus.
There are not noses enough for all this; the nose of a Rinocerot, that of
Papilus and that of Monsieur -- Et omnis copia narium
were not sufficient. A man who should send all this ought not to suspect that
one would put pede barbaro for him, or that it should fit his foot well. Should
a Barbarian have all these spoils of Greece and Italy? Barbarus has segetes?
--
But though I had called you so, I would have you to know; for I cannot forbear
teaching you something at all times, that it is not so offensive as you would
take it, and without observing to you, that bartarico posts auro, is
interpreted by Servius for multo auro, I shall tell you; that barbarica lege
jus meum persequar, in Plautus, is expounded by the interpreters Romana lege,
and again in the same Author, quid vrbes barbaras juras, that is to say, Italas.

Your citation of Horace's Furius amidst the discourses of Snow, you entertain
me with, convinces me that you understood it not; for Horace would not thence
infer that he spoke cold things, but would abuse the verse he had made,
Jupiter hybernas cana nive conspuit alps.
I am much mist ken if Quintilian cites not also this verse in a certain place,
where he censures ill Metaphors, and so Horace, to express that it was cold
weather, says ingeniouslie and with all satyricallie -- and cum
Furius hybernas cana nive conspuit Alps.
I am not of your opinion as to the explication you make of ludo fatigatumque
somno, by explicating fatigatus to signify lassatus as to ludo, and oppressus
as to somno. For I conceive that any one word that relates to two other, ought
to be construed in the same signification as to both, and for my part, I should
take fatigatum somno, in that place for, fatigatum somni inopia; as somnieil in
F^en^h is taken for sleep in effect, and also for the desire or inclination to
sleep. I can do no more for weariness and sleeping. For the rest, be it your
care, that all the passages which you allege of fatigatus, wherein you give
other significations then the ordinary, be more reconcilable to good sense,
by leaving it in that which is most proper to it; and I would rather say,
wearied the gods for another Empire, then importuned; and so of the rest.

I have found, as well as Aristotle, that Felicity was not in Gaming, and upon
that account I have quite given it over; it is seven months since I played at
all, which is a piece of news of great consequence and I forgot to acquaint you
with, Nec lusisse pudet, sed non incidere ludum.
I am of your opinion as to what you quarrel at in Quintilian; his reason is
good for the falls of children, but not for their recreations and runnings.

The severitie wherewith the Thessalians punished those that killed Storkes, I
think a rational proceeding; but I know not whether it was because the Storkes
devour Serpents, or because they nourish their parents in their old age, or for
that they were the first inventers of Clisters, which is a commendable and
advantageous invention. Certainly, abating their abusivenesse, as you know, O
Jane a tergo, etc.
they are a sort of Birds of very good manners, and endued with excellent
qualities. Nor do I wonder much at what Pliny says of the esteem which the
Romans had for the Ox, and even to this day, amongst a many Nations,
poudered beef is in great veneration; but do you know what Suetonius says of
that virtuous Prince Domitian, inter initia usque adeo ab omni caede
abhorrebat, ut absente adhuc patre, recordatus Virgilii versum,

Impia quae caesis gens est epulata juvencis; edicere destinaverit, ne boves
immolarentur. See the good Prince, what a tender soul he has, and you were
best trust him.

I believe you are not too well acquainted with Sylla when you say he was not a
fickle man, and I dare lay a wager you never saw him, animo ingenti cupidus
volupta^um, sed gloriae cupidior^tio luxurioso esse, tamen ab negotiis, nunquam
voluptas remorata. Consider if it may be hence inferred that he was neither
unconstant nor a Gallant.

I pray return my most humble thanks to the Abbot of Lauardin for the
judgment he has given on my side upon that passage of Quintus Curtius; and
that I am not so glad that he has judged it for me, as that he has judged
aright: for I shall henceforth concern my self so much in him, as to make it a
matter of congratulation, that he is so able a judge in things of this nature.

I am very glad that you study Etymologies so much; you have almost found
that of the besi^les, and it is no ill beginning but it comes from bini
circuli, or ^is circuli. That of Monsieur Crassot, which you laugh at, I like
well enough, nor shall I quarrel much with that of Vigenere, but I will give
you des mules (kibes) for his slippers, and you shall acknowledge that that
word is derived from mulaei, which were, calcei regum Albanorum rubri coloris.

Thus you have now what I should have written to you long since, but I have so
much business, and of that nature that I doubt not of your pardon, when you
know it.

Res misera est pulchrum esse hominem nimis. But, be a little more ventrous,
and let not Pegasus and Bellerophon frighten you; take it from me, all is but
fables. Aude hospes contemnere opes, and te quoque dignum
Finge Dea. --
By the next return I will send you the decision upon the words of your
Nobility, at the present I have not the leisure. I am

Sir, Your, etc,
I forgot to explicate to you the passage of Quintus Curtius, at least
according as I understand it, and certainly it is very difficult. There was
not, says he, any earth under the walls, whereon to fasten the
scaling-ladders, nor had Alexander any Ships; nay though he had had, yet when
they would have planted the ladders upon the Sips which moved and tossed up and
down, it could have been done with such diligence but that those upon the Walls
would have had time enough to force back with darts those who would have
scaled, and those who were in the Ships.



To my Lord d'Avaux. LETTER CXCVI.
My LORD,
IT is an extraordinary satisfaction to all that love you to see the
attendance of Madam de Longueville so full and so free of your praises, that it
might be thought they had not seen in all Germany but your self, and were
returned to Paris for no other business then to discourse of you. I meet upon
several occasions some I have no acquaintance with, who complement me and make
me proffers of their services upon your account; women and maids that will
needs take me by the neck for your sake. But above all, their Mistress gives
you those praises you may justly claim, and after such a manner, that it is
imposible any other can do the like. It is long since that your Lordship has
heard me say, that every woman has her humor; but there is not any can
pretend to so exact a one as she, and I am extremely pleased that it
absolutely concurres with mine as to what concerns you. All the World knows
that you are a great Ambassador, a great Minister of State, and a great Man,
Et pueri dicunt:
but as to what they call a Virtuous man and a Gallant man, if I may presume to
understand anything of it; no man ever arrived to that height which you have,
and yet this Truth is not so well known to any as to Madam de Longueville and
my self. She has a very high esteem for your integrity, your prudence, your
magnificence, and your magnanimity; She much celebrates the great credit and
veneration you were in all over Germany; but above all, she takes infinite
delight to speak of the delicacie and beauty of your mind; of the acuteness
you have in judging of excellent things, the facility to dispense them, and
all the recommendable qualities which are rare even in Plenipotentiaries, and
which she says she never could discover in any one besides your self. In a
word, she knows you as well as if she had looked through into your heart,
whether she have been there I know not. She has not mentioned a syllable to me
of the Letters I writ to you, though she does me the honor to speak to me with
much freedom, and that I have often put her upon that subject. What ever you
read here, my Lord, is somewhat too gentle, and may very well admit of a
corrective, but those Lustres and Olympiads, which you have so well represented
to me heretofore, does not this occasion put you in mind of them? Acknowledge
then that there are certain emergenc^e^ wherein the greatest souls, and the
most vigil^nt prudence may be guilty of some failing.

Paris. May 16. 1647.
To the same. LETTER CXCVII.
DVpliciter delectatus sum tuis literis, and quod ipse risi, and te ridere
posse intellexi. For ought I perceive, jucundissime Domine, (for why may not I
give you the same title, as Pliny in his preface, does Trajan?) You
Plenipotentiaries spend your time very merrily at Munster; you have taken up an
humor to laugh but once in six moneth^. You do very well to hug time while
yon have it, and not to slight those enjoyments of life which Fortune is
pleased to bestow on you. You lie there at rack and manger, up to the ears in
papers, always reading* writing, correcting, proposing, comparing, making
Orations, and consulting ten or twelve hours every day, fitting in good easy
and warm chaires, while we poor rogues here, are walking, running, trudging up
and down, playing, watching and tormenting our selves out of a wretched life.
But, amidst all your metriment, be pleased to acknowledge, my Lord, whether it
be not more unpleasant living at Munster since the deporture of Madame de
Longueville? Certain it is, that it is fairer weather at Paris since her coming
thither, Purior hic campos Ether, and lumine vestit
Purpureo. --


Such is the pleasure of Fortune and the World.

Hic apicem rapax
Fortuna eum stridore acuto
Sustulit, hic posuisse gaudet.
You have returned her a greater beauty and a greater wit then you had
received her from us, and notwithstanding her great bulk, she sets the greatest
part of mankind here afire. Arcanus hinc terror, sanctaque reverentia, quid sit
illud quod tantum perituri rident. I wish you heard what she says of you, and
with what esteem and friendship she expresses her self; if you did, though you
are not subject to any passions (is it Monsieur Cornifice Vlfelt that
maintains that opinion?) yet certainly you would run some hazard. She thanks
you for your notice, as to the marriage she was not assured of any thing
before, and has commanded me to make you thousands of complements from the
truest heart in the world. Your Italian and his elegance I am infinitely taken
with: seriously, my Lord, you frighten me.

Tot linguae, totidemora sonant.
There is something monstrous in it, that mouth with twelve springs, attributed
to Pindar, may it not with as much justice be to you? But into what a bysse did
you dive for, se no vi piace prestarmi quella feed, and by what art, ex rebus
damnatis, and jam nullis, can you extract beauties and graces never before
known or heard of? That, with Julio Bertolini, and Bartolo^aeo Dini, was lost
in the shipwreck of a thousaud other things which time has made in my memory;
you have recovered it, quasiiure postliminii, and with how great satisfaction,
I cannot express. I was I must confess, very much ashamed that my servant
should see me break forth into a loud laughter at the reading of a Letter,
which he had understood was brought me from my Lord d' Avaux, a man so grave,
so serious, and looked upon with so much reverence by all the world. Res ardua
vetustis novitatem dare, obsoletis nitorem, fastiditis gratiam, but with you is
nothing easier, as being able to do far greater things.

To the same. LETTER CXCVIII.
My LORD,
IT must needs be acknowledged you have in me a very strange kind of Clarke,
one that understands not a word of the Finances, never goes to the office, and
thinks it much to writ once in six months to his Master; but, in requital; he
is a good Gamester, an ordinary Poet, writes handsome Letters, and sights
duells at midnight by torch-light. I make the more haste to accuse my self,
merely to prevent your reproofs, for methinks I see you with your
plenipotentiarie Countenance upbraiding me again with my Olympiads, and saying,
Sperabam jam deseruisse adolescentiam,
Gaudebam^ ecce autem de integro*


But I think it is not a greater shame for me not to be wiser in my old days
then others are in their youth, Saleii Bassi vehemens and poeticum ingenium
fuit, nec adhuc senectute maturum. Yet must I needs confess, that I could not
but a little blush at it, nay so much that I durst not for some time write to
you; besides, that in the disturbance I imagined you were in, at the slow
advancement of your design, I thought Letters so disserious as mine are, would
have proved importunate. I am not ignorant, my Lord, what a great lover you are
of my Country, and consequently cannot doubt but you are much troubled at the
difficulties which daily arise, and so much recard the negotiation you are
employed in. All I have to say to you as to that point, is, that you ought be
sensible thereof only as to the public interest, without interposing your own.
The world is so well satisfied as to your good intentions, that when ever any
here quarrel at the slow progress of the peace, and those who are thought
(unjustly perhaps) not to contribute all they can toward it, it raises matter
of discourse of you, such as you would be extremely glad to hear. That
certainly is a strange constellation, that forces on you always the
affections of all people, there is not a Citizen, but names you, knows you,
and celebrates your praises. France has trusted you with the small hope she
had left; for seeing that the peace could not be concluded without a miracle,
it is believed that it must be you shall do it, and amidst the public
consternation, you are looked at as a Sanctuary. In the mean all things are so
changed here, peoples hearts so cast down, and so little of enjoyment, that I
think there is no great matter of choice between an abode at Munster and Paris:
a man cannot meet with any who have not their complaints, some that they cannot
get their Salaries, others that their pensions are shortened, nay there want not
Clarks that belong to the Revenue, who, say they are no better treated then
other.

Sacle is seen among the rest
When all things are locked up in the chest, etc.
This, if I mistake not, is a fragment of a piece of our youthful Poetry.
That your Lordship may see whether I am any thing improved since that time, I
send you some verses I made three years since upon the Prince his sickness
when he was in Germany. I had some reasons not to communicate them to any, nor
is it many days since I first showed them. They have been well approved here,
yet shall I not be satisfied till I know your judgment of them. Be pleased to
honor me so much as to let me know whether they are worth ought, that, in case
they answer not expectation, I may shake hands with Poetr^e, and apply my self
wholly to the business of the Revenue. I cannot conclude this Letter without
telling you that Madame de Longueville received lately one from you, which she
infinitely values, and which has been extremely commended by all that saw it.
To do you justice, it deserved no less, it being impossible there should be
any thing so handsome.

Nosti, Antipho, quam elegans spectator formarum sim.
You know whether I understand any thing as to Beauties of of this nature.
France affords not another that can write at that rate.

To the same. LETTER CXCIX.
My LORD,
YOu cannot give me a greater assurance of the setlednesse and tranqu^ity of
your soul, then by sending such a Letter as that came last to my hands, it
seems to be drawn

-- Medio de font Leporum,
So excellently well it is written, and so easy to perceive, that it is the
production of a clear and undisturbed mind. There is not certainly any thing
could, in my though^s, raise you so great esteem, as to see, that,
notwithstanding the present posture of your affairs, you can laugh in this
manner. This is called Diis frui iratis, and Fortunae minaci mandare laqueum.
Do you remember the time, when you built her so glorious a Temple in verse? You
are sufficiently converted from that Idolatry, and now you can as easily laugh
at her. And yet, I think that, for this time, she will but threaten. Those who
pretend acquaintance with the Court, hold, that it is not safe to be exposed to
the envy which one must needs run the hazard of by mis-intreating a person,
who, at the opinion of all the world, has deserved so well of France.
Monseigneur de Longueville has done me the honor to show me the Letter you
writ to him. I found it handsome, excellently handsome. Certainly, my Lord,
there is not of all the Wits, of all those, qui artem ^ractant musicam; any
that understands it so well as your self. I am extremely pleased that you have
not disliked my verses,...

In the mean time I am satisfied with your deferbuisse, my Terence is not so
correct as yours, nor I as you. But why will you enjoin me to write to you once
a month? Is it not enough that I serve you by the Quarter? Put me upon some
employment in relation to your Affairs, that so I may have something to
entertain you with. If you do not, my Letters will prove nothing but skin and
bones, short and cold. Nevertheless I shall obey you, and if I should not do
it out of a consideration of the many obligations I owe you, I could not for
bear for your Parenthesis of Mousieur Voiture of Amiens; ego enim (existimes
licet quod lubet) mirifice capior facetiis; moriar si praeter te quenquam habeo
in quo possim imaginem aentiquae festivitatis agnoscere. If I understand any
thing of it, you are the best and most prudent man in the world, a truth all
are satisfied of, nor is it less unquestionable, that you are also the most
pleasant.

BUTILLERIO CHAVIENIO. V. VICTURUS S.P.D. LETTER CC.
DVpliciter delectatus sum tuis literis and quod ipse risi, and quod te ridere
posse intellexi. ( this I have from Cicero, for the rest you will easily
perceive I am not in his debt) Verebar enim ne te hominem urbanissimum tam
longa extra urbem commoratio taedio and languore afficeret. Verum illae tuae
jucundae, suaves, salibus undique aspersae satis ostendunt solitum in te vigere
Genium, ill^mque ingenii tui aciem nulla ratione retundi posse. Nec miror sane
quod rure nihil ruris contraxeris, and te ubique tam elegantem praestes, quippe
qui omnium elegantiarum fontem tam prope habeas, and a latere viri supra omnes
eloquentissimi non discedas, -- and te haec
Scire, Deos quoniam propius contingis, oportet.


Vt enim videbantur Athenae migrare quocunque se Alcibiades sontulisset, sic
quicquid in urbe est urbanitatis politiorisque doctrinae, lepores, venustates,
Veneres ipsae Richelium, quoquo se vertat, comitantur. Quam lubenti animo
Epistolam tuam legerim, quamque capiar illis ingenii tui deliciis, illoque tibi
peculiari genere scribendi, peream si satis dicere possum. Tu-te reputa, quae
in ignotissimo diligerem, quam mihi chara esse debeant in te homine amicissimo,
omniumque mearum fortunarum ac rationum p^^trono. Quod mihi succenses, and
subirasci videris quod me parum diligentem praebeam in rebus domesticis
curandis, inque illo negotio conflciendo quod me hic detinet; jure quidem, sed
and perhumane facis, qui tantis implicitus negotiis mea curas. Caeterum, tibi
persuadeas quaeso, me omni observantia, fide, amore erga te, omni denique
studio, omnibusque officiis praestiturum, ut me hac tua humanitate ac
benevolentia dignum aliquando judic^s. Emin tuus, imo noster, quam me devinctum
habeat, and in posterum sit habiturus ipse judicare potes, qui and beneficium
ab illo in me collatum, and me quam gratus sim nosti. Certe Vir alioquin summo
ingenio, acerrimo judicio praeditus, liberalissimus, and ut omnia dicam,
amicitia tua dignus, vel ob id unum facinus ab omnibus laudari, a te amari, a
me coli semper debet. Roxanam his diebus diligentissime legi. Quid de ea
sentiam quaeris? nihil mehercule usquam elegantius, nihil ornatius, nihil
sublimius, dignam denique Alexandro and Armando. Quo propius inspexi, eo mihi
pulchrior visa est, tamque absoluta, ut nihil in ea praeter aliquem naevum
desideres. Sed quid ejus tibi nunc venustatem

Praedicem aut laudem, Antipho,
Cum ipsum me noris quam elegans formarum spectator siem,
In hac commotus sum.
Mi pergratum feceris, si tuum de illa judicium ad me perscribas, percupio enim
scire, an tibi tam lecta, quam audita placuerit. Si quid in hac urbis
solitudine faciam, quaeris? deambulo, lego, scribo, satis juc^nde^ haec omnia,
nisi anxius essem publicis rebus; deque tua salute. Vive and vale:

In obitum N.
PRima manu Troum quae missa est cuspis in hostem,
Eximio juveni funus, acerba, tulit.
At nobis meliorem aninam facta invida rollunt,
Et rapuit fortem mors properata virum.
Pro facinus! qui vel lauds aequasset Achillis,
Ille habuit fatum Protesilae tuum.
THE AMOROUS LETTERS OF Monsieur de VOITURE.
LETTER I.
Floricia,
FOR God's sake, let us once shake off this dark color, or if we must needs be
in mourning let it be for your absence. I received your excuses before you sent
them, and you cannot but think me reallie satisfied you were not in any fault,
since I had the confidence to accuse you* I have taken more pains then you
would have done your self, to find out what might be said in your defense; and
to be ingenious with you, I made your cause so much my own, and thought my
self obliged to be so tender of your innocence, that I durst not omit any
thing that might maintain it. For, had you been found guilrie, I should first
have suffered for it, nor indeed had any been so cruelly punished as my self.
But all this omitted, I have a greater opinion of my own fortune and your
courage then to doubt that either of them should fall so low. It is unworthie
both you and me, to fear that an affection so well cemented should by any
casualtie be dissolved: nay it is a crime in us but to imagine such a thing
possible. If but one of those two Gentlemen, with whose conversation I
reproached you, had staid till day in your Chamber, I should think you could no
less then take a whole night to fall out with him for it; nay though I should
have seen him in your embraces, I think I should have taken you for another, or
that you had mistaken him for me. In a word, I should rather distrust the
fidelity of my own eyes then your faith, and am more easily persuaded I may
be deceived in them then in you. No, your entertainment of those two men shall
never find my thoughts any business, nay though they had spent an Age with
you, I should not believe you had bestowed one quarter of an hour with them.
But I pray let me know, when you had dismissed the former, did you stay alone
with the other, or did your woman come immediately into your Chamber? Did they
upon their departure from you undertake that journey with as much satisfaction
as at other times? Do you still feed them with those fair hopes, wherein
only I esteem them more rich, then if they possessed all the World besides? I
am somewhat curious as to these particulars, out of a confidence that I cannot
but be much pleased with them, and no doubt but I should be rather satisfied
then any way disturbed at that interview, were I but fully informed thereof.
But, in the mean time, they saw you, while I was at a distance of thirty
Leagues from you, nay at the same time that I was alone in my Chamber bemoaning
your absence, they were in yours and heard you discourse. Nay it may be they
saw you laugh, and that you gave one of them occasion to fall into some
pleasant dreams that night. Ah Floricia! what a treacherous passion is
jealousy, and how easily she insinuates her self into us, while our Reason
is asleep! I know that your past errors oblige you to very deplorable
consequences, and that you are forced to many actions against your own
inclinations and mine, to avoid running the hazard of one thing which you think
very dear. But if you knew how much I am cast down at it, and how heavy
these considerations lie upon me, it may be, that another time you will hazard
any thing rather then my life; and yet you reproach me with a negligence that I
did not send you my picture soon enough. But I pray, was it your desire I
should have come and made a third with the other two? or could you have wished
me present to be an eyewitness of the entertainment you gave them? This is so
irrational, that my very picture would not have suffered it, for it would have
been no less then to put me to death in effigy. Add to that, I should have
felt something of it hence, and, no question, have fallen into some languishing
disease, not unlike those who are killed at the distance of a hundred leagues,
only by pricking their images. But though there were no such thing to be
feared, yet should you not desire the sight of my picture, especially in the
condition the first days of your absence had put me into. All the Art of
painting could not have afforded colors ill enough to represent that which
sadness had clothed me in; nor indeed can I see any likelihood that a man
half dead should be drawn to the life. You would have found me quite another
person, then what you had seen so pleasant in your company. If I had been well
drawn you would not have known me, for I hardly knew my self, and might
hardly pass for an ill coppie of what I was a while since. But I hope that
after some short time you will find me more cheerful and more divertible, for
I begin to clear up my countenance, and if the Painter do but his duty, you
shall discover in the Piece a certain hope, that it shall not be long ere you
may expect my attendance to second that of my P^cture. Do you therefore prepare
your self to entertain me with more freedom, and if you are yet at your own
disposal, let not the recommendations of the witty Gentlewoman hinder you. I
sent her not my humblest services, but only returned those I had received
from her by three several persons; and I should no have presumed to do it, had
I not been afraid to offend you by retaining any thing of hers. Besides, you
would soon have been informed, whether I had not made a conscience to be
importunate to you for a quarter of an hour by so unwelcome a refl^ction as
that. The same consideration which prevailed with you, not to acquaint me with
the news I have otherwise learnt, made me stif^e this. But since we know all
one of another, and that the bad angel, which keeps us asunder will needs
discover all those actions of ours which may any way give offense, I beseech
you let us elude his malice, and so prevent him in this, that knowing all
things by a mutual communication, they may put on quite another face; and for
my part, I profess to you, I shall never be guilty of any thing, which in any
likelihood may give you offense, whereof I shall not presently make my
confession to you. Be you pleased to make me the same promise, and withal, let
me know whence you came to understand that I had sent recommendations to any
one, and by what means you have discovered that, wherebie I came to the news
whereof I have made my complaint to you: for, to be free with you, I am
extremely troubled at it, and for my part, I can think no otherwise then that
you have some Genius about me, who acquaints you with what is done. But since
he tells you all, ask him whether I love you, as also, how often in a day I
sigh for you.

To Madam -- LETTER II.
IT is certainly a menace would startle a more confident person then I am. But
while you shall threaten me after this rate, I must needs confess I cannot
much fear you, and shall be so bold as to give you a meeting in the afternoon
according to your direction, what misfortune soever may be the consequence of
it. I know your lodging is no secure place for me, and that under pretense of
the friendship whereof you are pleased to honor me with a promise, there is
not any one from whom I should far more mischief then from you. But yet be
pleased not to leave me too long upon the Rack, for if you are resolved to be
kind as you pretend, let this occasion give you handsel. The truth is, my
implicit obedience toward you, and the resignation wherewith you see I put my
self into your hands, does in some sort oblige you thereto. Though I know what
you have destined me to, yet shall I do all that lies in my power, to satisfy
that person, who you desire should be, at my charge; and I promise you to keep
her affection secret, without deriving any vanity or reputation thence; but I
doubt I shall not so easily conceal your intelligence thereof.

To the Same. LETTER III.
Madam;
THe only way to make a Geometrical proportion in my sufferings is to
acquaint me that you are subject to any, and whereas I have hitherto undergone
my own with patience enough, I much doubt whether I shall be able to bear
yours. But happen as it may or will, I cannot endure too much, since it is for
your sake I do it; for the two words which you thrust into your Letter of a
different rank and file from the rest, cannot but render all things supportable
to me, and make me cheerful even in Martyrdom. I think you no Infidel as to
this point, but are satisfied of my resolution, since that having given me
notice of the mischief you intended me, you expect I should come my self to
receive it, and that in the afternoon I should repair to a place, where my
sufferings are to be multiplied. This m^^ace might frighten another, and would
oblige a wiser man then my self to mind his own safety. But what hazard soever
I may run, there is no means to avoid your commands, or, being honored so
highly with your acquaintance as I am, to forbear professing my self,

Madam, Your, etc.

To the Same. LETTER IV.
MADAM,
I Have clearlie forgotten all I should have said to -- to whom you would have
me reconciled; and yet I must needs tell you, it is not that I have slept
since. I am displeased with my self, that I have had no more respect for a
person, who had been recommended to me from so good hands, and that not being
able to afford her any room in my inclinations, she has found so little in my
memory. That is a certain part of my Soul where I might justly have allowed
her a place, for that is it which is the most opposite to judgment, and has
the charge only of things past. But if I tell her any thing that favors of
obligation this afternoon, she shall have no cause to complain that I speak to
her only by heart; for I find mine at such a distance from whatever I have
to say to her, that if I have not your immediate assistance, you will find I
shall be as far to seek as you, both as to words and time. But, were it Heavens
pleasure you knew not that of your departure, and that you were not able to
give me any account of it at least for this day. For, to deal truly with you,
I have not courage enough, to endure the very imagination of it, nay that
very thought st^fles in me all other. When I consider that to morrow you will
not be to be found here, I think it strange I should be in the World to day:
nay I am almost in an humor to acknowledge with you that there is some fiction
in the love I pretend to, when it comes into my mind that I am still alive, and
that this affliction does not absolutely make an end of me. Others have become
speechless, and confined themselves to the deserts of Thebais upon less
discontents then mine. But if I tell you, that I cannot go so far from you to
bemoane my misfortune, I am, methinks, the more to be excused, that I go not to
endure an hermitage in the wildernesses of Egypt, since I hope to find a
place in that you are going to build. This hope is all that flaies me in this
World, my life hangs altogether on this consideration. I know not whether all I
have said here be within the limits of a passionate friendship; and yet you
cannot affirm that I speak to you too clearlie, since you have ever had a
privilege to give my words several interpretations: nor complain that I write
not to you in such terms as you desire, since I could never yet meet with the
man that should teach me how to do it. While my failings are connived at, and
the discovery of my resentments allowed, I profess to you, with the same
affection as I did yesterdaie, that the only extravagance the World shall
know me guilty of, shall be, ever to be enamoured of what was ever amiable,
and encurre your displeasure from the hour that you are assured of my
friendship.

To the same. LETTER V.
I Am fully satisfied that my days are near an end, and that I am at the
Vigills of the greatest misfortune will ever happen to me. In the mean time I
find my self more free and undisturbed then I durst have hoped, and amidst
thousands of reflections that add to my torment, there are some few that
alleviate it. The astonishment I am in permits me not to examine the cause of
so extraordinary an accident; but I am not to be taught, that you produce in
my soul, I know not by what means, certain effects whereof I cannot find out
the cause, and that you kindle a certain joy in my heart, though I know no
reason for it. Be it as it will, I find my self so resolved for death as if
there were something for me to expect after it; and how insupportable soever
that separation may be which brings with it your absence, I am prepared to
endure it, as if it were only a passage to a better life. All I am troubled
at, is, that that person, to whom you lend me sometimes, suffers me not to end
my days qu^etlie, but I must be forced to spend between you and her the last
hours of my life. By this I am absoluttlie convinced (though I could not
hitherto be persuaded to believe it) that at the hour of death, we all see our
good and bad angels, and that we have at that moment happy and unhappie
visions. But I humbly beseech you in case you hate me not yet, not to forsake
me in this extreamitie, and to be careful and tender of a Soul which cannot be
saved but by your means, and must be tormented eternally, if you deny it
your protection.

To the Same. LETTER VI.
IT was high time for me to think of my Conscience, and it was a happy turn
for me, that I made yesterdaie some part of my confession; for I had not been
yet so sick as I am this day, and my sickness increases so, that, had I
delaied it any longer, I think I had died in a very sad condition. At least,
to measure things by the fits I am troubled with, and the distractions that
torment me, I see my self falling into extravagances and enthusiasmes, and
have no great hope to be, though but for one hour longer, absolute Master of my
senses and intellectualls. What persuades me the more it will be so, is, that
amidst the sufferings and afflictions which I expected should have swallowed me
up, I cannot put on much sadness, and find my self less troubled then
ordinary, though I am in the worst condition I ever was in in my life. I lost,
not many days since, a dear friend, whom the excess of his pain made
insensible thereof. His dreams made him laugh amidst the pangs of death, and
his imaginations found him some ease, whilst he was on the rack of a Fever. I
beseech you envy me not such a dissolution as that, and since I have not eight
days to live, give me leave to spend them after that manner. This granted I
shall acknowledge you merciful beyond my faith, and my self happy beyond my
hope. For an attempt so extravagant as mine should not meet with so good
success, and after the commission of so high an effence, I did not expect to
die so soon, nor so quietly. I crave your pardon; I thought not to have
written any thing to you but what concerned your friend, and now I first
perceive that I have not said a word of her. I humbly beseech you to dispose
of both her and me as you please, only let me know when you would have me to
come and hear the sentence. I should humbly beg it may be given this evening
-- but I am afraid to be too importunate, and I know not where to find you in
the afternoon.

To the same. LETTER VII.
IF this be the day that I am to entertain the person you recommended to me
yesterday, I beseech you send me what you would have me to do it withal, or
take it not ill, that I should make no presents to others, of a good, wherein
the poorest are richer then my self. I never had so many painful hours as the
twelve I spent last, and since I had the honor of your presence, I have had so
little rest, that I dare assure you there are few Feuillants but were better
lodged then I. That man, in whose heart you yesterday left the dagger, has had
a better night; Fear, regret, despair, and all the poisons of love that are of
a cold nature, were my perpetual Tormentors; and sleep, which for some time
would needs give me some ease, has been properly to me the image of Death,
since it continually represented to me that of your absence. The condition I
am in considered, I do not think your friend would find anygreat entertainment
in my company, unless it be that her love must needs be converted into hatred,
and all her passions swallowed up into that of Revenge. If this will serve, she
shall find in me absolute satisfaction, and shall be well pleased to see the
world affords some more wretched then she. However, give me leave to entreat
you, what humor soever she may be in, not to leave me so much alone with her,
that some body cannot separate us; and withal to consider that there is no
safety for me, whether she love or hate me. I humbly beg this favor of you,
that in case I may ever have her. -- I may not receive my death from any other
hands then yours, and that there may be no need of any other Instruments, but
that I may be stifled by my own sighs, and the disturbances I am in for your
absence. I know not whether you will begin, with this, to show her the Letters
I write to you; but I shall not complain of it, provided you give me leave to
be gone immediately, and secure my self in Spain. For that I think a remedy
appliable to all sorts of misfortunes; and if you have permitted another to
retire thither to avoid a feavour, you may very well excuse me, if I go thither
to shun death. But, the misery I am in considered, I wonder I should be guilty
of such a thought, an imagingtion of that nature, being, methinks, too light to
fall into a mind so deeply afflicted as mine. However, since you every year
save one man's life, and that you professed yesterday that you would do all the
kindnesses that cost you nothing; why should I not hope, that I happily am he
whom you will favor so much, and that you will not suffer me to die, since you
can prevent it with so much ease.

To the same. LETTER VIII.
I Thought there had not been any but your self could have caused me ill
nights, but I yesterday met a Lady, who has made me spend this last without
the least admission of sleep, and wounded me so deeply in the heart, that I
have not known any rest since I saw her. Without any design, as I conceive, to
mutther me, she told me that you were to depart to morrow, and that she had had
this news from your own mouth. If it be so, I think I have some reason to
quarrel with you, (having robbed me of half my life) that, without any desert
of mine, you make my days shorter then they should be. You will happily think
it strange, that a man so unfortunate as I am should complain that he is not
suffered to live long enough, and think my self injured that I am too soon
delivered out of my misery. But I see that even the most miserable are in love
with life; and since I cannot lose mine but by a separation from you, I think
it is only the manner of dying that startles me, and that I am to be excused,
if I am afraid of so cruel a one. This consideration has not permitted me to
close my eyes since yesterday, and if this day prove so long as the night last
past, I am to fear your absence as a misfortune which cannot happen till after
a hundred years. But such an unhappie accident ought to be foreseen even at
that distance; nay though it wece not to come to pass till the end of the
world, I should begin to fear it from this minute. However, be pleased to let
me know what I am to expect, and since it is all the kindness you can do me,
let me know the day and hour of my death, that so I may have a little time to
recollect thoughts before hand, and to prepare my self for it.

To the same. LETTER IX.
I Had designed the Letter I now send you enclosed, to have been much about the
same time with you at -- and that it would have stuck up at M -- 's a good
while, ere you had thought of it. But I was forced to keep it till now, as not
being able to find out the man's lodging to whom I should have delivered it,
till two hours after his departure. I believe you must needs have heard of the
fresh occasions of affliction which are happened to me since, and consequently
it is not necessary I should be my self the bringer of all the ill news. I
shall only tell you, that I am not much happier in my Friendships then I am in
my passions, and that Fortune smites me in all the patts where she can wound
me. However, to make this misfortune the more insupportable, she needed not
have sent it me after your departure, and if she was resolved I should take
this unkindnesse the more heavilie, she ought to have done it before she had
quite smothered me. By this you perceive what an inconsiderable thing
Friendship is, when it is not attended with passion. For this accident, which
at any other time would have run through my heart, and which I should have
given all I am worth in the world to have avoided, has not bin^able to castme
down more then I was; and of all the tears I have spilt since, I know not
whether I have bestowed one whole one on my friend And, to say truth, since he
was to stay here, and was out of all hope to come where you are, I cannot
imagine the loss of his liberty any great inju^y to him, or that he might not
easily dispense with the conversation of all the world, when he could not have
yours. I think it much harder measure, I should be kept here a Prisoner with
the rest, and should be detained when no body accuses me. However it be, yet I
confess the greatest Criminals are more innocent then I am, and though they
should have conspired against the state and the King, I am guilty of a design
more traitorous then then that, for which I see there is no way but death.

To the same. LETTER X.
THat neither grief nor love can cause any man's death, you need no greater
assurance then that neither has yet made an end of me; and that having past
two days without the honor of your fight, there is still some symptoms of
life in me. If any thing could prevail with me to dispense with your absence,
it was a certain faith I had that death would discharge me, and that so
pressing an affliction would not suffer me to languish long. In the mean time I
find, much contrary to my my hope, that I last longer then I had imagined, and
how mortal soever my wounds may be, yet I think my soul cannot take her leave
of my heart, because she sees your image there. It Is the only pretense I meet
with to clear her from cowardice, nor can I see any other reason that could
engage her so long in a place, where she suffers so much. Ever since the hour
you saw me drawn by four wild horses, and torn to pieces by my separation
from you, I da^e swear, I have not had the leisure to wipe my eyes, which though
they have now lost all acquaintance with light and colors, yet will never do
me such faithful service as they do now, since they help me to bewail your
absence. Amidst the torments I suffer, and the languishing condition I am in, I
think my self all that is left of mankind upon earth, or that I am transported
into that corner of the world, where the Sun is as seldom seen as Comets are
here, and where the shortest night is three months long. And yet, all this
notwithstanding, my unhappiness were not arrived to the height, if the
darkness wherein I now am, lasted no longer, and I much question, whether after
that time, I may hope to see day. But, consider I beseech you Madame, what
extremity I am reduced to, that being as yet but in the twilight of so long
and tedious a night, I begin, already to count the hours, and that without
breaking forth into impatience at every moment, as if a midst the obscurity I
am covered with, there were some short intervals of rest, and that I cold
sometimes flatter my self into some pleasant dream. But how extravagant soever
my imaginations may be, they attain not that height as to insinuate ought that
is delightful, and mythoughts are only rational in this, that they never
promise me any happiness. This being my condition, I think I may safely
swear, that the most w^etched man in the world is he who honors you most; and
it were certainly impossible I should live so long, did I no^ hope to die of it
suddenly. But I perceive, I cannot have fifteen days longer to bemoane your
absence, and that my miseries and life cannot last above that time. This hope
engages me to bear more patiently with both, and I believe you are not
displeased that I entertain it, since it is your will I should hope all I
ought. At least, I cannot interpret more advantageously for my self, the last
words you said to me; and which way soever^ cast my eye, I see not how I can
ever expect better. In the mean time, you that see (...) and much farther then
I do, be pleased to tell me whether my extravagance should hope a better issue
then that, and what would have become of me, if I had lived longer.

To the same. LETTER XI.
I Am very much ashamed to tell you so much; but the wretch who should have
been dead long since is still in the world; nay, after I had been fifteen days
without heating from you, I am in condition to give you some account of my
self. It Is, I must needs say, so sad a one, and the affliction I wrestle with
so insupportable, that if I shift it not off some way or or other, you will not
conclude it is for want of resen^ment and resolution, in regard that amidst the
torments I encounter with, there is less courage requisite to endure death
then continue life. And certainly, that which I lead is so unhappie, that I
had resolved to be rid of it a thousand times, if I durst presume on any
enjoyment of my self out of your sight, and if you had not taught me, that it
wants something of absolute misery, to have the satisfaction of a voluntary
death. That therefore I must look for as the sole effect of my own griefs, and
consequently I must creep by inches to my end, and not make my journey shorter
by half a day. And yet, though the trouble it is to me, that I shall never see
you again, has cost me above a hundred thousand tears, J have not sufficiently
bewailed your absenee; and having so many misfortunes to grieve for, it were
unjust J should be so ready to give up the last gasp.

To the same. LETTER XII.
SInce you have forsaken us, a minute has not past which has hot added
something to my afflictions, and J have not overcome an hour, which J thought
not should be that of my death. But now J perceive, that my soul is so
overpressed with grief, that it has not the strength to get away; and that if
she remain yet in my body, it is like the lazy birds in the Indies, whereof
you heard so me discourse, as J take it about a hundred years since, who cannot
be gotten to quit the Tree which cannot afford them any further nourishment,
and had rather die languishing, then take the pains to chang place. J assure you
J aggravate not this story in any thing; and that great mind, whereby you
imagine all things with so much ease cannot assist you in the comprehension of
half my afflictions. J spend whole days without ever opening mine eyes, and
the best part of the night without ever putting them together. And what you
will wonder at much more, is, that these restless hours of impatience and
despair, and those nights which the fear of having displeased you made me sit
up with many mortal disturbances, J now grieve for as lost joys, and the
enjoyments of my life past. This indeed is punishment proportionable to the
greatest extravagance that ever was known; these are the torments I am destined
to suffer for too near an acquaintance with you. But amidst all these
afflictions, though J see it must necessarily cost me my life, and that all
the indulgences of Heaven and Fortune are too weak to deliver me of them, yet
can J not be persuaded, though not imagine how, but that it is in your power to
make me die happy, and that what all the world besides cannot do, you only can.

To the same. LETTER XIII.
MADAME,
I Was in hope to make this advantage of the solitude wherein you left me, that
J should not have derived the least diversion or entertainment from any one;
and that being in a place where J am absolutely unacquainted I should have had
the leisure to entertain you with some of my thoughts. But J have hardly the
time to to say any thing to you, being snatched away for Fountainbleau, whither
Fortune is pleased to command me, upon business of great importance,
purposely, as J conceive, to dep^ive me me of the satisfaction of writing to
you. And indeed how liberal soever she may be of her smiles and flatteries, I
have but too much reason to be jealous of her, having been treated with so many
of her ill offices: nor can J think she can ever be fully reconciled to a man,
to whom she has done so much mischief. But having kept me up in the midst of
so many misfortunes, J might entertain some hopes, if there were any thing of
courage left in me, that she reserves me for some great accident, and that she
will do in me some of her miracles, when she has already done one so strange
as that of the saving of my l^fe. Yet the last favor she did me was much
beyond it, and I am more obliged to her for her assistance in the happy
recoverie of the first Letter you writ to me, after it had been lost two days.
I know not whether J should have acquainted you with it; but as soon as J had
it in my hands, J was presently satisfied that it was not impossible for me to
entertain some joy though I want your presence; and for the time J spent in the
reading of it, J much doubt whether J was any thing troubled at your absence.
Do not imagine, that a small time would suffice for this, for it amounts to
little less then all that is passed since I received it, and indeed it is the
only employment my eyes have taken any delight in since they saw you. J this, J
profess, J speak truly, and sincerely, though J have diverse times seen your
two good friends, being not any thing pleased either with the voice of the one,
or the actions of the other. When J went to her with whom J left you, the
verses of Tasso which J entreated her to repeat, made up one half of her
discourse, and her gestures the other. And though they are both excellent
things in their kind, yet all was not able to raise me out of melancholy,
great as the former wherein you had seen me; and I could find nothing in her,
that might any way alleviate the doom you give me, that I never gain her
affection. However, her friendship might have proved more advantageous to me
then you imagine, and I should address my self to her with more earnestness
then I do, sines she has cruelty enough to destroy those whom she loves, when
they are become as unhappie as I am. But I perceive, she would not do me that
favor without hearing my case, and that I must go through the rack to my
death. At least she began to put me on it the day I last saw her, and put a
many interrogatories to me concerning the cause of my transportation, which I
am not out of yet. But a man who can bear with your absence, may well endure
any racking, nor is it probable that Torments should force any thing out of me,
when I am so accustomed to suffer, and that having already confessed once, I
cannot perceive my pains are ever the less. It is on you -- that I fasten
this reproach, and whom, methinks I have reason to quarrel with, in that
having acknowledged my crime to you, you have neither justice enough to put me
to death, nor mercy enough to let me live. I heartily beseech you to grant me
either, and if I may not hope to find you favorable, let me find you just. But
what ever your doom is, be pleased to let me hear it from your own mouth, and I
do not much trouble my self whether it be life or death, so I have one of the
two in your presence. There is no attempt so difficult, which I shall not
accomplish; no enchanted Castle which I should not enter under your conduct.
But if the enchantments which hinder you from being seen, must ne dissolved by
the most faithful and most amorous man in the world, I certainly am He, there
being no other that shall presume to offer at this Adventure. But see Monsieur
de B. with whom I am to go, sends me word that he is just upon his departure;
and I dare not put him to attendance, for I honor him very much. He has a
seat in M. -- whither he is to go within these fifteen days: I must be allowed
much more leisure then I have now, to answer Letters that require Commentaries.
Be pleased then to afford time proportionable to the employment, for all I have
had hitherto has been hardly enough to understand them well.

To Diana. LETTER XIV.
IF the affliction it is not to see what you affect be as insupportable to you
as it is to me; and if, during that absence, you suffer something suitable to
what I do endure, what considerations were those, Fair Diana, that were able
to engage you two days from a sight of me, and why do we not run any h^zard or
extremity, rather then what whereinto we are reduced by this misfortune? To
smoother the discourses of four or five persons, and to hinder their
observations of our enjoyments, is it requisite we should not have any, and to
avoid a little noise, must we needs endure so much misery? no, no, my dearest
Diana, the greatest misfortune can possibly happen to us, is to be separated
one from another, nor indeed do I know any other we should fear so much.
Besides, you are not to imagine, that the trouble we put our selves to, can
make our Loves be thought any thing the more secret. The sadness, wherewith my
countenance is overcast when I want the light and influences of your presence
discovers them to all the World, and speaks louder then any person could do.
Let us then henceforward shake off a discretion which costs us so dear, and
give me leave and the means to see you this afternoon, if it be your pleasure
I should live.

To the Same. LETTER XV.
HAving permitted you to spend the time all yesterdaie till midnight, I
conceive there is no great danger, if to day, I put you in mind, fairest Diana,
that you have a servant who has not seen you almost these two days; and who
but yesterdaie was reproached with his sadness, when in the mean time, you
were commended, where you were, for your freedom and pleasantness. I have
therefore thought it not unseasonable, to be your remembrance of him this
morning, for happily you thought not on him yesterdaie, since I dare not hope
that in so good company, any thought of yours could be so presumptuous as to
mind you of me. At least I had so many of all kinds, that I have some reason
to believe there could not remain any with you; and I imagine that being well
attended, and thinking me too much alone, you sent me all yours to divert me.
And indeed they pressed upon me so much and were so confident that they
accompanied me into a house, where they could not expect to be very welcome.
'Twas a Lady's for whom you have sometimes reproached me that I had no
compassion, where finding one of your Cousins, who had as little for you, I
could not but take occasion to speak of you; this obliged me to stay there two
hours longer then ordinary, during which time your name was up above twenty
times. I could perceive both the one and the other break forth into fire and
jealousy, whence I thought us sufficiently revenged; I of him who had been so
bold as to love Diana; and you of her who had presumed to love what belongs to
her. I know not whether I have, in this, been too indiscret or too malicious,
but I assure you, it was the only pleasure I had yesterdaie, and the first I
ever had in that place. I humbly beg you will pardon it me upon condition of
a reciprocal forgiveness from me, if happily you received yesterdaie any
satisfaction without my participation thereof.

To Climene. LETTER XVI.
SInce I am so far from being in a capacity to speak to you, as if I were
absent, give me leave to write to you, and to make use of the only means
which is left me to express my self. I thought, fairest Climene, that the
greatest misfortune I could fear, was that of being at a distance from you:
but has absence any thing more cruel or more insupportable in it, then my
appearance before you such as it is at this present? To be near all the graces,
all the joys, and all the beauties in the Wo^ld, and not to presume to turn
his eyes toward them; to have his heart on one side, and to look perpetually
on the other; to speak of all things but what a man thinks on, and whilst a
man is in the midst of a fire, and upon the rack, to be obliged to tell
stories: these certainly are torments beyond all imagination, and such as it
is impossible any man should suffer, if he did it not for your sake. I am now
sufficiently revenged of all the mischiefs which I said mine eyes had done
me; they have now as little freedom as my self, they endure in their turn all
the misery they have caused me, and are now so punished that they dare not
look toward you, and have lost that joy for which they had sold you my
liberty. This, Climene, ^s the condition I am in upon your account, these the
afflictions I g^oane under, for my knowledge, above any other, of your
amiablenesse and perfections. I cannot perceive any possibility they should
have any remission, nay I foresee others that threaten me, and doubt not but I
shall be much more unhappie within these three days then I now am, when I
shall neither have the means to see you, hear you, nor write to you. In the
mean time, amidst these afflictions I perpetually bless the day I first met
you, and would rather endure all these miseries, then be guilty of the
tranquillity I was in before I had seen you. All I beg, is, that you would
have a little compassion on me, and afford me in your own tho^gh^s some few
wish^s of better fortune, since I can, for your sake, so well bear with a bad
one.

To Mademoiselle de -- LETTER XVII.
MADAM,
I Cannot sleep but with a great deal of disturbance, I have lost the taste of
all things, nay I have not the same advantage of the air as other men, and I
do not so much breath as sigh, this is the condition I have been in ever since
I saw you last. It Is true I am not well satisfied whence all this proceeds, and
am not certain whether it be an effect of my Rheum or my Love; but in all
probability you contribute most to my misfortune, since the greatest ease I
find is to write to you. I never certainly thought you so amiable in my life,
as you were the other day. Notwithstanding what you know, and what would have
frightened any other man, I thought you the most pleasant thing in the World,
and though you forced me away from time to time, and that your humor was
changed into that of Mademoiselle de St. Martin, yet was I extremely
satisfied with your discourse and your entertainment. This convinces me, that
besides those things in you which lie open to the e^e, there is some secret
enchantment forces men to love you, and makes it impossible, happen what will
to you, but that you must be fair and kind. All your disdains could never
oblige me to think you cruel: when you tear my heart into a thousand pieces,
there is not one but is yours, nay one smile of yours chaces away all the grief
and bitterness you make me endure. Since I am much pleased with all gentle
things, I cannot think ill what you do, nay even death it self were good as you
dress it. Since then I am so much taken with your rigor, do but imagine what
resentment I should have of your favors, and be pleased, though but once, to
try what effect they shall produce in me. You know that a small matter
con^ents me, and consequently the satisfaction of my desire will not stand you
in much.

To M. D. LETTER XVIII.
THis is the fourth Letter I write to you since I have heard from you; if the
fault be Fortune's, it is the greatest misfortune in the World, if yours, the
greatest cruelty you ever were guilty of. In the mean time I cannot forbear
being your remembrancer of my self, and without considering whether it will
avail me any thing, I write Letters to you without any expctation of answer,
and entertain you with complaints without any hope of pity or satisfaction.
The last time I writ to you, I thought my self a little at ease, but, for ought
I perceive there is not any to be looked for, after a man has once in his life
seen you. That representation, which I thought half blotted out of my mind, is
recovered there with all its colors and more light then ever: it so fills my
soul that there is no room for any thing else, and what this place affords I
look on as at a greater distance from me then you who are a hundred Leagues
hence. It is certainly a very sad case, that an excessive Beauty should be
guilty of an excess of cruelty and ingratitude, and that so many reasons as
there are not to love you, should consist with so much obligation, nay,
necessity to do it. Seeing you performed not the promise you made me, I did
all that lay in my power to recover my former Liberty, and to deliver my self
out of your hands. But now I have done all I could, I am fallen again into
them, and all my endeavors amount only to this, that I should beware another
time how I attempt an impossibility, and not add, to so many afflictions,
that of seeking remedies where there are none to be had. You may then do what
you please with me, without any fear that I shall resent it, as being at a
loss of all courage, strength, and resolution, when I have to deal with you.
But, methinks, it concerns your generositie very much, not to use cruelty
toward a man, who cries you Quarter, and casts himself at your feet, and make
the most complaint, the most disinteressed, and the most perfect passion that
ever was, the most unfortunate.

To -- LETTER XIX.
IT is one of the fairest days that ever were seen in Summer; I am at
Liancour, one of the most pleasant places in the World; I have the company of
three or four of the handsomest Ladies in France, and yet I lock my self up in
my Chamber, alone, to write to you. Hence you may easily infer that I am in
a much better humor now then I was the last time, and consequently this
Letter will be milder then the other. I repented me I had sent it an hour after
it was gone, and the same night I received yours, wherewith I was absolutely
satisfied; not that it caused any change in my judgment, or that I thought not
my resentment just; but I could be no longer angry with you, and am convinced,
that you cannot do me so great a displeasure, for which three words from you
shall not procure an act of Oblivion. For, in fine, my affection is at the
present, arrived to that point whereto you said once at St. Clou, that it ought
to be, in so much, that though I should find you guil^ie, not of a negligence
but an infidelity, I could not forbear loving you. Since it was decreed I
should be in the power of some one, it is certainly my great happiness that I
am fallen into the hands of a person of so much goodness, reason, and
integrity, and who disposes of me with more care, caution, and lenity, then I
could do my self. But all this granted, I have at the present to object to you,
that you have not that tenderness of my quiet you ought: for to deal freely,
what was your intention, to write to me that Fortune has carried her self
very stranglie toward you, without acquainting me how, and leaving the rest
to my conjecture? It is indeed an invention the neatest that may be, to make me
imagine and feel all the misfortunes that may have happned to you, whereas I
should have had but some to wrestle with, if you had acquainted me how it is.
Deliver me as soon as you please out of this pain, which I profess, is one of
the greatest I ever had in my life. I write to you in much haste and
disturbance, for I am now called away by some that knock at my Chamber door.
But I cannot endure to write you a short Letter, and you, h^pl^e, would think
it as mischievous as the other, if it be not long enough. I have kissed yours a
thousand t^mes, and read it almost as many; it is the han^somest and m^st
obliging in the World: But, I beseech you write to me negligentlie* that you
may do it the more pleasantly, and entertain me in your Letters with the same
freedom as you spoke to me in your Chamber. I am but too well acquainted with
your abilities, fear it not, and I would have a knowledge of your affection
proportionable to my wishes. I am extremely glad you are with the person you
tell me of; for knowing how much you love her, and how amiable she is, I doubt
not but she contributes much to your enjoyments. You tell me that she is now as
well acquainted with me as you are. How? have you acquainted her with all my
ill conditions, have you told her how full of mischief I am, and what trouble I
have put you to? If it be so, it is certainly very maliciously done, and
assure your self, I shall, to be revenged, know what I have to tell her of you,
when I see her. It was not necessary to make such a particular description of
me, and it had been better to have done it less like, that so I might have
been more handsome; for she, who is so tender of your quiet, and who has no
jealousy for you, and so much affects what you love, I am afraid may wish me
ill for having tormented you so much, and believe me, a person of little
honor, when she shall understand I have been jealous. But I beseech you, make
it your business to raise in her a good opinion of me, for I desire, above all
things to be in her favor, and now that I conceive my self in your affection^,
there is not any thing I desire so much as her friendship. Fo^r days since, I
lost Monsieur C. -- and certainly with much reg^et, for J love and esteem him
infinitely. I told him that J was to write to you by the way of -- you have
satisfied me very much where you tell me, that you take great delight in
reading the books I presented you with; but let me know which of them you are
most taken with, and in that, what pleases you best. I was resolved to beg some
account of them from you, but now I desire not only that, but of whatever you
do; for I shall be extremely glad to know the most inconsiderable of your
thoughts and actions. I am upon my return to Paris, where I shall find a
Letter of yours, which makes me very impatient to be there; two days, I hope,
will bring me thither: But in regard the Messenger goes not away till to morrow
noone, I send this Letter before by a Lacqueie. Adieu, I beg the continuance
of your affection; for my part, how much I love you, I am not not able to tell
you, time shall discover.

To Madam -- LETTER XX.
MADAM,
I Am at last come hither alive, and am ashamed to tell it you; for, methinks,
a person of honor ought not to live after he had been ten days without seeing
you. I should be the more astonished, that I have been able to do it, were I
not satisfied that for some time, there have happned things to me altogether
extraordinary, and such, as whereof I had not the least expectation, and that
since I have seen you, all things are done in me by miracle. It is certainly a
strange effect that I have all this while withstood so many afflictions, and
that a man so much wounded could hold out so long! No sadness so weighty, no
sorrow comparable to that I struggle with. Love, and fear, grief, and
impatience, are my perpetual torments, and the heart I had bestowed on you
whole, is now torn into a thousand pieces, but you are in every one of them,
nor could I part with the least to any I find here. In the mean time, amidst
so many and such mortal afflictions, I assure you I am not to be pitied, for
it is only in the lower region of my mind that the tempests are raised, and
while the clouds are in perpetual agitation, the higher part of my soul is
quiet and clear, when you shine with the same beauty, luster, and influences,
as you had on the fairest days wherein I have seen you, and with those beams
and circulations of light, and graces as are sometimes seen about you. I must
needs confess, as often as my imagination is directed that way, I am
insensible of all affliction. So that it sometimes happens, that while my heart
suffers extraordinary torments, my soul tastes infinite felicities, and at the
same time that I am afflicted, weep, and consider my self at a great distance
from your presence, nay, happily, your thoughts, I would not change fortunes
with those who see, are loved and enjoy. I know not whether you, Madam, whose
soul knows not the least disturbance, can conceive these contrarieties; it is
as much as I can do to comprehend them, who feel them, and am often astonished
to find my self so happy and so unhappie at the same time. But let not, I
beseech you, what I tell you of my happiness, divert your care from a
consideration of my miseries, for they are such as cease not to frighten me
even when I feel them not, the only agitation of two so different resentments
being enough to cast me to the ground. If then you have any reasons to comfort
me withal, that are not taken out of Seneca, I beseech you send them them me,
and withal some of those miraculous words, which you know, that can restore
strength and cheerfulness to the most indisposed minds, and which have twice
already saved my life? you ought certainly to be tender of it, since indeed
it is yours, and that I have made foheartie a present to you of it. For my
part, I must confess it is much dearer to me since it has belonged to you and
I should be loath to leave the world so soon after my acquaintance with what,
is most accomplished, and most excellent in it.

To Madame. -- LETTER XXI.
MADAME,
I Crave your pardon, and confess that I have not, in my opinion, loved you
long, and that the standing of my affection is but the day before yesterday. At
least it has thrived so much since that time, and is arrived to such a height,
that when I look thence on what I had before, it seems to me so little, that it
hardly appears, and that love, which, eight days since, I thought the greatest
in the world, seems in a manner nothing to me. As I am glad to see my self in
that condition, so is it a grief to me that it hapened no sooner, and I am
angry with my own heart, for having concealed from you so large a place so
long. Being am^able as you are, methink^ I have done you an injury in that I
have not loved you as much as I do now, even from the first minute that I saw
you, and should not have permitted, that the obligations I owe you should
contribute any thing thereto. But certainly, it was because I could not
discover what you were at the first sight; and, to say truth, the different
beauties you have, so many graces and attractions, so much wit, judgment,
courage, vigor and generositie cannot be seen with the cast of an eye, but it
tequires time to do it, and there are so many things in you, that it would take
up many days even to see you well. I know not whether I am mistaken, but
methinks now I have overcome it, and my soul is so filled, that there is no
place for any thing else; it is wholly taken up with reflections on you, and
comprehensions of you, which are attended with so much delight and attention,
that being upon the brink of a horrid precipice, I do not perceive it, and
being ready to lose you, I am all joy that I have found you. I profess,
dearest Madame, that what I write is clearlie what I think, and that the least
part of what I think is, what I now write. There are no words to express the
affection I bear you, it is beyond any thing that may be said, or thought.
There is only you in the world that can imagine it, etc.

To Madame. LETTER XXII.
MADAME,
I Am at this time a little in doubt how J ought to write to you, for J am
extremely dis-satisfied with you, and particularly that you have not given me
any account of your self, never wanting the opportunity to do it. What hinders
me, is that J would not say any thing whereat you might be troubled, or might
any way disturb your quiet, for, assure your self, J am more tender of it then
my own. But, withal, J must tell you, that J cannot disguise my resentment of
it from you, nor is it in my power to use any artifice as to you, or write to
you as J should, were J satisfied. To be free then with you, J cannot conceive,
how a person who has done so many things for the preservation of my quiet,
should not in six weeks find leisure enough to oblige me with a Letter, and
that you, who account absence a thing so dangerous, and seem to be in so much
fear it should produce some ill effect in me, are so carried away with it, and
have, during so long time, neglected to make use of the only remedy there is
against it. It is now upon two months since your departure, you had a certain
direction how to write to me, there were Carriers in all the places through
which you passed and yet J have not had so much as one Letter from you, What,
in your opinion, should J think of it? would you have me think that at Orleans,
at Blois, at Tours, at Angers, and since, during all the t^m you stand at --
and at -- you had not the leisure to send me a Letter? Was it that you were
indifferent whether you received any from me, and should thence infer that J
should be the l^sse hasty for yours? It is indeed true, that you were not
obliged thereto, and that I seemed content, at your departure, not to expect
any from you, till you had had the leisure to receive something from me. But
should you have done the less for that, and should you not rather have thought
it a pleasure to do me a kindness when I least looked for it? I had left you
ot your liberty; whether you would oblige me or no, you have made made use of
it, you have not written to me, because it was at your discretion to do it or
not. How then! if you had perceived that J would have been content to stay four
months for a Letter from you, should you not have written to me all that time,
for who can be content five weeks may as well twenty? To deal freely with
you, I know not what to think of it, might J object lightness to the noblest
mind, and surest heart in the world, J should conceive you changed. But any
thing seems more probable to me then that. However it be, assurre your self, my
M. (J call you so still, and that very heartily) my affection is not a whit
diminished. It only takes anay something of that secret joy which you had left
me in all my sufferings, and the satisfaction it was to me, to think, that
since J have known you, you have ever had a care, goodness, and kindness for
me great as J could wish, and that you never let s^ip any occasion wherein you
made me not the greatest expressions that might be expected, of a sincere and
perfect friendship. And though it be otherwise now, my love is never the less,
and you are as dear and precious to me, as when you would needs be let blood
every day for my sake, and were not afraid to shorten your own life, to
prolong the time you had to see me. J undergo my affl^ctions with much
constancy; and what troubles me most, is, that you have given me occasion to
imagine once in my life, that J were not the most ungrateful man in the world,
though J loved you but moderately, and with mediocritie.

LETTER XXIII.
M. D. M.
IN what darkness have you left me, and into what abyss am I now fallen since
I have lost your sight? I am more tender of your tranquillity, then to presume
to acquaint you with all the trouble you have put me to, though my afflictions
are come to that point, that I sometimes wish your love to me were not as mine
to you, lest you should suffer as I do. You will not think it strange I should
be so much disordered, if you consider the reason I have, and you will not
wonder I should take so much pains to get up again, after so high a fall. But,
my M. be but pleased to represent to your self what has happened to me in a
few days; fortune has directed me to the most amiable person in the world, I
have found her, I have seen her, I have loved her, she has discovered
abundance of good inclinations for me, I have lost her, and all this has
passed so luddenlie, and was done with so much precipitation, that I often
doubt, whether I have been so happy as I imagine I have, and that I have only
dreamed what has happened to me. And indeed to speak seriously, so much
friendship for me from a person I was hardly acquainted with, so much
confidence and resolution in a woman, so many excellent qualities in the same
subject, and many undiscoveted treasures at the same time; and on the other
side such a number of accidents one in the neck of another, such a throng of
good and bad adventures, are things that seem rather to have been imaginary,
then real; there being hardly a fable which is not so well contrived, as to
pretend to more probability then this. In a word, my M. the pleasant dream is
over, I know not what is become of all those felicities, my rest has been
disturbed, and, awakeing, I find my self in the blackest and most dismal
night that ever was. In the mean time, I endeavor to get it over with as much
patience as may be, and till the day does appear, I entertain my self with the
most pleasant imaginations I can. I censider with my self; that I derive joy
enough for the remainder of my life, from my having had your love, though but
for one minute, and that the very remembrance of this happiness, should engage
me to a cheerful suffering of all kinds of torments. I was not reasonable that
the most precious thing the world could brag of, should cost me nothing.
Fortune has been very just in forcing me to buy the heart you have bestowed
on me, and J am obliged to her, in that she has not called to me for
satisfaction for your love, till that after you had freely granted it me, at a
time when you owed me nothing, and that J could not look on it, but as the
largess of your own inclinations. J should therefore be very ungrateful, if
J should now be frugall of a few tears for a person who has lost so much
blood for me. I is now my turn to suffer, and it is but fit J should give you
some assurances of my affection, after J have received so many of yours. But
you are so good, that it is impossible J should suffer any thing in your
presence; and it was but necessary you should be at a distance, that my
martyrdom might be thought the more meritorious. In fine, my M. you see with
what thoughts J endeavor to moderate the bitterest sorrows in the world, and
to bear with the absence of the most accomplished, and most inviting person
that ever was. But, do what J can, J must needs confess, that many times my
resolution and my reason forsake me, and J easily perceive, that, if you
relieve me not I shall not be able to hold out long. Be pleased then to let me
hear from you as soon as possible; assure me that you are in health, and
command me to abate somewhat of my affliction.

To M. D. B. LETTER XXIV.
MADAME,
THe night is past with all other men, but not with me; since I cannot yet
discern any thing of what, of all things the world affords, I desire most to
know. It is long since that my mind has been overcast with such thick clouds,
that light can have no admittance, and the obscurity is so great, that I cannot
perceive any thing but confused and mis-shaped images of things, which
sometimes I am pleased with, but for the most part astonished at. Do you
therefore, in whom all the light and brightness of heaven seems to be centred,
dispell this darkness, and suffer me not to be any longer in doubt, whether I
am the most happy, or the most unhappie man upon earth. The sharpest
displeasure, and the most perfect joys are so interwoven, that one comes not
without the other, nay it often happens, that, at the same time, I am engaged
with incredible afflictions, and infinite enjoyments. Be pleased, I beseech
you, to separate these, and suffer not there should be so much disorder in a
place where you command; after so many riddles, tell me one intelligible word,
whereby I may know my good or bad fortune. For my whole soul, which I have
bestowed on you, I only beg, that you would but let it look into yours, and
that the dearest mind in the world, may not be ever the most obscure to me.
Consider what trouble it is to me, never to speak to you, but before a person,
who would prove a mortal enemy to my affection, if she came to the discovery
of it, and what torment it is, to make a perpetual comedy of a thing so
serious, and continual falsehoods the maskes and shrouds of such pure truths.
Enable me to do all this, have the goodness to make me eternally happy, by
saying one word only; suffer not the justest passion in the world to be most
unfortunate, or that I should die of grief for having perfectly loved the most
amiable person in the world.

To the same. LETTER XXV.
IT cannot possibly be otherwise then that you should use ^ome charm upon me
yesterday, when you made me acknowledge my self satisfied with you; for
certainly without some magical operation, it were impossible that by three
words, that signified so little, you should have made me forget the most
signal affront you were able to do me. In the mean time, certain it is, that
you laid my sorrows asleep, and so hansomelie surprised and eluded my
judgment, that in the most pressing grief I e^^r groaned under, I withal felt
the greatest joy I ever was sensible of. But the enchantment was soon over,
and, to my unhappiness, I recovered my understanding as soon as I had left
you, and after I had, in your presence, with much ado kept in the tears of
joy, I have all this night wept the most bitterly that could be. Let me do what
I can to humor my self, yet can I not but presently reflect on the
treacherous part you have played me, such as will never admit oblivion, and
has quite broken off all confidence and correspondence between us; and what is
most to be lamented, though there is all the reason in the world that I should
not love, yet I see not any likelihood how it can be done. All the sorrows,
whereof you yesterday stayed the course, have this day like a deluge overturned
all, and made such a disorder, that, unless (...) be the knowledge of my own
misery, and that my memory tells me that you are what is most amiable in the
world, I am utter^ie insensible of all reason, and discernment of things. This
is the condition I am in, which is such as seems incapable of my remedy. But
see withal what confidence I have in you! if I may this day receive but one
obliging word from your mouth; if you discover any one favorable look or
action, or but say within your self that you would have me recovered, I
question not but all my misfortunes are past, and that I shall forget all the
unkindnesse you have done me.

To the same. LETTER XXVI.
MADAME,
I Most humbly beg your pardon for it, but I must indeed confess, that I
have been satisfied with you these dozen hours. I know that, according to your
consideration of it. I could not have been guilty of a greater crime, and that
you are not offended at any thing so much in me, as that you should imagine I
entertained the least secret joy. Hence you may measure my gratitude, in that
though I am confident you will make me repent it, yet can I not but return you
my acknowledgements, and tell you, that, all this granted, there is no
affl^ction I would not willingly endure for your sake. You may therefore, if
you think good, ruin all my imaginations, and all my confidence, let me be
convinced that I have misunderstood whatever I have interpreted favourablie to
my self; let me perceive that my affection is indifferent, it may be
importunate to you. It Is happiness enough for all my life, to have imagined my
self though but for one half day, in your favor, and this very satisfaction
has enabled me to undergo all manner of inconveniences.

To the same. LETTER XXVII.
MADAME,
ARe you not the most implacable of any that ever were borne of your s^xe? you
are not satisfied that you show me not the least favor, nay, you are so far
from it, that you would not have me imagine so much, and as if you derived
abundance of reputation from my being perpetually sad, you are presently
offended if you find but the least complaisance in a corner of my mind. What
charge is it to you, I pray, if I flatter my self with some thoughts of my own
happiness, and entertain my self with such imaginary enjoyments as you
contribute nothing to, when in the mean time I have been so overreached, as
to cast my affection on the most ungrateful person in the world? Are you not
extremely unjust, after all this, to take it ill I should be at a loss of
discretion in other things, and that a man of so little conduct, should be so
ill a judge of himself? Be pleased then, in that at least, to let me take the
advantage of the irregularitie of my Reason, and the disorder you have put me
into. Had I my senses and intellectualls about me, I should not be so confident
that you loved me, nor indeed, had I them, should I do it; so that the
condition I am in considered, I cannot entertain a thought you should take any
offense it.

To the Same. LETTER XXVIII.
SInce you are so much afraid I should be too happy, and are extremely
disordered at whatever I magine, as if you were accountable for my thoughts,
yet is it but necessary I should discover them to you, and make you clearlie
understand what those confidences mean which raise so much hostility between
us. Though I die for it, I must give you a just account thereof, and knowing
the sharpness of your discernment, and that you are fully possessed of my
soul, it were in vain for me to pretend to conceal any thing of it from you. I
profess openly, I never entertained the least hope, desire, or, indeed,
imagination, that you had that affection for me, which I have for you: for,
conceiving you infinitely above any thing this Element affords, I could never
be persuaded you were subject to that kind of passion which cements together
two souls of the same nature... But proportionablie to the inclinations which
those spirits above are pleased sometimes to have for that part of mankind
which they take into their protection, I have thought it likely you might
regard my welfare, and that it was impossible, that the most generous soul in
the World should admit any passion but the purest that ever was. This
acknowleged, I must needs confess it has often happened, that some one action
of yours, a smile, the cast of an eye, a blush on some favorable occasion,
have sometimes raised a certain imagination in me that you abhorred me not; but
an imagination so weak, and so far from pretending to confidence, that it
signifies something less then opinion, a suspicion, or doubt, which lightly
moving upon my heart, left a certain track of light behind it, and filled the
rest of my soul with tranqu^llitie and joy. Now I have told you whence proceed
those enjoyments and satisfactions you are so highly offended with; but if
after this explication thereof you think them still unjust, I am ready to
disclaim them, for, I deal freely with you, were it in my power, to be so, it
would trouble my conscience to be happy, if you were unwilling I should, and,
having made an absolute conveyance of my soul, you are to make your own
advantages thereof; it is absolutely at your disposal, and it is wholly left
to your consideration, whether you would rather have it happy or unhappie.

To the Same. LETTER XXIX.
MADAM,
IF all that is handsome; all that is attractive, what ever has any
insinuation of delight, in this World were joined together, could it make us
any thing so amiable as you were last night? And was not all that the Poets say
of Smiles, Graces, and Loves, visiblie discovered about you at that time? Now
that I have been so happy as to have seen all this with my eyes, I make a
resolution never to complain of any thing,...

I know well enough it will cost me the rest of my soul; but may I perish if I
am troubled a jot at it! and had I the command of those of all the World
besides, I should heartily, with them all, purchase such a pleasure as that I
had when I saw you.

To the Same. LETTER XXX.
MADAM,
I Am now convinced I shall never get out of your hands, and that all the
designs I lay to recover my liberty prove ineffectual; for as you do every
day add some new unkindness to the former which raise in me some inclinations
to revolt, so I from time to time discover some new attraction that detaines
me; the increase of your perfections is proportionable to that of your rigours,
and according to both are my chains doubled. After I had used my utmost
endeavors to oppose whatever I thought handsome in your person, and your
intellectualls, it happen^ that when I see you again, I find in you some
beauty I never had observed before, and c^nsequentlie against which I was nor
prepared; and there is in you such a diversity of things amiable, that there
will never be a wanting some one against which I cannot m^ke my party good.

To M. de V. LETTER XXXI.
MADAM,
AFter fourteen Verses, you may very well give me leave to write fourteen
lines in Prose, and to tell you, in a language which is thought ordinarily to
speak more truly then the other, that I die for you. That Beauty whereof I
speak is much better written in my soul then it is here, and the image I have
conceived of it is such, that, when I celebrate you above Aurora and the Sun, I
say not any thing which I think not too mean, and which I conceive not below
you. Be pleased to consider, what quiet that mind must pretend to, wherein you
are so engraven, and which, perpetually reflecting on the most accomplished
thing in the World, amongst a many motives of desire discovers not, which way
soever it looks, any of hope. And yet, in this very condition, mine find,
content; it is so much taken up with a survey of your miraculous perfections,
and considerations of your beauty, that it both not time to bethink it self
whether I am loved or not, or be sensible that I die. The Idaea I have framed
to my self to you, and which I perpetually contemplate has such a command
over me, that I neither perceive what I want, nor what I endure; and while my
heart burns and is consumed, while it is disturbed by fears, desires, and
agitations, my thoughts are calm, and afford me joys exceeding those of
mankind. In the mean time, I must with all reason think, that my life cannot
last long at this rate, and (...) belongs to you, and is absolutely at your
dispos^* I thought it my duty to ^^ve you notice what danger it (...). It is
you^ part to take such order therein as you think good; for as to what concerns
me, I have not any thing to propose or beg of you concerning it, there being
in my will such an humble compliance with yours, that I give it not leave
either to wish the good you would not I should have, nor avoid the ill you
shall destine me to. All I have to say to you, is, that, you being absolute
Mistress of my Soul, it is not reasonable that all my felicity should consist
only in my imagination, and that it were, happily, but just, you should
entertain the most solid and sincere passion that ever was, with more real
and more solid enjoyments.

To Mademoiselle -- LETTER XXXII.
MADAM,
THe greatest pleasure I ever had in my life is that of having seen you, and
the greatest torment, that of being incapable to see you again. May I perish,
if my eyes could fasten on any thing they thought pleasant since I parted from
you! I have left at Blois all the enjoyments I was wont to find here, and I am
more disordered at Paris, then ever I was in any place. And yet I should be
much troubled to be less afflicted, and am even in love with my sadness when
I but consider that you would be satisfied with the sight of it. It is
certainly but just that so great a good fortune as that of having found you,
should cost me something, nay, though I forfeited all the tranquillity of this
life, I should not think I had bought it at too dear a rate. The least
reflection, or the remembrance of the most inconsiderable of your actions, or
of but some expression of yours, finds me a satisfaction, greater then the
affliction all the misfortunes in the World are able to give me, and, even at
the same time that I suffer, that I see you not, and am in doubt whether you
love me. I would not change conditions with those who are most fortunate, who
see, and who enjoy. So great resolution, where there is so much occasion of
disturbance, cannot certainly but raise in me a serious belief that you
dissembled not, when you told me that you had bestowed your heart on me; for
had I no other then my own, I were not able to hold out against so many
sorrows, and I am satisfied that I cannot have such an extraordinary strength
of my self, but must needs have derived it from you. To deal truly with you,
it is, I must confess a very strange adventure that is happened to me, to have
found in one single person, whatever this World calls amiable, to have no
sooner seen her then loved her, and to have no sooner loved her then lost her,
that my felicity has been raised and laid on an instant, and that, in so
short a time, I have had so much reason to enjoy and to bemoane my self.
However it be, I cannot but think that a happy hour wherein I saw you, and
would not part with the Idaea that remains of you in my imagination, for all
that is most substantial upon earth. I shall be further confi^med in this
opinion according to what answer you shall make me, which if it prove as
favorable as the words you last gave me, I shall think all I suffer for you
well bestowed. You may then safely slight the danger you say there is in
writing, and put your self to some hazard to deliver me out of that I shall be
in, if you quit your tenderness of me. Be pleased therefore to consider, that
nothing lays a greater obligation on a candid Soul then an absolute
confidence, and that it is but just, you should afford some little comfort to a
man, who desires no more, and cannot have any but what he receives from you.

LETTER XXXIII.
HAving had one of the worst nights in the World, it cannot be expected J
should have patience for a day of the same kind, and yet J cannot perceive how
this should prove any better, if you, who appoint my fortunate and unfortunate
times, are not pleased to order it otherwise. J thought my self yesterdaie,
when J took my leave of you, very well satisfied, and methought, there or four
words J had forced from you, had laid me asleep; but J had not gone ten paces
from your house, ere all my misfortunes fell upon me afresh; that distraction,
those fears, those jealousies, those diffidences which J had but newly shaken
hands with, made a general assault upon me, possessed themselves of my Soul,
and could never be gotten out since. Whether J sleep or wake, they are the
perp^tual employment of my thoughts and dreams: they have represented to me
whatever should prove most troublsome to me, and what I should most fear, and
have furnished my imagination with chimera's and extravagant apparitions. J was
in hope the day would have dispelled all this, but it is already far spent,
and yet J still see the same things. My Soul is a place where you exercise
supreme authority, suffer not there should be so much Anarchie where you are
accountable for the government: drive away these frightful images out of a
mind where there ought to be only your own, and let there not be so near the
most delightful object in the World, those that are the most hideous. J have so
much confidence in you, that if J have but three words from you, after the
reading of this Letter, J doubt not but J shall find immediate ^ase. J shall
be sensible hence of what you shall but whisper in your Chamber, and shall be
at rest as soon as you wish me so. Jf only your astonishment was the cause of
your silence yesterdaie, J beseech you let it not have the same power over you
to day; and since you cannot speak obliging things, but when your own
inclination directs you, be pleased to do it now when J am not near to
importune you, but beg it at a great distance, and with a great submission,
and am ready to assure you, that if it be your pleasure J should be unhappie J
would rather be so, then that there should be the least disconsonaneie between
your will and mine.

To Madam -- LETTER XXXIV.
MADAM,
When J had not so much as a thought of you, and was very much at ease, what
necessity had you to tell me in your Letter that it was your desire I should
be so? I was in the greatest ^e^en tie in the World, and you no sooner wish it
me, but it is changed into the greatest disturbance imaginable. The inevitable
privilege you have to disturb my quiet, is to me a very prodigious thing; I
can neither complie with your ind^fference nor your indignation, and it is a
great question whether I should stand more in fear of your bad then your good
inclinations. When I am in your favor, I can never be at rest, when I conceive
my self out ot it, I am withal out of all joy, and so which way soever I look
on you, In^ust still l^ok for disorder. The only means I know to secure my
self, is, not to think on you, and absolutely to discharge my memory of
whatever remains there of a person so amiable and withal so dangerous. This
was in a manner my condition when I received your letter, and you are come to
put all into commotion by wishing me peace and liberty. But since the
mischief is done there must be a patience to endure, and to see what will be
the result: but if it ever happen again while I live, that I can cease thinking
of you, for heavens sake, Madam, let me entreat you to spare your complements
of congratulation, and if you rejoice at my happiness, let it be done
secretly, so that I may be utterlie ignorant of it.

To -- LETTER XXXV.
MADAM,
I Shall not fail to wait on you at the Collation, though I were confident to
be poisoned; for I have already met with that venom in your Letter, that has
prepared me to receive all you can give me of the kind, nay indeed to desire
it. You need not have told me what strange alterations are wrought in men's
minds by Devotion, I know it already by experience on my self, since I must
attribute to it the change has happened in me that I cannot live without
seeing you. Three lines of what you have written have made another in me much
different. You should methinks have had more charitable considerations about
you, then to put your neighbor into any danger; and, if you are devout, you
are not, for ought I can perceive, troubed much with tenderness of conscience.
To deal soberlie and seriousl^e with you, it was a horrid impiety in you, to
have stir^'d up in me all those sentiments which I had with so much trouble
laid asleep, and I shall make my complaints to the bare-legged Carmelites, if
your future carriage prove not so favorable, as to oblige me to smoother them.

To Madam -- LETTER XXXVI.
MADAM,
I Thought my life so near spent that I had not the hope of one good day left
me, and it would happily have fallen out so, had I not received one this morning
from you. If there were any thing in me which you might not claim as your own,
this last f^vour of yours has infalliablie gained it y^u; and I must needs
tell you, that if hereafter I receive any other from you, I must confess my
self a bankrupt, and shall have nothing left me to return you for it. This I
tell you in very good earnest; and if it be not dangerous here to speak too
loud, when I cannot be heard of any one, I never thought my self so much
obliged in any thing, nor is it in my power to render you sufficient thanks
for the last act of Grace you did me. J may very well call it such, since it
has raised me again after the sentence you pronounced against me the other
day, and has inspired me with life amidst so many mortal afflictions. It Is
true that which J now lead is so unhappie, that J look on it as a present J
should not much value, were it not bestowed on me by you. For being to run
through fifteen days, ere J shall see you, J question whether it be not
cruelty to make me live so long. Yet J shall be content to do it, since it is
your pleasure to command it, and that J am much mote concerned in your
affection then...

To Mademoiselle -- LETTER XXXVII.
MADAM,
Unless I should send you Flower-de-luces, this world affords not any flowers
fit to make you a present, and therefore what I now send you are only strewings
for your feet. Nay indeed I much envy them that disposal, as conceiving they
will be much more glorious in that place, then if they were on the heads of
Queens. You will wonder much that a man who knows you so well should be
guilty of a presumption, great as as that of writing to you, and thence you
may measure the violence of my passion, since that at my age, and with my
countenance, it has forced me to the impudence to declare it to you, and that
so great a hazard as that of displeasing you could not oblige me to forbear. J
know, Madame, there cannot be any offenses more impardonable then what are
committed against you, and that J am not destined to die by any other hand then
yours. But I recommend my self to the disposal of my destiny, and what
misfortune soever may happen to me thereby, it is impossible J should avoid it.
While you read this, indignation makes you blush, and gnash your very teeth.
Yet J am as far from repenting me of any thing as ever, for J am now proof
against all, even the most extraordinary accidents, and am, though it cost me
my life, resolved to be eternally

MADAME, Your, etc

To Madame -- LETTER XXXVIII.
MADAME,
I Dare not acquaint you with the condition J am in, and after J have made such
brags of the Heart J have bestowed on you, am ashamed you should discover so
much the weakness of it. J was of a certain belief, that the assurance I had
of your affection, would have armed me against all afflict^ons of all kinds,
and that it was impossible, J should be loved by you, and unfortunate at the
same time. I, in the interim, find my self in as great disorder, as if J had
lost all things by the loosing of your sight, and am so much in torment as if
there were no other happiness or unhappiness in the world then that of your
company or your absence. Hence J infer, that our two souls are not yet well
sodred together, and easily discover that you have given me but a very small
part of yours, since J want a supply of courage to struggle with a single
affliction. It Is true, if we consider aright, that what I have to deal with, is
not of that kind of misfortunes which constancy teaches men to endure with
patience; nay Reason, with all its rigor and severitie, cannot disapprove so
just a suffering as mine, and if she will not permit me to regret the most
pleasing, the most inviting person, and the greatest Beauty in the world, she
cannot take it amiss I should grieve for the most accomplished, the most
generous and the most discreet. Though I should not be afflicted that I cannot
see you, yet that I hear you not is reason enough that I should, and have
withal an extraordinary resentment for the loss of a conversation that did
not only enlighten my soul, but enflamed it, and from which I never parted not
only a better man, but also a more amorous. If amidst so many occasions of
trouble it is possible I should admit any comfort, it must happen beyond my
expectation, and it will be much more convenient that you should give it me
then that I should take it of my self. Be you therefore pleased, Madame, who
have a better insight in all things then I have, and are particularly
acquainted with my heart and fortune, to tell me whether it be a rational
proceeding that my want of seeing you should be an infinite affliction to me;
or if you cannot convince me that that ought not to be; do but tell me that you
would not have it so, and that you command me to endeavor my own preservation
till I see you again.

To Madame -- LETTER XXXIX.
MADAME,
I Was beginning to grumble that you had made me no answer, when a report was
scattered up and down that you were to come hither shortly; which put me into
a better humor, and made this dis-satisfaction as short-lived as some others,
I have heretofore endeavored to entertain against you. I must confess indeed,
that I, who make it my business to call to mind all the excellent qualities
you carry about you, with as much entertainment as if I still saw them, should
certainly have forgotten all your kindnesses and civilities, if I thought you
could have forborne the expression thereof toward me in this occasion, and
have denied a man that comfort which you must needs think he could not but
stand so much in need of. To be free with you, I cannot believe there ever were
any afflictions comparable to mine, and though I was absolutely satisfied,
before I had left you, that your absence would have proved my death, yet could
I not imagine it should have done me so much mischief as it has. Billy, Gam,
and Phan, never wept so much in their lives for you as I have done, nay Biquet
was never so much troubled for you, as I have been though you never bestowed
any Roses on me. Seriously, Madame, I am just in the same posture at Paris, as
you were heretofore at la Basme, but that I have not the pleasure of buying any
sheep here, and if J understand any thing your humor, I durst swear your ten
years solitude seemed not so tedious to you, as that I have had, though but of
three weeks. I sometimes visit Ladies handsome enough, but do you imagine they
can so much as oblige me to speak? All women signify no more to meet the
present, then the man you know did to you, nay though they had all the Graces
about them, yet can they not find me a minutes entertainment. I cannot now, in
any company exceed a smile, and when I have viewed all about me, I retire and
slinke into a corner by my self. Be pleased, Madame, that the opportunity I
look for, may be with the soonest, and that after so much suffering, I may
enjoy your company, as you have formerly prophesied I should.

To -- LETTER XL.
MADAME,
THe Cannon of Arras has not done so much execution as the words you have
written to me; for these have in an instant, forced away the enemies that had
laid hold on me, and were ready to take away my life. Yesterday, is I came from
your house, I was surprised by a Troop of suspicions, fears, disturbances and
jealousies, and your Letter has defeated them all. They pursued me quite to my
lodging, and would not afford me one minutes rest all this night: you certainly
have more exquisite punishments for those that offend you, then my Lady
Ma^chionesse -- and by purting into my head what you do, you take a fuller
revenge then if you cleft it in twain. For you are to imagine that mine is at
the present, furnished with all that this world calls joy and grief,
satisfaction discontent, the greatest love and the greatest distrusts that ever
were, shuffled together. It must be your divinity, Madame that shall separate
all these, and since I have but three days to live, let me enjoy my self in
them free from all disturbance.

To -- LETTER XLI.
MADAME,
COnsider, I beseech you, the effects of your enchantments, since that, in the
condition I am in, they have made me utterly insensible of my misfortune, and,
being just upon the point of engaging with the greatest affl^ction could have
happened to me, I think my self the most fortunate man in the world. I am
within three days to take my last leave of whatever there is of beauty, wit
and gentleness, beneath heaven, nay I am to shake hands with all goodness,
Courtesy, and generositie. I know that at the same time I must part with all
joy, my life and soul and all; and yet, all this notwithstanding, I want not
my good Intervalls, and if I have not slept w^ll this last night, I may affirm,
J have not had an ill night of it. To say truth, one minute, such as I had
yesterday in the afternoon, is enough for a man's whole life. The very
remembrance of the felicity I have had, is consolation enough in all
occurrences, nay though J should have but dreamed it, it were enough to make me
eternally happy. You see what consideration my life wholly hangs on at the
present, and whereby it is armed against all manner of afflictions, since that
the happiness I can pretend to is only grounded on a certain faith I have that
you have some little affection for me. I humbly beg the continuance of it for
some time, and would not you should think it much to allow that satisfaction to
a man who is very suddenly to encounter with so many discontents.

To -- LETTER XLII.
MADAME,
YOu will understand by the Letter I writ to you this morning, that J complie
with you in all things; and J do now give you the greatest assurance J can
possibly, of my submission, when J return you what you had sent me. J find
them both so excellently handsome, that J could not resolve on any choice, and
therefore J refer my self to you. Yet J am, J must confess, as much taken
with the lesser as J am with the other, and in as much as she is more
sprightly and knows more dissimulation, she is so much the liker you. You may
now consider, whether you have not wit enough to find out an excuse for loving
two persons, when you have found out a way to make me in love with three. But
indeed there is no necessity for these Inventions, and if you consider how
innocent J am ever since this day, you will find J am to be disposed of at your
pleasure. But you shall never persuade me, after the receipt of the Letter J
last had from you, but that you are the merriest, the most amiable, and the
person the most given to Gallantrie and entertainment, of any in the world.

To -- LETTER XLIII.
MADAME,
I Have had my eyes often since yesterday in the same posture that you saw
them, but J have no sooner thought on yours, but my own were immediately
restored, and freed from all kind of distraction. J cannot imagine there can
any thing remain undiscovered in a person so full of Light, nor be persuaded
that Heaven should make a thing so excellent only to surprise men. The picture
I brought yesterday from your house has cured me of all misfortunes, and I no
sooner cast my eye on it, but all my ill inclinations are dispelled, all my
diffidences vanish, and my mind is replenished with content and complacencie.
This is the estate of my affairs while I write to you, and I dare affirm, the
world affords not a man more content, more happy, or more amorous then my self.

To -- LETTER XLIV.
MOnsieur de Castelnaut is in health, Monsieur de Mercaeur has been slightly
wounded, and the Marquess de Faure almost mortally.

I must needs commend your goodness, in that you are so tender of the dead and
wounded, and give you many thanks, for what concernment I may have therein. I
was my self to be numbered among the latter, the last time I saw you, but in
such a way, that I see not any probability I should ever recover it; and
unless it be, that I may never stir from your bedside, or farther then two
yards from you, I do not think it possible I should live. It is, questionless,
Madam, a very great indiscretion in you, to appear so amiable as you are, to
those whom you wish no hurt to; when I saw but half your charms and
excellencies, you had more about you then I was possibly able to endure. I
leave it to you to imagine what condition I must be in now. I have not had one
minutes rest since I left you. And yet this hinders not, but that I have so
much satisfaction and so much enjoyment of my self, that, were J to die within
an hour, J should not quarrel with you; besides that, since your departure
hence must be very sudden, and that J am to expect a most sad and unhappie
life, it were not fit J should much fear the loss of it, but rather be
extremely satisfied that you took it from mere you went hence.

To -- LETTER XLV.
MADAME,
IT must certainly be acknowledged that you do miracles as well in verse as in
prose, there is not any to be compared with you; for my part, it puts me into
the greatest amazement in the world. And when J consider how innocent you were
the last winter, when you durst hardly speak ordinary things, and were of
opinion, that the word Sophister was injurious, J am not able to comprehend,
how you came to do all you now can and that a person who never read but one
Comedy, should grow so learned. It is a miracle J understand not, may when J
heard the Nuns of Loudun speak Greek and Latin, J was not so much astonished
as I am now to see you write. All I beg of you, Madam, is, that you would not
make use of the wit you have gotten to overreach me, for I easily am
persuaded, that if you attempt it, I shall not be able to avoid it. I therefore
leave it to your conscience, requiring only you would be faithful to me, at
least till such time as you meet with another, who has a greater affection,
and a higher estem, and admiration for you, then I have.

To -- LETTER XLVI.
MADAME,
HAving well considered all that passed yesterday, my promises shall exceed
your desires; for assure your self, J shall never beg any thing of you, nay,
what is more, I will never see you. J have hardly taken my breath, since J made
such st^ange vows and resolutions to that purpose, that if ever J prove
delinquent hereafter, I must needs renew my addresses to you with the basest
heart, and the most perjured soul in the world. There must certainly be an
extraordinary weakness both in the one and the other, if ever they fall again
into your hands, after so much ill entertainment as they have received from
you, nay I shall justly incur all the mischiefs you are able to do me, if
the remembrance of those you have done deliver me not out of your power, A
small beam of light, descending as it were from heaven, has cleared up the
darkness I was in, discovered to me the Legerdemaine of your charms, and
convinced me, that she whom I thought yesterdaie the most inviting person upon
earth, is the most to be feared and avoided. Be pleased therefore to give me
leave to seek my quiet elsewhere, since I must not expect any near you, and
since there is no punishment you have not inflicted on me, and you know no more
torments to put me to, be not troubled I should get away from you, especially
considering it is not in your power to hinder it, and that at the same time
that you read this Letter, I leave Paris, with a resolution never to come into
it again, till you are out.

To -- LETTER XLVII.
MADAM,
NOthing so certain as that you are destined to be the perpetual disturbance of
my life, since that your kindnesses and unkindnesses are equally prejudicial
to my enjoyments. The Letter you writ to me yesterdaie, the affection you
pretended toward me, and the pains you took to speak with me, would not allow
me the least sleep last night. I spent it wholly in calling to mind the
perfections of your wit and behavior, in all that you said; and considering,
that what the world conceives most pleasant, most excellent, and most inviting,
was not comparable to the most trivial things you either spoke or did. I know
not what may become of me, but certainly, I am in a great fear, I shall not
be able to avoid that accident, which I told you yesterdaie you would be
extremely glad should happen to me. When I think you love me, I cannot sleep,
when I imagine you have cast your affections on another, I utterlie despair:
when I am at a great distance from you, I know not what I do, and when I see
you, all your actions, all your gestures, all your words, prove so much poison
to me. Hence you may be pleased to consider what kind of life I lead, and what
I must expect: there never was certainly any so full of disorder, and all the
hope I have, is, that your absence will shortly put a period to it, and
consequently deliver me out of all my miseries.

To Madam -- LETTER XLVIII.
MADAM,
YOu have, I must confess, much reason to laugh at me, who cannot but be much
ash^med that, after I had played the Hector so much, I am forced to discover
such cowardice and weakness. For ought I perceive, Madam, which way soever I
turn my self, I am never far from you. I have you perpetually in my heart,
and am as much at your disposal when J am in my Lodging as when in your Coach.
But if things be well considered, you are not to derive any reputation thence,
nor I dishonor, and since all this is wrought by enchantment and sorcerie,
there is not any thing you can with justice brag of, or reproach me withal. This
must needs be the true cause of this proceeding, for were there not something
supernatural in it, 'twere impossible, that, being so well acquainted with your
artifices, J should be so little able to avoid them, and that the most
mischievous person in the World should appear to me the most amiable. J beseech
you therefore, Madam, content your self with the mischief you have done me,
break the image you have made for me; or, if it be your pleasure J should
recover, be pleased, since nothing is impossible to you, to force me to believe
that you love me, and J shall cheerfullie endure all the miseries you shall
inflict on me.

To -- LETTER XLIX.
MADAM,
I Could not with any civilitie suffer your Lacqueie to go hence without a
Love-letter, and methinks it is much after the rate of those which may very
well serve a Millener's Wife, of your quality. J have subject enough ^o write
you one that were the most amorous in the World, if J should acquaint you with
the least part of what good inclinations my heart has in store for you. But
knowing how much you stand upon your advantages, I durst not let you know after
what manner you are there, nor be guilty of so much easiness of nature, as to
be drawn in with the present of a pair of Gloves, to discover my thoughts in a
business of such consequence. I am therefore to assure you only, that I have
received yours as I would do a Kingdom. They are indeed a most excellent
pair, I have kissed them above a hundred times, and that, I dare assure you,
more heartily, then I should have done the fairest hands in the World, were
they not your own.

FINIS.

