Vox Plebis: Or, THE VOICE OF THE OPPRESSED COMMONS OF ENGLAND Against their
OPPRESSORS.

Prove. 19.20. Hear counsel and receive instruction, that thou may be wise in
thy latter end. Prove. 11.21. Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be
unpunished: but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered. Printed in the
year 1653.

VOX PLEBIS.
SIRS,
BLame us not (seeing it is now high time after our many years sufferings and
tedious expectation to be delivered from our then declared pressures and
grievances) that we (by you declared) the free Commons of England should have
leave (for losers may have leave to speak) to tell you that we cannot but with
bitterness of spirit declare, That we wonder with what strange and unheard of
presidents, this Parliament has acted, there having never been any visible
rule for such actions in or by any Parliament before.

But leaving to speak of things that are past cure, let us come to expostulate
with you, about our future security, and that long promised good land, viz.
Peace, Freedom, and Justice; promised us at the beginning, and for which we
have with the expense of our Lives and Estates, so earnestly contested for.

Was it not unlimited prerogative, Corruptions in Law and Courts of Justice,
infringment of our liberties, illegal Taxes and the like, which was by you then
declared to be the misery of the Kingdom, a door and inlet to Tyranny and
Oppression? And was it not that Regal power might be limited by Law, not
proportioned by will? that the constitutions of our Laws might not be
destroyed, but reduced to their fundamental purity? that Justice might be
executed, and we preserved in our Liberties and Estates?

Give us leave then to the expostulate with you a little: How comes it to pass
that (notwithstanding all your promises made so solemnly in the presence of God
and the Kingdom) we reap not the harvest of this promised seed-time? How comes
it to pass, (we beseech you) that such fair blossoms, yield such slender
fruits? Whence grows this muttering, nay we may say groaning under, and
exclamations against Oppression, Tyranny, and Injustice in our streets, nay
Courts of (injustice) Justice we cannot call them, even at the Parliament-door,
nay within the Parliament House? How comes it to pass that so many irregular,
illegal, nay we may say unparliamentary proceedings are daily acted? Whence
proceeds this spirit of Ambition, Contention, Oppression, and Sedition, which
reigns so powerfully among you? We cannot be seduced to believe, that ever this
proceeds from principles of Law or Justice; but from principles of Ambition,
Usurpation, Pride, Covetousness or the like, which is made well known to us by
woeful experience, from the power of which, Good Lord deliver us, etc.

Can it (think you) consist with the Peace and Welfare of the Nation,
especially considering the state and temper of the people, that you who should
be acting for the Subjects liberty should drive on your own particular
interests? Is this to discharge the trust which you have in the presence of God
so often sworn to perform? Surely so long as you continue thus, we cannot hope
for any good, either by or from you.

What made you exclaim so vehemently against prerogative? Was it with intent
to destroy us by privilege? Did you exclaim against Injustice in others, that
your selves might be singular, yea superlatively unjust? Were corruptions in
the Law past cure, so that your Wills must be our supreme Law? Was the taking a
little of our estates illegal and Tyrannous in his late Majesty, but in you
Justice to take all? Is this the promised recompense for our labor? The return
of our expectation, the prize for which we have undergone so many dubious
changes in the wilderness of disorder and confusion, and for which we have shed
so much blood? Certainly we looked for the good Land of Peace, but behold
Oppression? We looked for liberty, but behold slavery! and our end is worse
then our beginning.

And now having with sorrow of heart given you some hints of our present
insufferable sufferings, take notice (we beseech you) of some of our desires,
which in the first place we expect speedy satisfaction.
First, Cast your eyes back into the rock, out of which you were hewn; were you
not our fellow-Commoners? Were not every one of us as equally, fully, and
properly interested in the safety, welfare, and government: of the Kingdom, as
any (or all) of you? Did you not receive your power from us for our good? And
have you not declared your selves to be our servants, and to be accountable to
us by whom you were empowered and entrusted? Have you not likewise declared,
that all intrustments are, and ought to be for the good of the Trusters? Upon
this ground we the free Commons of England expect from you the performance and
discharge of your duty herein, together with the following particulars.

Secondly, Have you not declared, that the Law ought to have been the rule of
the Kings actions, and must it not be of yours? Certainly you have sometime
confessed, that they that give Law to others ought not to be above Law, or
without themselves? Therefore we do expect, that all unlawful, unparliamentary
actions, either within or without the House, publicly, or privately, either by
the whole House, or any particular member, or any other by them entrusted or
improved, be publickely declared against, and that a way be opened for just
reparation against all such arbitrary and exorbitant practices.

Thirdly, Have you not declared, That no free Commoner ought or might be
dis-infranchised of his liberty without Indictment, and that the fining and
imprisoning men without due process of Law, was a breach upon the Law, and
destructive to the subjects liberty? How comes it then to pass, that since your
declaring it to be so unjust in others, you have so frequently used it your
selves, to the reproach of the Nation, and breach of the trust reposed in you
by us? What prison has been free; nay, what County or Corporation but has
some sufferers, being imprisoned by the arbritary, subject destroying power of
your Committees, who for the most part are composed of such as your selves; men
without souls, unconscionable wretches? the misery whereof we expect a speedy
redress of, it being your own declared duty, and suitable to both law and
conscience: that being no way lawful in you, which was by you condemned in
others.

Fourthly, Did you not complain that the Kings favorites spent the Kingdoms
money, and converted the public stock to private uses? and may not we the poor
Commons complain now of the like, or rather worse practices, considering the
vast sums of money levied upon us, which rather increase then decrease;
notwithstanding the incredible sums by you received, by Excise, Bishops lands,
Deans and Chapters, Kings Revenues, Delinquents Estates, etc. with many other
hellish inventions whereby you grind the face both of the Gentry and Commonalty
of this Nation, to the utter decay of Trade and Commerce.

Besides, has not much (nay, I may say the greater part) of these been shared
amongst your selves, thousands in a morning? but for what memorable service we
know not, unless it be for keeping us in perpetual slavery.

Fifthly, How you, exclaimed against his late Majesty, for protecting
Delinquents, and keeping them from trial: How comes it to pass then that you
your selves have protected and abetted so many false and Traitorous members,
under pretense of privilege? We conceive (by your leave) the late Kings
prerogative was a far better plea then your privilege, therefore we expect a
speedy suspension of all persons charged with any crime; and that all persons
that have acted to the prejudice of the Kingdom (by cozenage, injustice) or
otherwise, be speedily brought to condign punishment.

Lastly, Forasmuch as it is pretended, that (notwithstanding the vast sums of
moneys that have been raised) the State are not able to maintain war with the
Dutch, and maintain our standing Army without taxations, etc. We answer, That
forasmuch as it is apparent, that vast sums of money remain in the hands of
several Ministers of State, (as Parliamentmen, Committeemen, Excisemen,
Sequestrators, etc.) unaccounted for, to our great loss and prejudice, we
desire, that you would speedily call them to an exact account of all such sums
of money by them received and detained, and to employ it for the service of the
Kingdom, which would somewhat abate our heavy burden, under which our backs
are ready to crack.

Much more might be said, but we shall for this time conclude, desiring and
expecting the due execution of justice and judgment; and that all means be
used for the ease, peace, and safety of our dominions. That our burdens may be
removed, the accounts of the Kingdom perfected; the Public Faith, and other
Public debts satisfied; our grievous burdens by taxations and otherwise
eased; and our Petitions for Peace and Justice from time to time (without
danger of being murdered by you Red-coated-slaves) freely received. And so we
expect the fulfilling of these our desires, immediately laying aside all
by-respects and self ends; and unanimously act for the good of the nation,
giving a speedy testimony thereof by walking in the ways of justice and
righteousness, that thereby we may be secured in our just rights and liberties;
which if you neglect to do, we shall not only be necessitated to curse the time
we ever entrusted you; (which we have already repented us of) but also to
prosecute you as persons wholly bent to destroy our lives and liberties, and to
let confusion and desolation break in upon us. Therefore seriously consider of
what we have laid open to you, and neglect not this fair opportunity put into
your hands to do good; for if you do, the vengeance of God shall dog you at the
heels, and you shall be abhorred both of God and man, and we shall be driven to
take such a course as providence and our pressing necessities shall lay before
us, and leave the issue thereof to God, who is able to direct and protect us in
all our undertakings.

These are the Resolutions of us the distressed Commonalty of England.
April 1. 1653.
FINIS.

