THE VOICE OF THE LIGHT Unto the People called Quakers, In relation to TITHES.

LONDON: Printed for James Collins in the Temple-passage from Essex-street.
1678.

The VOICE OF The LIGHT, etc.
THus says the Light: Woe unto you Quakers! for ye are an evil and perverse
Generation; a Generation that walk not in the Light, but love your own darkness
better than the Light; you honor the Light with your Lips, but your Hearts and
Ways are far from it.

For the Light will tell you, and if you open your Eyes you must see it, that
you live under, and are protected by the National Laws; that those fix and
determine men's Rights, and were it not for them, every man would call that his
own, which he could take from another by force; and so we should fall into a
state of War, and be wild Beasts one to another. The Light will tell you that
Laws preserve what we have, and make it ours: And that the same Laws that made
the Ninth part of increase yours, give the Tenth unto the Minister or Rector.
Now hereby are ye condemned, O ye Quakers! for you take and enjoy the benefit
of the Laws as to your own part, but contradict and oppose the Law as to his:
And therefore, thus says the Light, The same measure you meet, may be measured
to you again; and as you will not allow the Law as to the Rectors right, others
by the same reason may refuse to allow it as to yours: and so every one may
take and withold your Goods from you by your own law, and rule of practice:
and here is foundation laid for universal confusion. So that in this, O ye
Quakers, ye are Enemies to the Light, to your own, and the Rights of Mankind.

The Light says, Thou shall not Steal. Now Stealing is either taking or
detaining that which by Law or Custom is another; in this also ye Quakers sin
against the Light, by taking the Tithes, which are none of yours: For there is
neither Law nor Custom that gives you any right in them; neither did you or
your Forefathers ever buy or pay for them; they were still reserved and paid
elsewhere; and the Seller abates of his rates on consideration that the Lands
are Tythable: So that you will have what you never did or could buy; and in
this you make your selves Thieves and Robbers, and Enemies to the Light.

The Light says, Do unto others as you would that they should do unto you: But
ye rebel against the Light, and deal with others as you would not be willing to
be dealt withal your selves. If you have right in a Common by ancient Law or
Custom, you would not have the Privilege taken from you; nor be willing it
should be enclosed for the use of a private person, who can claim but his
share; and yet you shut others out of their Common, and enclose all the
Increase of your Field to your selves, contrary to the most ancient Laws and
Customs of the Kingdom; and in this the Light condemns you.

The Light tells you, that you should Give unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's; and Tithes are due by Caesar's Laws and Caesar has the Tenth of them;
so that you deny the Kings Right, as well as the Ministers; and in this also
you contradict the Light.

The Light forbids you to remove ancient Landmarks; but this you do, and break
the bounds which your Forefathers, set and owned: they confined your rights
and properties within the Nine parts; but you would enlarge them to the whole
Ten, and so break over the bounds, and rebel against the Light.

The Light says, Give unto every man his due, Tribute to whom Tribute is due,
Custom to whom Custom: Now Tithes are Tribute to the King, and Custom to the
Minister: So that your withholding Tithes, on this score also, makes you
Enemies to the Light.

The Light says, that as far as is possible, you should live peaceably with
all men; but you will not let men live in peace by you, but force them into Law
and trouble against their wills, to defend their own just rights, which you
would take from them; and in this you are Enemies to the Light, and to the
peace of your neighbors.

The Light says, Give no offense neither to Jew nor Gentile, nor to the Church
of God. But you wilfully give great ground of provocation and offense to them
that meddle not with you, by taking their Bread from them, and putting them to
much trouble and vexation to get their own; and in this likewise you act
against the Light.

The Light says, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors goods; but you Quakers
covet and usurp the livelihood of other men, and many times bring them and
their Families to beggary and ruin, by withholding their Bread from them and
their Children: So that the Light condemns you for Persecutors, and Oppressors,
ravening Wolves in Sheeps clothing.

The Light says, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor; but
you bitterly Revile, Reproach, and Slander Ministers for receiving their own,
as if they were Thieves and Robbers for so doing: So that your Tongues are not
guided by the Light, but set on fire of Hell.

The Light requires that we should do things honest in the sight of all men;
but you Quakers, in carrying away Tithes that are not yours, do what is
dishonest in the sight of all men, except your selves, whose Eyes Covetousness
and the God of this World seems to have blinded; so that you see not, or
pretend not to see that right belonging to Ministers, which is so clear, and so
apparent to all the world besides: in this you show your selves men of corrupt
minds, that make Gain Godliness, and love the wages of unrighteousness, and so
the Enemies to the Light.

The Light says, Let none of you suffer as an evil doer, as a Thief, as a
Murderer, etc. For if men are buffetted for their faults, what thanks have
they? But you expose your selves to just sufferings as evil doers, for
oppressing, and defrauding, and robbing your Neighbors: And in this you glory
as if it were suffering for Conscience and Religion, when it is suffering for
plain knavery and theft: And Highway men and Cut-purses have as much reason to
glory in their suffering, and to cry out Persecution, Persecution, as you: So
that you abuse the sacred name of Conscience, and profane Religion, by this
your vain and absurd glorying, and sin against the Light.

The Light says, Let your yea be yea, and your nay nay: It requires plainness
and simplicity in our speeches; but you Quakers use words of deceit, and tricks
and evasions to color your injustice in withholding Tithes. You bid Ministers
prove Tithes due by the Gospel-rule. It were not hard to do it to men of any
tolerable understanding, and indifferency of judgment; but there is no need of
it, they are certainly and most undoubtedly due by the Laws of the Land, which
are enough to give right. You say there is no mention of Tithe to be paid upon
your Leases: but you knew when you bought that the Seller could convey but the
nine parts to you; the Tenths beyond all memory of time were transferred
elsewhere; and if you had bought Tythe-fee, you must have given more for your
Purchase. You say, If the Minister has any right in your Field, let him tell
whereabout his due lies: A piece of vain Sophistry! Let me ask them the same
Question; If they have right of feeding in a Common, let them tell me where
their particular share of Grass lies? Their answer to this, will serve for one
to themselves: where more have interest, the particular shares cannot be
determined till division be made; and when their sheaves are counted, the
Minister can easily tell what is his. By such silly shifts and pretenses, O ye
Quakers, you plainly show your juggling and insincerity, that you are led by
carnal reason, the reason of your obstinacy and worldly interest, and not by
any principle of Truth or Light.

The Light says, you should rather suffer wrong, than do any: men may quit
their personal rights without sin, but cannot take another without it; so that
if the case was doubtful whether Tithes are due or not, the safer way was to
let them go, rather than contend; or if they were not due really, it were much
honester to part with them to those on whom Laws and constant Custom have
placed them, than to offer violence to the Laws, to thwart ancient Usage, to
trouble our Neighbors, and to offend and disturb Governors by detaining of
them: So that in this also you rebel against the Light.

The Light commands you to submit to every Ordinance of man, to be subject to
the higher Powers, to obey Magistrates; and these have enacted, and most
solemnly commanded the payment of Tithes to Ministers, through all times; and
therefore, O ye Quakers, by denying this payment, you rebel against their
Authority, and refuse that subjection to them that God has made their due, and
so you affront and sin against the Light.

The Light bids us to eschew all appearances of evil; but to break ancient
Customs, to oppose legal Establishments. and to withold that which the Laws
have made due to others, has at least an appearance of evil; and therefore in
this also, O ye Quakers, you transgress against the Light.

So that thus says the Light, Repent and return, O ye Quakers; for Oppression
and Violence is in your hands, and the ways of Justice and Peace you have not
known. Turn your eyes to the Light, and your hearts to righteousness and
judgment, that you may do justice and love mercy, and walk as Children of the
true Light that enlightens every one that comes into the world.

Amen; so says the Light.
FINIS.

