The Earl of Warwicks LETTER To the Right Honorable, The Committee of Lords and
Commons AT DERBY-HOVSE, CONTAINING A NARRATIVE OF His Proceedings in Pursuit of
the Revolted Ships, And their declining the Engagement: And of the Conjunction
of the PORTSMOVTH Fleet with the Lord Admirals.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith
printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
September. 6. 1648.

To the Right Honorable, The Committee of Lords and Commons at Derby-house.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
BY my Letter of Thursday last I gave your Lordships a brief account of our
condition.

I shall take leave now to trouble your Lordships with a more particular
representation of our proceedings.

On Tuesday morning 29 August, the Fleet with me proceeded down as low as the
Shoe, where the Tide of Flood coming in, we anchored.

In the Forenoon of the same day we discovered a great Fleet of Ships coming up
into the River; and by a signal from the Adventure Frigot (sent out the 28 for
advice) we found them to be the Revolted Ships: at their coming nearer we saw
their three Flags, and made them to be (small and great) at least twenty in
number.

We had by this time a very great experiment of the Mariners affection, those
aboard my Ship applying themselves to a preparation for fight with the greatest
alacrity that ever I saw, there being not one of them that discovered the least
aversness to engage, or unwillingness to lay down his life for the Enemies
reduction; which (as the Captians informed me) was likewise the general temper
of the rest of the Fleet: And truly the special influence of God upon their
Spirits was visible to admiration, and (which I value as no small Privilege
and Honor to this undertaking) their eyes, hearts and prayers were so advanced
to Heaven (as the place only from whence they expected their help) that it was
a great engagement to our faith, that God would manifest and engage his sp^cial
presence and power amongst us and for us, in the issue of this Service.

The place where we that day anchored was full of Sands, and the Channel
narrow; therefore about Noon we began to ply up toward the Buoy of the
Oze-Edge, endeavoring to keep the advantage that God had given us, of being to
the windward of the Enemy. That night we anchoring off the Buoy of the
Oze-Edge, and the Enemy at about a League distance from us, the Prince sent me
a Summons by Mr. Henry Seymour about eight of the clock, which I received, and
answered, as I gave account in my last to your Lordships; wherein, of the
Summons, and of my Answer, I enclosed a Copy.

The same Tuesday night I consulted with a Council of War, where we determined
how to manage the next days action; the sum of our Resolution being, That every
Ship should weigh, and be loose at the windward tide, and get and keep the wind
of the Enemy if possible, and assist each other to the best advantage, if
engaged; but not on that day to begin the Engagement on our part, we being
every hour in expectation of the Portsmouth Ships, and the Channel where Gods
Providence had cast us being so narrow, that in case of Engagement some of the
Ships would have been necessarily forced upon the Sands, and so destroyed
(which inconvenience we considered might be prevented by the Portsmouth Ships
falling upon the Rere, while we fell upon the Van of the Enemies Fleet) yet
withal to keep our ground about the Oze-Edge, being a place of more advantage
then many others thereabouts.

That night and the next day, viz. the 30 of Aug. till about Noon, all was
quiet (the Mariners retaining their former Spirit of Courage, Unanimity and
Resolution) and then the Tide of flood coming on, the Enemy weighed; I also
weighed with the Fleet under my Command, which plying up and down some hours
according to the Resolutions of the Council of War, maintained the advantage of
being to the windward of the Enemy, and expected, without scruple, a sudden
Engagement, the weather also being fair, and a Calm expected rather then
otherwise: But about four in the Afternoon there fell so great a Gale of wind
(amounting to no less then a Storm) that the Admiral of the Revolted Ships,
with his whole Fleet, was forced to come to anchor, and so were we, there being
no action the remainder of that Afternoon, nor the night following, during
which the Admirals of the two Fleets rode about a League each from other.

That day I sent forth a Vessel to enquire after the Portsmouth Fleet.

On Thursday morning 31 Aug. I called a Council of War; and then it was again
considered, That the Portsmouth Fleet was not yet come in, nor heard of; That
some Ships of this Fleet (specially the great ones) would in all probability be
forced on the Sands, if we should here engage; which would also produce the
like effect as to some of the Revolted Ships, whereby the strength of the Navy
would be much impaired; That a few hours expectance might bring in the
Portsmouth Fleet, whereby we might not only proportion the Enemies strength,
but also by Gods blessing disable their return: We considered withal, That on
the miscarriage of this Fleet depended the miscarriage of the Portsmouth Fleet,
and the putting of very high advantages into the Enemies hand, further to
prejudice the Trade of the Kingdom, and to make their strength at sea much more
considerable: Upon which, and some other grounds then offered, it was (amongst
other things) unanimously Resolved upon the Question by my self, the
Commissioners of Parliament, and the rest of the Council of War (consisting of
twelve in number) not one voice contradicting it, That the Ships of this Fleet
should observe the Enemies motion, and if he ply up, then to ply up before him,
keeping as much as might be to the windward, and declining at present an
Engagement, unless it should be unavoidable; and that in case the Enemy should
weigh, and fall downwards, this Fleet should follow them, yet at such a
distance, that there might be room enough with convenience to anchor, and to
succor the Portsmouth Fleet, in case they should be in sight; and so we
prepared our selves, in expectation of an Engagement that Afternoon.

But by the time that these and some other Resolutions of the Council of War
were digested, and ready to be signed, the Viceadmiral of the Revolted Ships
did, about ten in the Forenoon, weigh, and shortly after so did the rest; and
forthwith their whole Fleet stowed away: I did thereupon give order to the
Fleet with me to weigh; and as soon as my Letter to your Lordships of that day
was dispatched, we gave them chase, some of our Ships keeping at a small
distance: Of which, the Adventure Frigot espying a Fleet a head of the Enemy,
shot a Gun, in token they were the Portsmouth Ships: Whereupon I made all the
Sail I could, to the end this Fleets conjunction with the Portsmouth Ships
might be improved to the more effectual engaging of the enemy, though the Fleet
supposed by Captain Ball to be from Portsmouth, proved other Ships.

Afterward night being come, and the Pilot conceiving it dangerous further to
proceed so near the Sands, I anchored near the middle of the Gunfleet, about a
League and a half short of the enemy (who by shooting off a Gun, and haling up
their Sails, gave cause of confidence that they were also coming to anchor)
purposing to weigh early next morning to pursue them, and appointing some Ships
of this Fleet to lie near to observe their motion.

The next morning the first of September. we found that the Revolters had
withdrawn themselves in the night* and about six of the clock we discovered the
Portsmouth Ships (conceived to be those, by the many Guns that passed by way of
salute (as was interpreted) betwixt them and some of this Fleet that went up to
them) whereupon I gave order to weigh, but the wind grew so high, that the
Pilot delivered his opinion, This Ship would not in such weather be able to
sail, without danger of siding upon Gunfleet Sands; whereupon we remained there
at anchor all that day, the wind continuing to night very high.

This day being the second of September, we weighed from the middle of
Gunfleet, and about ten in the Forenoon met with all the Portsmouth Fleet
(other then some of the smaller Vessels that retired into Harwich for shelter
against the yesterdays Storm) and so we proceeded together to Albrough Rode, to
enquire after the Revolted Fleet; where anchoring, I spoke with the Captains
that came from Portsmouth, who represent their several Companies to be as
cordial and resolute for the enemies reduction as could be desired.

Since my coming hither, I have endeavored to inform my self which way the
Revolters are gone, and find it most probable that they are retired to Goree,
there being not the least intimation in these parts, that they are gone
Northwards: Therefore I shall (God willing) repair to morrow morning toward
the Downs, where I shall expect your Lordships further Commands; intending in
the mean time to send an Express to Holland, for a certain account whether the
Ships are in G^rce, that I may be in a quicker capacity to put in execution
such Orders as shall be given me in charge concerning them. I shall add no
more, but to commend it to your Lordships consideration, whether it may not be
necessary, That the Order be renewed for indemnity to the Revolters, upon
their submission to the Parliaments Obedience, and to rest,

Your Lordships, etc. affectionate and humble Servant, WARWICK.
Aboard the St. George in Albrough Rode, 2. Sept. 1648. I have written to
Colonel Temple to take off the restraint of Ships passage by Tilbury Fort, Any
Order or Desire from me notwithstanding.



FINIS.

