HIS ROYAL HIGHNE^S The Duke of SAVOY's Proclamation On BEHALF of the VAVDOIS.
VICTOR AMEDAEUS II. By the Grace of God Duke of Savoy, Prince of Piedmont,
King of Cyprus, etc.

WHEREAS we have been obliged by the reiterated and pressing Instances of a
Foreign Force overpowering us, to issue forth the Edicts of the 31st. of
January, and 9th. of April, 1686. against our faithful Subjects the Protestants
of the Valleys of Lucerne, Perouse, St. Martin, and the Neighboring Places,
viz. Prarustino, St. Bartholomew, and Roche-Platte. And whereas we have been
invited to receive them into our Favor, by the manifest Proofs of Fidelity,
and Authentic Marks of Zeal for our Service, which these our Protestant
Subjects have given, and continue to give us: As also in consideration of the
Instances of his Majesty the King of Great Britain, and of their High and
Mightinesses the States General of the United Provinces in the Low Countries;
by these Motives we have thought fit not to defer any longer to make it appear,
That they are altogether restored to our Favor, that they may be the more
excited to make themselves worthy of it. And by these Presents, which we will
to have the Force of an Edict, from our certain Knowledge, full Power, Absolute
Authority, and by the Advice of our Council, Repealing and Disannulling, as we
Repeal and Disannul the said Edicts of the 31st. of January, and 9th. of April,
1686. and their Ratifications: As also all other Declarations of Punishment,
Sentences, Ordinances, and all other Acts and Orders issued forth in execution
of the said Edicts against the forementioned Protestants, in such a manner as
that they shall remain for the future of no Force, nor Effect, as though they
were never issued forth. And likewise we give a full Release and entire
Remission, Absolution, and Abolition, as far as it is or may be necessary, of
all the Infractions to the said Edicts, and of all other Excesses of what
nature and quality, and how enormous soever they may be, that might be ascribed
to the said Protestants, and that should require a particular and individual
Mention; as also of all the Punishments declared against and incurred by them
both in general, and by private persons. We restore the said Protestants, and
all those that have either abetted, advised, or favored them, in their former
Honors and our Favor, as they were before the Infractions to the said Edicts;
Ordaining, That all those of our Protestant Subjects who may be yet detained
Prisoners, and all their Children of what Sex, Age, and in what Place soever of
our Dominions they may yet be detained, shall immediately be released, without
paying any Fees, and left at full liberty to return with their Parents into the
said Valleys, and there profess their Religion, without being molested or taken
notice of, as well they as any body else, for the sake of any Act of their
Religion, or Abjuration they themselves or their Fathers may have made, as
being extorted from them by Violence. Forbidding for this purpose, to bring any
hindrance or difficulty, by concealing them, or in any other manner whatsoever,
to their returning into the said Valleys, and much less to offer them the least
Violence; which is likewise forbidden to the said Protestants against the
Catholics, who shall be willing to remain in these our said Dominions, and to
continue to exercise the Catholic Religion. And we will that our Governors and
Judges of Places be bound to see the forementioned things performed; and that
the said Protestants of both Sexes be no ways forced nor hindered to use in this
their free will, and be at full Liberty to return into the said Valleys.
Moreover, we restore the said Protestants to, and will that they be maintained
with their Children and Posterity in the Possession of all and every one of
their Ancient Rights, Edicts, Customs, Uses, and Privileges, as well in respect
of their Abode, Trade, Commerce, of the Exercise of the Religion they profess,
as of any other thing, none excepted, even as they were before the said Edicts:
Reestablishing and Restoring the Protestants in the quiet and peaceable
Possession and Enjoyment of all their Goods; Lands, Houses, Hereditaments,
Titles, Debts, Actions, and all other things, which shall yet be found in being
and Nature, and of which it may be made out by any sort of proof, That they
have belonged to them immediately before the said Edicts; commanding all those
that may be possessed, by any Title whatsoever, of the Goods and Effects which
have formerly belonged to the Protestants before the said Edicts, That in
obedience to this, they restore and deliver them to their free and peaceable
enjoyment, without vexing or molesting them in any manner, either at this
present or for the future, under what pretense soever it may be. Forbidding
them and all our Subjects their Adherents, now and for the time to come, on
account of the forementioned Infractions, their Consequences and Dependencies,
by the Magistrates, Judges, Officials, Fiscals, or any other that may be
thought fit, to offer them any further Molestation either Real or Personal, in
such a manner as they may never be troubled, either in general or in
particular, nor disturbed by any means whatsoever, either in their Persons or
Goods, by reason of the foresaid Infractions or Abjuration they may have made,
as having been violently extorted from them, as aforesaid. And therefore
following the Example formerly practiced by our Ancestors in the like cases, we
enjoin a perpetual and final silence to our Fiscals, or any other that may be
necessary; Declaring null and void from henceforth whatever may ensue to the
contrary, promising our Protection to all those who shall be Molested or
Disturbed notwithstanding this our Declaration: And besides, giving leave to
every Person Born in the said Religion, and making Profession of it, freely to
go in order (...) themselves in the said Valleys, but first taking; at the
hands of our great Chancellor, the due and usual Oath of Allegiance, viz. That
they shall be and live Good, Faithful, and Obedient Subjects to us and to our
Successors to the Crown, during their Abode in the said Valleys; wherein they
may possess Lands within the prescribed Limits, and there enjoy the same
Privileges and Prerogatives, none excepted, which are or may be enjoyed by the
Protestants, natural Inhabitants of the Country, except the French in regard
to whom this Concession shall terminate Ten years after the [Future] Peace.
Declaring besides, That those of the Valleys of Pragela and Perouse, who shall
have occasion to come and settle themselves in those of Lucerne, and other
Dependencies of our Dominions within the Limits mentioned in this present
Edict, for the s^ke of any Inheritance, Substitution or Marriage, shall have
power to do it at any time, provided they come to settle themselves entirely
there, leaving their Abode in the said Valleys of Pragela and Perouse; and we
will also that our Protestant Subjects, that may settle themselves in the said
Valleys, shall not have Power to Molest by any means the Catholics Inhabiting
the same, under any pretense whatsoever; allowing however all the Protestant
Inhabitants of our said Valleys, to Buy and Acquire, without Violence, and
Freely, all the moveable and unmovable Goods, that are contained within the
Bounds of our said Valleys, in what hands soever they may be. And therefore we
Enjoin, and Command all our Magistrates, Ministers, and Officers, and all
others whom it may concern, to observe these Presents, and cause them to be
strictly observed: And to our Senate and Chamber of Piemont, to ratify and
approve them in all things and as far as may be requisite, without any
difficulty or contradiction. And we will that they be Published in the usual
Form in the several and respective Places of our said Valleys, and wherever it
shall be necessary; and that the same Credit be given to a Copy Printed by our
Printer Valetta, as to the Original it self; for such is our Pleasure.

Given at Turin; the 23 d. of May, 1694. V. Amedeo, V. Bellegarde

Reg. Gallinati. De S. Thomas.
The Chamber of Accounts of his Royal Highness.
LET it be known to every one, That we have seen the abovewritten Edict,
Confirmed under the hand of his Royal Highness, issued forth in due Form,
Sealed and Subscribed De S. Thomas, given in this City the 23d. of the present
Month: And having heard the Conclusions of the Seignior Count Peter Frances
Frichignono de Castelengo, Councellor, Senator, and Advocate-General of his
said Royal Highness, to whom it has been communicated; and having considered
the Tenure of it (as far as it concerns and belongs to this Court): We have
ratified, admitted, and approved, and by these Presents, ratify, admit, and
approve that Edict, with the following Declarations, as to what concerns the
Limits mentioned in the same Edict, understanding the same, which are expressed
and prescribed in the last Edicts, and declared to be the said Bounds: provided
that the Persons and Goods of the present Inhabitants, and of all others that
shall take for the future their Abode in the Valleys, and Places mentioned in
the said Edict, and in the meaning of the same, be respectively obliged to all
the Charges, Gabels, and Impositions, as they were bound and obliged to his
Royal Highness, and his Princely Successors, before the Edicts of the 31st. of
January, and 9th. of April, 1686. and as other Subjects are, and remain
obliged: And as to the rest, according to it is Form, Meaning, and Tenure,
enjoining that it be Registered in our Records, that recourse may be had to it
upon occasion: In confirmation of which, we have granted these Presents.

Given at Turin, the 25th. of May, 1694. By the said Most Excellent Chamber,
Aymo.

The Senate of his Royal Highness Sitting at Turin.
LET it be known to evey one, That we have seen and read the above-written
Order of his Royal Highness, given at Turin the 23d. of this present May,
Consirmed, duly issued forth, and Sealed by his Royal Highness, and Subscribed
de S. Thomas: And that having considered the Tenure of it, and the Conclusions
of the Seignior Count Peter Frances Frichignono, Councellor, Senator, and
Advocate-General of his said Royal Highness, to whom it has been Communicated;
inasmuch as it concerns and belongs to this Sovereign Court, we have admitted,
approved, and ratified, as by these presents we admit, approve, and ratify it:
And withal Declare, That the Restoration of the Vaudois, or others of the
Reformed Religion, of which mention is made in the present Edict, is to be
understood to comprehend only and merely the Goods, Debts, and Actions of which
they have been deprived on that occasion, and in consequence of the Edicts that
were issued forth the 31st of January, and 9th of April, 1686. And that from
them are excepted the Debts, or Actions of any Persons whatever, upon the Goods
and Persons of the same People, before the said Edicts. We likewise declare,
That as to the Goods that were then bought, in which the said Protestants are
Re-established, by the disposition o^ the present Edict, that the right is
preserved to the Buyer to demand the price which he has paid for it to the
Receiver of his Royal Highness, as far as it shall belong to him; which may by
no means reflect either directly or indirectly upon the Protestant or their
Goods: since it is understood that they are only restored and reestablished into
that state in which they were before the said Edicts. And as to the rest let it
be in all things according to the Form, Meaning, and Tenure of the present
Edict, enjoining every one whom it may concern to cause the present Edict to be
observed, as we Record it by these presents in our Registers.

Given at Turin the 25 th. of May, 1694. By the most Exccellent Senate,
Dalmazzo.

Translated from the Italian Copy, printed at Turin by Antony Valetta, Printer
to his Royal Highness and the most Excellent Chamber.
LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
1694.


