THE ARCH-REBEL found; OR AN ANSWER TO Mr. M. H's. Brief Enquiry into the true
Nature of SCHISM.

By T. W. Citizen of Chester, and a Sincere lover of Truth.

EZEKIEL. 13 Verse 10. Because, even because they have seduced my People, saying
Peace, and there was no Peace.

Printed for the Author, in the Year, 1690.

TO THE READER.
THO by many Learned and Pious Clergymen of our Church, the Folly and Schism
of our Dissenters, has been clearly and sufficiently evinced and demonstrated;
yet you see how restless their Spirits are, and with what little shifts they
continue to buoy up their Faction: The little Book of Mr. M. H's Enquiry, etc.
shall by them be vastly preferred to, and Dogmatically affirmed, to have the
Conquest over all the Learned, Orthodox and ^laborate Writings, of Hooker,
Bramhall, Hammond, ^aunderson, and diverse others. I have heard some of his
Disciples boast, that it was not, nor could be Answered by any of the
Churchmen; which considering, and withal, how it was as much below a
Clergyman to spend his precious time about such a trifle of a Book, as it is
for a Lion to concern himself with a little insignificant barking Whelp; I
undertook my Lay-brother; with a Resolution of Patience and Cour^ge, without
any Apology; (being not skilled therein) to undergo the censures of all that
read these papers.

If thou be a true Member of our Church, I have confidence and am well assured,
thy precious Balm will never break my Head; thy Religion has taught thee
Charity and Candor sufficient to cover any weakness, that thou may discover;
and if thou art pleased with my attempt, it is my great satisfaction.

If thou be a Dissenter who has not Sacrificed thy Name to the Factious, so as
to divest thy self of all Christian Temper of Humility and Consideration, there
is hope of thy Reconciliation, and that thou will consider thy desperate State
and Condition; and if my weak endeavors may contribute to the snatching thee
as a Firebrand out of the Fire, I shall exceedingly rejoice, but not I only,
for the Blessed Angels in Heaven will have joy among them, for thy Addition to
the Catholic Church; of which they are the most Glorious Members.

If thou be Skeptical, a slighter of our Religion, Obstinate and Perverse, a
Despiser and Reviler of our Clergy, whom I esteem as the Stewards of the
Mystery of God, and the Ministers of Reconciliation? I shall altogether glory
in thy Scoffs, and have a low esteem of thy good words.

THE ARCH-REBEL found; OR AN ANSWER TO Mr. M. H's Brief Enquiry into the true
nature of Schism, etc.
SIR,
HAD your Enquiry been to find out the true Notion of the Ninth Article in the
Apostles ^reed, (viz.) I believe the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of
Saints? ^ou had then found the true Standard, by which you might have made a
far clearer discovery of Schism, than you have done by your Enquiry.

For which purpose I offer to your Consideration, first the Origination and
first Existance of the Catholic Church; which was before the day of Pentecost;
Acts 1. v. 15. The number of the Names together, were about an Hundred and
Twenty: This Number consisted of the Apostles and Disciples.

That this was the Church, appears, Cap 2. v. 47. And the Lord added to the
Church (that is to the Apostles and Disciples) daily such as should be saved;
To increase his Church, and to plant it in all Nations, Christ Jesus the head
thereof, gave unto the Apostles Universal power, (Saint John, 20.21. As the
Father sent me, even so send I you) to Preach the Gospel to all the World; that
in every Nation, they that believe might be Baptized and made Members of this
Church, which is the Mystical Body of Christ.

And the Apostles according to the Command of our Savior, and by Virtue of
that Power wherewith he invested them, and those extraordinary gifts which they
received by the Descent of the Holy Ghost, enabling them mightily for so great
a work, did preach the Gospel to all Nations; and so wonderfully prevailed,
that in the life time of St. John, there were Seven Churches Established in
Asia, under Seven Bishops, each Church having a Bishop presiding over it; which
is very manifest by the name Angel, which St. John gives them Now, though there
be a Multiplication or Plurality of Churches, by the increase of Believers, yet
no variation; they are all one with that Church first mentioned at Jerusalem,
and all one with one another, being all United into one Spiritual Society, or
Body, under one Head Christ Jesus, and are in all things the same with that
first Church; United in one Baptism, and in one Faith; and all partake at the
same Table, eating the same Bread, being the Symbol of the same Body which
suffered on the Cross; and drinking all of the same Cup, the Cup of the New
Testament, the Symbol of the Blood of Christ which he shed for his Church; and
so United all, in the visible external Worship and Service of God. This is ^
Original and first being of the Church.

The next thing, Sir, I offer to your consideration, is the Continuance o^
Duration of this Church on Earth, and that is till our Blessed Savior's second
Advent, St. Mat. 28.20. And lo I am with you always; even to the end of the
World, Amen.

The power wherewith our Blessed Savior vested the Apostles, was not to cease
or expire with them; but as they had received the power of Governing, and
Conferring Orders in the Church from Christ Jesus, so they conferred the same
on others, that the Church might for ever retain this Apostolical power; and
thus, in this respect our Lord is with his Church to the end of the World.

And this Apostolical Succession was begun in Timothy and Titus, the former
being Ordained by the Apostles, Bishop of Ephesus, the other Bishop of Creet;
that they were both invested with power of jurisdiction, and conferring Orders;
and that though in each Diocese there were many Presbyters, yet that none had
Authority to ordain Elders or Priests but they, is most manifest by Saint
Paul's Epistles to them both.

To propagate this Apostolical Succession, Linus, by Apostolical Consecration
Succeeded the Apostles in the Sea of Rome; Symeon Succeeded Saint James in the
Chair of Jerusalem; Anianus Succeeded Saint Mark in the Jurisdiction of the
Church of Alexandria. And this Succession in the right line from the Apostles,
to secure the Church from Impostors and Pretenders, was so sacredly carried on,
and propagated with such certainty, that Saint Irenaeus affirms, Lib. 3. adv.
Her. c. 3.
he could name all the Successors of the Apostolic Churches unto his days.

And accordingly, this line of Apostolic Succession of Bishops, has continued
in all Ages without interruption, to this present time. Now whoever he be, that
is out of this line of Apostolic Succession, and exercises any Ministerial
Office, without the Commission of Episcopal Ordination, can be no more or
other, than a Lay-Impostor, and a Schismatic. And consequently, all Societies
of Christians, who withdraw themselves from the Government of their Bishops,
who are the Apostles Successors; and from communicating with those Presbyters
lawfully set over them, by Episcopal Ordination and Institution, and frame
themselves into any other kind of Government, are guilty of Schism. This (...)
the true formal Notion of Schism, in the sense of the Fathers in the ^tive
Church.

Of which more anon.

This Church so constituted and established to continue to the end of the
^orld; from its Universallity was by the Primitive Fathers, called the
Catholic Church; and from its Unity the Communion of Saints. Which is now to
be considered.

What this Union and Communion of Saints is? appears by Holy Scripture, St.
John 13. v. 35. By this shall all men know, that ye are my Disciples if ye have
love one for another. Love is the Badge of a Disciple of Christ, and Member of
the Catholic Church; but there must be more in the command to the Disciples,
to love one another, than commonly the acceptance Love has; for the Christian
Religion enjoins Love and Charity to all men; To Love our Enemies, to pray for
them that hate us, and to do good to them that despitefully use us and
persecute us; is the command of our Blessed Savior, and Gal. 6. v. 10. As we
have therefore opertunity let us do good unto all men. So that this Love which
one Disciple is to have for another, must be such as distinguishes Chrstians
from all other men.

Now what can that be, but to love one another as members of the same Body,
whereof Christ is the Head; and what can that be, but to live in Christian
Communion and Fellowship one with another?

I^ cannot be the bare loving one another; for there are some who are not
Christians, who are so bountiful and loving toward all men; that if this were
the only Charact^ristical mark of a Christian, they would and must pass for
Christians, without believing in Christ: And who sees not, that Pirates and
Robbers, and the vilest of men love one another? So that it is (as before is
said) not the bare loving one another, by which men are known to be Christians,
but the being admitted by Baptism into the Society of the Christian Church, and
loving one another in the Communion of that Church; this is that which makes
true Christian Charity. Saint Paul commands (1 Cor. 12.25, 26.) that there be
no Schism in the Body, but the Members should have the same care one for
another, and whether one Member suffers, all the Members suffer with it; or one
Member be honored, all the Members rejoice with it; now ye are the Body of
Christ, and Members in particular. Christians to love one another, is to love
like Members of the same Body, to preserve the Body from all Rents and Schisms,
and to maintain Sympathy and Chri^^^ Charity in the Communion of Christ's Body,
whereof we are all M^^bers. So that Christian Charity unites us to Christ's
Body, and nothin^ ^ Christian Love and Charity, that does not unite us in one
Body, (...) one Communion; that is, one external visible Communion of the
Christian Church.

Thus you see, that by the words Christian Love and Charity, so much used in
Scripture, must be understood the Communion of Saints; and that out of the
Communion of Saints, there can be no Christian Charity. And so is the same
thing meant; expressed by other words, namely Brotherly Love, Romans 10.12. and
by the name Brethren. Heb. 13. v. 1. Let brotherly Love continue: This term
Brother was given to none but those who lived in Communion with the Church; not
the Gnostics, who separated from it under pretense of greater Knowledge, nor
any who separate upon any pretense whatsoever.

And after the Apostles, the Primitive Church did confine the Christian
Brotherhood to the Communion of the Church; all the Precepts relating to
Brotherly Love, either in the Evangelists or Apostles, suppose Christians to be
Members of the Mystical Body of Christ, that is his Church, and to be all
United there in full Communion; and this is what the ^postle means to have no
Schism in the Body: out of all which it appears.

Fi^thly to assent to, and believe all the Articles of Faith, contained in the
Apo^^les, Nicene and Saint Athanasius's Creed, allowed and received in the
Primitive Church; to partake all of the same Table, where we a^ partake of the
same Body which was broken for us; and of the same Blood which was shed for us;
and to join all in the same holy Prayers and Supplications, Intercessions, and
giving of thanks; made (as the Apos^le expres^ly commands) for all men, to be
Subject and Obedient to ou^ Spiritual Rulers and Governors (who have derived
their Power and Authority from the Apostles, by a due succession to this
present Age) in all things pertaining to Godly Life, Decency and Order, as the
Catholics did in the Primitive times; this is true Christian Charity in the
Language of the Scriptures, and this is the Communion of Saints.

To hold Communion in the Articles of Faith only, or what you call
Fundamentals, without any visible Sign of being in Communion with some Church
that is a true Member of the Catholic Church, is not sufficient to make a
Catholic, or one in the Communion of Saints; though without such a Communion
of Faith, it is imposible to be so.

Corah and his Company were of the same Creed with Moses and Aaron, yet were
Schismatical wretches, and were punished with a Vengeance. The Don^ti^^s whom
you acknowledge to be Scismaticks, held the Fundamentals of Religion, but their
separate Communion from the Catholic Church, upon pretense of greater purity,
and excluding all other Churches as not Cat^o ick; this made 'em Schismatics
in the judgment of the Fathers in the Catholic Church at that time. So that
all particular Churches, who agree with the Primitive Catholic Church in all
the Articles of Faith; and in the external visible Worship and Service of God,
are true Members of the Catholic Church, and in the Communion of Saints and no
other.

The Church of England then, having from the first planting of the Gospel here,
retained the Apostolic power of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and Ordaining
Priests by an unterrupted Succession of Arch Bishops and Bishops, in the right
line, from the Apostles to this present time; and agreeing with, and no way
repugnant to the Primitive Catholic Church in Doctrine, Discipline and Worship,
is truly a Member of the Universal Catholic Church* out of which there is no
Communion of Saints.

The necessary consequence whereof, is, that they who live within the
Jurisdiction of the Church of England, and refuse Communion with her, in the
external visible Worship and Service of God; do exclude themselves from being
Members of the Catholic Church, or in the Communion of Saints; and are,
consequently guilty of Schism.

The reason is plain, because there is no other way for any to hold Communion
with the Universal Catholic Church, but by holding Communion with the
particular Church wherein they live, that Church not being Schismatical; all
the particular Churches through all the World, being the Members that make up
the Mystical Body of Christ, the one Catholic Church.

Sir, having showed you as clearly as I can, the true Notion of the Catholic
Church and Communion of Saints: Schism is so clearly unmasked, that a man may,
though not from the same impulse, yet with as much certainty, pronounce and
declare you a Schismatic, as the Prophet Nathan did King David's Sin, when he
said, Thou art the Man.

For it is most manifest, that all who pretend Christianity, and wilfully
refuse Communion with the Catholic Church, do cut themselves off from, and
cease to be Members of the Body of Christ; for he has but one Body, that is
his Church; and this in the Language of the Scriptures, and the Judgment of the
Fathers in the Primitive Times is Schism. And this agrees too, with the Nature
and Signification of the Word.

Sir, though it be above my Education, yet since I undertook your Enquiry, I
have made search, and do give you this following account of these Fathers whose
Judgments are against you.

St. Irenaeus Bishop of Lugdunum, Lib. 4. adver. Her. cap. 43.
who was Cotemporary with Policarpus a Disciple of St. John, (who must in
Reason be allowed to know the Primitive, Apostolic notion of Schism, better
than you, or any who are of your Faction) exhorts all Christians to harken to
those Presbyters, who were in the Communion of the Catholic Church, and that
they might not be deceived, describes them.

Qua propter is, qui in Ecclesia sunt Presbyteris obaudire oportet iis, qui
Successionem ha^ent ab Apostolis, etc.

Wherefore they are obliged to obey those Presbyters, who are within the Pale
of the Church, who (as we have shown) are the Successors of the Apostles, who
have received the sure gift of Truth; together with an Apostolical right of
Succession, according to the De^ree of the Father^

Reliquos vero qui abs^stunt a principali Successione, and quocunque loco
colliguntar, etc. As for those who renounce the Apostolical Succ^ssion, and
Assemble themselves in any place whatsoever, suspect and esteem them as
Heretical and Damnable Opinions, who flatter themselves with hope of Lucre and
Vain Glory; but as for them who rend and tear in pieces the Unity of the
Church, they shall receive punishment of God, as Jeroboam did.

St. Ignatius the Second Bish^p of Antioch from St. Peter, in his Ep. ad
Tralian^s, ad Smyrnen^es, and in those to the Phil^ippians, etc. frequently
charges 'em to keep in the Unity of the Christian Church, by a regular
obedience to the Bishops, and by Communicating with those Presbyters, who were
set over them by Authority of Episcopal Order: that to disobey those Bishops
and their Presbyters, and to separate from them, is in those Epistles charged
with Schism.

St. Athanasius brands Ischyras for a Schismatic, and gives this Reason for
it; that Ischyras did Usurp a Ministerial Authority, without regular Ordination
from the Bishops of the Catholic Church, and gathered to himself a
Congregation, separate from the Bishop of Alexandria, in whose Province he
lived.

St. Cyprian, Ep. 4. ad populum Carthaginensem, de quinque Presbyteris; exhorts
them to have no Communion with those who had divided themselves from their
Bishops; assuring them, that to be sine Episcopis, was to be extra Ecclesiam.
And in his Book De Vnitate, he gives this Notion of Schism; Contemptis
Episcopis, and Derilictis Dei sacerd^tibus, constitu^re aliud Altar, aut
Conventicula diversa constituere. That it was Schism to despise and forsake the
Bishops and Priests of God, and to set up another Alter; or to set up distinct
Conventicles.

Sir, though I pretend not to the Originals, yet having found these Instances
produced by men of unquestionable Sincerity, and great Learning; I presume to
present you with them. I have more of this kind before me, but these
Testimonies are sufficient, to show how different from, and far short your
description of Schism is, from the Notion of Schism the Fathers had in the
Primitive times; and that in their Judgment you are Guilty of Schism.

Sir, you cannot by this time but see your Guilt; and though you, as Criminals
usually before our Tribunals, plead not Guilty, ('it is your own phrase) yet I
beseech you consider, your Trial must be before that Tribunal which cannot be
deceived or bassled; you had better try and judge your self now, that you be
not judged. To live in Schism you ingeniously acknowledge, is a black and
hanious Crime (to promote and patronize it as you do, must then be a great
agravation of it) it is to be out of the Catholic Church and Communion of
Saints, out of which there is no ordinary means, nor any firm ground to fix any
hope of Salvation; its plain, Acts 2.47. The Lord daily added to the Church
such as should be saved; no being added to the Church, no being saved: there is
no other way revealed by which you may be saved. And it concerns you highly, to
consider how you can answer for all those many poor Souls, that you seduce into
Schism, and so industriously keep out of Christ's Fold. I caution you in all
Meekness, and Christian Charity; and out of a sincere desire of your eternal
welfare: and if you have that preparedness of mind, that Meekness and
Sel^-denial, which the Holy Jesus requires in the Gospel, you will no longer
contend with Flesh and Blood, but immediately surrender your self into the
Communion of that Church, where if you will not be wanting to your self, you
will find all the satisfaction that a Christian can desire; there being all
things exhibited to you that appertain to Life and Salvation.

Having thus finished what I designed, as sufficient to show you the true
Notion of Schism, and your mistake in the Nature of it; I proceed to make some
Remarks upon your Brief Enquiry, etc.
THe Scope of all you say, till your Instance of Eldad and Medad, amounts to no
more, but that Schism is an Arch-Rebel, etc. a deformed Brat, etc. a Crime so
black, no body will plead Guilty to the Indictment. And then comes another Law
term, Hue and Cry, etc. it is an hanious Crime, but it is very difficult and
scarce possible to find it, it cannot be described.

All I need say to this, is, the difficulty is removed; I have plainly showed
you how to describe it, and so to make a true Judgment, who are Guilty, whether
they plead Guilty, or not Guilty.

The Instance of Eldad and Medad, is nothing to the purpose of Schism, for,
they were not (if I mistake not) to administer in Holy things; not any thing of
the Priesthood, but that Spirit of Prophecy which they received, was to
qualify them for the ease of Moses in the Civil Government; and a Crime in the
State is Sedition, not Schism. Yet they did not assume that without Divine
Authority: and when you can make as signal a proof that your Authority is
Divine, we will no more blame you for Exercising in your Stable, then Moses did
them, for Prophesying in the Camp.

In Page 8. you say, I cannot believe that the greatest Worshipers of the Diana
of their own Opinions, will be so sottish as to brand those for Schismatics,
who in every punctilio of Opinion are not exactly of the same Standard with
themselves.

Wh^m you mean by the greatest Worshipers of the Diana of their own Opinions, I
take not upon me to tell? but if by that saucy Language, you mean the Bishops
and the other inferior Clergy of the English Church? I can answer for them,
that if the punctilios of Opinions you mean, do not cause a Separate Communion?
they will never censure that for Schism.

^t is not Opinions differing in little things (as you call 'em) but the
erroneous and sinful Opinions, that tend to Separation from a truly Catholic
Church, that they of our Church (to use your words) brand with Schism; men may
differ in Opinion in speculative things, and be Innocent, but Opinions that
break the Communion of Saints, are Schism.

Pardon me if I give you a pleasant Instance; your Father's Opinion was, that
it was best to put you to be a Lawyers, or an Attorney's Clerk (as I have
heard) my Uncle who was (in loco parentis) my Guardian, his Opinion was, that
it was best to put me an Aprentice to a Mercer; here were different Opinions or
Apprehensions, but no Schism.

In your Ninth Page, you put a fair Question, enough to make the World believe
you to be a man of great sincerity; viz. Whether a diversity or sep^ration of
^ommunion, be the fo^malis ratio of Schism. I affirm and have proved it is: but
you answer it with great partiality, making a most unnatural Exposition of the
Apostles words that can be; 1 Cor. 1 10. Page 10.
I beseech you Brethren, that there be no divisions among you. (which you
rightly say, is in the Margin Schisms) and pretend upon Enquiry to find what
the Schism is, by the next following Exhortation of the Apostle; That ye all
speak the same thin^s, (which you expound) viz. In the Fundamental Doctrines of
Christianity, for in little things it can never be made a duty to be of the
same Opinion, since it is m^r^lly impossible. And you name Estius, but do not
make him vouch for your Exposition; if his Exposition agrees with yours (which
I rather think it does not) it cannot be the Apostles meaning: for you say,
Observe, he does not oblige us to think the same things, i. e. In your
preaching and conver^e, speak of th^se things only wherein you are agreed; and
f^r those things where^n you differ, do not fall out and fight about them, but
love one another notwithstanding.

To this I Answer.

St. Paul is mightily obliged to you for this Exposition; you say, he does not
oblige us to think the same things: but though your thoughts ^e diverse, yet
speak the same things; what is this? but that men may think one thing and speak
another; (this does not agree with the sincerity of Saint Paul) for this is
down right Hypocrisy and Knavery; I can make nothing else o^'t.

But you think to make it Orthodox by an i. e. In your preaching and converse,
speak those things only wherein you are agreed, etc.

This Doctrine were it known, would reconcile the World; this would merit a
Dispensation at Rome, you may be admitted there upon these terms; if in your
Preaching and Converse you will speak of nothing but wherein you are all
agreed. The Pope, they say, is commonly an old ^ivil Gentleman, and this new
Doctrine of yours, tending so much to Peace, and to the stoping of the mouths
of Heretics, who are apt to ^peak of things wherein they are not all agreed;
would move him to think of some preferment for you. But if they at Rome should
prove so inhumanely morose and sullen, as to make your Journey thither
unfortunate, ^his Doctrine cannot fail of entertainment at Constantinople; the
Merchants who trade thither, will assure you, that the Mahomitans are very
obliging to all those, who preach and say nothing in converse, but wherein all
are agreed; and you being withal a great abhorrer of Popish delusions, they
will nemine contradicente, heartily agree with you therein; and you being a
Minister too, as you say in your Enquiry, page 27. And as such abliged to
preach, and to trade with that Talent you have received (or you say) there will
be an uncomfortable account shortly; especially (say you) if we look abroad,
and consider how the apparent necessities of precious Souls, calls for our
utmost diligence.

Sir, there are abroad at Constantinople abundance of precious Souls, who want
your diligence: Now you, who say nothing in your preaching and converse, but
wherein all are agreed, will oblige 'em to hear you, and so you will gain an
oppertunity to preach your great Gospel Truths to 'em, among whom there is
nothing so much wanting; one Voyage of you, and all your Brethren with your
Talents thither, could not fail of great improvement; that place totally
wanting you, and we having not nere so great occasion, or necessity for you
here; it would look like a real sense of your Duty, if you would Imbark
thither, to take care of the many precious Souls there, who are like to miscary
for want of you: And pray consider, our Churchmen are so invincibly lazy,
they will never undertake it; and if some of them should have the Courage? alas,
they are so dull, it would be to no purpose: You are much more qualified for
it, who by Inspiration hold forth with such life and vigor, so much more
powerful, that the success could not fail in you; and beside all this, there is
no reason to fear, that one Soul here would perish by your absence. This
Doctine of yours, justly deserves this Harangue.

But does not this Exposition of yours, bar all reasoning and lessen the use
and power of preaching, one main end and design whereof, is to convince men of
error, and so to Unite their minds and affections, by Uniting their Judgments
and Understanding; you say not one word of Union and Communion, which is most
strictly enjoined in every Sentence in the Exhortation; That there be no
Divisions or Schisms, which by the other Sentences, the Apostle tells 'em how
to prevent, (viz.) that you all speak the same things, that ye be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment; now it is impossible
for people that speak the same things, and are perfectly joined together in the
same mind, and in the same judgment, to have any Divisions or Schisms. That
learned and pious Doctor in our Church, Doctor Hammond, Familiar in Fathers and
Councils, has this Paraphrase upon this Text: That, therefore which I first
exhort you to, and that with all earnestness as possible (as the prime addit on
of these gifts, and graces that are among you) is this, that ye all teach the
same Doctrine, and nourish Charity and Unity; that there be no divisions in the
Churches, but that ye be compacted, and United as Members of the same Body, in
the same belief and affection. Is not this quite different from your
Exposition? you take off the force and efficacy of the Apostle's Exhortation to
Unity, purposly to excuse your Schism; is any thing more demonstrative in the
World, than that your practice is quite contrary to this Exhortation; who have
set up a Communion separate from the Church of God, established in this
Kingdom, both by Divine and Civil Sanction.

You are unlucky in your Exposition, very wide from the mark; and it can never
fare otherwise with you, while you live in Schism; it being the Nature of
Schism to hurry men into a thousand errors.

Again in the former Paragraph, That ye all speak the same things, viz. In the
Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, for (say you) in little things it can
never be made a duty to be of the same Opinion, since it is morally impossible.
I must here say again what I have said; that different Opinions in mere Notions
and Speculations, or any differing Opinions that break not Communion, are not
here meant; for so men may differ and not be guilty of Schism: But if you mean
by morally impossible, that it is impossible for Christians to be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same Judgment (as the Apostles
exhorts) so, as to maintain Unity, and prevent Schism in the Church; either the
Apostles Exhortation is to no p^^pose and effect, or your insinuation very
vain. You go on, that ye be perfectly joined together with the same mind, and
in the same ^udgment (which say you) must be understood of a serious endeavor
af^^r it, for otherwise a perfect conjunction must be reserved for a world of
^verlasting perfection.

Sir, are you so self dignified (to use your own words) as to be a Teach^r of
Saints, and know not, that a perfect Conjunction in the Catholic Church, and
Communion of Saints, is required of all those who are to ^^^e to the world of
everlasting perfection?

Your 11, 12, and 13 pages, are filled with an Enquiry of the Corin^hians
miscari^ge; you say, that Clemens Roman^s, in his famous Epistle to ^e
^^rinthians, sti^l calls Schisms contentions, which I believe is true. For
^chism is the Mother of Contention.

You find that the Corinthians were divided in their Opinions, about their
Ministers, one cries I am of Pa^l, as more Edifying; another cries am of
Apollos, and another I am of C^phas; this you say, did not make ^he Schism; for
say you, Why might not each go where he might be most edi^^d? but you say the
Schism was, in that they Sacrificed Christian Love and ^harity; and after you
say a great deal to little purpose. For,

Its very plain, the Corinthians were accused of that you call Schism, ^are^y
for preferring, or admiring one Minister above another, though ^dification was
the pretense, and not for breach of Communion, for with ^hichsoever they
Communicated, it was one and the same Communion; ^r Saint Paul and Christ were
not divided, nor were either of the other ^ivided from Christ, their Communion
was the same, though their Cures ^ere several; so that there was no reason (as
you impertinently say) to si^ence any of them, for in them there was no Schism,
nor any blame. ^ut say you, the w^y of Curing this Schism was not to silence
Apollos and ^ephas, that they might all be of Paul, and here you make St. Paul
some ^art of amends for your former Scandalous Exposition, in saying, that he
^refered Souls S^lvation before his own Credit.

How impertinently do you say, the way to Cure this Schism was not to ^lence
Apollos, etc. As if to silence you, that your followers may come ^o Church,
were as illegal as to have silenced them: Sir there is a vast ^ifference
between you, and they, who are Pastors and Ministers of Christ; ^^ey are the
Stewards of the Mysteries of God, and the Ministers of Re^onciliation, and are
made so by Apostolical Power; of them our Blessed ^aviour says (St. John 10.
v. 2) thus, He that enters in by the door, is the Shepherd of the Sheep; but
such as you, who climb up some other way, our Savior (in the 1 v.) calls a
Thief and a Robber.

Had Apollos and Cephas been as disorderly and Schismatical as you? St. Paul
would in all probability have exercised his Apostolical Power, and have
silenced them as the Cure; and it is more than probable, that the Schism which
you maintain, would receive a Cure, were you, and all such silenced and
suppressed.

In your Recipe for the Cure of Schism, one Ingredient is; That they walk all
the same way, though they trace different paths, (your falacy and equivocation
in this is very visible) for here is nothing like a different path, it is all
one way, and one path; they were all United in the same Communion: But you
cunningly insinuate this, merely to delude the ignorant and undiscerning, by
persuading them, that your Conventicle is the same way with the Church; only
(as you call it) a different path: which is no other than Schismatical meeting.
So your cure of Schism is to continue in Schism. You are a rare Spiritual
Physician.

And then to bring up the rear, you have this rare Inference, viz. It appears
that narrow Spiritedness (which is a very improper expression) which confines
Religion and the Church, to our way and party whatever it is, to the condemning
of others that differ from us in little things, is the bain of the Christian
Church. And to make this as true as the Gospel, you set down a Latin Proverb;
hinc illae lachrymae.

Sir, Religion is the bond of Unity; did you ever know Religion with out
Bounds, and Rules for all of that Religion to be confined to, even to a
Punctilio, and is it narrow Spiritedness to observe those Rules, and t^ be
confined within the Bounds of Religion? is it a Schismaticating Principle to
make a true Judgment of Schism (which you call an Arch-Rebe^ in Christ's
Kingdom) and censure them who are Guilty of it?

Have not all they of your Conventiling Communion Rules given them (though of
your own parties making) by which they are confined to yours, and
distinguishable from all other different Communions? If you or any other of the
Presbyterian Communion come to London, or any other part of this Kingdom; do
not you hold exactly the same way of Worship a^ you have here? (sure you cannot
deny this) and is not this to confin^ your Sect to your own way and Communion?
Why then do you reproachfully call this narrow Spiritedness in others, and
practice it your selves.

You say, condemning of others that differ in little things, is the great
Schismaticating principle which has been so much the bane of the Christian
Church: hinc illae lacrymae.

It must rather be the setting up of your Separate Communions, that has been
so much the bane of this Christian Church. I am sure it was the Puritanical
Faction, who in their Conventicles blew up the Trumpet of Sedition and
Rebellion, and overturned the Government of both Church and State; and through
pretended Sanctity and Gospel Zeal, perpetrated the most hellish Actions that
ever were since Adam. Then was Violence under the color of Zeal; the Note and
Badge of Sanctity, Loyalty to a Prince of incomparable piety, and faithfulness
to the most pure Christian Church, was damned for malignancy: I am sure you are
of the same Tribe; these were the men, by whom the Church was not only rent in
Pieces, but for a time (which was as long as they were in Power) rooted out;
here we may truly say hinc illae lacrymae, Mr. H. I lived in the time when
through Blood and Rebellion, your Party gave Laws and Rules to all; then, all
that were of our Church were not Censured for little things, but Branded for
Reprobates; Excluded from Mercy, all the Clergy, not only Silenced, but
Sequestered, and many Imprisoned and starved; it was not much worse with
Christians under Nero and Dioclesian, and all this for not Conforming to your
Novel Discipline; yet the gentle Penalties of the Royal Laws, which were made
for Peace and Unity, are cried up by you and your Party, for such a Persecution
as never was. Alas Sir, for all your pretended Meekness and Charity now, you
that retain the same principles, would certainly repeat the same miseries, had
you the same power, which God of his Infinite mercy for ever prevent; Amen,

Now I return, and try whether from your Instance in the Corinthians, you could
not have found a far more genuin conclusion, and more agreeing with the
Apostles meaning.

If but the having one Minister of Christ, though rightly ordained in
admiration above another, to the begetting Contention, incur the Guilt of
Schism, and is no way to be Tolerated in the Church of God?

How much more am I a Schismatic, who am not only, not rightly ordained, but
keep up a Communion separate from the Church of God, in the Kingdom where I
live, the Argument will hold a Minori ad Majus If contentions about admiring
one Minister above another, be Schism then sure to maintain a Separate
Communion, which makes Contention much hotter, fiercer and more numerous, must
much more be Schism*

In Page 15. you say, That Is Schism, which breaks or slackens the bon^ by which
the Membe^s are knit together. In this you are Orthodox, but you keep not to
it; for you say,

Now that bond is not an Act of Uniformity in point of Communion in the same
Modes and Ceremonies, but true Love and Charity in point of Affection.

The breach of Communion, be it for want of Uniformity in the same Modes and
Ceremonies, or what you will, (that is not sinful) does certainly (to use your
own words) Break and Slacken the Bond by which the Members are knit together;
for to divide in point of Communion, is to dis-unite and unknit the Members;
and consequently the Bond, be it (as you say) Love and Charity, or the Unity of
the Spirit, or what you please, is broken; and this you most truly say is
Schism; and yet you say, that the Bond is not an Act of Uniformity, etc. in
point of Communion; which is a manifest contradiction.

Now all these erroneous and miserably mistaken Expositions of Scripture, and
inferences equally false, are the Foundation upon which you erect your
Description of Schism: and which at present you apprehend, is the true
Scriptural Notion of Schism; which that all who read these papers may judge of,
I here Insert.

Schism is an Uncharitable Distance, Division, or Alienation of Affection,
among those who are called Christians, and agree in the Fundamentals, of
Religion, occasioned by their different apprehensions about little things.

You agree with our Church in all that you call Fundamentals, and your Distance
and Division you acknowledge, is for little things, that it is an Uncharitable
Distance, and Division is undeniable; for the breach of Christian Communion, is
certainly the breach of Christian Charity: here you are Condemned out of your
own mouth.

But how far different your Description is from the Primitive Catholic Notion
of Schism, sufficiently appears to you, by what I have showed before.

You mention not Seperating, or withdrawing from the Communion of the Church;
which is most Infamous and Notorious Schism, and confine it only to breach of
Charity, which (though always a great fault) yet in many cases amounts not to
Schism.

I now take notice of your Fourth Inference, page 23.

If this be Schism, then there may be Separation of Communion, where there is
no Schism, (say you) for thus we all agree, that there may be difference of
apprehension, and yet no Schism, provided it do not eat out Christian Love; but
be managed amicably, as betwixt the Arminians and the Calvinists in the Church
of England.

What strange kind of Reasoning is this?

If breach of Charity be Schism? then separate Communion may be without Schism;
and to prove this, you instance in the difference between the Arminians and
Calvinists in the Church of England, who differed in Opinions; the former
Asserting the Freedom or Liberty of the Will, the other Election and
Reprobation; here was no separation of the Communion, or denial of any Article
of the Church; (for both signed the Articles) nor from Communion one with
another? both parties submitting to the Uniformity required; so you bring an
instance to justify separate Communion from Schism, where there was no
separate Communion at all; see how illogical your reasoning is?

If breach of Charity be Schism, then there may be separate Communion without
Schism. Would any man of Sense, but you, have made such a Conclusion from such
premises; would not the Argument have run truer thus?

If breach of Charity be Schism, then separate Communion is much more Schism.

But breach of Charity is Schism.

Therefore, etc. I am forced here to say what I have said before, that it is
most manifest, that a separate Communion, unless from a Schismatical Church, is
in it self the agravation and extremity of Schism, and is naturally and
infallibly the cause of the highest breaches of Charity, and of the hottest and
fiercest contentions, which you own to be Schism.

But suppose there were some thing in our Constitutions that needed amendment
or alteration, yet every defect and supposed Corruption in a Church, is not a
sufficient ground for Separation or warrant enough to tear it in pieces. Hear
Mr. Calvin's Opinion, he says, where ever the Word of God is duly Preached,
and Reverently attended to, and the true use of the Sacraments kept up; there
is an appearance of a true Church, whose Authority no man may despise, or
reject its admonitions, or resist its Councils; or set at naught its
Discipline, much less separate from it, and Violate its Unity so long as it
continues in the true use of the Word and Sacraments, though otherwise it be
overrun with many blemishes and corruptions. Inst. l. 4. Sect. 10, 11; and 12.
You see how Mr. Calvin is against you, from whom the Original of your way had
its date.

I here make it my hearty request to you, that you will read the Letters of the
Reformed Divines of Foreign Countries, to the Bishop of London, viz.

That, of Monsieur le Moyne, Professor of Divinity at Leyden, concerning the
Nature of our Differences, and the unlawfulness of Separation from the Church
of England,

That, of Monsieur de Langle, a Preacher of the Reformed Church-meeting, at
Charenton near Paris. And also,

That of Monsieur Claude, all of the same Subject; you have them all at the end
of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation. They all conclude you
under Schism.

In Page the 20th. toward the end, you have these words, (I need not mention
the occasion having dispatched that before) Whether they be Episcopal,
Presbyterian, Independent, or by what Name or Title soever they be
self-dignified or distinguished; you cannot forbear not only Uncharitableness,
but Hatred and Malice against the Clergy; and consequently the whole Church,
you Condemn Bitterness, and Uncharitableness, as Schism in all other; and where
can it be found more apparently than in you, in these words? By what Name or
Title soever they be self-dignified or distinguished; these are not Applicable
to your Party, less to the Anabaptists; then they must be spoken of the
Arch^Bishops and Bishops of our Church, whom the King always nominates, and
they are accordingly truly Consecrated to be so; Orders instituted by the
Apostles in the Church of Christ, and from them continued to this present age,
without interruption 1 Cor. 12, 28. And God has set some in the Church; first
Apostles, secondarily Prophets; thirdly Teachers, etc. helps in Government,
etc. God has set them up, and you revile them, as men setting up, and
dignifieing themselves, is this your Charity; what more Diabolical Spirit can
there be in any Sect among men, than thus to despise and set at naught, those
who are dignified by Divine Right and Authority, to Rule and Govern in the
Church of God? you make it a Schismaticating Principle to censure you of
Uncharitableness, and Bitterness, who have even in this, ranked your self among
those whom the Apostle St. Jude (in his Epistle verse 28.) calls filthy
Dreamers, who speak evil of Dignities. Yet say you.

But to come a little closer, the Meetings of the Dissenters (though now
blessed be God permitted, and allowed by the Law of the Land, yet) are commonly
Charged with being Schismatical; the great Outcry is, that we leave the
Church; and the Vnthinking Mobile, who are so well taught, as to know no other
Churches, but the Public places of Worship, are easily induced to believe it;
as if it were Schism to Worship God any where else, let the Worship there be
what it will, (you go on) those who will allow themselves the Liberty of an
Vnprejudiced thought, cannot but see the difference so small, that as long as
we believe the same Christian Faith, and agree in the same Protestant
abhorrence of Papal Delusions; we may easily be looked upon, as one and the
same Church, as well as two several Parish Churches may, especially being
United under the Care and Protection of one Protestant King, and Members of the
same Protestant Commonwealth.

Sir, Indulgence (which carries the Title of the Act) always imploys a defect,
if not a Crime; you say, you are permitted and allowed, though the Act is no
more than Indulgence, which never signifies approbation or likeing; all you
have by it is but for the hardness of your Hearts; as our Blessed Savior says,
of the Indulgence of the Jews, for putting away their Wives by a Bill of
Divorse; to which our Savior says Mat. 19 8. But in the beginning it was not
so. Their Plea for that Indulgence is distroyed by an Argument drawn from
Antiquity. I have the like Argument for you; in the Primitive Church it was not
so, no Indulgence for separate Communion, upon any pretense whatsoever; you
have one, and I give my reason why I wish no ill effects follow it.

In the year 1560. Mr. J. Calvin by his Letter to Arch Bishop Grindal,
solicites him to obtain the favor of the Queen, to Assign; and at his request,
she did Assign the Church of Saint Anthony in London, for some French exiles
then there, and were of Mr. Calvin's Principle, to meet in, and with License to
set up the Genevian Discipline, and a Form of Prayer which had no Conformity
with the English Liturgy, which proved in the event a design expedient of
Calvin's, for advancing Presbitery in the room of Episcopacy.

Upon this Toleration, their numbers so increased, that in the year 1568. they
broke out into open Schism, choosing to meet in Barns and Fields, rather than
in Churches, with their Brethren as formerly; teaching 'twas impious to hold
any Correspondence with the Conforming Churches. Upon this very occasion (viz.)
the Queens Toleration, and particularly her Indulging the Genevian Discipline,
within 8 years time, their Members so increased, and their Insolence also; that
the Queen plainly saw (as her own words were) that such were the restless
Spirits of that Factious people, that here was no quietness to be expected from
them, till they were utterly suppressed: In order to which she called a
Parliament in 1592. wherein strict Laws were made against them, and executed
accordingly; Barrow, Penry, and Burchet, were hanged for such
Nonconformity-principles as were Treasonable; and by those sharp Laws made
against them, the Ring leaders were humbled, and the whole Body of 'em brought
to a good degree of Quietness at that time and held dureing her Reign.

I heartily wish that your Great Champion Mr. Baxter, prove not a true Prophet,
who in his Epistle Dedicatory, (before his Treatise of Self-denial) to Coll.
James Berrey, then one of the Council of State; calls Toleration Englands
misery; a Liberty for drawing men to Hell; a wicked damning Liberty; a
Strengthening the Party Tolerated; a giving way for their Power; a giving a way
our own Power; a preparing Faggots for our own Martirdom. And he represents
Tolerating Magistrates, as a sort of men that Rule as though they were
uncertain whether there were a Heaven or a Hell. Thus he,

By the story in the Queen, you see what use your Predecessors, those great
pretenders of Sanctity, made of their Indulgence; and if you tread their Paths,
you may fall into the like mischiefs; and I will tell you why you can never
stand right with the Government; because your Principles carry you to the
rooting out of Episcopacy, which is the Pillar of Ecclesiastical Government.
And we see by Mr. Baxter, with what Vigor and Zeal Uniformity will then be held
forth in all your Pulpits.

I now return to the remainder of your Paragraph. You say, the meet^ng of the
Dissenters (and after a Paranthesis) are commonly charged with being
Sch^smatical; the great outcry is, that we leave the Church, and the
un^hanking Mobile, who are so well taught as to know no other Churches, but the
^ublick places of Worship, are easily enduced to believe it, as if it were
^chism to Worship God any where else, let the Worship there be what it ^ill.

You cannot be without the Leaven of Reflection, for all your pretend^d Candor
and Charity, is not this highly reproachful? to say that the Unthinking Mobile,
etc. are easily induced to believe it, (that is) that ^our Meeting is Schism;
What can you mean but the Pastors and Mini^ters of our Church, seduce the
Mobile to believe that which is false, and ^he unthinking Mobile are easily
enduced? This is a pretty falacy, by ^his you would persuade all (if you could)
that none but the Mobile believe ^ou are Schismatics; all the Privy Council,
the Judges, Universities, and Magestrates, and all above the Mobile have no
such thoughts; this ^s a random Shot: Pray how many besides the unthinking
Mobile can you boast of in your Communion? God knows you have too much to ^oast
of, if you have any; however your boasting in this, is much more vain, than God
be thanked you have real cause for; and all those Poor Souls you have
Captivated, and lead astray out of Christ's Fould, are ^gnorant, or
Giddy-minded; and it is done under pretense of more Spiritual Edification and
Holiness, which is but the Counterfeit of them which glitters with greater
Luster (it being the Nature of all Counterfeit things so to do) to the
Undescerning and Ignorant, than the real: just as Quack Mountebanks, with
cunning devised Words, and Fables, persuade the Moible, that their Medicines
have much more the Virtue of Healing, and that their skill and judgment far
surmounts the truly Learned and Judicious Physicians: But God I hope will
consider their simplicity, and have mercy on them; though I wish they would
consider what our Savior says, That if the Blind lead the Blind, both fall
into the Ditch. Then you say, as ^f it were Schism to Worship God any where
else, let the Worship there be what it will.

It would occasion too long a discourse to pursue; I will therefore only
mention it. The Samaritans in the time of our Savior were as fully persuaded,
that their Altar and Worship was as true and acceptable to God as that at
Jerusalem, as you are, that yours is more pure than that of our Church; yet our
Blessed Savior tells the Woman, St. John 4. v. 22. Ye Worship ye know not
what, we (says he) know what we Worship, etc. The true reason why the
Samaritans Worshipped they knew not what; was, because it was a separate Altar,
and a separate Worship from that at Jerusalem; this was Schism, and had the
same effects, as your separate Communion has in this Kingdom, (viz.)
Contentions, breach of Charity, alienation of Affection, etc.

And I do not see, but as it was Schism in the Jewish, which was the Type of
the Christian Church, to set up a separate Altar, and Worship* so it must be
Schism, to set up a separate Table, and separate way of Worship in the
Christian Church, which is the Antitype.

I mention this, because you, in the 32 page say, The common Outcry is, that
it is the setting up Altar against Altar; supposeing your thoughts here, might
be upon Mr Dodwells one Altar, and one Priesthood, as that which makes the
Outcry against you; though the Term of Setting up Altar against Altar, was
used by many of the Fathers in the Primitive Times, against Schismatics in
their days, whom he follows. But Sir, If you without prejudice, will seriously
peruse that Book, you will find such weighty reasoning, that you will never
more despise it; and if you cannot but despise it, you will perpetuate your
Name amongst the most Learned and Judicious, above all your Tribe that have
been, or are, and proselite the Diocese besides; if you will Answer that Book?
However it will be a sufficient Answer, for me to say, it is not the place that
makes the Schism, but the separate Communion; for, if you use your way of
Worship in one of our Churches, it would not abate or excuse the Schism; and
so, if you were rightly ordained, and should use the same way of Worship which
we use in our Churches, and is required by the Church in your Stable, and
through some Providence necessitated to such a place; no one of our Church
would, nor any other justly could charge you with Schism.

In your 25 page, Those who will allow themselves the Liberty of an
Vnpre^udiced thought, cannot but see the difference so small, that as long as
we be^ieve the same Christian Faith, and agree in the same Protestant abhorence
of Papal delusions; we may easily be looked upon as one and the same, as well
as two several Parish Churches may, especially being United under the care and
protection of one Protestant King, and Members of the same Common^ealth.

Difference in small and little things comes often in my way; I cannot but
wonder, that we who agree in the Belief of those High and Sacred Mysteries of
Faith, so contrary to Flesh and Blood, and so transcendant above Natural
reason, which cannot be wrought in us, but by the Grace of God, and the
operation of his Spirit; and yet that even among these, there should be men of
high and preverse minds, sensual, and such who cause Division: As the
Donatists, who did separate and ^rend the Church, and yet believed the same
Fundamental Faith, and were Zealous (to use your own Words) for the great
Gospel Truths, but their separation was as yours is, for little things. How
would you have your Separate Communion to be looked upon as one and the same
Church, as well as two several Parish Churches? When it is apparent that you do
Rob our Parish Churches. All you can and would Monopolize all our Parishes into
your Communion, and yet forsooth would be looked upon as one of our Parish
Churches: This is a Paradox which pass^th all understanding.

And it is as wonderful, that the having the same Protestant abhorence of
Popish delusions, should be a bar to Schism; a man may be an Arian, Socinian;
ay, or an Atheist, if he can but abhor Popery, and yet be free from Schism; is
this one of your great Gospel Truths? Is this any thing like Primitive
Doctrine? that Heresy, Atheism, Quakerism, and all other divided and currupt
Opinions, so they but abhor Popery, may be looked upon as one and the same
Church; is new and strange Divinity.

Sir, all that follows in your Book, being of the same spinning I will spare my
self from any more trouble, and expose you no far^her. The Reader will be able
to Judge, whether I have, or not, given you a truer Notion of Schism than that
in your Enquiry, and sufficiently convicted your unskilfulness in expounding
Scripture; and fully Answered you.

I will only add this digression, which I think not impertinent, and then I Will
close.

The Prayers made for the the Wednesday Fast, cannot be Charged with Popery, as
your Party have the Liturgy; Supplications fitted to the Occasion, and for all
capacities, imposed by Lawful Authority, by them who have the Rule over us;
What account can you give to God, to the Government, and to your own
Conscience, why you omit or refuse so indispensible a duty.

The Apostle says, Obey them that have the Rule over you; and Commands this
duty of Obedience to our Governors, upon the Severest and Highest Penalties.
Romans 13. v. 1, 2. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.

How can you reconcile your Practice with this Apostolical Injunction? Unless
you can charge the Prayers with something not lawful, or not reasonable to be
offered to God; you are highly Criminal in the Apostles Judgment. God Almighty
has now settled the Government, where there is as true and real Abhorence of
Popish Delusions, as you or any of your Party can pretend to; yet you yield not
obedience to them even in a Religious Duty.

All your pretense is, that your Prayers are more purely Spiritual; you seek
God in more apt and pleasing words, words which immediately flow from the
Spirit.

What is this? but to limit and restrain the Holy Scripture to your way and to
your Faction, as if no Prayers but those hammered out of your own Brains, could
bear the stamp of the Holy Spirit of God; and is it Swoppery in Robbery.
not highly Profane, if not Blasphemy, to impure all your Levites and
Impertinencys to the immediate dictates of the Spirit of God? though this Holy
Spirit you pretend to, can no where be found, but in the Holy Catholic Church,
and Communion of Saints; where alone our Blessed Lord has Promised it shall be
to the end of the World.

All the Impostors in the world who have set up before you even Mahomet
himself, and a great number of Heretics, and Schismatics in the Christian
Church, pretended to inspiration, and by it have deceived many. But this your
pretense to inspiration, can never proselyte any, but the Ignorant and
Undescerning, and those who are given to Change; unless you can produce the
Credentials of a Miracle.

All our Prayers in our Liturgy are directed to God Almighty, and are presented
in the name of the Blessed Jesus, and all we supplicate for, are for no other
things, but what is allowed of, and required in our holy Religion: Now why any
but Atheists, and those that are Antichristian, join not with us in those
Prayers and Praises, especially considering that it is the Apostle Saint Paul's
Judgment, Romans 15.6. That we might with one mind, and with one Mouth glorify
God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; I know not, unless for the same
Reason that you refuse those Prayers for the Fast added to the Liturgy, viz.
Obstinacy and Disobedience.

Now Sir, to close up all; you cannot but see your Guilt, I Address to you in
all Meekness and Christian Charity, that you will seriously consider the
dangerous and desperate State and Condition you are in; for all the great and
precious promises, made by God in Christ Jesus, are only to them who are
Members of the Mystical Body of Christ, the Holy Catholic Church and Communion
of Saints, they who are not of the Catholic Church, and Communion of Saints,
may flatter themselves with Unwarrantable and Groundless Fancies; but can have
no real Title, or Right to any of those precious Promises; and therefore as
you love your Soul, suffer not filthy Lucre, Interest or Pride to withold you
any longer out of the Catholic Church wherein alone Salvation can be had, it
is not your purer Administrations, or any other pretense, can avail or stand
you in any stead, they only who are of this Society, which is the Mystical Body
of Christ here on earth; have any Right ( Heb. 12 verse. 22.23.24.) to come to
the Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem,
and to an innumerable Company of Angels to the General Assembly, and Church of
the first born, which are Written in Heaven: And to God the Judge of all; and
to the Spirits of just men made perfect: And to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant; that you may have Right and Title to all this; I heartily Pray with
the Church in the Liturgy, That it may please God to bring you into the way of
Truth; and all such as have erred, and are deceived, Amen.

FINIS

