A VOYAGE OF THE Sieur Le Maire TO THE Canary Islands, Cape-Verd, Senegal and
Gamby, UNDER Monsieur DANCOURT, Director-General of the Royal Affrican Company.

Printed at Paris this Present Year 1695.

And now faithfully done into English.

LONDON, Printed for F. Mills and W. Turner, at the Rose and C^own without
Temple Bar. 1696.

THE PREFACE.
IT is now a considerable time, since this Relation was put into my Hands by my
very good Friend the Sieur Le Maire, upon his return from the Voyage which he
performed into those Countries, whereof he has given us a Description.

The Reading of it seemed so diverting, and the Account so singular, that at
first sight it appeared to me not a little suspected, since it differs in many
Essential things from an Author of this Age, in a Collection which he has made
Public.

These Important Contradictions, made me resolve to be satisfied of the Truth,
by those who accompanied my Friend in his Travels: I made it my business to
have particular Conferences with each of them, especially upon those Heads
which seemed so opposite in these different Relations; and I found them so
corresponding in the Matters of Fact, which created my Scruples, that I
believed I could not better repair the Injustice I had done my Friend, than by
revoking my Doubts, and reposing a Confidence in him, which till then I had
suspended.

Monsieur Dancourt, Director-General of the Affrican Company, under whom my
Friend made this Voyage, who has acquired a perfect knowledge of the Lives and
Manners of the Inhabitants of these Islands, and of the Curiosities of these
Countries, by his long Travels, almost through all the Parts of the World;
(which has procured him the Esteem of the Messieurs Colbert and Soignelay) the
Conferences (I say) which I had with him, did not a little contribute to
determine in favor of this latter Relation, which he found to be very exact,
and that the Author had entered into Particularities, which till now were never
touched upon by any Person whatever.

My Friends, who had looked it over, concluded that I had injured the Public
in concealing this Novelty so long, and did at length persuade me to alter my
Resolution of not Publishing this Piece till the return of the Author, who
would, no doubt, have made a considerable Addition of new Remarks. But since
it is four or five Years since I heard any thing of him, I thought I should do
him no wrong in Publishing the Fruits of his first Voyages, which may bespeak a
good Reception of what he himself shall think fit to give us for the future;
and, perhaps, the Applause of this Work may the sooner engage him to Publish
his Remarks of his later Travels.

Indeed, the Industrious Care which the Author has taken to penetrate into the
particulars, of the Manners, Religion, and Politics, of the People, who
Inhabit the Coasts of Africa, does very well merit an Universal Approbation.

One may take a view here of their Original, of the Tyranny which the Kings
exercise ever their Subjects and Neighbors, of many Petty Kings Tributary to
each other, their Policy, and their manner of making War.

One may find here the perfidious Dealings of these People toward the
Europeans in respect of their Traffic; the Fertility of a Country that is in
no manner Cultivated; their Miseries for want of Industry and Forecast; what
Animals are common in this Climate; And, in short, all things that are the most
Remarkable in these Islands, and not to be met withal in other Places.

THE VOYAGES OF THE Sieur Le Maire TO THE Canaries, Cape-Verd, Senegal, and
Gamby.
I Had served in the Capacity of Surgeon to the Hotel-Dieu of Paris near the
space of three Years, when I received intimation, that Monsieur Dancourt was
ready to set forwards for Cape-Verd, as General Director of the Royal Affrican
Company. This News created a Desire in me to make the Voyage along with him. He
seemed glad at the opportunity of my Company, and after having determined our
Agreement, he Presented me to the Members of that Society on the 14th of
January 1682. who readily ratified the Articles we had before concluded.

After having spent some time in settling my Affairs, and taking leave of my
Friends, we departed for Orleans, where we took a Boat to go to Nantes along
the L^i^. We ought not in course to have been more than three days in
accomplishing this Journey; however, it took us up seven or eight entirely,
besides running of great risques, and exposing our selves to many dangers.

We had the Wind all along full in our Teeth, and so strong a Gale, that the
Waves of this River did near equal the tossings of the Sea: To this
inconveniency was added that of the Banks being overflowed, so that we seldom
was sensible whether we were in, or off the Chanel. We could only discern some
straggling branches above Water, so that we sometimes fell foul upon the Trunks
of Trees where Birds do build their Nests.

However, at length we arrived at Nantes, and after having rested there for the
space of ten days, we took Horse for Breast. What we saw of Brettagny as we rode
along, afforded no very pleasant Idea, had we not already been otherways
informed, that it was a Province rich and fertile in some places, since the
whole Journey gave us no other prospect but of a Sandy Road, which occasioned
very tedious Traveling.

Having reached Breast the 4th of February, we believed we should Sail in few
days; but the Vessel was not yet in a condition, she being but indifferently
fitted out, and very defective in her Rigging. We were to wait till she was new
Masted, and put in a capacity to bear Weather, and to Fight too if there were
occasion.

Two Months was spent in refitting this Ship, which was called the St.
Catharine; she was of 400 Tun burden, and carried 40 Guns: She was built at
Flushing, and designed for a quick Sailor, and Commanded by Captain Monsegur,
by the Order of the Members of this Company.

The Port of Breast, where she then was, is by much the best Harbor we have in
the Ocean; the largest Vessels Ride there in safety, and lie as it were in a
Chamber sheltred from all manner of prejudice from the blustering Winds, for
which reason it has received that Name; they can go out to Sea as well at low
Water as at high Tide, since the Ships there always ride afloat: Its Entrance
is as narrow as the Mouth of a River, fortified of each side with two good
Half-Moons, and on the Right has a stately Castle of Antic Building to defend
the Passage. This Haven shoots up in a Spiral Line; it is a large half League
in length, and about 200 Paces over, situated between two Hills: All which
Advantages are the pure effects of Nature.

I saw in this Port the finest and largest Ships in the whole World; amongst
the rest, the Admiral called the Royal Sun, she is not so richly Gilt as the
Royal Lewis of Thoulon, but she is better Built, of a greater length, and a
more nimble Sailor. She carries a Hundred and Twenty Pieces of Cannon, and
fortified with three Decks; her State-Room is Magnificent, curiously Gilt and
Beautified; her Platform was designed by Monsieur Le Brun, she has about 15
more Apartments, but much less; however they are very convenient and handsome.

Besides this Vessel, there were more than fifty other Ships, of 90, of 80, 70,
60, 50 Guns each, without taking notice of those of lower Rates. Next to the
Royal Sun, the finest are, The Queen, the Crown, the Glorious, the Brave, the
Good, the Thundering, the Lightning, the Rock, and the Diamond, etc. The
prospect of those vast Machines, like so many floating Palaces, appears
delightfully astonishing; nor can they be viewed without exciting a Veneration
of the Puissance of their Renowned Master.

Our Vessel being Rigged and Fitted, it fell down into the Road on the 20th of
March: Five of the King's Ships, well appointed, went out at the same time,
four of which was to join the Fleet of Thoulon, in the Expedition against the
Algiers, and the other was to Convoy some Ships belonging to the East India
Company.

Wednesday the 9th of April 1682. I embarked with four more of the Family that
were to go along with us, Monsieur Dancourt staying yet at Breast. In the mean
while, these Gentlemen and I made a Match of Shooting, imagining it was as
easy to come on Board again as it was to go off. The Director's Cook was
brought aboard about some business, in a little Skiff Rowed by two Young Lads
of about eleven or twelve Years each.

The opportunity seemed lucky for us, and we, without considering how we should
get back again, took his Boat, and went almost two Leagues off near to Camaret;
the eager desire of our Sport, made us Land at the first place we came to,
slighting the danger of climbing the Rocks that hung shelving over the Sea,
from which I was near falling two or three several times.

After all our pains, we had not the good Fortune to meet with any substantial
Game, but were obliged to take up with killing a few Larks, which at length
stood us in more stead than we imagined. We left our unlucky Sport, and set to
a better, refreshing our selves with some good Wine and cold Provisions we had
with us.

When we had consumed what Stock we had, we went aboard our small Skiff, and
had scarce got off to Sea, when a violent Storm arose, which soon put me to my
Devotions, imagining that we should unavoidably perish in a moment. One of our
Companions being excessively tired, fell fast asleep at his first getting into
the Boat, but being at length disturbed with our frequent shricks, when we were
got near half way to our Vessel, he, though not wholly awake, began to perceive
the danger, and cried out that we should certainly be lost, if we did not
return ashore with what speed was possible.

This Opinion seemed to us very probable, since the strength of our Young
Watermen was very inconsiderable, though they showed much greater courage than
any of us, telling us, That the Boat would only over-turn, and that there was
no danger of its sinking to the bottom. I suppose they imagined that all of us
could Swim; but indeed they were mistaken, for I very well knew my own Ability.
Sometimes I entertained my thoughts with the difficulty of escaping amongst
Waves that were so large and violent, which I concluded would infallibly dash
us in pieces against the Rocks.

We readily embraced the Advice of our Comrade, and set all hands to Work to
Row back to shore, and with much labor we gained the Land, to wait there till
the Storm was abated.

Whilst each of us was relishing a small Tranquillity, we heard the report of a
Cannon, and at the same time saw the Top-sail loosed, which is the ordinary
Signal for Sailing. There were some Lighters at hand, but we could by no means
find the Masters that owned them to carry us on Board.

Thus we saw our Ship under Sail, Saluting the Admiral with seven Guns, the
Wind full a Stern, all the Sails out, without hopes of regaining her. I looked
upon my self to be in a miserable taking, without Clothes, without Instruments,
and exposed to the Extremities of Fortune.

We followed the sight of our Vessel, tearing our Throats, and firing our
Fuzees, but to no purpose, she in a little time disappeared. One of our
Comrades not being so good of Foot as the rest, took the way to Camaret,
believing he should find us there; for our parts we were looking after him; so
we spent the best part of the Night seeking each other.

Thousands of Unfortunate Accidents befell us, one stuck in a Bog, the other
fell into a Ditch, and each called out upon the other for assistance, and
Cursing our Sport was the common Dialect of us all. Hunger came in the Rear of
our other Misfortunes. We at length took into a small Hedge-Tavern, where, by
good luck, every thing was answerable to the small Stock we had to spend.

We met with nothing there but a Crust of very brown Bread, a Scrap of
Holland-Cheese, and Straw Beds; the small Stock of Money we had was expended
for discharging our Supper and Lodging; and for our Breakfast, we deferred it
to a more favorable opportunity.

Whilst we were upon the hunt for our straggling Companion, Coasting the Sea,
we discovered some Masts, which we at first took for Trees that grew upon the
Banks of the River, not daring to flatter our selves that we should ever regain
the sight of a Vessel, which we at that time imagined to be far distant from
us; but drawing nearer, we perceived that she was not gone, and that she lay at
Anchor in the Road of Camaret, three Leagues from Breast.

You may easily imagine our Joy, there was nothing now to be done but to find
our lost Comrade, and so go on Board. We endeavored to make Signs to the
People in the Ship that they might know us, and send off their Shalop, but we
were no more successful in this than in our former Enterprises.

Whilst we were contriving all manner of ways to get out of this Scrape, we
perceived a small Bark, which hired her self to carry off to any Vessels at
Sea. I cannot tell how it came to pass that our strayed Comrade should be there;
but so it was, he was the first that knew us. We made signs to him, he
understood us, and ordered the Bark to come near us; but though the shore was
almost unaccessible, upon the account of the Rocks, yet we were obliged to get
aboard in spite of all their threatening Precipices.

At length we got in, and after many Congratulations of being once again met
together, we settled our selves to repose: But it seems it was not yet time to
take our ease, for the Waves rose so high, that they washed over the Boat from
Head to Stern; so that we were all thoroughly Sous'd. This, together with the
Cold that it occasioned, and the danger of being overset, which our Seamen
seemed to dread, renewed our Miseries, till at last, after these unlucky
Adventures, we arrived safe aboard.

We laughed at leisure at all these Accidents, and set immediately to remedy
our present Hunger: We lay sometime longer in the Road to wait for Monsieur
Dancourt, who staid at Breast. He arrived Sunday the 12th of April 1682. about
Noon, and we immediately made ready to Sail.

About three Leagues off at Sea, we met with the Ship called the Burning; she
Rode at Anchor waiting for the Tide to carry her into the Bay of Breast, she
carried to Guns, and came from Haver to (...) aboard Monsieur de Preuilly the
Lieutenant General, and was afterward to Sail with him for the Coast of Algier.

We saluted her after the accustomed manner, with seven Guns, Trumpets
Sounding, and crying three times, Vi^e le Roy. She returned as many, contrary
to the General practice of the King's Ships, who always give two less. It
appeared that it was out of Complaisance to the Intendant, who was an intimate
Friend of Monsieur Dancourts, and then aboard her.

Having returned our thanks with three Guns, we continued our Course, the Wind
being at North East, having doubled the Cape to the West, making West South
West, from whence we took our Point to Steer, at 48 degrees 20 Minutes of the
Northern Latitude, and 11 degrees of Longitude. But since I am not very export
in the business of Pilotage, I shall not for the future make any such
particular recites, unless they be absolutely necessary.

Tuesday, the 21th of April, we made two Vessels direct East of us; by their
endeavors to get the Wind of us, we indg'd them to be Pirates. We put our
selves in a posture of Defense, which no doubt prevented their coming upon us,
they guessing by our Countenance that they could expect from us nothing but dry
Blows.

Sunday, the 26th in the Morning, we were in 32 Degrees and as many Minutes of
the Northern Latitude, and in 4 Degrees 13 Minutes of Longitude, when we made
the Cape Cautin, the Coasts of Barbary, and the Kingdom of Morocco, being but
six Leagues from Land. Had the Night continued we had certainly perished, since
we took our Course for the West of Madera, which was above 140 Leagues from
thence.

Wednesday, the 29th, we made the Island of Ancerott, one of the Seven
Canaries, which we left about 10 Leagues to the South-East; here we were for
some time becalmed, and suffered the scorching of excessive heats.

Thursday, the 30th of April, we were got in 28 Degrees and 30 Minutes Northern
Latitude, taking, according to the Custom of our Nation, the first Meridian
from the Island of Fer, having then the Grand Canary 10 Leagues from us to the
North-East. We went off a Fowling near a League into the Island, where we staid
till Night. We could not come to an Anchor for want of a Wind, and for the
darkness of the Night which came on, which made us stand off to the East, and
continue till three hours after Midnight opposite to Land.

Friday, by break of day, we veer'd to the Westward, taking our Course to the
Great Canary: About half an hour after Nine we came to an Anchor in 24 Fathom
Water, and brought up a gray and red Sand mixed with Coral; the Town which lay
South South-West, is a League and half from the Road, and is defended by a
Castie, though very mean and despicable.

When they perceived us from off the Castle, they hoisted the Flag of Spain,
which we Saluted with five Guns; but they made no return, which I believe was
occasioned by want of Powder.

Anchorage is extreme good in this place, so that they don't draw too near the
Town, whose approach is rendered dangerous by Rocks that lie concealed under
Water. It is Guarded by a Castle situated upon a Hill, from the Insults it
might suffer by any Vessels that might undertake to Attack it. It Is Inhabited
by Twelve Thousand flout Islanders, who are capable of making a very good
Defense. Our Ship Anchored before the Town in 18 Fathom Water.

Its Precincts are near a League in compass, most of the Houses well built, but
low, having not above two Stories, they are all flat Roord, so that no Ridge
appears, and one would be apt to take them for Houses so far burnt down. In the
day time, scarce any Body appears in the Streets.

Though the Bishop, the Governor, and the Men of Quality, make their Residence
at Teneriff, yet the Sea Episcopal, the Tribunal of the Inquisition, and the
Sovereign Council, which is, as it were, the Parliament of the seven Islands,
are always kept in this Capital. There is here four Religious Foundations, one
belonging to the Dominicans, one to the Franciscons; the two other are the
Bernardins and the Recollects.

These Islands, who heretofore were called the Fortunate, had that Title not
without good Reason, if we consider either the Goodness and Purity of the Air,
or the Fertility of the Soil. They abound in Bread-Corn, Barley, Honey, Beef,
Mutton, Fowl; in short, with all Necessaries for good and plentiful Living.
They afford so large a Store of Malmsy Sack, that France, Spain, England,
Holland, and other places, are from thence furnished every Year.

The felicity that these Islands are capable of bestowing above any others, in
what respects commodious Living, gave, some time since, occasion to the Pagans
belief. That these were the Elizian Fields, destined for the Habitation of the
Souls of the Blessed, after their separation from the Body.

Their Water is not proportionably good with the rest of their Commodities, but
they have a way to remedy it, by pouring it into Vessels made in the shape of
Mortars, of a Stone very Porose, through which being strained, it becomes fresh
and purified, and consequently very wholesome.

Their Harvest is commonly in March, sometimes in April, and in several places
they are double in each Year: The Soil is so Redundant, that I have seen a
Cheriy Tree Slip produce Fruit in 6 Weeks time after it had been Grafted.
Flowers thrive there without requiring any manner of Industry; and Oranges, and
Citrons, are in a surprising Plenty.

Grand Canary, as well as Teneriff, and the Palm, did continue some time in
Idolatry after the Conquest of the Spaniards made in 1460. Ancerott,
Fort-Avanture, Gomere and Fer, did first espouse Christianity, and at length
the other three followed their example. The Spaniards desiring absolutely to
reduce this Country to their Obedience, sent great store of the Inhabitants
Slaves into Spain; those that remained amongst them became Civilized, and lived
after the manner of their Conquerors These People, especially those of Grand
Canary, are extreme Lovers of Strangers.

Monsieur Dancourt was very Honorably received by the Governor of the Island,
at whose House he was entertained at Dinner, being conducted by Monsieur Remond
Consul of our Nation, who was Born at Liege, and is a very honest Courteous
Gentleman. He Regaled us very Nobly, and let us want for neither Liquor nor
Fruit; I staid two entire days with him, where I received all the Civilities
imaginable.

I was four times at the Convent of Bernardins, the Providore having given me
that permission at the Instance of the Lady Abbess. There were here some French
Ladies, amongst the rest one from Paris, who did me the kind Service of being
my Interpreter. As there were some amongst them that were Infirm, they omitted
not the opportunity of Advising with me, and of giving me great Respect and
Attention

A Physician being at hand, made several of them make the best of the
opportunity, and many of them complained that had no real occasion, hoping
thereby to gain the greater liberty, though otherwise they were no how
indisposed. I soon discovered, that the greatest part of them had no other
Distemper, but of that of being Locked up from the rest of the World, and
therefore I could furnish them with no Effectual Cure. However, to appear a
Person something considerable, and of Universal Experience, I ordered them some
Specific Medicines, such as was most proper for Chimetical Distempers.

These good Religious Ladies were not wanting in their Caresses, and took care
to load me with Biskets, dry and wet Sweetmeats, Lemonade, and Sack; together
with all manner of Fruit, which they had served up upon Plates, and Porcelain
Salvers, garnished with Roses, Pinks, Orange-Flowers, Jessimin, and Tuberoses,
with variety of Nosegays. I also made them some small Presents, which were
received with great Respect and Civility.

When I left these good Ladies, and returned to the Consul's, there were more
People that waited, to take me along with them to Visit the Sick. Particularly,
I went to a certain Lawyer's esteemed worth Five hundred thousand Crowns, whose
Wife had long labored with the Suffocation of the Womb, which was caused by
some Obstructions: The Doctors of the Place dealt with her as a Peripneumony,
by which chiefly I discovered their Ignorance.

Their general distrust of them, makes the Inhabitants very fond of any French
Surgeons. The Lawyer used his utmost endeavors to persuade me to take up my
Abode in the Grand Canary, offering me his House, and his Table, and great
Advantages besides. I had no mind to forfeit the promise I made to Monsieur
Dancourt, so that I made my returns of Acknowledgments for the obliging offers
of the Spaniard, and prescribed what Remedies I thought most proper for his
Lady, and what might be best met withal in the Island; where, indeed, Medicines
are very scarce.

He offered me a Recompense in Money, which, out of Honor for our Nation, I
wholly refused. I had designed to have visited him again in a day or two, since
he had begged that favor of the Consul, adding, that he would find out some
other way of gratifying me, since I refused his first offer; but I had not
time, the Boat being come to fetch me on Board the Saturday Evening.

I do assure you, I was almost Enchanted with the Sweetness of that Country; so
that I could scarce leave it without regret. Should I ever quit France, it
should be to fix my Habitation in the Grand Canary, though I hope I shall never
be obliged wholly to leave my own Country, which I must own is very dear to me.
Before I have done with this Island, I must not forget to acquaint you, that it
is about 30 Leagues in Compass, and of a Form very near Round.

Saturday, the 2d of May, in the Evening, the Wind being North North East, we
made ready about Three a Clock in the Morning; we took our Course in the sight
of the Pique, a high Mountain in the Island of Teneriff, and made forwards to
Ride in the Road of St. Cruce. Our Pilot observed in this place, that the
Compass varied to the North East 3 Degrees, and 30 Minutes.

Sunday, the 3d, being full North of the Grand Canary, having a gentle Breeze
at North North East, we lay off Westward from the Cape all Night.

Monday, the 4th, in the Morning, we arrived at Teneriff, the Richest of all
the Canaries, being in sight of St. Cruce, a small Town of the same Island,
upon its Eastern Point. We might there have Anchored in 25, or 30 Fathom Water;
in the mean while we never dropped our Anchor, but our Ship lay by all the time,
expecting the return of our Shalop, which we sent ashore.

Though the Governor of St. Cruce suffered those that were in the Boat to come
ashore, yet he sent to acquaint the Governor-General, who had his Residence at
Laguna, 3 Leagues from the Seaside, that there were some French who desired to
come on Shore to take in some Provisions, which they stood in need of: Whose
Answer was, That he should detain them if they did it. Perhaps he feared that
we had some Infection on Board, should we have come from the Levant, a place
very subject to Contagion.

To what remains when I speak of the Pique, I must acquaint you by the by, that
it is one of the highest Mountains in the World. It Is said that it may be seen
40 Leagues off at Sea; as for us, we m^d^ it not above 12 or 15, by reason of
the Duskiness of the Evening, which made it appear to us like a Pointed Cloud;
it is continually covered with Snow, which neither falls off, nor does it ever
Freeze.

As for Teneriff, it is reputed to lie the highest of any Island in the Ocean,
and the best Peopled for its bigness, containing about 15000 Inhabitants: She
produces that Excellent Malmsey Sack, which, without Contest, is esteemed the
best in the World. This Liquor was not known in this Island, till after the
Spaniards had made themselves Masters of it, since they were the first that
transplanted some Vine-Stocks from Candy; though, at this day, the Wine is
justly allowed a preference to that from whence it owes its Original, and a
much larger quantity of it is here produced than in Candy it self.

All the seven Islands of the Canaries lie almost in a direct Line from East to
West, they are very Mountainous, well Peopled, and extraordinary Fertile; the
least of which is 60 Miles in Compass.

I had formerly heard Discourse of a Miraculous Tree in the Island of Fer,
whose Leaves were long and narrow, always green, which supplied the Inhabitants
with all their Water. I had a mind to inform my self of the Truth of it, I
therefore asked concerning it, whether so great a Dew fixed it self on this
Plant, that it continually distilled a clear and wholesome Water into Basins of
Stone set on purpose to receive it; so that there would be, by this means, a
sufficient quantity both for the Inhabitants and their Cattle, Nature kindly
supplying, by this perpetual Miracle, the want of fresh Water, which was not to
be met withal throughout the whole Island. The Inhabitants confirmed me in the
Opinion that I had before entertained, that it was a mere Fable. There were,
however, some that told me, that there was such a sort of Trees, but that they
never furnished such prodigious quantity of Water which was spoke of.

Tuesday, the 5th, we continued our Course to the South, being in 27 Degrees 40
Minutes Northern Latitude, and in 360 Degrees Eastern Longitude. About Six a
Clock in the Evening, being full South off the Grand Canary, we kept East North
East for about 7 Leagues.

Wednesday, the 6th, it blew so strong an Easterly Wind, that the Tackling of
the Top-Sail, and the Main-Yard, broke in pieces, and the Mainmast buckled so
much, that it was in danger of breaking. This Wind ceased in a quarter of an
hour, afterward, and the Vessel began to be Steady and Trim.

Thursday, the 7th, at Noon, being in 20 Degrees Northern Latitude, and in 28
Minutes Easter. Longitude, we cut the Tropic of Cancer.

It was not forgot in this place, to keep up the Ceremony that is used by all
Sailors, they call it the Baptism; it is put in practice upon all those who
never yet passed the Tropic. See here the whole Description of it. They set a
great Tub of Water at the foot of the Mainmast, with a Stick laid across it;
Then those, that have been Initiated in former Voyages, having Grim^c'd their
Faces with Smut, walk in Procession a-round the Deck, one carrying a drawn
Cut-lash, another a Drying Pan, and the rest several of the Kitchen Utensils.
The Pilot, to distinguish himself, turns his Coat, and Displays some tattered
Rag instead of a pair of Colors. The Procession being finished, which is
always performed in great State, with Trumpets Sounding, and Drums Beating,
they proceed to Baptizing of the Ship, flinging several Peals of Water about
the Deck, till the Captain gives the Ship's Crew some Drink-Money.

They go then, first, to the most considerable of the Ship, whom they make to
sit, one after the other, upon the Stick I already mentioned: The Mob gets
about. him, presenting a Basin to receive his Baptismal Offering, holding the
Cymeter a cross his Neck: Then the Pilot brings his Book of Charts, and makes
the Patient put his Hand upon the Tropic Line, and Swear to observe this
Ceremony, in like manner, at any time for the future, to those that were fresh
Travelers. At length they mark him with a black ^^^^^s upon the Forehead, and
fling a little Water upon his Head, which followed by a Present flung into the
Basin, they dismiss him; though, if it be a Person of Common Rank, they draw the
Stick from under him, Sousing him into the Tub, flinging Buckets of Water upon
him, and thumping him, at a good Rate, with the Stick he sat upon. There is a
necessity of undergoing this Ceremony, nor is an Admiral himself exempted,
though they use him in a more Civil manner than ordinary.

Friday, the 8th, we drew near the Coast of Barbary, being at Midday in 21
Degrees 47 Minutes Northern Latitude, the Wind blowing a fresh Gale at North
North East, we were satisfied that it was impossible to reach Cape-Blanc within
Daylight, being 4 Leagues off from Land, having 28 Fathom Water, with a Sandy
bottom; we kept our bent East South East, and on Saturday the 9th, about Eight
a Clock in the Morning, we found our selves but a League from shore.

We Coasted along to Cape-Blanc, and Anchored there in 14 fathom Water to the
North-West, being about a League from the Point of the Cape; which is,
according to our Account, in 20 Degrees 30 Minutes Northern Latitude, and 359
Degrees 10 Minutes Western Longitude.

When the Portuguese discovered this Cape, about the Year 1454. they gave it
the Name of Cape-Blanc, by reason of its barren white Sand, insomuch that
nothing of Green appears in view. It lies almost as flat as the Sea; on which
Account it is called the Sea of Sand.

From Cape-Cantin to this place, which is 300 Leagues, nothing is to be seen
but a Flat of Sand, by the Ancients called, The Desert of Lybia, and by the
Arabians Zaara. It Is not Inhabited, save only with Wild Beasts, such as Lions,
Tigers, Ounces, Leopards, and other like sort of Creatures.

These Deserts are bounded on the North by Mount Atlas, and to the South by the
Country of the Negers; they are of that extent from East to West, that they
cannot be crossed on Horseback under the space of 50 days. Over these Sands, the
Caravans pass from Fez to Tombut, Melly, Borneo, and other Kingdoms of the
Negers.

When any Storm arises in these Deserts, the Sands overwhelm both the
Passengers and their Camels, often smothering them to Death; at other times,
filling up the standing Pits of Water, so that they perish by Thirst. The
Caravans, for want of any beaten Track, are obliged to make use of the Compass
as though they were at Sea.

At the Point of Cape-Blanc, there is formed a certain Gulf which takes its
Name from the Island which it makes, and is called Arguin. This Gulf shoots up
more than 15 Leagues within Land, by which the prospect of it is lost having
once passed the Point.

The Portuguese had formerly a Fort in this Island, where they Established a
Commerce with the Azoaghes, Arabs, or Moors, who Traffick'd with them for Gold,
Gum-Arabick, Ostridges Plumes, which are there in great Plenty, by reason of
the abundance of those Birds. It Is said-of this Animal, that they are so far
destitute of Memory, that they forget where they lay their Eggs, and that they
brood over the first they chance to meet withal. I much doubted the Truth of
the Report, that one of these Eggs were sufficient to satisfy the Appetite of
eight Men of good Stomach. To the rest, they bring these Merchandises from
Hoden, which is four days Journey into the Main Land, and is the place where
the Caravans arrive from Tombut, Gualata, and other Inland places of Lybia, and
the Country of the Negers.

These People are Disciples of the Precepts of Mahomet, they never continue
long settled in a place, but wander in the Deserts from one part to another,
according as they meet with Pasturage for their Horses, Camels, Cattle, Sheep,
and Goats, by whose Milk they are nourished. They are divided into Tribes or
Lineages, they own no King or Superior by any legal Right, though he that has
the greatest Stock is voluntarily obeyed as their Captain or Conductor.

Their Traffic with the Negers consists in Horses and Camels; they receive for
a Horse, 6, 8, or 10 Slaves, but for a Camel only one or two, may be sometimes
three.

The Fort of Arguin was taken by the Hollanders from the Portuguese, and taken
from them again during the War in 1672. by Monsieur Ducas, a Captain of the
Royal Affrican Company. He had but 120 Men in this Expedition, of which he lost
but three. The Supine Negligence of the Dutch Governor, contributed much to
this easy Conquest; for there had been nothing more practicable than to have
prevented it. Our Artillery consisted but of 6 small Pieces, the largest being
only an 8 Pounder; we had no manner of shelter, and above all, we were in great
want of Water, it being impossible to Drink of a stinking Spring, which was the
only Water our Men could come to in the whole Island.

This Fort was reserved to the French by the Peace of Nimeguen, with all the
other Places that our Company had then in Possession. Notwithstanding which
accord, the Hollanders do every year Traffic thither with some of their
Vessels, which is a manifest breach of Articles.

The Captain of our Ship went ashore with 30 Men, in hopes of finding there the
Vessel called the Town of Hamborough, but she was already gone off. They met
with only one Vessel upon the Dock, which was not quite finished, they set her
on fire, with another small Boat which had on Board some Moors, and a few
Hollanders, who quitted her, and betook themselves to Swimming. They found her
laden with Tortoises, which proved a good Booty for our Ships Crew, they at
that time wanting Provisions: They are very large upon this Coast, and their
number in abundance, one alone being able to satiate 30 Men; their flesh very
much resembles that of Veal, and relishes full as well; their Shells are at
least 15 Foot in Circumference.

Cape-Blanc abounds in Fish, as Guiltheads, Pargues, Vielles, Sea-Dogs, and
many other whose Names I am not acquainted withal. Our Seamen took great
quantities with Angling, and feasted themselves highly during 8 Days as we
Coasted along the shore, till we reached the Mouth of the River Senegal. There
are some Habitations of the Moors, separated from the rest, upon this Coast,
who, through the Barenness of the Soil, are forced to live altogether upon the
Fish.

Saturday, the 7th, we continued our Course for Goree, and passed in sight of
the River Senegal; of which I shall Discourse hereafter.

Tuesday, the 19th, we made Cape-Verd, being in 14 Degrees and 45 Minutes
Northern Latitude.

This Cape was so called by the Portuguese, who discovered it the same Year as
that of Cape-Blanc They Named it Cape-Verd, because you are immediately
presented with the Prospect of great Groves of Trees, many of which hold Green
all the Year: It lies high, and affords a most ravishing Prospect. Above the
Woods there appear two round Hills, to which they have given the Name of the
Mammells, since their situation do, in some measure, resemble a Pair of
Breasts. This Cape juts out a great way into the Ocean, and is esteemed the
largest in the whole Ocean next to that of Bonne Esperance.

Its situation is wrong placed in our Charts, where we find it in 14 Degrees
exact, though in reality it be 14 Degrees and a half. After having doubled the
first Point, for there is two, you discover a small Island which is not
Inhabited; it is called the Island of Birds, of which, at all times, are seen
great Flocks, it lying wholly open to view.

When this Island is passed, the other Point must be doubled ere you can make
Goree, which lies behind the Cape, almost opposite to the Mammells. The Coast
enclines toward the North West, and makes a Bow, where the best Water is to be
met withal that is in all these Parts, which is a great refreshment to the
Voyagers.

Being arrived at Goree, Wednesday the 20th of May, 1682. and Anchored in the
Road, we Saluted the Fort with 7 Guns; they answered the Salute, Gun for Gun,
the first with Shot, out of respect to Monsieur Dancourt. When he went off in
his Boat, we Saluted him with 5 Guns; all the Ships that were in the Road did
the like, and when he Landed the Fort gave him seven.

After having showed his Letters from the Company, which constituted him
Director, he entered into the Management of his Employ. He found the Affairs in
a miserable Condition, by the ill Conduct of two Persons, who both pretended to
the Sovereign Command: The one was a Frenchman, and Commandant for the Company
at Goree; the other was their Agent-General all along the Coasts. But as these
things are not to my purpose, I shall say nothing farther of these Concerns.

The Island of Goree was so Named by the Hollanders, because it resembles an
Island in Zealand of the same Appellation; it is about the fourth part of a
League in Circuit, and extends it self length-ways from North to South, being
something more than a League distance from the Continent. It has, to the South,
a steep Rock washed by the Sea, and is wholly encompassed with Rocks, having
but one narrow passage by which any Vessels can come to.

As the Portuguese were the first that made any considerable Voyages along this
Sea, these Parts were first by them discovered, as well as the remainder of
Africa in the Ocean, and Atlantic Sea; and falling under the Power of the
Dutch, they Built a Fort on the weakest side of the Hill for the Defense of the
Island, and another sorry Fort at the Hill foot.

The Count D'Estrees, Vice Admiral of France, made himself Master of this Fort
in November 1678. it being Surrendered to him by the Governor, without so much
as putting himself in a posture of Defense; and he not being able to spare
Force for Manning them, he Demolished both the one and the other. The Members
of the Company, who are in present possession of this Island, have a little
repaired the Lower Fort, having built a small Magazine, and a very indifferent
Wall raised out of the Ruins of the Old Fort, which are only capable to prevent
the Insults from their Neighboring Negers.

Monsieur Dancourt immediately employed himself in facilitating the Commerce,
and in visiting the Warehouses along the Coasts, giving necessary Orders to
all the Officers that were therein Entrusted; at length he Established a good
Correspondence with the King of the Negers, and with their Principal Chiefs.

Upon this Account he traversed the Country near 24 Leagues across, from the
Mouth of Senegal to that of Gamby, which are the two main Currants by which the
River Niger disimbogues it self into the Sea. I accompanied him in all these
Journeys along the Coasts, wherein I made it my business to inform my self
concerning these Countries, of the Religion, Manners, and Customs, of the
Affricans of Cape-Verd.

We began our Journey the 6th of December 1682. for Senegal, whether we could
have no passage by Sea, by reason of a strong Northernly Wind. In the mean
time, the State of Affairs requiring the presence of Monsieur Dancourt, upon
the Death of the Governor who came thither but some days before, he resolved to
go by Land, and to send the Renown, a Vessel Commanded by Captain Oyere, to
carry the Merchandises, and to bring back the Goods for which he should make
Exchanges.

It were an easy matter to come from Senegal to Goree, but not to go thither.
This Vessel having had a fair Wind, was a Month a making her Passage, which
would be no more than 40 Leagues in a direct Course, but full 500 the way she
was obliged to take. During this time, we began to imagine that she must be
lost, when at length we see her come into the Road.

Our Journey by Land was not so long, but much more tiresom, since the Road
does not furnish Travelers with the least Necessaries. The Guides themselves
are in want; and throughout the whole Village of Rafis, which is but 3 Leagues
distant from hence, we could meet only with one Horse for Monsieur Dancourt,
and six Asses, two of which we Loaded with Provisions. Mine, I must confess,
had a very brisk Countenance, she winc'd and played the Devil for the first two
Leagues, afterward she would scarce move a foot.

Our Negers were weary of beating her, and, indeed, I was obliged to dismount,
but she being of no large size, I got on and often without much trouble, having
no occasion for Stirrups. When I lighted upon a piece of bad way, and my Beast
began to stick with me, it was but setting my feet to the ground, and she would
be persuaded to move from under me, and leave me fairly to get out my self;
finding her self without her Burden, she would kick and run after her
Companions with a deal of vigor; which I perceiving, I made bold once more to
bestride her. But, in short, we were deceived in each other; she fairly stood
still, expecting me to get off as before, and with all the Stripes I was able
to give, I could only make her move a Foot-pace, as gravely as the Portuguese
himself to whom she belonged. Her Back was so sharp, that she inflicted the
same pain as the Wooden-Horse. In short, without any fault of my own, was I
thus racked during the whole six days of our Journey.

Though it were in the Month of December, yet the heat was insufferable; which
added much to my grievances, we continuing our march from Sun set to Sunrising,
making only a small Halt at Noon, where, under the shade of Trees, we took some
refreshment out of the Provisions we brought along with us. At Night we Lodged
in a small Village, but we found neither Victuals for our selves, nor Mill for
our Carriers, which is the ordinary Food of the Negers, who often, for want of
Corn, live entirely upon Roots.

Our Landlords entertained us after the best manner they were able, but their
extreme Poverty made even that most insupportable. Their Houses are made of
Straw, even that which belongs to the King himself. There are some places,
where they are made more Commodious than in others. These worthy Structures are
about four paces Diameter; their Covering is round, in the shape of a Dome; the
upper part whereof is Straw, and the under Palm Leaves, the whole very prettily
worked: The Dome is supported with five or six forked Staves: The Wall is
either with Straw or Palm-Leaves curiously interwoven.

They have neither Doors nor Windows to their Houses, save only a Hole much
resembling the Mouth of an Oven; so that whoever goes in or out, must do it
upon all four. Though the Heat must needs be excessive in such a straightened
place, yet they cannot content themselves without a fire, which must of
necessity make an intolerable Smoke, which to them is very agreeable, they
taking a particular delight in Smoke. The Floor of the House is Sand, having
Trenches dug in them half Leg deep.

Some of their Houses have their Entrance so very small, that I admired how
they could possibly creep in and out. And I remember a Gentleman, of something
a larger size than my self, having lain in one of these lovely Palaces,
endeavoring to creep out like a Serpent, having half out he very fairly stuck
by the middle. In vain I endeavored to help him, and not daring to cut the
Wall, I was obliged to call help to drag the Spark out.

Their Beds are still more incommodious than their Houses; they are made with a
parcel of Sticks as thick as a Man's Wrist, placed two Fingers breadth asunder
in the Nature of a Hurdle; the great knotty Sticks thus Platted, seem made on
purpose to break a Man's Back. Their Beds, as well as their Houses, are
supported with forked Sticks: They lie down upon them without any more to do,
though those of the better sort of Quality have a Mat, which serves instead of
a Quilt.

By this that I have already said, it is easy to conclude, that though their
Country cannot afford its Inhabitants any great Felicities, by reason of its
Sterility, yet their Laziness does much contribute to their Miseries.

But to return to our Journey, which this digression has interrupted: After six
days Traveling, we were got to a Village called Bieure, at the Mouth of the
River Senegal. We found it to be the Custom of the Country, for their Women
only to meddle in the business of Traffic, their Men not concerning themselves
at all; so that out of pretext of bringing down their Merchandise, the Women
come to divert themselves amongst our Seamen, who often are very ready to
oblige them.

We left our Equipage here, and Monsieur Dancourt sent to the Residence, that
they might send him a Bark to carry us the remaining 5 Leagues, to the Island
St. Louis, which is made by Senegal; where we happily arrived on the 13th of
December, two hours after Midnight.

This Island is situated in the middle of the River, 5 Leagues above its Mouth,
and is about a League in Circumference: The Company have there a Storehouse, a
Commandant and Commissioners; it is thither where the Negers bring their Skins,
Ivory, Slaves, and sometimes Amber-Gris; for our Gum-Arabick, it comes from the
Moors, as I have already mentioned.

We give in Exchange, to these Negers, Linen, Cotton, Copper, Tin, Aqua.
Vitae, and some Glass-baubles. The Advantages that accrues by this sort of
Traffic, is 8 Hundred for the Hundred: The Skins, the Ivory, and the Gum, are
brought into France; for the Slaves, they are sent to the French Plantations in
America, to be employed in the Sugar Works.

Those of the better sort are purchased sop eight Francs each, and are re-sold
for above a Hundred Crowns. You Will often have a good substantial Slave for four
o^ five Quarts of Aqua-Vitae. Thus their Prie^^ is small, but the Charges of
Transportin^ amounts to something considerable.

The River of Senegal is a Branch (...) Niger, separating it self about 600
League^ above its Entrance: This River diffuses i^ self in the Kingdom of
Cantorsi, and from thence spreads into several Branches; the principal of which
are Gamby and Riorgande.

Senegal sepanates the Azonghes, Moors or Tawnies, from the real Blacks; so
that on one side of the River are the Moors of a Tawny Complexion, and the
other is Inhabited by People that are perfectly Black. The former are
Wanderers, still Encamping, and making no longer stay in a place than they are
furnished with good Pasturage; whereas the others, to wit, the Negers, are
Sedentry, and associate themselves in Villages.

Those have no. Superiors but what they voluntarily choose, but these are
subjected to Kings, who Despotically Tyrannize over them, and render them mere
Slaves and Vassals. The Moors are small, Meager, and of an uncouth Mien, but
have a Genius that is free and refined. On the contrary, the Negers are large,
fat, and well proportioned, but very Silly, and of shallow Conceptions. The
Country Inhabited by the Moors is a Barren Sand, desti^^ce of Greens; and that
of the Nigers fertile in Pasturage, Mill, and ever Greens, though they produce
no Fruit for Sustenance.

It is from these Moors that we have our Gum-Arabick; they gather it in the
Deserts of the interior Lybia. It sticks to the Trees that discharge it, as
that of Cherry and Plum-Trees in France: They expose it to Sale a Month or six
Weeks before the Inundation of Niger.

We give them in Exchange blue Cloth, blue Linen, and some small quantities of
Iron; they bring it 5 or 600 Leagues by Land; some have half a Quintal, some
more, and others less. They Ride wholly Naked upon their Camels, Horses, or
Beeves, which they make use of for carrying, their Merchandises. Those of the
greatest Rank amongst them, have a kind of Mantle made of Furred Skins, which
very much resemble the Hoods of our Chanters; others have only a sorry piece of
Leather to cover their Nudities. They make use of little other Nourishment but
Milk, with some Gum dissolved therein.

They are accustomed to feed in Gangs when they come down to Traffic; and
sometimes they buy a Beef expressly to devour him, but must themselves out his
Throat, otherwise they will not eat of him; and there are those amongst, who
are set a part for that piece of Service Though they have good store of Cattle,
yet they rarely eat any, save only when they have some one that is ready to
expire, either by some Distemper, or by Age.

Those that Negotiate with them have an intolerable deal of trouble, since they
always meet with either Cheating or Insult from their hands; but since the
Commerce is drove on the Bank of the River, they cannot so easily Cheat, for
the Goods are immediately put on Board as they are Measured from them. This
Commerce is performed in the Months of May and June, 30 Leagues above our
Residence.

When all is finished, they begin to Rattle you with a thousand opprobrious
Reproaches; and if they can Trepan any French, or other White Man, they
certainly kill him in Revenge of some Quarrel, though of 20 Years standing. No
longer than two Months since, they had taken a Seaman that knew the Language,
who was sent by a Captain of the Company to Arguin, and they demanded no less
than 50 Slaves in Exchange of him.

Never was Nation more Roguish and Perfidious: They are very Cunning; and can
make use of Fire Arms, but dare not stand a Shot; so that three White Men did
once prevent more than four hundred from seizing of a Bark, with which these
Infidels came to Traffic; the Musket Shot which they were plied withal, did
utterly Disarm them of their Courage, and baulk their Treachery.

It was known afterward, that the most part of them were Moors from the Skirts
of Mount-Atlas, who came to Depose Cheiratick, one of the most puissant Negers
Princes of that Country; of whom I shall speak more hereafter. I had forgot to
mention that they retire into the Uplands, as soon as the Niger begins to
overflow.

The Kingdom of Senegal is the first Land belonging to the Negers: It has been
formerly very considerable, at present it is of small Note; though they have a
very brave King, yet, for want of Force, this Prince is become Tributary to
another.

His Dominion extends it self along the River for the space of 40 Leagues,
without reckoning some petty Signiories about its Mouth, and about 10 or 12
Leagues into Land; all which are his Tributaries.

This King is called Brac, which is an Appellation of Dignity; however Absolute
he is, yet is he so Poor and Miserable, bib that often he has not Mill for his
own Support. He is so great a Lover of Horses, that for the generality he
contents himself with a Pipe of Tobacco, and a small quantity of Aqua-Vitae,
and spares his Mill to give his Horses. Sometimes he makes Incursions upon the
most unprovided of his Neighbors, without the least pretext, and so drives off
their Cattle, in which their Riches consist; nay, often makes a parcel of
Slaves, whom he sells for Aqua-Vitae.

When his Stock of Strong-Water diminishes, he Looks up the remaining quantity
in a small Chest, and gives the Key to one of his Favorites, whom he
dispatches, perhaps, 30 Leagues from thence, to tell some foolish Story to his
Wein^^n. This he does, that he may not have power to Drink during his absence
with the Key, by which means his small Store is preserved.

If he has no opportunity of exercising his Tyranny upon his Neighbors, he
does not fall of giving his own Subjec^^ a taste of it, by over running his own
Country, staying two days in^^ one, Village, three in another, where he exacts
an Entertainment for himself and all his Court; which is composed of 200 of
those that are most exquisite in Roguery, Rascals that have refined themselves
by the Commerce with the Whites, of whom they are sure to retain their worst
qualities. After they have ruined the Town, they take occasion to carry off
some Slaves, upon the least pretense of injury imag^nable.

And if the Prince be Perfidious, his Subjects don't come an Inch behind him,
for they will lay hold on all opportunities to sell each other, without the
least regard either to the degrees of Sanguinity; so that a Father will sell
his Sons, and a Son his Parents, as it best happens. They will pretend to
employ those whom they have a mind to sell, in helping them with their Goods to
our Residence, and when they have them there, they deliver them to whoever will
purchase them, if they understand not the Language.

I will insert here an Adventure that happened some time since, which will
verify what I have been saying. One of these Wretches had formed a design of
selling his Son, he perceiving it dissembled the thing, and understanding the
French Tongue, whilst his Father was gone somewhere aside he went to our
Storehouse, and told, That he had a Jolly Slave to dispose of; and, in short,
the Price was agreed on, and the bargain concluded, he sold and delivered him.
This Slave was his own Father, who seeing them go to put Irons on his Feet, he
began to be in a passion, and cried out, He was his Father; he denied it, and
the Bargain stood good.

This Crime did not go long unpunished, for the Son going home again with his
Merchandise, met with a powerful Seigniour, who fairly stripped him of what he
had, made him a Slave, and sold him at our Residence.

After the Kingdom of Brac, you meet with that of Cheyratick; which is as much
as to say, the most potent of the Empire. Of this latter depends more than ten
little Kings, and other mean Sovereigns: His Empire extends it self upon two
branches of the River Senegal, and contains full 300 Leagues of Land. These
Countries produce Dates, Mill, and plentiful Pastures for feeding great store
of Cattle. These People are called Fowls; they are not quite black, neither so
white as the Moors, but are betwixt both.

They are far more Civilized than the rest of the Negers, and entertain
Strangers very civilly. It has very often happened, when any of our Seamen have
been ill treated by their Captains, they have taken Refuge at the Court of
Cheyratick, where they have been kindly received, admitted to his Table, and
have partaken of all the satisfaction and diversions that the place was capable
of affording.

He, for the most part, feeds upon Mill, Beef, and Dates, and never Drinks
either Wine or Aqua-Vitae, observing the Precepts of Mahomet more Religiously
than the other Negers; he can take the Field with 50000 men, but for want of
Provisions he cannot long subsist them.

Ascending from the Estates of Cheyratick, you meet with the Countries of
Fargots and Engusland, 300 Leagues from our Residence; we also manage a
Traffic with them. They differ not in the least from the Fowls. Since it is
impossible to get any higher, my knowledge of those Countries reaches no
farther; nor do I know a tittle of any thing beyond.

After the River Senegal has winded it self about Cantercy, and several other
large Islands, it empties it self into the Sea, by two several Passages, in 15
Degrees 32 Minutes Northern Latitude. Betwixt the Sea and this River there lies
a Flat, or Bed of Sand, of about a Cannon-shot over; this resistance forces it
to continue its Course for 6 Leagues before it can discharge it self into the
Sea, though their surface lies of an equal level, but when it has forced it
self two several Passages, it disembogues it self by two Mouths into the Sea,
of about two Leagues distant from each other, between which is found an Island.

In each of these Channels there arises several Sand-Banks, which the River
washes down with it, and are cast up back again by the Sea, and are left in
dangerous ridges very incommodious for the Shipping for want of open Channels;
the continual agitation of the Sea, meeting a resistance by the Banks, render
the Waves of a terrible largeness, whose force do often split the Vessels
against the shore; and then there is no manner of help for the Seamen, for
should they endeavor to save themselves by Swimming, they would be immediately
devoured by the Requiems. These Passages are only dangerous at Low Water, and
not at the overflowing of the Niger.

What is singular in these Inundations, is that they almost, every time the
Waters rise, force themselves new Passages through the Sands to get into the
Sea. About 20 Years past, it made its entrance right against the Island which
is Inhabited by the French, which obliged them to remove a little higher; which
Passage is now closed, and others made anew, which are still so
interchangeably filled, that there, however, remains but two at one time.

Several Nations of Europe have Traffick'd formerly in this River, at present
they are only French that use that Trade.

Perhaps, having often mentioned the Inundation of Niger, it may be required
that I should give an Account how, and at what time it increases, without
pretending to give any Physical Reasons for its so doing; if by the Relation of
the circumstances such a knowledge may be forwarded, I will do my best to
recount the Particulars, such as I found them.

The Heats are very excessive under the Torrid Zone for want of Rains, which
are here very rare, and never out of the Months of July, August, and September.
On the South Side of the Equinoctial the Rains begin earlier, and especially
falls in abundance at this Season; they are accompanied with furious Winds, and
followed by so great a Calm, and such soul tring Heats, that it is very
troublesome to breath. After the interval of two or three hours the Tempest
recommences, and holds thus successively during the three Months; this
occasions violent Distempers, Fevers, Cholera-Morbus, Ulcers upon the Legs,
frequent Convulsions, followed by Death or the Palsy.

The Reasons of the Inundation of the Nile are sufficiently known, nor have I
any occasion to repeat them; this of the Niger is, no doubt, produced by the
same Principals. I believe that the true cause proceeds from the Sun's
repassing the Line of Cancer, which in France makes our Summer Solstice; and
here the Winter draws together a great Mass of Vapors, which are afterward
discussed into great and continued Rains, which, consequently, cause the
overflowing.

These Rains begin in Aethiopia in April, and continue May and June, but here
they begin the 15th of July; they hold increasing for the space of 40 days, and
are as long in their decrease. This Inundation, which enriches the Soil, is not
general, but only on the Country that borders upon the River. When you are once
up, the Course of the River is no longer perceived, since its Chanel has not
depth enough to contain these Waters, nor power to convey them straight into
the Sea; so that they fill up all the Valleys, and lay the whole Country in a
level.

It Is dangerous Sailing during this Flood, especially on the River Senegal,
when the Chanel cannot be known; for upon the decrease of the Water the Bark
may be left either upon some eminence, or in some hollow, of which it would be
impossible to get her clear.

It is about 15 Years ago since an Accident happened, which will confirm what
I. have said. The Gentlemen of the Company having a mind to take the benefit of
the Flood, sent some Barks to discover the Inhabitants about the place, and
where the Branches of the Niger separate; they endeavoring to Sail from the
River of Senegal to that of Gamby, of whose entrance the English are Masters;
and by a Fort which they there maintain, they hinder any Commerce by others
into that River. And since our People could no how make any Discoveries that
way, but at the time of the high Waters, by whose assistance they might Sail
over Rocks, which at other times stood on dry ground. They sen^ 30 Men in these
Barks, who went up nea^ 300 Leagues from our Residence, but they underwent such
Fatigues, that but five o^ them returned. Having one time lost the Chanel,
their Bark, amongst other Misfortunes stuck fast amongst the Trees; by good
Luck they were not far off the Chanel, so that by force and main strength they
got her once more afloat.

When Monsieur Dancourt had dispatched his business in these Quarters, in what
related to the advantage of the Company, finding the Barbarre, or the Mouth of
the River, in good condition to be passed, there being a gentle Easterly Wind,
he accomplished it in a Bark appointed for that purpose; she carried us Aboard
the Ship called the Ronown, who waited for us in the Road, on which we Embarked
to save a troublesome Journey by Land.

We weighed Anchor the 10th of January 1683, and Sailed for Goree; we Coasted
along the shore, which being adorned with Trees of a continual Green, afforded
us a most engaging Prospect.

When he had visited all the Coasts, and given his necessary Orders, we
returned the lame way, which took us up eight hole days. I have here set down
what Remarks I was capable of making during my small continuance there.

The People that Inhabit the Coasts from the Mouth of Senegal to that of Gamby,
are divided into three sorts, The Geloffes, the Sereres, and the Barbecins;
they are governed by several little Kinglings, each Absolute in his own
Territories: He of largest Bounds is King Amel, Sovereign of the Geloffes. The
Name Amel is not peculiar to this Prince, but it is a Name of Dignity. Since
all their Governments do very much resembe each other, as well in respect of
the People as the Country, I shall content my self with this Example, to make
you sensible of the others.

The Geloffes Inhabit beyond the Mouth of Senegal as you go South, till you
come within 6 or 7 Leagues of Cape-Verd, which contains, from North to South,
40 Leagues of the Maritime Coasts, and from East to West 100 by Land.

The Country of the Sereres, have for their King him whom we call Portugady, by
reason of a Town that belongs to him, and bears this Name; Jain is his Name of
Dignity. It contains 10 or 12 Leagues along the Coast, and extends it self
almost an hundred by Land.

The Kingdom of Barbecins, otherwise Jouall, (for the same reason as I have
alleged of Sereres) is governed by King whose Name I cannot call to mind; he
has no larger Territories than the former, with whom he often wages War.

Besides these three People, there are a sort of Portuguese; they are so
called, since they descended from them who first Inhabited these Coasts after
their first Discovery. The Negresses, whom they espoused, brought forth these
kind of Mule men, from whom there comes a Race still more swarthy. They may
also be Fugitives from Cape-Verd, or from Cacheau, another Colony of that
Nation, upon one of the Branches of the River Gamby, distant three days
Journey. As they have followed the Religion of their Ancient Masters, they are
partly Jews, partly Catholics; they carry a great pair of Beads about their
Necks; there are none of any greater Rank than others; they are great Cheats,
and very Malicious, having all the Vices of the Portuguese, and not one of
their good Qualities.

All these parts in general are Sandy and Barren; the Heat is more violent in
the Month of January, than it is in July or August in France. It Rains in the
same manner, as I have already said, when (...) spoke of Senegal.

The Country is well Peopled, and is very Woody. They begin at the end of June
to Cultivate their Land, and Sow their Seed; some small while after the Rains
have ceased. Their Harvest falls our in September; so that in three Months time
they prepare their Land Sow and Gather in. This makes the Richness of the Soil
apparent, which, notwithstanding its Sterility, and their Natural Laziness,
produces them great store of Grain; I mean their Mill.

Their way of laboring their Earth is odd and pleasant: They get four or five
together in the Field, which they call Cougan; or Courgar, and so with a little
round Iron Shovel, something larger than ones Hand, set in a Stale of Wood,
they break up the Earth, which they fling before them, not entering the Swerd of
the Ground above three or four singers breadth, each having a Pipe constantly
in his Mouth. If they Work one hour, they will besure to Chat two for it. When the
Ground is so ordered, they Sow it as they Sow Pease in France, and never take
care to lay by any Store. They are for the most part so Lazy, that they don't
gather half enough to serve them, living in the mean time upon a black Root,
which is dried till it afford no manner of savor; and upon another called
Gernotte, whose taste is something like that of a Wall-nut. If by chance their
Harvest miss, and they are left destitute of a Crop, they even dye of Hunger.

It is not five Years since the like misfortune happened to them, being seduced
by the promises of a Marabon, which is the name of their Priests: He was of the
Azoaghes, or Arabs, of which I have already spoken. Under pretense of Religion,
he possessed himself of all the Country betwixt Cheyratick to Sereres, telling
them, That he was inspired by Heaven to revenge the Tyranny of their Kings. He
promised Miraculous Forces to prove his Vocation; and, above all, to make their
Land bring forth a plentiful and voluntary Harvest, without giving them any
trouble of bestowing their Labor.

This Promise suiting well with their idle temper, tickled their Imaginations
at a strange rate; so that almost all of them, especially those of the Kingdom
of Damel, espoused the Cause of this Impostor. Their King was Deposed, and all
their Neighbors Pillaged in this Revolt; they lived in daily expectation of
this Miracle, and waited two Years looking for their Mill, but to no purpose.
At length they began to Eat one another for want of Sustenance, and afterward
were obliged to surrender themselves Slaves. Process of time convinced them of
their folly and madness; so they drove away their Tyrant, and restored Damel to
his Estate. At present they will allow no more Marabous in their Country, but
make Slaves of all they can lay their hands on.

Besides their Mill, they have black and white Beans, very like our French
Beans, and Melons full of an insipid Juice. Of this sort of Grain, they make
that which they call Couscouse in Arabs and Laguere in their Language, which is
their ordinary sort of Food. The Fruit which we call Bananes, and in the
Canaries Adam's Apples, are very plentiful amongst them. They feed Cattle and
Goats; and those amongst them which have the largest Stock, are of the greatest
Repute. Their Beefs are no larger than a Calf of eight or nine Months old in
France, which I suppose is occasioned by their great Droughts; for all along
the Banks of the River Senegal, which affords good Pasturage, they are as large
as in Europe.

There are great store of Palm Trees, of which I observed three several sorts:
The one resembles the Date-Tree, the other like them we have in France; the
third is a sort of Latanier. As for that which bears the Coco, there is none of
that kind here.

By Incisions which the Negers make in these Palm Trees, a Liquor is Distilled
of a Pearl color, which they call Palm-Wine, it is sweet and palatable to be
made use of the first day, it entoxicates, and loses its gust, every day
growing sowrer than other; the older it is, the more it affects the Head. Each
Tree may produce three Pints of Liquor; it is generally made use of for the
Regaling of Strangers, nor is it ever wanting amongst the Persons of Condition.
This same Tree produces a sort of small Coco's, from which they draw the Punick
Oil; which smells like Violets, is of a Saffron color, and tastes like Olives;
it makes part of the Composition of the Musselin-Oil of Nicolas Alexandrin.
Some Customs from these Trees are due to Alzair, or the Lord of the Village.

As the Palm Trees are high and without Branches, and that the Incision must be
made in two or three places below the Tuft of Boughs, which is the Beauty of
this Tree, they climb up after this manner: They have a round Hoop made of
Bark, which they can tie and untye as they please, by which they mount; they
seem as if they sat within it, and push their Feet against the Tree, sustained
by the Rind which goes about their Thighs, and holds them as firm as though
they sat upon the Ground. Thus they Inch up till they get to the top, where
they make their Incisions, and fix too their Calabasses to catch the distilling
Liquor. You cannot look upon them so high, upheld by so small a matter, without
being sensible of some dread and terror.

All along the Coasts they have an infinite number of Animals, of which I
shall not pretend to give a particular Description, since I am not well-skill'd in
the Science of the Naturalists; I shall only mention them that I know, of which
many may be seen in Europe, by the Care and Curiosity of several Princes that
have occasioned their Transporting: But seeing them there in their Natural
fierceness, before they are any ways tamed, what I have to say concerning them
may, perhaps, give you some more particular Ideas.

The places where, for the most part, these wild Creatures are seen, are Ponds
and Ditches which the Rain has filled up; Evenings and Mornings they come
thither by Droves, as well as others that be less Savage: There are then to be
seen Elephants, Lions, Tigers, Leopards, Ounces, Wolves, Tyger-Cats, such as
produce Civet, Foxes, Wild Goats, etc.

What they observe of an Elephant, is, That she is never to be attacked where
there is room enough for her quick and free turning; for when she is at
liberty, she will certainly overturn the Men with her Trunk, and trample them
to Death. I do not know the time when the Female brings forth her Young, what I
know, is, That she often has three at a time, and feeds them with Herbs and
Leaves, which she puts in their Mouths with her Trunk. They often come by Night
into the Villages, not at all concerning themselves though they be frequented
places; and instead of turning out of the way, when they meet with any of the
Negers Houses, they keep straight forwards, and overturn them in their Walk as
though they were but Nutshells.

The Lion is very curious and cunning in seizing his Prey, not leaping directly
upon it, but taking a compass, ramping upon the Ground, and when he finds
himself within compass, he darts forth and flings himself upon it. They are
easily tamed when Young, we having had of them as gentle and as fawning as a
Dog.

The Tiger is more fierce than the Lion, his length and height is near the
same with a Greyhounds, and will indifferently fall upon either Man or Beast.
The Negers kill many of them with their Zagayes, and their Arrows, that they
may get their Skins; whatever Wound they have received, yet they keep upon the
Defense during they have any life left, and scarce ever fail of killing some
before they fall.

The Leopard is cruel and nimble; however, they do not care for attacking Men,
unless they meet them in a place so narrow that they cannot be avoided; but
then he flings himself upon them, tearing their Faces with their Claws, pulling
off as much flesh as they can grasp, and thus killing them. They are Mortal
Enemies to the Dogs, and devour them wherever they meet them.

They say the Ounce is still more fierce than a Tiger, of which I believe they
are a Species, or, at least, what we call Panthers; their Skin is more
beautiful than the Tigers, though they be spotted alike.

The Tyger-Cat is also so called, by reason of his black and white spots; they
are shaped like our Cats, but four times as large; naturally voracious, and
eats Monkies, Rats, and other sort of Animals.

The Wolf differs in no respect from ours, but that they are something larger,
and more cruel.

The Cat, which produces the Civet, has the Head and Muzzel of a Fox; it is
large and spotted like the other, and very wild. One may get Civet from them
every two days; which is a sort of Muscosite, or thick Sweat, which is under
their Breech, within a concavity which contains their Testicles.

I never saw any Rhinoceros, though there be some here. There are several sort of
Apes and Monkies, as the Guenons with long Tails, and Magots which have none at
all; I saw none of these latter. For the former there are store every where, of
which there are three kinds; two of which are of a small Composure, and do but
little mischef. Of these lesser sort, the^ call some of them the Bewailers, by
reason of a Cry like unto small Children.

Of the other sort, there are some (...) large as the Magots; they have not
onl^ Hands and Feet, but have something ver^ near Mankind in their Gesture. The
N^gers are fully convinced that these Ape^^ can speak if they please, but that
they do not lest they should be obliged to Work Though we know that these
Creatures are good for nothing but to bite and tear, y^^ they often meet with a
great deal of kindness at our hands. It is, I believe, on the account that the
Negers of Senegal w^^ bring Rats in Cages, as though we were fond of all sorts
of Beasts; and they will te^^ you, that those are more Brave and C^^rious than the
Monkies, and that therefo^^ we ought to love them more.

It is not to be imagined what Havo^^ these Creatures make, when the Mill an^
the Corn is ripe, on which they fee^ They will get 40 or 50 of them together
and so go to Cougan; one of them is plac^ Sentinel upon some high Tree near
th^^ Field, whil'^r the rest are busy at the^ Harvest. Whenever he perceives
any body a coming, he will Cry like a Ma^thing; the others of the Gang taking
hint at the Signal, get off with their Booty with all the speed imaginable,
leaping from Tree to Tree with a prodigious agility. And the Females, who carry
their Young along with them, will, notwithstanding, leap the Trees to a
Miracle, as though they were not at all encumbered.

They eat here great store of Venison. Wild Boars are very plentiful, but have
not the same relish as ours, and their flesh is as white as that of a young
Pig. Wild Goats, Kids and Hares, are in great store.

I did not see any of their Stags, which are headed as well as in France, only
their Horns are like those of the Capricorns in the Mountains of Switzerland,
saving that they are straight.

There is to be seen here several Species of Birds unknown in Europe, abundance
of which live altogether upon Fish; particularly, they have one they call the
Great Gosier, they are twice as big as a Swan, having a Beak a full Cubit in
length, and a Craw of Skin under their Throat in the ^ashion of a bag, they
swallow Fish entire^y whole, though as large as a good middling Carp. Cormorants
and Vultures are the ^ame as in Europe: Of these latter sort there are some as
large as Eagles, which will devour small Children whenever they can catch them
a straggling.

I saw some Birds of so changeable and so curious a Plumage, that it is
impossible for me to give you a just Description: Their Nightingals do not
warble so sweetly as in Europe.

I have already mentioned the Ostridges, of which some are of an excessive
largeness; those of them that are Flyers are delicious Food, and their several
parts have a distinct relish; they are as large as (...) Swan, and their Plumes
are gray and black. The Wild Geese are very good and pleasant Food: Their Teal,
above all the other Fowl, have a most incomparable relish; and those of them
that are gray upon the River Senegal, do much surpa^^ the rest in goodness.

The Partridges there do Perch upon Trees like other Birds; as also do their
Hens, which the Portuguese call Pintade^ These Hens are speckled gray, and
black having a small red Wattel on each sid^ their Ears; they are of a larger
size that ours, and I believe them to be a kind (...) Partridges.

The Parrots there are of two kinds, the one are small, and wholly Green; the
other are larger, with gray Heads, their Bellies yellow, their Wings green, and
their Backs a mixture of gray and yellow. These never talk, but the small ones
have a clear and sweet Voice, and will learn whatever is taught them.

Of all those different Birds, I know none that are so curiously Industrious,
as a certain small Bird that makes its Nest upon the Palm Trees, after a most
curious way of Architecture, and by a wonderful Instinct, secures it from the
Serpents that often creep up the Trees. They build them on the extreme Point of
the smallest Branches, to which they fasten a Rush or S^raw, the strongest that
they are able to carry, of about a Foot and a half in length; and to the end
which hangs downwards in the Air, do they strangely affix their Nests, leaving
a small hole for their entrance on one side near the top. This resembles a Ball
hung up by a Thread and since the Branch to which it is affixed is too small to
bear any offensive Creature, they there produce their Young in security.

The Sea is extraordinary full of Fish along the Coasts, where all sorts may be
met withal: Those of Prey have large and long Teeth, of a double or triple
range. Those that are commonly Eat there, are Parques, Guiltheads, Vieills,
Tunnys, Mullets, Rucaes of the shape of a Salmon, Negres, Soles, Smelts, and in
abundance of Sprats; by which the Sea is sometimes covered.

The Requiem is a Sea Monster, of the shape of a Sea-Dog, but as long as three
of them; from four to eight Foot in length. She brings forth her Young ones
alive, and has a Matrix like a Bitch, her other parts like a Fish; it is the
most rapacious sort whatever, eating all sort of Animals that they can catch;
insomuch, that it is dangerous going into the Water to Bath, or to fall into
the Sea, wherever they are, for the best Swimmer in the World will not be
able to escape them.

The Marsouin, or Sea-Hog, is the same bigness as the Requiem, and very good
Food; these will offer no injury to Mankind. There is Bacon made of them, but
of an ill savor; their Sides and Intrails are the same as in a Swine,
excepting that they have two several Stomachs, one at the extremity of the
Oosophage, the other adjoining to its side, and near as large as the former. To
this is a small passage as big as the Pipe of a Quill, by which the
communication from the one to the other is performed: They are full of little
Cells, very like the Cells of a Honeycomb. The Duodenum, I very well remember,
has its rise from the latter. I had not an opportunity to make a just search,
our Seamen had so mangled it.

The Whales are prodigious in size, both as to length and thickness; so that
they often seem to exceed a Vessel of 26 Tun burden: However, they never
overturn a Ship, nor so much as a little Bark or Shallop, which care of theirs
must be rather attributed to the thinness and tenderness of their skin than any
good intentions, they not being able to strike against any thing that is hard,
unless when they are wounded, then the Fishermen in their Boats must keep off
at their peril.

The Blower very near resembles a Whale, but of a much lesser size; they fling
up Water as the Whale, but only by one single passage, which is above their
Muzzel, whereas the others have two.

I do not know the Name of a certain Fish, from whose Upper-Jaw a Bone shoots
out the length of four Foot, having sharp pricks a cross all along each side,
ranged in equal distances, and very sharp; which Weapon they often make use of.
This Fish we call the Sword Fish, they are declared Enemies to the Whale, and
often Encounter them with advantage, wounding the Whales at that Rate, that
they force them. selves ashore, and bleed to Death.

There are a sort which the Seamen call Sp^^tons, which have a large Bone
situated in the same place as the so mer, with thi^ difference alone, that it is
smooth and very sharp. I believe it is the same we call the Naruval. This Bone
resembles the Fabulous Horn of the Unicorn. This Fish i^ capable of piercing a
Vessel, and making her leak Water; if it does not happen that endeavoring to
get clear they brea^ this Bone, and then it serves for a Peg to mend the hole
it made.

The Sucker, so called for fixing them selves to any Vessels by their Mouths,
an^ sucking, they are of the bigness of a Sole when they fasten upon the Rudder
the retard the Ship, but not stop it as is fal^^ reported of the Remoras.

Amph^^ions Creatures are not frequently met withal upon these Coasts; nor do
you often meet with the Crocodile, the Sea-Harse, or the Sea Calf, the
Lamantin, and the Tortoise, unless it be at the Mouths of Senegal and Gamby.

There are in Marshes and Pools small Crocodiles of about 5 Foot in length,
whereof some are venomous, and others not They are in the Nature of Serpents,
and frequent those places that have most plenty of Pismires. These little
Creatures build themselves a kind of Forts by degrees, carrying little Morsels
of Earth till they increase the Hillock to 12 or 15 Foot in compass, being
hollow underneath like an Oven, and so ranged, that you would believe them at a
distance to be a Village.

There are in the River Gamby Crocodiles of above 20 Foot in length, and
proportionably in thickness; insomuch, that they will swallow a Kid whole. They
are very dangerous Creatures, having their Tails full as long as the rest of
their Body; their Skin is so hard that a Z^gaye cannot pierce it; some of them
will Eat nothing but Fish, others will venture upon a Man. When they Watch for
their Prey, they hide themselves in some frequented Rivers, and being near to
any that go Wash themselves, or if they are Rowing in a Canoe, or if a Bullock
comes thither, they will catch them with their Tails, and so devour them; they
only move their upper Jaw, their under one being immovable. They do no great
mischief out of Water; when the Negers kill them they eat them. They lay their
Eggs on Land, covering them with Sand; when they have done, they return either
into the Rivers, or the Woods.

The Seahorse, such as are met withal in the Niger, is of the bigness of an
Ass, and of the shape of a Horse; his Skin is hard, and without hair, and lives
on Land as well as in Water, which he never leaves, saving when he goes to
feed. They make great Havoc amongst the Mill and the Rice, since they spoil
ten times more than they eat. They will overturn the Canoes of the Negers, but
however they do not seize on the Men: They have two large Teeth which is made
use of as Ivory.

The Sea-Ox, which comes and feeds on Land, is as large as a Calf of 6 Months
old.

There are more Lamantins in the River of Senegal than in that of Gamby; they
are as large as the Marsouin, and have the same sort of Flesh and Bacon; when
they are out of the Water, they make use of their Fins instead of Feet. This is
all that I know of things of this Nature; I shall now give you an account of
the Manners and Genius of the Negers.

The Negers are very well shaped, and very proportionable in their make and
size: You shall not see any amongst them either Hunch-back'd or Lame, if it
does not befall them by some mischance. They are Stupid, and without Address,
even in Matters of the smallest concern: They are swinging Liars, but greater
Thieves. They have a dexterity in nothing else but in Lying, having so good a
knack at this business, that they will Rob you before your face, without your
perceiving any thing of the matter, by scraping away with one of their Feet
what they have a mind to take, and then taking it up behind them.

When any of the Mountaneers, for so they call them that come off from Land,
come to Negotiate with us, there is no manner of Cheats but the Negers will put
upon them; for under pretext of helping them to carry their Merchandise, and to
be serviceable to them in the nature of Interpreters, they will fairly keep
half of the value of what they receive from us, as though they had a real
interest in the Goods.

The terror of those Punishments which their Kings inflict on those who Rob on
Nights, and the many Persons taken in the Fact, cannot remedy this Vice that is
so Natural to them; notwithstanding the Chastisement in this case is
sufficiently rigorous, for on this account they are to become Slaves to those
whom they have Robbed.

Whoever is obliged to make use of Negers for Interpreters, is miserably
exposed to their Rogueries, they scarce ever giving a true account of what is
spoke, always finding out some evasion that is quite contrary; and by that
means often render our Bargains litigious.

Their Manners are altogether insupportable, especially when they believe
themselves to be serviceable in any respect. Their Drunkenness is to an extreme
excess, being continually gorged with Aqua Vitae; their Palm Wine is not
plentiful enough to be always at hand. Their Drunkenness is accompanied with a
total deprivation of Reason, and a furious Brutality.

They are not sensible of what Nature is Restitution, nor have they the least
tincture of Civility. Their* ignorance is so notorious, that they scarce can
comprehend that two and two makes four; nor have they any knowledge of their
Age, nor of the days of the Week, for which they want Names to distinguish.

Their Maraboux, who have sometimes a small tincture of the Arabs, writing
their Griz Griz in that Language, I shall take to explain these terms hereafter.

These People have but one good Quality, they are very Hospitable; nor do they
ever suffer a Stranger of their Nation to go from them, without entertaining
them with Eating and Drinking, and doing their best to detain them for several
days. And as they set their Aqua Vitae in great esteem, they therefore conceal
it from their Guests, since they would be ashamed not to give it them should it
be set in view. They recompense themselves of their Hospitality toward the
Mountaneers, by cheating them of the Aqua Vitae which they have in exchange for
their Merchandise, never allowing them so much as a half.

They are all extremely Poor, their whole Stock depending on a few Cattle, the
most Rich not having above 40 or 50, 2 or 3 Horses, with, perhaps, as many
Slaves; it is very rare that they have any Pieces of Gold to the value of 11 or
12 Pistoles.

Though they have no Wit, or any Talent of a Genius, yet they are excessive
Lovers of Praises and Adulation; so that there are a sort of People called
Guiriotz, whose business it is to perform this piece of Service. These Guiriotz
carry a sort of Drums near four or five Feet in length, made of a hollow Trunk
of a Tree, which they Beat either with their Hands, or with small Sticks. There
are also Moresque Drums, resembling Baskets, crossed over with little Cords,
which they finger with one Hand whilst they st^ike with the other.

I observed that they made use of another sort of Instrument, sufficiently
Harmonious did they know how to touch it; it gives a sound like a Harp. It
consists of a row of several Strings of several sizes, suspended to the touch
like the Wires of a Spinet.

I saw another of their Musical Instruments, which would be proper for the
Chamber of a Sick Person. It Is a kind of Lute made of a piece of hollow Wood,
covered with Leather, with two or three Strings of Hair, and adorned with Iron
Plates and Rings like a Tambour de B^sque.

These Guiriots Tune these several Instruments to their Voice, which is very
harsh; and thus they Sing Panegyricks of their Men of the best account. The
general Topics are, that they are great Lords, Rich, and as Puissant as the
White Men, who are great Slaves of a King; and, in a word, an infinite number
of such foolish expressions.

These Persons are Transported with their Elogies, and largely recompense these
Guiriots, who Sing their Praises. They make their Acknowledgments at so great a
rate, that I have seen them strip themselves to reward these false and fulsom
Flatteries. When these Varlets miss of their expected Fees they fall a railing,
and publish in the Villages as many base things as they can rip together
against them, contradicting whatever they had said good of them; which is
looked upon to be the grandest Affront imaginable.

It Is esteemed a very great Honor when the King's Guiriot Sings any ones
Praises, and he never fails of a good Reward, they sometimes giving 2 or 3
Bullocks, and often the best part of their Goods.

These Guiriots do not omit the Singing the same stuff to us, crying, That we
are Great, and Rich Lords of the Sea; but they scarce find it worth their while
amongst us, since we are not such senseless Boobies as the Negers.

The Habits of the Blacks are very plain. The poor People have nothing but a
piece of Linen, or Cotton, of about half a Foot breadth, to cover their
Nakedness; it is fastened to a Cord, which serves them for a Girdle, and they
let the Cloth hang down before and behind them, which they look upon as a great
Ornament.

The Gentlemen, and Men of Quality, are something better Equipped. They have a
Cotton Frock made in the shape of a Franciscan's Gown, with long and large
Sleeves; they are not Plaited at the Neck, for they only have a slit to put
through their Heads like a European Smock; they have them of all Colors, some
have blue, yellow, brown, etc.

Since these Jackets reach but half way down their Thighs, they have Breeches
of the same Stuff, that reach from the Girdle place below the Knees. These
Trowse^s are so large, that they take up five Else of Cloth; they resemble
Women's Petticoats-Sew'd together at the bottom, leaving only 2 places to put
the Legs through; the largest are the most fashionable.

They wear upon their Heads a sort of Bonnets, straight at the entrance, but
large at the bottom, something like the Hood of the Jac^bins. The Common People
go with their Feet Naked, but the People of Quality have Sandals made of a
piece of Leather cut into the Shape of a Shoe Sole, fastened at the top of the
Foot with Thongs, alter the manner of the Sandals of the Ancients.

Their Hair, though short, yet is tress'd up very prettily, and adorned with
Gris-gris, Silver, Leather, Coral, Copper, etc. They wear at their Ears Rings
of Tin, Silver, and Copper. Those that are Born of a Race of Slaves are not
allowed to wear their Hair.

The Maids and the Women go Naked from the Girdle upwards, unless the Cold
obliges them to fling over some Covering; the other part of their Body they
Cloth with a Paign, which is a piece of Linen or Cotton stripped after their
fashion, about the bigness of a Towel, which reaches to the half Leg. Their
Hair is also decked with Coral, and other little Baubles; their Head-Dress
makes a Crest upon the Head half a Foot high, the higher they esteem the
handsomer.

The Girls and the Boys go Naked till Eleven or Twelve Years old. Men and Women
adorn their Legs and Arms with Coral, Bracelets of Silver, Gold, Tin, and
Copper, according as they abound in Wealth.

Cotton, with which these People Cloth themselves, would be produced amongst
them in abundance would they bestow labor to Cultivate it; but they content
themselves with what they have a Necessity, and very often want even that. The
Women Spin the Cotton, and the Men make the Cloth; nor has their Pieces above
five Fingers in breadth, for want of necessary Employments for the making
broader, otherways they would make as good Weavers as in France. They are
forced to join ten or twelve Pieces together to make a small breadth.

Mill is the ordinary sustenance of the Western Negers; the Women that prepare
it make thereof Sanglet or Couscouse, which are their terms that signify two
manner of Victuals.

They begin at break of day to make their Sanglet, for it requires full six
hours for the preparing it. Two or three go about this Work, then taking all
the Mill they are to make use of at this time, they Pound it in deep Mortars
made of Wood, having not the practice of any Mills: When the Mill has lost its
Husk; they winnow it with Fans made of Leaves of Palms to cleanse it;
afterward they Boil it in Milk, or with Butter, or Meat Broth, or with dried
Fish, or with Water.

The Couscouse, which is their best Victuals, is also Mill well beaten and
clean Sifted. When it is well cleansed, a little of it is put in a Bowl, and
sprinkled a little Water upon the Meal. After it is well turned by Hand, some
more Water is put in, and then it is to be well Molded again; then it is to be
made up in little Balls. They are then to be dried; when they are well dried;
they are set in a Pot full of holes, upon another Pot where Meat has been
Boiled seasoned with Selpiment and Palm-Oyl, when any is to be had. This Ragou
is well enough when it is rightly prepared, and the Sand well Dressed out; which
is seldom done.

When they go to War, they take along with them a little Bag a Foot long, and
the thickness of a Man's Arm, full of Couscouse ready Boiled. Since the Women
have this Handiwork for their daily Employ, they are not a little busied.
Should the Women of France take such constant pains for their Husbands, I fear
the Men would lead but sorry Lives.

For their Beeverage, they have Palm-Wine, and Water out of some stinking
Ditch, or from a worse place; they make use of Milk when they can get it.

As Ambition is a Passion unknown to these People, they give themselves no
trouble of Building Towns, Castles, or Houses of Pleasure; but however, they
have neither Industry nor Materials. They Inhabit only in Villages, in Houses
as I have already described. There are several made according to their Quality
or Sufficiency; those that are nearest the Palm Trees are the handsomest,
though they be also without either Doors or Windows. The House of a great Lord
will be composed of, perhaps, 30 Pavillions, which they call Combettes;
sometimes of 40 or 50. A Poor Man will have but two or three, and the King
above a Hundred, but covered with Straw as the others.

Those of Persons of Quality are encompassed with Pallisades of either Straw or
Thorns propt up with Stakes: These Combettes communicate one to the other by
ways laid out in the form of Labyrinths; within the Precincts of the House are
very sine Trees according to the Capacity of the Owner, though they be
scattered, and without any regularity, as the place has by Nature produced them.

The Building of the Palace of King Damel surpasses all the rest in
Magnificence. Before you come to the Gate of the Pallisades, which makes the
first Enclosure, there is a spacious open Field, where his Horses are Managed,
though there be not above ten or twelve of them in all. Without, by the sides of
those Pallisades, are the Grand Seigniors Cabbins: You go in from this place
into the Palace by a large Avenue; this place is adorned with several Trees
which we call Collbassiers, because their Fruit resembles a Calbass.

Persons that are Employed the nearest about the King, have their Cabbins by
the side of this Avenue; and their nearness, or distance, from the
Combett-Royal, distinguishes their Ranks. Each of their Cabbins are also
encompassed with Pallisades; you must turn and wind very much before you can
come to the King, few People dare go into his Appartment.

All the Women have their Lodgings separately, and each of them have five or
six Slaves to serve them. The King may Lie with which he pleases, without
creating a jealousy in any of them. He has always one whom he loves better
than the rest, and when ever he is weary of her, he dispatches her into some
Village with her Slaves, and appoints her Land for her Maintenance. To her
succeeds another, of 30 which he keeps; the one half of them are sent away into
the Country.

The Negers, from this place to Gamby, observe the Law of Mahomet; but in the
Territories toward Siera Liona, and toward the Coast of Gold, have for the
most part no Religion at all, or, at least, they Worship what they first meet
withal in the Morning. Formerly they were Idolaters, worshipping the Devil, to
whom they Sacrificed Bullocks; and though they fed upon Cattle, yet they were
Believers of the Metempsucosis.

There are some who will not have the Lizards, which run about their Huts,
killed, upon any account whatever; for, say they, it is the Soul of either their
Father or Mother that comes to make the Folgar with them, which is to say a
Merriment.

They received their Mohammedan Religion from the Azoaghes or Arabs, of whom I
have already told you. It is but very pitifully observed by the vulgar sort,
who are only lightly tainted with it. The substantial are more devour, for they
generally have a Moorish Maraboux that belongs to them, which are cunning
Rogues, and have a strong Influence upon them. They make their Sala, or
Prayers, three times a day, in the Morning toward Sun rising, toward Noon,
and in the Evening; some in the Afternoon: The meaner sort of People say them
not at all, or at least but very seldom, nor do not trouble themselves in the
Building of Mosques.

The King and the Grandees have Mosques covered with Straw like their other
Houses They there keep standing a considerable time, looking against the side
toward the Sun rising; then they advance two Paces, muttering some Words
betwixt their Teeth, then they lay themselves flat upon their Faces, then
rising they place themselves upon their Knees, making a Circle round about them
upon the Earth, and about their Heads two or three several times. Afterward
they kiss the Earth by several ^erks putting Sand upon their Faces with both
Hands, repeating the same Ceremonies for the space of half an hour.

One demands of God Almighty that he may have no Enemy, but such as he has
Power to defeat; that God would do him no Injury. Another begs, that he may
have handsome Women, and great store of Mill, etc. During their Prayers no
Accident whatever is capable of Interrupting them, even though they saw their
own Houses in flames.

They believe Predestination, and whenever they fall into disgrace, they charge
the Cause upon God Almighty; so that if one Neger be killed by another, they
say that God killed him. However they lay hold on the Murderer and sell him.

They are so Superstitious that they imagine, that having certain Spells, they
cannot be so much as touched by any Beasts that approach them, since that will
either destroy them, or procure them some mischance.

They have a sort of Character which they call Gris-gris; these are little
Billets of the Arabian Character, interlaced with Negromantick Figures, which
are sold them by the Maraboux. One serves to prevent their being Wounded, to
help their swimming, to procure them good success in their Fishing; others for
procuring them great store of Women and Children; to hinder their being taken
Captive; and in General; for all purposes that either Suits with their Fears or
Wishes.

They have so great an assurance in these Characters, that some of them by
their Protection will not scruple standing the shot of an Arrow. It Is true,
that they are armed wholly over with this Magical Cuirase, not one single part
of their Body being destitute thereof, so that they could scarce be hurt with a
Zagay. Their Grand Seignior more particularly have their Vests and their
Bonners wholly covered therewith, often loading themselves at that rate, that
they are obliged to be set on Horseback. They also affix them to their Horses
to render them more sprightly, and to prevent their being wounded.

These Gris-gris are wrapped up in Linen very hard, folded and glew'd, and
covered over with a red Leather handsomely fitted up some of them are no larger
than your Thumb, worked up and Pointed in form of a Diamond, of which they make
Bracelets, into which the Marabouxs do often enclose nothing at all; as I have
experienced by some that our Slaves wore.

Before and behind them, at their Back and Stomach, they have them very large
as big as a Book in Quarto, and the thickness of your two Thumbs; they make
them in the shape of a Horses Arse, of a Stag Horn, or of a Wild Bull, covered
with red Cloth. Two of this latter sort they affix to their Bonnets, and in
this Equipage they appear very frightful; this secures them in their Combats
which they have one with another, but not all against our Musket Shot; so that
they are accustomed to say, that there is no Gris-gris that is Pou proof, which
is the Name they give our Firearms.

The Maraboux ruin them by the purchase of this Gris-gris, for they make some
which they sell for three Slaves, others for four or five Bullocks, according
to the stock of Virtue or Force which they attribute to it. The Opinion the
Negers entertain for their Gris-gris, has imposed upon the Ignorant of the
French, so that they have believ^d to have met with frequent Sorceries amongst
these People. There is a certain time when these pretended Sorcerers make a
thousand Grimaces, Singing or Crying, when, as they say, the Devil beats them.

When they believe that this happens, if it be a Woman they Dress her in the
Garb of a Man, and put a Zagay into her Hand, and walk about Singing with a
very mournful and deploring Voice, being persuaded that by this means they
shall chase away the Devil with this Ceremony. I have often observed, that
these pretended Witchcrafts have been absolute Cheats, for when we take Cudgels
and belabour well the Person so possessed, this Exorcism is of so great force,
that the Devil never returns more.

During their Ramadan, which is the Mahometan's Lent, and which continues all
the Moon of September, they perform the Ceremony of Circumcision; they stay
till the Children be ten or twelve years of Age. It Is a Maraboux that cuts the
Prepuce, which must be eaten by the Person Circumcised, who by no means is to
complain of any Pain that he suffers; nay, they often laugh when they are
Seer'd with a Hot Iron for the stanching of the Blood.

So long as the Ramadan lasts, they make their Folgar in the Night, for during
the day time they do not so much as eat a single Morsel, nor Drink, nay, not so
much as Smoke; some of them dare not Spit. As soon as the Sun is Set, they make
a horri^ noise with their Drums, and eat and drink till the day begins to
return.

Though by the Laws of the Alcoran they are not allowed above four Wives,
nevertheless they keep as many as they can maintain. As soon as they meet with
a Lass that pleases them, they demand her of her Father; if he consents to it,
they agree of a Price, their Quality or their Beauty makes them insist on high
Terms. The Dowry consists of Bullocks, which redound to the benefit of the
Father; which Dowry never exceeds five Bullocks. This Bargain being made, they
Lie together without any farther Ceremony. If they warrant her a Virgin, which
is a Commodity very scarce in that Country, they lay a white Cloth upon the
Bridal Bed, which if it become Bloody, confirms their Opinion of her being a
Maid.

Afterward they walk about the Village, carrying this Cloth in Procession,
being accompanied with several of the Cuiriotz. who Sing the Praises of the
fair Lady, and their Wedding Joys If on the contrary she does not prove what
she was engag'^ to be, the Father is obliged to take back his Daughter if the
Husband requires it, and restore the Bullocks again; though this seldom
happens, for the Girl is taken under strict Examination before the matter is
concluded, nor is the demand made but upon sure grounds. And if she be
restored, she is not at all slighted upon that account, for though she cannot
be a Wife but to one, she may be a Concubine to another; and by this the Father
has always fresh Markets to make. When, in long run, the Husband is tired with
his Wife, he drives her away, and may quit her with the loss of what he gave in
Purchase; and she her self may take fair leave of her Husband, by restoring to
him the Bullocks again.

When the King has a mind to gratify a Favorite, he Presents him with one of
his Women; but this Gentleman cannot upon any terms put her away, though the
Prince can retake her whenever he pleases.

The Funerals of the Negroes are performed with great State and Ceremony. A
Marabou washes the Body of the Deceased and shrouds it up with the best Linen
he had during his Life: All the Relations and the Neighbors come to make their
Lamentations, asking the Corpse several ridiculous Questions. One asks it, if he
did not live at case with them, what Damage he had ever done him, if he were
not Rich enough to his desires, if he had a sufficient store of handsome Women,
and other like Fopperies. Seeing he can get nothing in answer, he withdraws,
and makes room for another, who says as much: In the mean time the Guiriats do
not fail of singing his Encomium.

And since it is the Custom to make Folgar for all those that come to accompany
the Dead; some Bullocks are killed for that purpose; Slaves are sold to
purchase Aqua vitae, with which they comfort themselves. When the Assistants
are well feasted, they inter the Body in the same Cabin where he died, taking
off the Dome or Covering. At length, whisst the Corpse is yet above Ground, the
Mourners redouble their Yellings; and four People hold a Cloth four square,
hiding it that it may not be seen.

Then comes the Marabou and whispers some Words in the Ear of the deceased, and
covers it with the Pall, and afterward the Dome is again put on, to which they
affix some Cloth, either black, red, or any other color suitable to their
Fancies. Afterward they erect a Stake, on which (...) hang the Bow, Quiver,
and Zagay (...) Defunct. They set by him a Pot of Couscouse, and another of
Water, which is his Provisions for a twelve Month, since they imagine he can eat
though he be dead. In some places they encompass the Cabin with Thorns, or a
great Trench, to secure the Body from Ravenous Beasts, which however sometimes
do get to it. After this is over, the Mourners continue in their Grimaces for
the space of eight days following.

When it is a Boy that is dead, the Women and the Girls sing these Funeral
Elogies, and the Boys run with all the force imaginable one against the other,
with naked Cimeters in their hands, rushing together in the Encounter, clashing
each others Cimeters; upon these occasions they play a hundred foolish Pranks,
which would be tiresome to relate.

The Negers have few Artisans amongst them, the most common are Smiths, Weavers
and Potters: The first make Knives, Iron for their Slaves, Rings of Gold,
Sil^^^, Copper or Iron; trimings for their K^^ves and Sebors, and coverings for
their Gri^gri^. They make the Chapes of their Scabbards of what Metal they
please, and the handles of their Sabers. They have no Farriers, since they do
not shoo^ their Horses When they are at work at the Forge, they get two or
three together under the shade of some Tree, sitting upon their Breeches with
Pipes in their Mouths: they make so little a fire, that you can scarce boi^gn
Egg at it, which they blow with Bellows made of two Skins, from thence pressing
forth the Wind, which resembles the squeezing of a Bladder. Their Anvil is
something like the Stone with which a Mower whets his Sithe, the striking upon
which drives it into the Ground, so that after every two or three strokes; they
must pull it out again, which takes up the best share of their time.

Their Weavers have but little Employ, for, as I have already mentioned, they
make use of very few Clouths.

The Potters make but one for of Pots, which serve for Kettles, and they make
also Pipes of which the bole is only of Earth, the steal being a small stick
made hollow, and so fixed to the earthen Head.

In General, all these Handy Crass Men are intolerably Lazy, and spend more
than half their time in prattling about Trifles. They are but little concerned
when their Provisions grow short; for upon this occasion they make bold to go
Gossip amongst their Neighbors.

The matter of Huswifery, except what belongs to eating, gives their Women but
little trouble. For the movables of the greatest Seignor, amounts to no more
than to a few earthen Pots, some wooden Utensils, and Calabasses clove in two
in the middle, serve for Cups.

Their Children, tho very small give them but little trouble; for they leave
them naked upon the Sand, where they crawl about the whole day: Those which
cannot walk themselves, they carry upon their backs, with their legs to their
sides, bringing their feet before them, and tying them off with a Cloth, which
they fix about them.

Whatever work they do, they keep those Bantlings at their backs, even when
they beat their Millet, from whence comes that their Bellies are always large,
and their Noses flat; for their Mothers in slooping and rising again by jerks,
bruise their Noses against their Backs; and so these Children for avoiding the
blows, which however they still meet withal, draw themselves back, and set out
their Bellies, which makes them large. I believe this to be the sole Reason
that the Negers are flat Nosed and big Bellied. I do not find it true, that
they have the greatest esteem for Noses that are the most flat, or for Lips
that are the largest.

They have the same consideration for the matter of Beauty as we have, they
love a fine Eye, a little Mouth, handsome Lips, and a Nose proportionable,
excepting their black color. There are Negresses as well made as any of our
European Ladies, they have a better Genius than the Men, and are extremely
smooth.

The Caresses of White Men please them wonderfully; but in the mean while,
these Dames being very Mercenary, they will not grant their favors for
nothing. The Men take it for an Honor to have the Frenchmen Lie with their
Wives, Sisters, or Daughters, they very frequently making the first offers.

It is not the same amongst themselves, for should this at any time happen,
they would certainly Revenge the Fact with either their Sabre or their Knife;
however, their Gallantry is not limited to their Concubines, whose falseness
they will not suffer willingly.

The Women have always Pipes in their Mouths; they are very brisk and Galliard,
and love Dancing in the Evenings, especially when the Moon changes. They Dance
in a Ring, clapping their Hands, and not budging from their place, except those
in the middle, Singing what next comes in their thoughts, without having any
regard either to Rhyme or Sense. Their latter, in Dancing, hold one Hand upon
their Heads, the other upon their Back sides, thrusting out their Bodies
forwards, beating their Feet against the Earth. Their Postures are very
Lascivious and Infamous, especially when a Boy Dances with them; a Calbasse, or
a Kettle, serves for Music, for they are great Lovers of noise.

The Men Exercise themselves in Wreffling, and approach each other in very
ridiculous Postures, holding up their Finger, Fist, or Foot. On these occasions
they always have one that plays the part of a Guiriot, rattling upon the bottom
of a Kettle, or upon a Drum, to excite their Courage; as they are Naked, they
have much ado to fling each other upon the Ground. When one is down, the
Guiriot Sings and extols the Valor of the Conqueror, and exhorts the rest to
play their Parts against the Champion, better than he that engaged last. They
give each other very rude Jolts, and fall very heavy.

Most of those that live near the Rivers are Fishermen, and breed their
Children to that Trade whilst they are very young. They make use of Canoes,
which are small Boats made of the Trunk of a Tree hollowed for that purpose,
all of a piece, the largest of which may contain 10 or 12 Men, being 30 Foot in
length, and not above two and a half broad. These Canoes go with both Oars and
Sails, and they often over-set when the Wind is high and the Water rough, though
they do not much matter it, being all excellent Swimmers, and never sink to the
bottom. They turn it right again with their shoulders, and get in as
unconcerned as if nothing had befell them, and so Row away as swift as an Arrow
from a Bow, the nimblest of our Shalops not being able to reach them.

When they go a Fishing, generally two of them go into the Canoe, and take a
compass near 6 Leagues into the Sea. Their Fishing is for the most part by
Angling, but as there are great Fish, which will not bite at the Hook, they
strike them with Harping Irons something like broad Arrows, which are fixed to
sharp Sticks of the length of a Half-Pike, and fastened to ^^^e, with which
they draw back the Cramping-Iron after they have Darted it.

They dry their small Fish, such as Sprats, and slit the large ones such as
Green-Fish; since they do not Salt them, they are almost ever putrified before
they are dry. It Is then when they approve of them as the most Dainty, not at
all esteeming them whilst they continue fresh and sweet. They sell these Fish
to them who live farthest off the Sea, and would thence make a prodigious
profit, would they give themselves the trouble to carry it to the Villages; for
the Inhabitants are as much too Lazy to come and fetch them, as the other are
for carrying them thither, and by their unaccountable Idleness it becomes at
length spoil^d and good for nothing.

Besides the Commerce they have with us, they keep particular Markets amongst
themselves, but of so little consequence, that I have been amazed to see them
come 6 or 7 Leagues to bring thither a small parcel of Cotton, a little Linen,
some sorry Pulse, as Beans and Fitches, little Wooden Dishes, and Palm Mats.:
Another time I saw a Man that had come 6 Leagues to bring a Bar of Iron of half
a Foot in length.

Notwithstanding sometimes very precious Merchandises may be here met withal;
for example, Rings of Gold, Beads for Necklaces, called by them Dougaret, of
the same Metal, but these are so few, that in the whole Market there is not to
the value of five Pistoles. Formerly they used to make Exchanges in all their
Markets, but since their Commerce with the Europeans they make use of Rassade,
and small Bawbels of Glass, and little Bars of Iron. What they bring of
greatest consequence to these Markets, which are held at the ends of Villages,
are Elephants Teeth, Bullocks Hides, and some Slaves; all which they brought to
fell at Goree, for which the Members of the Company give Iron, Strong Waters,
Rassade, Indian Linen and Coral, by which they reap an unaccountable Advantage.

Their Government is Monarchical and Hereditary, though they are not the King's
Children which succeed, but his Nephews, the Sons of his Sisters. This Custom,
which however fantastical it seems, has this for its Ground and Foundation:
That it is not certain whether the Children brought him forth be really his
own, but it is incontestable that the Sons of his Sister are hers, and
consequently more certainly of Royal Blood than his own.

When the Prince makes his Accession to the Sovereignty, every body comes to
Congratulate the Felicity he has obtained above the rest of his Brethren, for
generally they being many, the Empire becomes always Contested, and falls to
him that has the greatest Force, or the best Success.

None can approach the King without a great deal of trouble and circumspection,
and very few are admitted the Privilege to see the innermost Recesses of his
Palace. When a great Lord, even though he be one of his Relations, has procured
an Audience, he puts off his Frock at the entrance of the Court, being quite
Naked from the Girdle upwards. When he draws near the place where the King is,
he falls upon the Ground on both Knees. Then he bows down his Head, and with
both Hands he often besprinkles Sand upon his Head and Face, afterward rising
up, repeating the same Ceremony still as he advances from one distance to
another, till he has reached within two Paces of the King. When he is arrived
so near as that; he keeps his Ground, and discloses the Motives which he had to
demand an Audience, having finished his Compliment, which is made kneeling, he
arises without daring to cast the glance upon the King, resting his Hands upon
his Knees, and from time to time flings. Sand upon his Forehead.

The Prince very slighting of his Subjects, seems not to regard what was said
to him, diverting himself some other ways; however, he does not omit at the end
of the Harangue to answer his Demand with an extreme affected Gravity, and
afterward the Supplicant intermingles himself with the rest of the Courtiers
that are paying their Attendance.

I believe there are no Princes in the whole Universe more Revered and more
Absolute than these Neger Kings; which Deference is an effect of their
severity; for upon the least transgression of any of their Subjects, at which
the King is displeased, an Order is immediately issued out for taking off their
Heads, all their Goods are Consiscated, and all their Family made Slaves. The
ordinary People are less miserable than the Grandees, being only Subject to
Captivity on the like occasions.

The Azeaghes, the Maraboux, and the French, have a much greater freedom than
the Negers, and we the greatest of any, When the Europeans accost him they make
their Reverence, and he reaches out his Hand to be put upon theirs. When this
is done, he either sits or lies according to the Custom of the Negers, upon a
Bed decked with a Quilt covered with red Leather, having a Pipe in his Mouth.
He then makes them sit down by him, and asks what they have brought along with
them.

Whereas we never have any of these Audience but when we are to interceed for
some favor, or to make Complaints of his Officers, and of Insults made upon
some White Men, we never come empty handed; our Presents consist, for the most
part in 10 or 12 Pots of Strong-Water, a little parcel of Sugar, some Birds
Heads, 5 or 6 Else of Linen, and some pieces of Coral

When an Envoy has any thing about him which pleases the King, as a Coat,
Stockins, Shoes, Sword, or Hat, he requires to make Trial of them, I and ^ys
them on, one after another: This he did, soon after we arrived, to an Envoy of
Monsieur Dancourt, and took from him a Brocade Wastcoat, his Stockins, Hat and
Shoes, so that he had returned to us stripped Naked, had not he, by good
Chance, taken another Suit with him of a lesser value than the other.

As long as the Brandy Bottle lasts the Prince is Drunk; thus you must expect
no Answer till it be all off. When he grows Sober he gives his Audience of
Congee, presenting him with two or three Slaves, which he sends to have taken
up in the first Villages. Unhappy are they, who at that time fall into the
hands of his Guards, for they stay to make no Choice, the first at hand serves
the present turn.

Whatever care is taken for carrying Provisions, when you become a Solicitor
to this Court, yet whilst you are there you are ready to Dye with Hunger, since
the King requires your Stock, and for his share does always eat the best half.
He gives you in Recompense a quarter of a Camel, which is very course Food, a
little Couscouse, and some Palm-Wine.

During my stay in this Country, a very pleasant passege happened, which will
sufficiently discover what powerful effects Presents have upon these Princes,
and what small regard they have either to Justice or Equity. Two Petty
Tributary Kings to Damel had a Contest about the Succession to a sorry sort of
Sovereignty; they were Uncle and Nephew; that is, Son of the Deceased King, and
they maintained their Pretensions by diverse Arguments too long, and too
frivolous to be here inserted. They proposed to terminate their difference
either by Force, or by the King's final Judgment. This Prince having
interdicted all other means, they were obliged to refer themselves to his
Decision.

The day being appointed in which Judgment was to be given, the two different
Parties assembled themselves in the great space before the Palace, accompanied
with very numerous Attendance, who formed two Battalions distant from each
other about 30 Paces; they were all Armed with Darts, Arrows, Zagayes,
Javelins, and Moresque Knives. The King followed with 600 men Accoutred with
their Grisgris, appeared mounted upon a fine Barbary Horse, and so placed
himself betwixt the two Rivals.

Though they all spoke the same Language, yet they made use of Interpreters,
who repeated to the King what they had heard. The Son of the Deceased King
finished his Harangue in demonstrating; That since God had before given those
Dominions, which were in Dispute, to his Father, they must of necessity belong
to him as his Right; and that thus he hoped from His Majesty the Confirmation
of the Title, which could not be Disputed without palpable Injustice. The King
having hearkened to him very attentively, told him, with an Air full of
Gravity, God gave it you, and after him I give it you again.

Such a peremptory Answer soon dispersed the Unkles Party, who fairly retired
by himself. The Guiriots, with their Instruments and their Drums, Celebrated
the Praises of the Victorious, saying to him, You Merit this Dignity far beyond
the other, and the King has done you nothing but Justice: You are by much the
finer Man, more Rich, more Potent, and more Valiant, etc.

Whilst this wretched Prince Dreamed of nothing but enjoying his Happiness, he
was wholly surpised the day following to see himself stripped of this
Authority, with which he was but newly Invested; for his Uncle not missing the
opportunity, made the King so acceptable a Present, that it defaced the
remembrance of those he had before received from the Nephew; so that he, in the
Morning, dispossessed him that he had Enthroned in the Evening, and Installed
the other in his place. This Reverse of Fortune soon changed the Notes of the
Guiriots, and they began to Extol him they had before Decry'd. Such is the
Perfidy of the Prince, and the Instability of his Subjects.

To return to what concerns the King more particularly, I shall tell you, That
when he takes the Field, he has no occasion for Vivandiers, for he is provided
for by the Women of the Villages which he passes with all his Train. They serve
him up sometimes 50 Wooden Platters full of Couscouse, seasoned after several
ways, he reserves which suits best with his Palate and gives the rest to his
People, who are frequently as hungry after the Repast as before.

They all eat very nastily, lying along upon the Ground, taking it up with a
full hand, making no use of either Napkins or Plates. No body eats with the
King but the Grand Marabou, or one of the Lords that is most Accomplished;
often he eats alone.

He will by no means suffer the Thoubabes (for thus he calls us) to see him at
his Meals. I believe he conceals himself from us, because that he imagines that
our Repast are more decent and better than his own; and that he is ashamed of
his Poverty. Amongst the meaner sort of People, all of the same Family eat
together; their first Mess is Couscouse, when that is cleared they fall Aboard
the Flesh, which they tear in pieces with their Fingers, making no use of
Knives; after they have gnawed it, they put it again into the Platter for the
next. They use only their Right Hand during the Meals, which they always have
both at Noon and Night; the Left Hand they reserve to Work withal, and on that
Account they esteem it an indecency to eat with it.

The King has under him several Ministers of State, who assist him in the
Government, and in the Exercise of Justice Condy, who is a Tributary Sovereign,
is after the manner of our Constable, and has the General Command of his
Troops. The Grand Geraff is the Chief Justice throughout all the Territories of
King Damel; he goes his Circuits from time to time, to hear the Complaints of
all People; he generally does Justice out of hand, and punishes a Thief with
Slavery; for seldom are any People of a private Condition inflicted with the
punishment of Death.

The Kings Alzair Exercises the same Employ as the Geraff, but his Power is
more limited. He has under him Alkatys or Alkairs of Grand Villages, that are
as particular Lords.

When a Neger is accused of a Crime, of which he cannot be easily Convicted, he
is obliged to lick a red hot Iron three several times; if it burns him he is
reputed Guilty, if not, he and his Accuser leave the Court, and the Process
falls without Costs.

The Kings of the Negers go to War upon very small pretexts. When any such
happens, the Condy assembles all the great Lords, and the rest of the Subjects,
of which he composes his Cavalry, and his Insantry. They seldom have a body of
above twelve or fifteen hundred men; so that their War is but a sort of a
Skirmish. In all the Kingdom of Damel, they can scarce Muster up together two
hundred Horse. The Men of Quality in the Army, especially the Cavalry, are
Loaded with their Gris-gris, as I have already remarked. I believe, should they
be once dismounted, they would no the able to march four paces on foot.

The Cavalry are armed with Zagayes, which is a sort of a Dart, long and large,
with three or four Spears, bigger than those of Arrows, and have several small
Jags, that tears open the Wound when they draw it forth. They can cast these
Javelins and Zagayes a great way, and go very rarely without them. Besides
these they have a Cimeter, and a Moresque Knife of a Cubit in length, and the
breadth of two thumbs. They guard the blows with a round Buckler, made of very
thick Leather; though they are thus encumbred, yet they have still their Hands
and Arms at liberty, and they can attack very smartly.

The Foot are armed with a Simeter, a Javelin, a Quiver stocked with Fifty or
Sixty empoison'd Arrows, whose Wounds are always mortal, if they are not
immediately seer'd with a hot Iron.

The Teeth of the Arrows produce another miserable Effect, for they cannot be
taken out but by another hole which must be made by the Arrow it self.

Their Bow is made of a Reed, very like that which we call a Bamboo; what they
make use of for the String, is another sort of Wood very curiously fitted up.
They are so dextrous in shooting out of Bows, that they will hit a mark of the
compass of a Crown above Fifty Paces. They march without any order of
Discipline, even in the Enemy's Country. The Guiriotz excite them to Combat by
the sound of their Instruments.

As soon as they are within Shot, the Infantry discharge their Arrows, and the
Cavalry cast their Javelins. This Discharge is followed with Blows of the
Zagays. They space their Enemies as much as possible, that they may make the
more Slaves; the Persons of Quality themselves are not exempted. As they are
naked, and very dextrous, their. Wars are very Bloody. They are very hardy and
had rather lose their Lives, than be guilty of the least Cowardice. The
despite that is showed to a, Coward, amongst them, and the fear of losing
their Liberty, does very much augment their Bravery.

This first Shock being over, they begin a fresh often for two or three days
together; afterward they send Marabou of each side to treat of Peace. When
they have agreed of the Conditions, they swear upon the Alcoran and by Mahomet,
though they know very little of either one or the other. The Prisoners of
either side have no Benefit of the Peace, continuing Slaves as though the War
were to be Eternal.

See here in short how Affairs stand in this Country. Whatever I can meet
withal farther, before my return into Europe, I shall take a just and faithful
Account thereof, that I may discharge my s^^ of what my Friends have enjoined
m^ which was to communicate to them my O^^ervations. My little Knowledge (...)
Writing, and my uncouth Style, will soon discover my small Ability of
transmitting to them these Relations. All that can (...) pleaded on my behalf,
is, that I shall no^ impose upon them, and that I shall give preference to
Truth before the Reputation of distinguishing my self by a recital more stuffed
with Singularities, than those of others.

The End of the First Voyage of the Sieur le Maire.
The Bookseller's Advice to the Reader.
A Particular Person that is very knowing, having traveled the Coasts of
Africa, and seen the Author of this Voyage at his Residence at Goree, remitted
to me these following Relations. I thought my self obliged to publish them, and
affix them to this, and to acquaint you they are not the Remarks of the Sieur
le Maire.

Relations of the Islands and adjacent Places of the Rivers of Bresalme,
Gambie, Zamenee, St. Domingo, Geve, and others, etc.
THE Kingdom of the Barbessines, who are almost all Neger Mahometans, is very
small, having not above six or seven Leagues upon the Coast: It Is joined to
that of the Joloffes, beginning at a Village called Joualle, situated upon the
Seacoasts, inhabited by some Mulatters and Portuguese. There is another small
Village which they call Coringue, which is nearer to Cape-Verd, and is
dependant of Joualle, it is there they drive the greatest Commerce.

In going up about seven or eight Leagues we meet with the River Bresaline,
whose Mouth is very large, filled with sand Beds, which prevents the Entrance
of Conves, Shalops, or little Barques, nor do they drive any great Traffic
here, this Kingdom affording no manner of Varieties. However the Portuguefe do
here paronase both Salt and Victuals.

Upon the same Coast, two Leagues higher, is the River Gambie, which has two
Passages for Vessels, the one to the North, and the other to the South, where
Ships of Five Hundred Tun may easily enter. You must first sound the Passage
with a Shalop, for fear of striking upon the Sands; having entered, you meet
withal toward the North the Kingdom of Barra, whose King lives a quarter of a
League from Sea. The People and Inhabitants are called Mandingues, for the most
part Mahometans.

The Island Chiens, to which you may go dry Foot at low Sea, is right over
against it in the River. The French did formerly inhabit it, but they had their
Throats cut by the Negers, afterward it was not inhabited, being of no
Consequence.

The Flouppes Negers, of which I shall speak anon, are just in the Entrance
upon the South Point.

Six Leagues farther up the River to the North, is the Village called Albroda,
where the French had formerly a Warehouse, The English have one at a Village
called Zeelfray, which is a League higher on the same Shore.

They have also a Regular Fort in the Island over against it, which is not
above half a quarter of a League about, built upon a Crusty and Gravelly Rock.

This Fort has above Fifty Pieces of Cannon mounted, which are of no great use
for want of Men to Manage them; they are forced to fetch all their Water and
their Wood from the main Land. These are they who have the best share of all
the Trade that is made up this great River, which chiefly consists in Neger
Slaves, Ivory and Wax. It is Navigable above Two hundred Leagues.

A Description of the River Zamenee.
THE River Zamenee is Inhabited by many sort of Negers, those at its Mouth
toward the North call themselves Floupes, People extremely Savage, with whom
no Nation have any Commerce. They are all Pagans, having every one his God
according to his particular Inclinations; one worships a Bullocks Horn, another
a Beast or a Tree, to whom they Sacrifice according to their manner.

Their Dress is like those of Cape-Verd, and the Inhabitants of the River
Gambie, which consists in a piece of Cotton Cloth, striped according to the
Custom of the Country, which barely covers their Privities.

They have no Succession of Kings, the most absolute and most powerful amongst
them Commands.

They Cultivate their Land in pretty good Order, which they sow with Millet and
Rice. Their Riches consist in Bul^^^ks, Cows and Goats, of which many have
great quantities. They possess from the River Gambie about 6 Leagues into the
Land. Their Villages are well Peopled, distant from each other about a quarter
of a League.

The Negers, or Flouppes, that Inhabit the Mouth of the River toward the
South, are Barbarous, and very Cruel; when they can catch any white Men, they
give them no manner of Quarter, and they say they eat them.

These are in Possession all along the Coasts to the Village named Boulol,
which is at the Entrance of the River St. Domingue. This Coast is much better
Peopled than that of Gambie. The Villages are distant from each other near two
Leagues, and from the Sea about a quarter of a League.

About seven or eight Leagues farther, the Tide makes a little Brook, which
goes up to the Town of Jam, where several Portuguese make several quantities of
Wax, which they sell and traffic by Land at Gambie and at Cacheaux.

The adjacent Countries are inhabited by Negers which are called Bagnons. These
have a King who lives about 12 or 13 Leagues off Sea.

Description of the River of St. Domingue.
THE River of St. Domingue is situated from East to West; it winds above Two
hundred Leagues in length; it is also inhabited by different sorts of Negers,
and by the Portuguese, who have there several Towns.

At its Entrance to the North, there is a Fort belonging to the Portuguese,
guarded with four Pieces of Cannon, and commanded by a Sergeant and four
Soldiers.

Four Leagues upwards on the same Shore near the Village of Boulot, is the
little River Linguin, which loses it self nine or ten Leagues within Land. They
are the Negers Bagnons that possess it, and cultivate the Lands. They are all
Idolaters, and worship Forests or great Woods, and in them many Thieves, whom
they stand in great dread of.

The Village of Quongain is directly at its Entrance, where abundance of
Portuguese and Gourmets inhabit, who make there great store of Wax.

The River Bougind is on the same Coast, about three Leagues beyond where the
Tide comes, which disperses it self twelve or fifteen Leagues within Land,
inhabited by the same sort of People, who as I have told you, traffic
altogether with Wax. It Is the ordinary passage to go from Cachoar to Jam.

At the Entrance of the River St. Domingue, on the South, is a large Wood,
which they call Matteformose: It Is a Village inhabited by the Flouppes, more
familiar than those I before mentioned, with whom they traffic for Slaves and
Victuals; above all they have great store of Rice.

Going up the River about two Leagues, you meet with a small River which is not
Navigable, which separates the Flouppes from the Papels.

The Papels are also Heathen Negers, all Idolaters as the former. They have a
King who dwells about five or six Leagues from them. When any Considerable
Person dies, they Sacrifice Bullocks, Cows, Kids, and Capons to their Gods, who
are for the most part one or more Trees, or a Bullocks Horn, or such like
things.

In the same district, about four Leagues higher, you meet with the Town called
Cacheau, in possession of the Portuguese, who have there three Forts, the chief
of which may have about ten or twelve Pieces of Cannon, and the other two,
about two or three each. A Captain-Major has the Government, who depends upon
the Governor of the Islands of Cap-Verd. They are every year Recruited with
thirty or forty Portuguese Soldiers, who are generally banished Criminals, they
supplying the Places of those who die for want of good Nourishment, by
Necessity, or by an over addicting themselves to Women. It Is for them a sort of
Exile, which however is somewhat supportable They may have in the Town two or
three hundred Inhabitants; the generality of them are Mulaters, the rest are
their Wives and Concubines.

There is in the Town a Receiver of the King's Customs, from the Ships that
come to Traffic there, who pay ten per Cent. both coming in and going out,
together with a Writer, who holds the Place of both Notary and Sheriff. It Is
the Governor that renders Justice. There is also a Parochial Church, a Curat,
and a Visitator, who is in the nature of Vicar in France, who always makes
Visitations on behalf of the Bishop of Saint James.

There is also a Convent of Capuchins, where there are seldom more than three
or four Religious.

The Inhabitants of the Town have little Boats and Barks, with which they
Negotiate upon the River Nounne Pougues Serlianne, and in the Island of
Bezagotts, where they have great Commerce of Wax, Slaves, and some small
Parcels of Ivory.

The Portuguese have yet another Town higher up the River, distant from Cacheau
about a Hundred and Fifty Leagues, which is called Farim, which is encompassed
with Pallasadoes; the Inhabitants are not so numerous as in Cacheau: Those of
the best repute in Cacheau have also Houses there, where their Gourmets make
their Cloth and Wax. There is also a Curat, a Captain Major, who is depending
of Cacheau. The Negers who inhabit the the Lands adjacent are called
Mandingues. All the Villages that are from Cacheau to Farim, are inhabited by
the Gourmets of the Portuguese, who gather Cotton, etc.

Leaving the River Saint Domingue, going Southwards you meet with several
Islands. The first is called Three Islands, which effectively has that Figure,
possessed by the Gourmets, or Negers, who have loosed themselves from the
slavery of the Portuguese, most of them, tho they are Baptized, have renounced
the Catholic Faith. They Cultivate this Island, which produces good store of
Cotton, of which they make their Cloth. They have Canoes to serve them in
their Traffic with the Negers of the Continent. The place which they pass is
called the Bot; they have a particular care in suffering any Boat to approach
their Island.

Over against it is the Island of Bussi* in possession of the Papels, who have
a King not very absolute. It is so low Water, that it may be passed by being
only wet to the middle Leg.

It is difficult to Negotiate with them without being known, for their strange
mistrust makes them suppose that there is no sincerity.

I know that several English and Dutch, have been there Massacred, for
endeavoring to have Commerce with them. They have great Store of Provisions,
as Cattle, Poultry, Wax, Mill and Feasants, but of a very indifferent relish.

Their Island is about ten Leagues in Circuit, and has two Ports, the one to
the East, which is called Old Port, the other to the South-East, which is
called the Port of the White Stones. Right over against it, is the Village of
Cazelut, and many small Islands which are not inhabited. Very near it you find
the Island of Bisseaux about two Leagues distant. A Vessel of three hundred Tun
may pass betwixt them both, so that the Chanel is well known. It is forty
Leagues in Compass; the Papel Negers which inhabit it are altogether Heathens
There are in this Island nine Kings, of which one is superior to the other
Eight, which properly are no more than Governors of Provinces.

When any of the Kings die, they take care to strangle more than thirty
Persons, above all the young Girls and the Slaves that have been the most
faithful to the Deceased, whom they bury along with them. They put with him
into his Tomb all his Riches, as his Gold, Silver, Amber Gris, Stuffs, etc.

When they choose another it is after this manner, they are only the Geagres that
make Pretensions. which are, as I may say, the Dukes and Peers of France.

They assemble together in a Ring, in the middle of which is the Tomb of the
deceased King, made of Reeds and very light Wood, which is sustained in the Air
by several Negers, which they toss up into the Air, and on whom ever it falls,
they choose him for King in the Place of the Deceased.

They often Sacrifice to their Gods, Bullocks, Capons and Kids.

There are several Ports in this Island, the chief of which is called Part
Bisseaux, Ships of Sixty Guns can there ride at Anchor with ease.

The King's Palace is distant from thence only half a League there is one
Parish, and a Convent of Capuchins, several of the Portuguese are married to
the Negresses of the Country.

There are several of those Heathens Sons who have received Baptism, and
embrace the Catholic Faith. The King has his Guards, his Army, and several
Women kind of all Ages. He has about Fifty Canoes of War, which hold about
thirty Men; for their Weapons, they have only a Cimeter hanging at their Arms,
and are clothed with only the Skin of a Kid, which hangs down behind, and is
fastened up before betwixt the Legs to hide their Nudities. They go to War
against the Biaffores, who inhabited the Continent, twice or thrice each Year.

The Portuguese did formerly build a Fort of eight Pieces of Cannon, to hinder
Strangers from trading thither, but the Negers would not suffer it. They always
were sticklers for the Freedom of their Country, which occasions a welcome to
all manner of Strangers, that come to Traffic in their Ports, who may
Negotiate in the Island with all imaginable Security, without dreading any
Insult. When you arrive at their Port, you have not liberty to set foot on
Shore, till their King has killed a Bullock, and sacrificed; when he has
finished, you have liberty to disembark.

Over against the Port is an Island called Sortiere, full of Trees, where the
Negers make their grand Sacrifices every year, in which the King himself
assists. Vessels Anchor there very safely.

A Description of the River Geve.
THE River Geve winds about seventy Leagues into the Continent, lying
North-East, South-West. All the Villages of each side, distant about a League
from Sea, are inhabited with the Biaffares. At the Entrance of the River
toward the North, is the Village called Gouffode, distant one League from the
Port. There it is where Bullocks and Poultry is to be sold, and they also
Traffic for some Slaves and Ivory.

Upon the same River, five Leagues more upwards, is the Town of Geve, the
greatest part of which is possessed by the Portuguese and by the Gourmetts,
which is encompassed with Palisadoes.

They have one Parochial Church, one Curat, and one Captain, who has the
Command, and is dependant on the Governor of Cacheau. The adjacent Places are
possessed by the Negers Biaffares. Most of the Portuguese have Barks in the
Port, by which they Trade to Serlienne. Cocters is a Fruit which both in shape
and taste resembles the Marons of India; there are both white and red, of which
they have great trading amongst them, especially in the Countries of the
Biaffares and Mandingues: They also send their Barks to the Negers upon the
River Nounne for Morsil and Indigo in leaf, with which they color their
Clothes.

The Barks can get no higher than the River Gowe. As for their Canoes, they go
up several little Rivers of small Note: You meet with several Islands about the
Port, especially that of Boulam, well stocked with Trees; it is about six
Leagues in Circuit; it is just at the Entrance of the River Riogrando, and is
not at all inhabited. The other Islands are of so small a Consequence, that I
do not think it worth while to recite them. I will not speak of Cap-Verd, nor
of the Canaries, nor of Senegal, since the Sieur le Maire, by the Care of Mr.
Dancourt, has said more than I am capable of saying.

FINIS.
Plays Sold by T. Chapman.
SOphonisba. By Mr. Lee. Theodosius. By Mr. Lee. Oedipus. By Mr. Dryden and Mr.
Lo. Country-Wife. By Mr. Crown. Abdelazer. By Mrs. Behn. Ibrahim. By Mr.
Settle. Heir of Morocco. By Mr. Settle. Pastor Fido. By Mr. Settle. Mr.
Dryden's Plays, in Three Volumes, or Single. Mr. Ottway's Plays, Bound or
Single. Mr. Lee's Plays, Bound or Single. Mr. Shadwell's Plays, Bound or
Single. With Plays of all sorts.
Books Printed for T. Chapman.
Caesar's Commentaries. By Edmonds. with Additions. Plutarch's Morals.
Kettlewell on the Sacrament. Fire of the Altar. By Dr. Horneck.

