portrait It Is not he that possesses most, but he that wants least, that is
the richest Man.

To be content is to be rich, and these Riches any Man that will, may give
himself.

Content is all we aim at with our Store,
If that be had with little, what needs more?


THE Way to Save Wealth; Showing how a Man may Live plentifully for Twopence a
Day. Likewise how to make A hundred Noble Dishes of Meat, without either Flesh,
Fish, or Fowl. To make Bread of Roots, Herbs, and Leafs of Trees. To brew good
cheap Liquor, without Malt or Hops. To make Shoes last long. To make Coals last
long. To save Soap in Washing. To save Cloth in cutting out a Shirt. To make
Coffee of Horse-beans To feed Cattle well, without Hay, Grass, or Corn. To save
Candles. To know any one's Mind by Signs; if there be Twenty in Company, they
cannot apprehend it. To order Bees aright. To settle your Estate with Christian
Prudence. To know Scripture-Weights and Measures. Of Dreams. To cure Wounds by
Sympathy. The Way to Live long. To make Spring-Potage. To cure all sorts of
Cattle for 12 d. Charge. To improve Land, order and cure all Deseases in
singing Birds. To kill Vermin. To brew Pale Ales. To make Wines, and all sorts
of Liquor, and an easy Way to fine, and order them.
With diverse other curious MATTERS, Adorned with Cuts.

LONDON Printed, and are to be Sold by G. Conyers, at the Ring in Little
Britain. Price 1 s. 6 d.

THE Way to Live for Twopence a Day.
EXperience teaches us, that Nature is satisfied with a little; and that
little is also easily to be obtained; such as Corn-food, Spring Water, Herbs,
Roots, Fruit, Milk, Cheese, etc. And for my own part, seriously when I feed
upon Bread and Water, and sometimes more splendidly, upon Bread and Cheese, and
if I have but brown Bread, Hasty-pudding, Wheat, or Barley-broth, I think my
Table so well furnished, that I dare dispute Felicity with any Person. By this
way of living I am made superior to the frowns of Fortune; for, what Estate is
there in this Life, that can reduce a Man to a lower ebb than Bread and Water?
Whereas many that accustom themselves to live deliciously, frequently commit
Robberies, Murder, and other detestable Villainies, to gratify their Luxury and
Profuseness. And I do affirm, that a Halfpennyworth of Flower, made into Pap or
Hasty-pudding, with Water, or with Water, Milk, and Flower, and a
Halfpennyworth of Bread to eat with it, and a little Salt, will make People as
strong as they that eat Flesh, Fish, and Fowl. And farther: Living on
Corn-food, you have small occasion to drink; and a little Bread, Cheese, and a
Pennyworth of Ale, exhilerates a Man three times as much as Flesh, Fish, or
Fowl, with the same quantity of Drink.

1. Bread and Water takes place of all Foods, and are the foundation of dry and
moist Nutriment; it is a good Food, and of an opening and cleansing nature, and
now and then will make a good Meal.

2. Take two spoonfuls of Wheat Flour or Oatmeal, put it into cold Water, and
mix 'em well together, stir this into two Quarts of Water over a quick Fire
till it boil up, putting a little Salt and some Bread; or instead of Bread, an
Onion boiled in it will do. This will not cost above a Farthing, and makes a
noble exhilerating meal: You may make it thick or thin, as you like best; thick
is best for healthy People.

3. Take a quart of Water made boiling hot, a spoonful of ground Oatmeal, and
temper it with cold Water, then brew it into your Water, set it on the Fire
till it boil up, then brew it again and it is done, put some Bread and a little
Salt into it, then eat it; and this makes as good a meal as the World affords:
If you make a meal of this alone, you may boil in it some Pot Herbs and Onions,
and it is done.

4. Take four quarts of Water, and put a pint of Pease therein, then set 'em in
the Pot on a gentle Fire, let 'em boil slowly for 3 or 4 hours, while they are
soft and incorporated into Potage, add a little dry Sage rubbed into powder, and
shred an Onion into it; you may put in a little Mint if you please, or any of
these Herbs will serve. After your Herbs are boiled, put two spoonfuls of
Wheat Flour made into Batter with cold Water, and when your Potage boils up,
it is done. This will make about two quarts, and will serve a laboring Man a
Day, costing not above three halfpence.

5. Take a quart of Water and set it on the Fire till it boils up, then put a
spoonful of Oatmeal well mixed in 2 or 3 spoonfuls of cold Water, mix an Egg
well in it, and put it to your boiling Water; put a little Salt and Bread if
you please to it, and this makes a noble meal.

6. Take Flower a sufficient quantity, then add Water sufficient to make it
into a Paste, put a little Salt and Ginger to it, and a little Yest; make your
Dumplins as large as a Crown piece, and boil 'em; this is wholesome, nourishing,
and pleasant Food.

7. Take an equal quantity of Milk and Water, and when it begins to boil put in
Flower, the usual way of making Hasty-pudding, and eat it with Butter or with
Milk: This is hearty and strengthening Nourishment.

8. Or Water and Flower, with a little Ginger, made into Hasty-pudding, and eat
with Milk or Butter, is hearty Victuals.

In many Countries you may have two quarts of Milk for a Penny, to which add a
pint of Water, and not half a Penny worth of Flower, and make it into flowered
Milk, according to our Directions, and you will have a fine Dish sufficient for
4 People, and stands but in three halfpence: Eat some Bread with it, and
there is nothing affords better nourishment, and that to all Ages, especially
young People. If every one observes his time of eating, and his weight and
measure of Food, great trouble and waste may thereby be avoided. As to quantity
of other Foods, we suppose sixteen ounces of solid, (to wit) Bread, Cheese,
Butter and Eggs, may be sufficient 24 hours for a laboring Man: And the best
time for eating (we suppose) to be about 8 in the Morning and 4 in the
Afternoon. If the Food be flowered Milk, then a pint of it, and 4 ounces of
Bread and Butter, or Cheese, is sufficient; if Water Gruel or Potage, a pint,
and 4 ounces of Bread and Cheese; if raw Milk, the same; but, if flowered Milk,
with an Egg in it, three ounces of Bread and Butter, or of Cheese, will be
sufficient.

Diverse other Dishes, not more healthful, but more toothsom, and very wholesome.
9. Bread and Butter eaten with our thin Gruel, wherein is nothing but Salt, is
the most approved way of eating Water gruel; and the best way of eating it, is
to bite and sip, as you do raw Milk and Bread. This is a most curious and sweet
Food for the Stomach, of easy digestion, creates rare Blood and causes it to
circulate freely.

10. Milk made boiling hot, and thickened with Eggs, is a brave substantial
Food, of a friendly mild nature and operation.

11. Bread and Butter, or Bread and Cheese eat alone with washed Sallads, with
or without Salt, Oil, or Vinegar, makes a dainty Food, of a cleansing quality,
and light of digestion; the frequent eating of which sweetens and creates rare
Blood and fine Spirits; it prevents the generation of sour Humors, and keeps
the Body open: And all Herbs thus eaten are to be preferred before those eat
with Salt, Oil, or Vinegar, be the Food what it will, especially for Women, and
all that are subject to generate muddy Diseases.

12. Eggs broken and buttered over the Fire, is excellent Victuals, being eat
with store of Bread; or Eggs roasted or boiled in their Shells, (roasted being
the best) eaten with Bread, Butter and Salt, or Bread and Salt, is very
substantial.

13. Eggs, Sorrel, and Parsley mixed and stirred together, and fried in a Pan
with Butter and a little Salt, and when fried, put on 'em some Butter and
Vinegar; it is a most excellent Dish, and affords great Nutriment; but remember,
there must not be a great many Herbs, for that will render it more heavy and
dull.

14. Parsley boll'd and cut small, mixed with some Butter and Vinegar melted, and
poach'd Eggs, makes a curious Dish, gives great satisfaction to the Stomach,
supplying Nature with Nutriment in the highest degree, and is pleasant to the
Palate.

15. Eggs beaten together and fried with Butter, and when fried melt some
Butter and Vinegar and put over 'em, is a most curious and dainty Dish, being
much better than the usual way of frying Eggs, they being lighter and more
tender, and easier of digestion.

16. An Egg broke into a pint of Ale, and brewed well together, and eaten with
bread, make a brave meal, and has a vigorous and quick Operation in the
Stomach; in the Winter warm it, but in the Summer you may drink it cold.

17. Poach'd Eggs eaten with a Dish of boiled Spinach buttered, is a curious
Food, being eaten with plenty of bread, affords agreeable Nutriment.

18. Eggs mixed with diverse sorts of Fruits, with Butter and Bread, made into
Pies, is a kind and pleasant Food, that a Man may eat now and then with great
satisfaction to himself, and no less to Nature, provided it be not often.

19. Raw Eggs broke into Water Gruel that is thin, and brewed well together,
with a little Salt in it, and then eaten with Bread, or Bread and Butter, makes
a most delicate Food, and is very fit for all young People, being of a warming
quality, and agreeable to the Stomach, creates fine Blood and brisk Spirits;
for the often using this, and other Spoon-meats, do naturally sweeten all the
Humors, and prevents the generating of sour Juices, frees the passage from
Windiness and griping pains.

20. Artichokes boiled, and eaten with Bread, Butter and Salt, are an excellent
Food, and create a substantial Nutriment; a Man may make a fine meal of them.

21. Take one or two Eggs, beat them with a little Water, and take a pint of
good Ale or Beer, sweeten it with Sugar, then put it on the Fire, making it
boiling hot, but not boil, then brew them well together; this is a comfortable
Food, or rather a rich Cordial, which mightily replenishes Nature both with dry
and moist Nutriment.

22. Asparagus boiled, and eaten with bread, butter, and salt, is a most dainty
Food, and affords a clean Nutriment; it is friendly to the Stomach, loosens the
belly, powerfully purges by Urine, and opens Obstructions.

23. Rice and Water boiled and buttered, is a friendly Dish, and easy of
digestion, and affords a good Nutriment.

24. Boiled Coleworts, Collyflowers, and Cabbage eaten with Bread, Butter,
Vinegar and Salt, the first of the three being the best, for they purge by
Urine, loosen the Belly, and are easy of digestion; but remember that you boil
them in plenty of Water, over a quick Fire, and not too much; which must be
observed in all the Preparations of Herbs and Grains.

25. Rice and Milk is also a dainty Food, affording a substantial Nutriment,
especially if you put Sugar in it.

26. Green Beans boiled, and eaten with Salt, Butter, and Bread, is a most
delicate Food. Let all People subject to windy Diseases eat them sparingly.

27. The young buds of Coleworts and Spinach, boiled in plenty of Water, with a
quick brisk Fire, and eaten only with Bread, Butter and Salt, is a fine
delicate delightful Food, affording a clean Nutriment.

28. French Beans boiled in plenty of Water, with a brisk Fire, and eaten with
Bread, Butter and Salt, makes a most curious and pleasant Food, being of a
cleansing and opening nature, affording a good Nutriment, gently opens the
belly, and purges by Urine.

29. Endive, young Parsley, and Spinach, boiled and eaten with Bread, Butter,
and Salt, is a curious friendly exhilerating Dish, makes rare Blood, and
cleanses the passages.

30. Bread, Butter, and Sorrel makes a brisk Food, easy and quick of
digestion, cleanses the Stomach, and creates a brisk Spirit.

31. Spinach boiled with the tops of Balm and Mint, seasoned with Salt and
Butter, and eaten with Bread, makes a curious Dish, affords excellent
Nutriment, and is of a warming quality.

32. Carrots boiled, seasoned with Butter and Salt, and eaten with Bread, is a
curious Dish, very pleasant, wholesome, and easily digested.

33. Smallage makes a Potage or Gruel of a cleansing quality, being eaten twice
a day, is an effectual Remedy against all Consumptive Humors, it cleanses the
Blood, and opens Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen.

34. Boiled Wheat buttered is a curious Dish, affording a sweet, friendly, and
most agreeable Nutriment, being easy of digestion, it creates fine thin blood.

35. Green Pease boiled, seasoned with Salt and Butter, and eaten with Bread,
makes a most delicate Dish; but if not sparingly eaten, are windy. Their
Nutriment is not strong.

36. Bread, Butter, and Radishes is very acceptable Food, affording substantial
Nutriment; now and then a Man may make an indifferent meal thereof.

37. Boiled Turnips seasoned with Salt and Butter, and eaten with Bread, makes
a very good Dish of Food, especially for all young People. They are easy of
digestion, open and purify the passages, consequently may with safety be eaten
plentifully.

38. Sweet Charwell makes an excellent Potage, being eat with Bread, Butter,
and Salt, is not only very agreeable, but the frequent use thereof purities the
Blood; it is a friend to the Lungs.

39. Parsnips boiled in plenty of Water, seasoned with Salt, Butter, Vinegar,
and Mustard, makes a curious hearty Dish, and are agreeable to most
Constitutions.

40. Light Puddings made of Bread and eat with Butter and Sugar, are very
pleasant to the Palate, and not ungrateful to the stomach, if sparingly eaten.

41. Watercresses made into Potage, eaten with Bread, Butter, and Salt, is not
only a good Food, but often eating thereof purifies the Blood, and prevents
Fumes and Vapors from flying into the Head.

42. Boiled or roasted Potatoes eaten with Butter, Salt, and Vinegar, makes a
pleasant Dish, are easy of concoction, very grateful to the stomach; now and
then a meal may do well.

43. Rice Puddings, both plain and made with Fruit, are for the most part a
pleasant sort of Food, easy of Digestion, and may be freely eaten.

44. Take Currants, boil them in Water, when almost done, mix a little small
Oatmeal with two spoonfuls of cold Water, stir it in, and let it boil a little;
when done, season it with Salt, and put some Sugar to it; this eaten with
Bread, makes a good meal. You may put in Butter, as most Housewifes do; but I
must tell 'em, that makes it heavy on the stomach, and apt to send Fumes into
the Head.

45. Apple-Dumplins eaten with Butter, or Butter and Sugar, is the best of all
Dumplins, affording a friendly Nourishment, and are easy of Digestion.

46. Mint makes a noble exhilerating Potage, frequent eating thereof not only
prevents windy Humors in the Passages, but mightily strengthens the retentive
faculty of the stomach.

47. Pears, being full ripe, make an excellent Pie, and are a fine, gentle,
friendly Food, easy of concoction.

48. Steep your Pease eighteen hours, then boil them in a pot with some sweet
Herbs, and an Onion stuck with Cloves. This is a pleasant wholesome Food.

49. Take Sorrel, Lettice, Beat, Purslain, and a bundle of Herbs, boil them
together with Salt, Butter, and the crust of a Loaf soakt: This is an excellent
Potage.

50. Potage of Colewort-sprouts is made thus: boil them in Water, Salt,
Pease-broth, Butter, Onion sliced, and a little Pepper, then soak your Bread,
garnish it with Sprouts, and fill your Dish therewith.

51. Potage of French-barley is made by putting your Barley (being cleans'd
from Dust) in boiling Milk; being boiled down, put in it large Mace, Cream,
Sugar, and a little Salt, boil it indifferent thick, and it is eatable.

52. Bread, Butter, and Sage affords great Nourishment, expels Wind, and warms
the stomach.

53. Garlick-potage is chiefly good for corpulent People, and such as are
troubled with Coughs, the Stone or Gravel.

54. Take your Sallad-herbs, such as you most like, and put some Vinegar,
Mustard, and Oil well beaten together to your Herbs; it is an excellent Sallad
eaten with Bread only, or with Flesh, if you must needs eat Flesh.

55. A piece of Bread and a few Raisins in the Sun make an excellent meal, a
pint of Ale or Beer being drank after it.

56. Clary shred and Eggs, beat well together and fried with Butter, is an
excellent Dish, especially for ancient People.

57. Take a Cabbage-leaf, shred it very small, put a little Vinegar Pepper and
Oil to it; this is as pleasant as Cucumbers to Flesh-eaters.

58. The young tops of Asparagus boiled, makes an excellent meal, eaten with
Bread and Butter.

59. A Root that grows, called Mercury, if the tops (which something resemble
Asparagus) be boiled, and eaten with Butter and Bread, it is an excellent Food,
being of a cleansing quality.

60. Shadown or Holy-thistle boiled, with Butter and Vinegar put to it, makes
an excellent meal, eaten with Bread.

61. Pumpkin fried, with Vinegar and Butter put to it, makes a good meal, eaten
with Bread only.

62. Whole Oatmeal boiled in a Pot or Pipkin, but first let the Water boil;
being boiled tender, put in Milk or Cream, with Salt and fresh Butter, eat it
with Bread.

63. Alixander and Oatmeal together, picked and washed, when it boils put in your
Herbs, Oatmeal and Salt; boil it on a soft Fire, make it not too thick; being
almost enough, put in some Butter: Eat this with Bread, and it makes an
excellent meal.

64. Pease put into boiling Milk or Cream, with two or three sprigs of Mint;
being tender, salt 'em and thicken 'em with a little Milk and Flower: This
makes an excellent Food.

65. Green Corn taken as it grows, or a little parched or dried against the
Fire, or steept or boiled in Wine, affords in hard Times a reasonable
subsistence.

66. Bread and Milk, as it comes from the Cow, or raw, is very good, sweetning
the Blood.

67. Eggs boiled in the Shells or roasted, eaten with Bread and Salt, and
sometimes Butter, is nourishing Food.

68. Eggs with Flower and Water made into a Pap on the Fire, is a noble Food,
affording brave clean Nourishment.

69. An Egg or two beaten and brewed in a pint of raw Milk, is a noble
substantial Food; if the weather be cold, you may warm the Milk.

70. There are several Foods made with Milk, as Custards, Cheese-cakes and
Whitepots; these nourish much, but are not to be eaten too frequently.

71. Boiled Puddings made with Flower, Milk, Eggs, Raisins, and Currants, being
well buttered, it is pleasant Food.

72. Wheat boiled and buttered, is a noble Dish; with this alone a Man may make
a better meal than with Princely Varieties, and it affords good Nourishment.

73. Smallage, Sallary, Leek or Onion Potages or Gruels, nourish the body, and
purify the blood.

74. To make an Apple or Pear-Tart. Furnish your Tart-pan with a Coffin of
Paste, and lay a bed of Sugar into it, filling it up with the mellow of Apples
or Pears pared and shred small, or cut in slices, the seeds and cores being
taken out, mingle Pine-Apple-kernels therewith, as also Currants and the peel of
preserved Lemon; if you please, powder the whole with a little beaten Cinnamon,
put thereto some Sugar at discretion, and a little fresh Butter, about the
bigness of a Walnut, or thereabouts, for an indifferent Tart: Cover this Tart
in the same manner as you do other Fruit-Tarts, and put it into the Oven after
you have varnished it; and after it is baked, you may scrape a little
Loaf-sugar upon it, and sprinkle some Rose Water on it, and so keep it for use.

75. To poach Eggs. You must put some Poached Eggs into a Dish, a few or many,
add a little Salt to them, and powder them also with Sugar, and sprinkle them
with a little Rose Water, or Verjuice, or Lemon-juice, or Orange juice, unto
which you may add a little beaten Cinnamon or Cinamon-water, which will give
them a good relish.

76. How to dress a Dish of Eggs without any Butter. Beat as many Eggs as you
please into a good large Silver-dish, Whites and Yolks together, after which,
set your said Dish over a Chasing-dish of hot Charcoal thoroughly lighted,
putting nothing to them, but stir them continually with a Silver-spoon; so that
they may not be hard, nor stick to the Dish, and when they are Poached enough
to your Fancy, take them off from the said Chasing-dish, and put to them a good
quantity of Orange-juice, and seasoning them well with Salt, and if you please,
powder them with good store of Sugar and Cinnamon, not forgetting to put grated
Nutmeg into them, as you are a straining of them; and before your Orangejuice
is poured upon 'em, this kind of moistening or poaching of Eggs is least
offensive to the Palate, and less nauseous to the Stomach, which is very often
overcharged by putting Butter to 'em.

77. To make an Omcelet stufft with Herbs. Mince all kind of sweet Herbs, and
the Yolks of Eggs hard together, season the whole with Salt: You may also add
some Mushrooms half boiled, and some Currants, put these minced Ingredients on a
Plate or Dish, and cover 'em over with a flabby or limber Omcelet, and strew
Sugar and Cinnamon upon it, if you please.

78. A Pippin Tart. Take eighty Pippins, pare 'em and quarter 'em, and then
your Paste being raised, lay in your Quarters as thick as you can, then put to
'em a little whole Cinnamon and Ginger, and a few Cloves, with a pound and half
of Sugar, and so, bake 'em. When you have closed your Tart, sugar it at the
top, and so serve it.

79. A Potatoe Pie. Boil your Potatoes tender, then peel 'em, let 'em be cold,
season 'em with beaten Cinnamon, Nutmegs, and a little Pepper; let the pieces of
your Potatoes be cut indifferent, and fill up your Pie, and then put the Marrow
of 2 or 3 Bones to 'em, and some Dates cut in half, a little Mace, some
Barberries, or Grapes, or Lemons, some Citron-Suckets; then put in half a pound
of Butter, and close it, and bake it. moisten it with the Liquor you do a
Chicken-pye with.

80. An Artichoke Pie. Take Artichokes and cut away the green Leafs from the
bottom, till the Bones look white, then boil the bottoms as much as if they
were to be eaten; take out the Core, and season the Bottoms, (being cut in four
parts, as you did the Potatoes) put all things into that Pie, and bake it, and
liquor it as the other.

81. To make Hasty-pudding. Take a pint of Cream and set it over the Fire, with
a blade of Mace, when it boils put in a spoonful of Flower, but not let it
knob; then take the Yolks of 3 Eggs and beat them with some Sugar; so stir
them, and let them boil till you perceive the Butter round the edges of the
Skillet: pour it into the Dish, set it over Coals, and cover it; you must keep
it stirring in the Skillet.

82. To make Gooseberry-fool without Milk. Take a pint of Gooseberries, scald
them, break them very small in some of the Water that scalded 'em, then beat
the Yolks of two or three Eggs with a spoonful of Rose Water; stir in a good
piece of Butter to melt; then put in your Eggs. Sweeten it to your mind, and
put it over the Fire to thicken, and dish it to eat hot or cold.

83. To make a Papist Pudding. Take a quart of Milk, a quarter of a pound of
Rice, a little Spice, half a pound of Currants, mingle all well together, butter
your Dish, so bake it.

84. Panadoes. Boil Water in a Skillet, put to it grated Bread or Cakes, good
store of Currants, Mace and whole Cinnamon: being almost boiled, and indifferent
thick, put in some Sack or Whitewine, Sugar, strained Yolks of Eggs; otherways,
with Bread, Water, Currants, and Mace; being well boiled, put to it some Sugar,
Whitewine, and Butter.

85. Posset of Herbs. Take a fair scowr'd Skillet, put some Milk into it, and
some Rosemary; the Rosemary being well boiled in it, take it out, and have some
Ale or Beer in a Pot, put to it the Milk or Sugar, or none. Thus of Thyme,
Carduus, Camomil, Mint, or Marigold flowers.

86. Potatoes cleans'd and boiled, with a little Butter put to them, and eat
with Bread, or without, make a good meal.

87. Colliflowers well boiled, and a little Salt put to 'em, and dish'd up with
Sippets round 'em, and a little Butter and Water. or Juice of Lemon or Orange,
makes a noble Dish.

88. Gourds, Pumpions, Cucumbers, or Muskmelons, cut in pieces, pared,
cleans'd, and put into boiling Water; when it boils put in the Pumpion, or
other things, which you think fit, with some Salt; being boiled, drain 'em well
from the Water, butter 'em, and serve 'em on Sippets. Otherwise, bake them in
an Oven, and take out the Seed at the top, fill them with Onions, slie'd
Apples, Butter and Salt; butter them, and serve 'em with Sippets, as before.

89. To dress French Beans or Lupins. First take away the tops of the Cods, and
the Strings, then have a Pan or Skillet of fair Water boiling on the Fire; when
it boils, put them in with some Salt* and boil them up quick: being boiled,
serve 'em up with some Butter, in a Dish with some Salt round it.

90. To dress Garden Beans. Being shell'd and cleans'd, put 'em into boiling
Liquor with some Salt; boil 'em up quick, and when so done, drain away the
Liquor and butter 'em; put 'em in the Dish cross-wise, and serve 'em up with
Pepper and Salt on the brim of the Dish. Thus also green Peace, Haslers,
Broom-buds, or any kind of Pulse.

91. Cut the tops of Beans when they have codded, boil and butter them, and they
make an excellent Dish eaten with Bread.

Of SALLADS.
92. Take Sorrel, Parsley and Spinach, Lettice, and some few Onions; then add
Salt, Vinegar and Oil, a good quantity: If you cannot get Oil, good Butter
melted may serve as well, for it is scarce discernable from Oil; but let the
Salt predominate. Eat Bread only with the Sallad, which is better than if you
eat Bread and Meat, or Bread and Butter, or Cheese.

93. Another. Take Sorrel, Lettice, Pepper, Grass, Spinach, Tops of Mints, and
Onions, seasoned as before.

94. Another. Take Sorrel, Lettice, Cellery, Spinach, Onions, and Endive,
seasoned as before.

95. Another. Sage, Mint, Penniroyal, Balm, and some Lettice and Sorrel; eat
them as before: This is brave Sallad.

96. Another. Young green Buds of Coleworts with Onions, is a good Sallad,
seasoned as before.

97. Another. Taragan, Nettle-tops, Penniroyal, Mint, Parsley, Sorrel, Lettice,
and leaves of Coleworts eat as before, is an excellent Sallad, if seasoned to
the highest degree.

A SALLAD for Winter.
98. Parsley, old Onions, Endive, Cellery, Lettice, Sorrel and Colewort-plants,
seasoned with Salt, Oil and Vinegar, is an excellent warming and cherishing
Sallad.

99. Another. Take Cellery, Endive, Spinach and Lettice, and half a head of
Garlic in it, seasoned with Salt, Vinegar and Oil; this is a brave Sallad.
Sallads are good at all times, but most proper from the end of January to the
first of July: Then again from September till December; and indeed all Winter,
if the Weather be open.

In SPRING.
100. Spinach, Corn-sallad, Nettle-tops, and the buds of young Cabbage, and
others of like nature, being boiled, is an excellent corrective to them that
eat F^esh-meat; they loosen the Belly, and open Obstructions. In April, May and
June, eat Spinach, Parsley, Lettice, Mint-tops, Borage, Scurvy, Dandalion,
Cornfry, and the like, boiled in plenty of Water over a brisk Fire; add to them
Butter melted, and some Salt; then eat with Bread, or Bread and Flesh, is good
Food.

101. Sallads to be had, especially in Spring, that costs nothing but the
labor, fit to boil and eat with or without Flesh-meat; all very wholesome. Young
Nettletops are very wholesome and well-tasted, Dandalion is the same, very
wholesome and well-tasted, only you must let it lie 20 or 24 Hours in Water, that
takes away its bitterness: This is much eat by French People. Comfry is
excellent Food, it grows in Marshground generally. Goats-beard, or Tragopogan
grows in Marshes; its an excellent boiled Sallad. Turnip-tops, Radish-tops,
tops of young green Pease, or tops of Beans. Turnip-tops running to Seed,
boiled, eats like Asperagus, Ladies Thisle, called by some Shadown, is very
wholesome; tops of Mallows, young, eat well, Watercresses, Smallages and Clivers
make Spring-pottage, or eat well boiled, Garlike, Mercury, or Blite eats like
Asperagus boiled; Hop-buds eat very well, Redshanks, Alixander Leaves and
Stalks. Roots of Arum boiled eat well, so does Ashwood Jump about; Corn-sallad,
Redbeet Roots eat as well as Carrots, Wheat in the blade 5 or 6 inches high,
cut the rank part and boil it, eats well; tie it in Bundles as you do Nosegays:
young Dasy Roots are generally eaten by Spaniards and Italians all the Spring,
till June. Alixander are of the nature of Parsley, the Sprouts, Buds and Tops
are best eat in Spring. All kind of Docks, Cole says, has this property, That
Meat boiled therewith, though never so tough, will be tender and fit to eat; and,
that Calamint laid among stinking Meat, when it is raw, will recover it: And
Evelyn says, That the sharp pointed Dock brewed in Ale or Beer, are excellent
for the Scorbute or Scurvy. Jackly-the-Hedge, or All-Sauce, is a good Sallad,
it grows under Hedges and Banks. Mushrooms boiled and picked, stewed with a
little Vinegar, Peper, Butter and Spice, eats very well; and so they do well
pickled. Vine-Clapers, or Tendrels, whilst young, may be eat alone, or with
other Sallads; and Evelyn says, That the common Burdock about April, when
young, before the Burrs and Clotts appear, being stripped and the bitterness
soaked out and then boiled, or eat raw, is a good Sallad.

The best way to make Herb-Pottage.
102. Smallage, Clivers, Watercresses, Elder-buds and Nettle-tops; put Water to
them proportionable to your Herbs; then add Oatmeal, as much as you think fit
to leave it in thick: When the Water is ready to boil, put your Herbs in, cut,
or uncut; then when it is again ready to boil, take a Spoon or Ladle, and lade
it, so that you keep it from boiling; do this 8 or 9 Mornings, then take it
off, and eat it bloodwarm with the Herbs in it, or strained; adding a little
butter, salt and bread. This is an admirable cleansing Pottage.

103. Another. Spinach, Corn-sallad, the tops of Penniroyal and Mint, ordered
and eat as before.

104. Another. Take the young and tender Stalks of Turnips and of Cabbages,
when they first run up in the Spring, boil them and peel them, and put butter,
vinegar and pepper to them, and eat them with bread.

A cheap way to Live in Case of great Scarcity or Famine.
To take away the Unsavory Rank Taste of Pease, Beans, Beech-mast, Acorns,
Chestnuts, Vetches, and such like.
BOil your Beans, Pease, etc. in clean Water, and if they are not pleasing
enough, change the Water again, and at the second or third time, you will find
a great alteration in Taste, then dry them, and if you please, you may hull
them, or grind them unhull'd; if you please, you may put a third part or a
fourth (of Wheat Flour) to it, and make bread thereof: Or you may make good
bread without any wheat added to them. Or for better Expedition, you may take
the ground-meal of them, and infuse warm Water thereon, and as it begins to
cool, drain it away, and put on fresh warm Water, till the taste please you;
then dry up the meal, and make bread thereof, either simply of it self, or
compounded as before, Probatum est.

But if you are not content with this Preparation, you may work it into Paste,
with a Liquor first strengthened with some bruised Aniseeds, Liquorice or sweet
Fennel Seeds, or with the Seeds themselves incorporated in the Paste; or to
save charge, with Peperwort, Time, Winter-savory, Penniroyal, etc. and this is
hearty, and wholesome, and nourishing. What is here spoken of Pease, Beans, etc.
may be generally understood of all other Grain, Plants, Seeds, Pulse, Roots,
etc. and that that is serviceable in Meat, will be much more tolerable in
Drink.

It Is said, that Allom rolled five or six times a day in the mouth, has kept
alive fifteen or twenty days.

Wheat Straw chopped into short pieces, and ground with some proportion of Wheat
into Meal, has been made good Bread; but you must grind it well in a Steel or
Hand-mill.

Some say, a small quantity of Liquorice-Roots chowed, will satisfy both
Hunger and Thirst.

To make Bread of the Root of Aron, called Cuckoopit, or Starch-Root.
The Roots that are large must be cleansed from the Skin and Filth, then cut
into slices small, then sees them in boiling Water so long as you find the
Water hot and biting, and till the Root begins to wax sweet; then change your
Water, and pour fresh upon them, and so continue doing till the Water becomes
sweet, and the Roots have lost their Acrimony. Take them out, and lay them
abroad upon Canvas supported with Frames; and being dry, grind them, and they
make a very white meal, which of it self, or by mixing of a third with
Wheat-meal, makes savory bread, and the best Starch: gather it in March or
April be sure; Turnips will do the like.

Pompions mixed with a little meal, makes savory bread; and if you put Sugar or
other Sauce on it, it is a delicate Dish.

Take your great and sweet Parsnip Roots, and cut them in thin slices, and
having washed and scraped them clean, dry them, and beat them into Powder, or
grind them, sifting them through a fine Sieve; put two parts of Flower to one
of this Powder, and make it into Cakes, and these taste daintily. Query,
Whether Turnips, Carrots, and the like Roots, will not do as well?

All manner of Pulse, as Beans, Vetches, Lentils, and such like, first rubbed
over in Lee, and then hull'd, and after ground, will yield fair meal, and
better bread.

A Poultice made of Flower or Meal, sodden among Pears, Apples, Plumbs, or the
like Fruit, or of some Bread and Water, or Broth of Flesh, or Milk, wellboil'd
together, fills the Stomach to content.

Suchlike Composition made of Bisquet, dry, hard, or stale, make Bread, affords
good Food.

Cheese mixed, and wrought up with meal, make^ a glutting sort of Food.

Meal and Oil of Olives, or other Fruit or Seeds mixed together, may be made
into Bread.

Dough kneaded with Ale-wort or Wine, is hearty Food.

You may make bread of the powdered or ground leaves of the Pear Tree,
Apple Tree, Beech, Oak, and so likewise Drink.

So likewise, white Poplar being cut off close by the ground, and watered with
warm Water, well seasoned with Leven, in four days space will bring forth
excellent Mushrooms.

A bread may be made of the Rape, or Navew, being first scorched after sodden,
then baked.

Bread is made of Panick or of Millet, whose Seed even in a small quantity,
arises greatly in Substance.

Bread and Drink may be made of Lentils.

Bread made of Flower of dry Beans, is strong in Nourishment, and may be
corrected of his Taste, by adding Cummin-seed.

Of DRINKS.
1. Water it self is an excellent Drink; or take a Spoonful of ground Oatmeal,
and incorporate it into a quart of clear Water, pouring it out of one Vessel or
Pot into another, fifteen or twenty times, and its excellent against Gravel,
Stone, Scurvy, or most other Distempers whatever. In Winter, make it
blood-warm, or I think it better if just boiled into a thin Gruel.

2. Another. Gather the tops of Heath, whereof the usual Brushes are made, and
dry them, and keep them from moulding, then you may at all times brew a cheap
Drink, which is very wholesome for the Liver and Spleen; if you put a little
Liquorice into it, it will be much pleasanter; and also a little Treacle.

3. Another. Water and Vinegar is a pleasant Drink; or a quart of Water, and
five or six Spoonfuls of Aqua Composita, a small quantity of Sugar, a little
Borrage, or a branch of Rosemary, all brewed together.

4. How to Brew good and wholesome Beer without any Hops at all. Take Wormword
that is either cut down in the Leaf before it is Seeded, or being Seeded, that
is cut into short pieces, whereby there may be an equal mixture of the whole
bulk together; for you must note, that the Seeded tops are much stronger and
more oily than the rest of the leaves or stalks: Make first a Decoction of four
ounces of Hops with nine gallons of Water, which is the proportion that some
Brewers (in some sort of Drink) do use, and when you have gotten out by
Ebullition, the full strength and virtue of them, keep the same apart, and
begin likewise with some small proportion of Wormwood to the like quantity of
Water as before; and when you have bestowed as much time and fire herein, as
you did about the Hops; you may taste each of them by it self, and if you find
it to exceed the first in bitterness, then begin with a less proportion of
Wormwood, and so reiterate your work, until you have equally matched the one
with the other; then you may safely proceed by the Rule of Proportion, to a
Barrel, and so to a Tunn, and on to a whole Brewing. Many Persons put Broom
into Beer instead of Hops. Some say, that Centaury, Artichoke leaves, or Aloes
Hipatique, will perform the same. Platt's Jewel-house, page 1, 3.

5. To Brew without Hops. Take Sage, Tamarisk, tops of Pine or Firr; Bartholine
commends it to Brew withal, as much better than Hops; for it is reckoned
excellent against the Scurvy, boiled in your Liquor.

6. Herbs that will serve in Brewing, as well as Hops, and for many
Constitutions much better. As Balm and Penniroyal, Mint, Tansie, Broom,
Wormwood, Centaury Carduus, Eyebright, Sage, Betony, Dandalion, and good Hay.
Note, That you gather these Herbs in their proper Seasons, and dry, for they
are not near so good if used Green: if you infuse Broom, Wormwood, Carduus, or
any other that exceeds in bitterness, let them not lie in your Wort above half
an hour, but a quarter of an hour is enough, if you put in a good quantity.

7. Instead of Malt, the Liquor of Beech is commended, for making an excellent
wholesome Drink.

8. Potatoes rightly ordered, makes good Beer or Bread.

9. Take a quart of fair Water, a spoonful of Vinegar, or Aqua Composita, and a
spoonful of Sugar, and add (if have it) some Borage or Rosemary, and brew them
well together.

10. Another. Take a bushel and a half of good Wheat-bran, and a gallon of
Molossus, and some Ginger; add Water to it, and it will make a barrel of good
Table-beer. Houghton's Collect. No. 94. Vol. 4.

Another excellent Drink. Take a quart, or 2, or 3 of Water, and some white
Sugar and Nutmeg; brew them well together, and it makes a pleasant and wholesome
Drink: A spoonful of Treacle and a quart of Water mixed, is excellent tasted
Drink, and is good against Coughs.

To restore to Health Consumptive People.
COnsumptions are a Decay of the Radical Moisture, whereby the natural heat of
the Stomach is so weakened, that it cannot make a due Separation of Meats and
Drink received, which causes from thence to arise abundance of bad Juices or
Phlegm; so that no good Nourishment can be bred, let the Food be never so Rich,
nor the Drink so Cordial, which all People afflicted find by Experience. But
these Distempers proceed likewise from various Causes. As,

1. From over-charging Nature with too great quantities of rich Food; or in
others, by drinking much Brandy, Wine and strong Drinks, which weakens the
natural Heat, and destroys the Action of the Stomach. In others, an idle,
sedentary course of Life, or want of proper Exercises; lying in Bed too long,
too warm Clothing, and too soft Feather or Down Beds, which proves always
prejudicial to the Health of all Persons. It is caused sometimes by too much
frequenting the School of Venus, provoking Nature beyond her Ability, and
oft-times corrupts her in her very Radix. Young married People, as well as the
most Lewd, are often caught in this Snare, and let this be a caution. Others by
excessive Heats or Colds, Surfeits, and the like Accidents: Some by Fevers and
long Fits of Sickness; some through Melancholy, Grief, or Trouble of Mind, or
Despair and Envy. Some have Consumptions Hereditary, which is the hardest of
all to cure.

Now, when thou find thy self indisposed, and thy stomach to grow weak, and
a general Disorder to (...) through thy whole Body, and that thy strength
decays; consider what it was that caused it, whether Temperance, or
Intemperance in Meats or Drinks, ^n respect of the Quantity or Quality, as also
thy Exercises, and all other Extremes thou have inured thy self to Consider
further, what Air thou have lived in, where the Disease was bred, and by this
means thou may guess at the cause of thy Distemper. And when this is done,
thou ought gradually to alter for the better, the whole Course of thy Life;
not in the nature and quality of the Meats and Drinks only, but in their
quantity: As also thy Exercises, and the Air, as far as the Condition of thy
Life will admit thereof. For change of Food, Exercises and Airs, work Wonders,
if withal you betake your selves to mere simple Meats and Drinks, that are easy
of Concoction, and generate a freer and firmer Substance.

I shall now set down what Food, Drink and Preparations are agreeable to the
Stomachs of sick and languishing Persons: And first,

Of MILK.
Which is an incomparable Food, and the best way for weak Consumptive People to
eat it, is raw.

Take what quantity of Milk you please, let it stand open to the Air one Hour
or two, then skin off the top of it, and eat it with well-bak'd Bread; neither
toast your Bread, nor warm your Milk; except the Weather be cold, and then you
may take it bloodwarm, but then do not toast your Bread. You may, if you
please, eat Bisquet with your Milk, but do not eat too great a quantity at
once; sometimes you may mix a little Water with the Milk, and sweeteen it with
good white Sugar: You may eat this three times a day, if you make it your sole
Food. Continue this six or eight months at least, and you will find great
benefit by it: For Distempers that have been many years generating, cannot be
cured in a moment.

To prepare Milk with Wheat Flour, an Excellent way.
Take a quart of new Milk, after it has stood five or six Hours from the time
it was milk'd, put to it a third part of River or Spring Water, set it on a
clear Fire; then take some Wheat Flour, and temper it with either Water or
Milk into a Batter, and when the Milk is ready to boil, put in your Thickning,
and stir it a while; and when it is ready to boil again, take it off, then put
as much Salt and Bread to it as you please, then let it cool without stirring
it, and it will eat much sweeter. Two spoonfuls of Flower is enough for a quart
of Milk and Water, make it about the thickness of ordinary Milk-po^age. This
keeps your Body in excellent temper, neither binds nor loosens too much, and it
never tires nor clogs the Stomach.

Another way. Take a quart of Milk and a Pint of Water, add to it as much
Oatmeal as you please to have it in thickness, thin is best. Set it on a clear
Fire, and when it begins to boil, take it off, and brew it in two Porringers
eleven or twelve times, then set it on the Fire again; and when it begins to
boil, take it off, and let it stand a little, and the large Oatmeal will settle
to the bottom; then add Bread and Salt to it, and eat it when it is blood-warm.
This is an excellent Food, agrees well with weak Natures, and affords firm
Nourishment. And if you add at any time to this a new laid Egg or two, beaten
with your thickning, and put it in as aforesaid, it will make a rich Dish.

If you would add Eggs to Milk-potage, first put your Milk and Water into your
Sauce-pan, take a spoonful of ground Oatmeal, and beat it up with your Egg or
Eggs, with either a little Milk or Water, and when it is ready to boil, stir it
in, as in flowered Milk, and then you need not brew it; put a little Bread and
Salt to all your Milk-meats, but no Sugar be sure. This is a substantial and
friendly Food. Observe, That Milk is best the first half year after the Cow
has Calv'd, but not so good after taking Bull, or Conception. Milk boiled by
it self is not so good as when mixed with Oatmeal, Flower, or Water as
aforesaid, being not of so cleansing a quality. The best time to begin
Milk-diet, I think, is about March or April.

Of BONICLABBER.
Boniclabber is made by letting your Milk stand till it sowres, which will be
in Twenty-four Hours, if the Wea^er be very hot. It has a pleasant sowrish
Taste and must be eaten only with Bread, especially by Consumptive People. It
is excellent against Stoppage, and it is e^sie of Concoction, and digests all
hard or sweet Food; it cools and cleanses the whole Body, and quenches Thrist
to a wonder: It is the best spoon-meat for Consumptive People that I know. And
though it may not be so agreeable to the Palate at first, yet a little Custom
will make it familiar and pleasant.

Of WATERGRUEL.
This is good for Consumptive People, and is made as follows: Take a quart of
Spring or River-water, put to it two spoonfuls of Oatmeal, then stir it well
together, set it on the Fire; and when it is ready to boil, take it off, and
brew it out of one thing into another; then let it stand, and the greatest
Oatmeal will ^ink to the bottom: Then pour it off, and add Bread and Salt to
it, and Butter, if you please, then eat it when it has stood till it is
blood-warm.

Observe, That Milk boiled, is nothing so good as either raw or scalded. An
excellent Gruel of various Ingredients. Take 2 pints of Water, and put half a
quarter of a pound of Currants well washed, let it stand on the Fire till ready
to boil, then move it to a less heat for 4 or 5 Minutes, then take another
Vessel with a quart of the like Water in it made to ^ boiling then have your
tempered spoonful of Oatmeal ready, brew your Oatmeal and Water together very
well, then take your infused Currants out of the hot Water, and put them into
your brewed Gruel, with some Butter, Sugar and Salt, throwing away the Water
that your Currants were infused in; then brew it as before, the Currants, Salt,
Butter and Bread all together: If you have a mind to put Spice to it, then put
it into the Water you make your Gruel of, when you set it on the Fire.

A Purging Gruel. Take as much Water as you please, make it boiling hot, then
put in these Herbs, or any other you shall like best, as Corn-sallad,
Spring-parsly, Scurvy Grass, Smallage, Elder-buds, take off your Water from the
Fire, cover it, and let them infuse about half an Hour, then take the Liquor
from your Herbs, and brew it with some tempered Oatmeal, you may put in Salt if
you please, and drink a pint or quart, two or three in a Morning, and fast till
Dinner, this Gruel will give you a Stool, and cleanse the Stomach from all
superfluous matter, makes good Blood, opens the Passages, by which the Humors
will freely circulate; this is good in Spring, and all Seasons of the Year,
when you can get the Herbs.

To make all sorts of Herb-Gruel, first of Elder-buds.
Take what quantity of Water you please, make it boiling hot, then have your
Oatmeal tempered with cold Water, and the Elder-buds, and put them both into
the boiling Water, and keep it lading or stirring, besure, let it be (...) it
were on the boil, but not boil up, a little while, take it from the Fire, and
let it stand three or four Minutes, then take the Herbs out, strain it, and put
into it a little Salt; when cold, you may drink a quart more or less as your
Stomach serves, this cleanses and opens all Obstructions of the Breast and
Passages, and gives a gentle Stool; its very good for Fat People, especially if
they join Exercise with it.

Balm Gruel is made the same way as Elder bud-Gruel, and is a notable Cleanser,
good both for Old and Young, it expels Wind and Vapors, is good for Fat, Gouty
or Dropsical People, it cleanses the Passages and cheers the Spirits; drink it
in March, April and May.

Scurvy Grass Gruel is a most excellent refiner of the Blood, begets a Stomach,
purges by Urine, sometimes by Stool: the excellency of this Herb would be too
tedious to mention.

Smallage-Gruel cleanses the Blood, opens Obstructions, gets a good Stomach,
and is good against Shortness of Breath.

Ground Ivy, or Ale-hoof-Gruel, is a great Cleanser of the Bowels and Stomach,
wholesome for all People, the sick, and those that are well.

Sage-Gruel is excellent against most Distempers, so is Gruel made of
Penniroyal or Spinach.

An excellent Food for all sorts of People, but more especially for Children
and sick People.
Take a quart of Water, two spoonfuls of Wheatflower, and two or three Eggs;
beat the Flower and Eggs together with a little Water, and when the Water
begins to boil, stir in your thickning, and keep it stirring till it is ready
to boil; then take it off, and put Bread and Salt to it, when it has stood till
it is blood-warm, eat it: You may put some Butter to it, or an Egg, if you like
it best. This is an incomparable Food for all sorts of People, it breeds good
Blood, opens the Passages, sweetens the Blood, prevents windy Distempers and
griping Pains; it is next to Breast-milk for Children, and it is excellent for
Consumptive People, if they keep to it four or five Months, or more, and eat
nothing else, and drinking three or four Glasses of good Ale; let them use
gentle Exercise, and moderate Clothing, and good sweet hard Beds. This, and
all other Spoon-meats made thin, are best.

Of FLUMERY.
It is thus made: Take three spoonfuls of Oatmeal more or less, and put to it a
convenient quantity of Water, then let it stand till it begins to be sowerish,
then take this Water and Oatmeal, and put it into a Vessel, stirring it, and
making it boiling hot, with a quick Fire, and when it does begin to rise, brew
it to and fro with your Ladle, to keep it from boiling; this do about four or
five Minutes, then take it off the Fire, and it is prepared. Some eat it with
Ale, others with Cream, Milk, and the like, but I think it most beneficial to
be eaten with Bread only. It removes Obstructions, strengthens the Stomach,
cools the Body, opens the Passages, and is excellent good for Breakfast in
all hot Climates. This is good, more especially for weak-stomach'd People, and
those whose Breast and Passages are obstructed by tough phlegmy Matter.

Of BREAD.
The best sort for sick People, is that which is made of Wheat flower, but not
too fine dressed; for then it will be dry and husky; and your leavened Bread is
much better than that made with Yest; you may make it after this manner: Take
what Flower you please, make a hole in the middle of it, break then your Leven
in; take as much blood-warm Water as will wet about half your Flower, mix the
Flower and Leven well together, cover it with the remaining Flower close; this
do in the Evening, and by Morning the whole will be levened. Then add as much
blood-warm Water as is sufficient, and knead it up very stiff and firm, the
more pains you take, the better. When you have so done, let it lie warm by some
Fire near two Hours, till the Oven is ready, then bake it, but let not the
Oven-mouth be close stopped, that the Air may have more or less Egress or
Regress. But the best way, is to make it into thin Cakes, and bake the on a
Stone, with a Wood-fire under. Of Rye, Barley, Oats, etc. you may make Cakes
after the same manner; put no Salt into your Bread.

Of BUTTER.
Butter affords good Nourishment; the best that is for the Stomach, is made
from May to August it is very wholesome, if eaten moderately with Bread or with
Herbs, Roots, or the like. Take good Butter and melt it thick, and put it to
your H^rbs, as you do Oil, and it eats as well and pleasant, and can scarce be
distinguished from Oil: This (I believe) a great many may have cause to thank
me for: All Butter ought to be well seasoned with Salt.

Of CHEESE.
Cheese affords good Nourishment for healthy working People, if eaten with good
store of Bread, and a Cup of good Drink be not wanting. It is altogether as
nourishing as Flesh; it is clean, and of a stronger, firmer Substance, and
digests a Cup of Drink better: And he that lives on Bread and Cheese,
intermixed now and then with Flower'd-milk, Water Gruel, Milk-potage, and raw
Sallads, seasoned with Vinegar, Salt and Oil, and drinks a Cup of good sound
Ale or Beer, not over strong, shall exceed in Health and Strength him that
lives on Bread and Flesh, and drinks the same Liquor.

Of EGGS, and their best way of Dressing.
They are an excellent Food, friendly and innocent in Operation. Dress them as
follows:

Let your Eggs be boiled soft, then break the Shell, and put them into a Dish,
and let them stand till they are Blood warm; then with Bread and Salt only eat
them. A strong Stomach may eat them with Bread and Butter spread upon it, not
melted. Or you may boil them hard, then peel, off the Shell, and eat them with
Salt, Bread and Vinegar. Poaching is a very good way. Take an Egg, a spoonful
of Wheatflower, and beat it well together then put it into a pint of Water
boiling hot, stir it together; then take it off, and eat it with a little
Bread, Salt and Butter, and it will make an excellent meal. Eggs in a Morning
supped off raw, and Bread eaten after them, is very wholesome.

Of PYES.
Pear and Apple-pyes are wholesome and healthy Food, if the Fruit be t^orough
ripe, and made as they ought to be* The b^st way is thus:

Take good W^eat-flower, make it into a Paste with a little Leven or Yeast,
with Milk and Water, or a bloo^-warm Water only, then put in yo^ Apples or
Pears, and if you please, add some Carr^way or Fennel-seeds. In baking, let the
Oven stand almost open, that some Air may come in. When baked, draw them, and
cut holes in the top, that the sulphurous Atoms, and the fiery Vapors may pass
away; eat them not hot, for they are much better cold. Apples raw and ripe,
eaten with Bread sometimes, are wholesome; and so are Peaches, Plumbs,
Gooseberries, Currants, Apricocks, and the like, very good Food eaten with Bread
sometimes. And observe by the way, that hot Bread ought not to be eaten, for it
is very injurious to the Health; and your Bread ought to stand two days before
you eat it.

Of OIL.
It is of a brave nourishing clean Nature, and friendly to most Constitutions:
It is very proper to be eaten with Herbs and Fruit. Bread and Oil makes a
delicate Breakfast or Supper; for it cleanses the Passages, breeds good Blood,
and is easy of Concoction. With Fish it is very good, more especially with
Salt-fish; for it allays the fierce keen property of the Salt, and sweetens the
lean Body of the Fish; for these purposes it is better than Butter. Observe,
That toasted Bread is not so good as cold Bread. Olives are not so good as Oil,
nor ought to be frequently eat, for then they obstruct the Stomach and
Passages. The best way of eating them, is with Bread only; but we might as well
be without them.

Of SUGARS.
Sugar is an excellent rich thing, but in my opinion, fit only to be taken
Physically, and not at every turn to be mixed with our common Food and Drinks;
the use whereof makes it of evil consequence, particularly all sweetened Drinks
and Food forward the generation of the Gout, and other Diseases of the Body,
which simple innocent Food would prevent, if Temperance be but observed. But if
Sugar be used in Milk-meats for old People, it may prove beneficial, but I
think to none else.

Of SUGAR CANDY.
It is made thus: First, they boil it as high as other Sugars, then out of the
Pans they take this Syrup, and put it in an earthen Pot; then they set it in a
hot Stow, there to stand 9 or 10 days; in that time the fierceness of the
sulphurous Heat coagulates it into an hard tough substance, then you take it
out from the Syrup, and put the Candy or hard Lumps into the Stow again, but
made about 2 or 3 degrees hotter, where it must remain 9 or 10 days longer, and
then it is done.

There are two sorts of it, one White, the other Brown, but they are both of
one nature and operation; they are much made use of for Coughs, Colds and
Stoppages, but in my opinion there is nothing more contrary and burthensom to
Nature in such cases than this very thing, and therefore ought to be abandoned;
for, in truth, the best Food for those that are invaded with these Colds, etc.
are thin bri^k Gruels and Potages, made as I have taught before; also good raw
Sallads with Bread and Oil, but eat Oil sparingly: Likewise Bread and Butter,
and all sorts of lean Food, light of digestion; and for Drinks, Water and
Rhenish-wine, two parts Water, and one Wine, or good small Ale, with moderate
exercise and clothing, walking in the open Air sometimes, which will gradually
remove these Distempers.

Of the Occasion of Colds and Coughs, and of their Cure.
Coughs and Colds are produced by intemperance in Meats, Drinks, Exercises and
Habits, or by eating or drinking too much in quantity, and things of a contrary
quality, or improperly prepared, and not from thin Clothing, as many imagine;
for if the inside be sound and clean, there is little danger of outward
Inconveniences. The best way to prevent outward Colds, and the Evils that
happen through thick and thin Clothing, and by Heats, Sweatings, and the like,
is to change your Clothes often. As for Example: Put on, when you stay at home,
in a Morning, one sort of Clothes, and when you go out, put off your Clothes to
your Shirt, and put on fresh and cold Clothes, and again at Night, pull off
them to the Shirt, and put on the other. And for those that sweat much by their
Labor, let them pull off all their Clothes, Shirt and all, and put on fresh
Shirts, and cold Clothing; and for those that over-travel themselves, let them
do the like; but observe that both fit still a while, before they either eat or
drink.

Observe farther by the bye, That Prunes, Figs, Nuts, and Almonds, and many
other suchlike things, ought not to be eaten at all, except only with common
Bread, or in a Physical way, in opening Drinks. Also Candied Gingers, all sorts
of Conserves and Preserves, and all Confections, Hodge-podge, Cakes, Bunns, are
very prejudicial for it, and obstruct the Passages, generate Crudities, spoil
the Stomach, and prepare Matter for a multitude of Diseases.

Of CANARY.
Canary is an excellent Cordial Liquor; eat a good piece of Bread, and drink a
Glass of Canary after it, and it will make a rich meat. It is, in my opinion,
the best Cordial an Apothecary has in his Shop, for any Man in time of Disorder
and Sickness.

Of SHERRY.
It is a fine Cordial Wine, as Food for common Drinks as Canary; being mixed
with Water, it begets Appetite, cleanses the Passages, and helps Concoction;
it purges by Urine more than Canary. But this, as all other Liquors, must be
drank with discretion and temperance, and not too frequent.

Of WHITEWINE.
Whitewine is an excellent cleansing Liquor, it begets Appetite, and purges by
Urine; but let it not be too frequently drank, left it indispose the Body, by
putting it into an unnatural Flame.

Of RHENISH-WINE.
Rhenish-Wine is an excellent Cleanser of the Stomach, somewhat akin to
Whitewine, it begets Appetite, and helps Concoction.

As for Old Hock, esteemed by some, it is the most prejudicial of any Liquor,
and therefore ought to be forborne.

Of CLARET.
Claret is a good Stomach-Wine, moderately drank; it helps Concoction, and
begets Appetite, it is the best of Wines for those that eat abundance of
Fat-flesh, and Succulent Foods: But it purges not by Urine so much as White.
Take Notice, that this (as all other Liquors) are not to be frequently used,
for then they are prejudicial; but a Glass of Claret, or a dram of Brandy, or
the like, are good Cordials, when you have eaten too much in quantity of any
Foods too foul or gross in quality.

Of CIDER.
Cider (if well made and fermented) is a fine brisk Liquor, and altogether as
good as Claret or Whitewine, and perhaps better for English Bodies, if drank
temperately. Note, That no Cider ought to be kept above one year, if you regard
your Health.

Of MUM.
Mum (if temperately drank) is very wholesome for Melancholy Flegmatical People,
and for those whose Food is coarse Bread and Cheese, Flower'd-milk, Herbs, and
lean Potages; but I think it not near so wholesome as well-brewed Ale.

Of COFFEE.
Coffee ought to be used only in a Physical way, by them that are troubled with
Fumes and dulling Vapors that fly into their Heads: It is likewise good after
hard Drinking, Weariness. Labor and Fasting; but for others, I think it best
to forbear it: Yet a Dish will do no Man harm.

Of TEA.
Tea is an innocent harmless Liquor, that purges by Urine, and is of an opening
Quality; but it is not comparable to an Herb called Dandalion; which being
infused in boiling hot Water about half an hour, and then pour the Liquor from
the Herbs, and sweetened with white Sugar, is a much better Drink. It purges by
Urine, and cleanses the Stomach. Sage, Penniroyal, Thyme and Mint, dried in
their proper season, and kept in Bags, make as good Liquor as Tea.

An excellent Drink against Stone, Gravel, and other Obstructions.
Take Scurvy Grass Leaves, Seeds of Daucus, some Horse-Radishes cropped, put them
in an earthen Vessel, and then add as much Whitewine as will cover he Herbs,
Seeds and Roots; let them stand five days and nights, then pour it off, and
keep it in Glass-Bottles; it will continue good four or five weeks: Take a
Sack-glass of this, and a like quantity of Water every morning, fast two hours,
and then drink at ^east a quart of our thin Water Gruel, either of the cold or
hot. The constant use of this, is not only a prevention and cure, but it moves
most sorts of Obstructions of the Stomach, begets Appetite, generates good
Blood, causing it to circulate freely.

How to Purge by Herbs and Foods.
When you are minded to purge your self with both ease and safety, and to
preserve your Health, then observe the following method, viz. In the Morning
drink a quart of our thin Water Gruel, either the cold or hot, eat a small
piece of Bread with it; at Dinner take Spinach, Lettice, Onions, Parsley and
Sage; wash them, and eat plentifully of them with your Food, be it what it
will; at Night drink a like quantity of Gruel, and eat some good Bread, as you
did in the Morning. This you must do for four or five, or six days together,
more or less, as you see occasion. The like method you are to observe, if you
would purge your self wi^ Carrots, Turnips and Parsnips, as you did wi^h H^bs,
with this variation, viz. drink your Gruel, and ea^ your Bread Mornings and
Nights, and at Dinner ^at only Carrots, Parsnips or Turnips, boiled only in
good Water, and eat them freely with no other thing, but a little Salt and
Bread, during these several days. You may purge your self to what degree you
please.

Another way to Purge by Foods and Drinks.
Drink in the Morning at several times, three pints or two quarts of thin
Water Gruel, at Dinner drink a pint or a quart, at Night drink a quart more,
and eat some Bread. This method will purge, or at least will keep your Body
open; let your Food at Dinner be what it will, the Body being kept open and
cool, does prevent and cure various Diseases in hot costive Constitutions.

To make the best Herb Diet-drink.
Supposing your Herbs well gathered, and dry, and kept in Bags; take what Herb
you think fit, put it in a Linen Bag, and steep it 7 or 8 hours in Beer, Ale
or Wine, or other Liquor, and then take it out, and it is done: Let not your
Wormwood be steeped above three or four hours; observe, that one sort of Herb
by it self, is much better than Compounds.

To prevent the SCURVY.
Eat not Meat and Drinks too strong for Nature, for Nature ought to be stronger
than the Food. Meat and Drink ought not to be eaten that are of a contrary
Quality to the Constitution. Have a care of eating to Fullness, or to Excess.

Take care that your Victuals be (in all respects) properly prepared; for some
will but half do it, others over-do it.

Advice to Flesh-eaters.
Let all sorts of Flesh and gross Food be boiled in plenty of Water, and over a
brisk Fire. Forbear eating too much Flesh. It is most unwholsom in July,
August, September, October. Forbear eating too much Fish. Remember you eat not
before the former Food be digested. Drink moderately; let your ordinary Drink
not be hard, stale, nor sour, nor too new. Let your Clothing be moderate. Let
your Houses be airy, your Beds hard, clean and sweet; use proper Exercise and
Labor in open airy places; take Walks often by River-sides, or on Plains and
Downs; observe the Rules of Chastity, avoid all compounded Foods; avoid carking
Cares, Hates, Revenge, Envy, Violence, Oppression, keep a good Conscience, for
that is a continual Feast. Hearken to the Voice of Wisdom, and the Dictates of
Reason and Nature, and that will bring thee to endless Felicity.

Notable Things; How to Cure all sorts of Wounds by Poultices only.
AN excellent Poultice, which cures scalded Limbs, Burns, Biles, Felons, Tumors
proceeding from Choler, Phlegm or Melancholy. It also cu^es all Contusions,
Inflammations or Bruises, either with or without a Wound; old Wounds, Ulcers,
or running Sores* Excellent also against the Gout, and Inflammation of the
Eyes; admirable against sore Breasts, and Bites of Dogs, or any other hurt of
what kind or nature soever. Which is thus:

Take two pints of Water, River, Rain or Spring; then take as much ground
Oatmeal as will make it thick, fit for a Poultice; add to it two ounces of good
Sugar, a handful of Dandalion cut small, then place it over the Fire in an open
and convenient Vessel, keep it stirring till it is boiling-hot, and then it is
made.

Another. Take about a quart of Water, then take as much Houshold-bread as will
make it thick, and three ounces of beaten Raisins of the Sun, and one ounce of
Sugar, and about half a pint of new Ale; stir all together, and make them
boiling-hot over a clear Fire, and it is done.

Another. Take one quart of Water, as much Bread as will make it thick, five
ounces of Raisins of the Sun, and one ounce of Coriander-seeds, beaten with a
Glass of Ale, made boiling-hot, and then it is prepared.

Another. Take one quart of Water and Bread, to make it as thick as a Poultice;
of Sugar two ounces, a Glass of Sack, or for want of that, other Wine, make it
boiling-hot. Apply these Medicines to the part afflicted, by spreading the
Poultice pretty thick on a Linen Cloth, that will cover the whole part,
somewhat warmer than Milk from the Cow: But let it not be so hot as is usual,
for Extremes prove generally prejudicial. Apply these Poultices every two hours
at least in the day, and three or four times in the night, if the Wound be
dangerous; otherwise, ten times in a day and a night will do. When you take the
Poultice off, put that away, and put a fresh one on every time, and keep, a
constant Repetition for 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10 or 11 days, if occasion be; but it
will cure most Distempers in less time, if you observe this method. But besure
wash your Sores 'twixt whiles, with Water and Sugar, and sometimes with Water
and fresh Butter beaten together, which will keep it clean and pliant.

A Rare Poultice against the HEADACHE.
Take a quart of Rain or River-water, an ounce of white Sugar, as much
Malt-flower new ground as will make it thick enough; add to it half a pint of
good Ale, making it boiling-hot, and stirring it all the time that it is made:
Spread this on a Linen Cloth pretty thick; apply it Milk-warm every hour.
Continue the Application as long as occasion serves.

An excellent Poultice against SPRAINS of all sorts.
Take clean Water two quarts, make it boil, then put green Sage in, as much as
the Water will cover; then boil it, then let it stand off the Fire half an
hour, then strain the Water off, and put to this Sage-Liquor, as much Bread as
will thicken it; then take double-refin'd Sugar three ounces, a quarter of a
pint of Claret, and Spirit of Wine, Sugar or Malt, five spoonfuls; stir them
well together, making them boiling-hot; besure stir it all the time. Spread
this on a Linen Cloth, apply it blood-warm every two hours, resting all the
time.

A Poultice, excellent to cure a sore BREAST.
Take a quart of River-water, then cut some Sorrel small, of Coriander-seed
beaten to powder half an ounce, of good brown Sugar 2 ounces, and as much Bread
as will make it into a Poultice, make it boiling-hot, stirring it all the time
that it is made: Apply this every 2 hours blood-warm; do it 3 or 4 days as you
have occasion. Be sure, every time you apply this Poultice, to wash your Breast
with Water and fresh Butter beaten together. This is an excellent thing.

A Poultice to cure a SPRAIN.
Take 2 quarts of fair Water, and of good-strong Beer a quart, refined Sugar
four ounces; boil it up, then add to it fresh-gather'd Thyme as much as the
Liquor will cover, then boil it up again, then strain it from the Herbs, and
put of brown Bread as much as will thicken it; stir this over the Fire till
boilinghot, and it is done. Put to this 3 ounces of Spirit of Wine, stirring all
well together: Apply this spread thick on a Linen Cloth every 3 hours
blood-warm.

Another. When you have strained any part, presently put it into cold Water,
wherein some Wood and Ashes are put. Do this about an hour, and it gives Ease.

To cure GAULS, or SKIN rubbed off.
Wash your Sore every hour for a day or two, with Spirit of Wine and Vinegar
mixed well together, laying on a Diaculum Plaster. This cures in a small time.

Against a STAB or CUT, or any other WOUND.
Take double-refin'd Sugar and Spirit of Wine mixed with it, and with this Wash
or Syringe your Wound well, then put a small quantity of refined Sugar powdered
into your Wound, and immediately sow it up with Silk and a fine Needle. This
will do wonders.

To cure old ULCERS.
Take of the best double Spirit of Wine one pint, beaten Aloes half an ounce,
double-refin'd Sugar 3 ounces, Myrrh half an ounce, mix them well together. Use
it thus: First wash your Ulcer with very clean Rainwater, dropping some of the
forementioned Spirits into your Ulcer. Then apply this Poultice following:
Rainwater a quart, Balm, two ounces of good Sugar, Parsley and Mint cut small,
of each a like quantity; as much Bread as will make it of a fit consistency for
a Poultice; make it boiling-hot, stirring it all the time; then put a Glass of
good Beer or Ale, Syder or Wine, into it. Lay this Poultice on every three
hours, always washing it with the Rainwater and Spirits.

A new Way for the right Ordering of Cattle.
A Horse is an excellent and useful Creature, but through ill Management, often
abused; to prevent which, the Drivers ought to observe, First, That in the
Morning, they drive them moderately. Secondly, When they have done Labor, rub
them well down, then tie them to the Rack for an hour or two, during which time
give them no Meat, but between whiles keep them rubbing, till their tired
Spirits be refreshed, then give them a moderate quantity of Meat and Drink.
Thirdly, Let the Stables be open to the Air, and keep them clean: Let not your
Horses in the Stable, especially your Saddle-horses, have constantly Hay in the
Rack, nor Provender in your Manger, but tie them from their Racks, five, six or
seven hours together; let not your Cattle have too much Meat at a time, but
such a quantity as they may eat up clean: When your Horse has been hard Rid, or
Worked much, you may conveniently give him a little Water about two hours
before you give him Meat. Rubbing down Horses is better than walking them, when
hot. Those that give their other Cattle Grains, as the People about London do,
let them put a little Salt into them, which prevents the Rot, and watery and
windy Diseases. Let your Mares with Foal, and their Colts, run in the Fields
for a Year. Observe but these Rules, and your Horses will seldom want Drenching
or Bleeding; but if you find they prove too fast, the best way to cool their
Blood, and keep them from Diseases, is to give them moderate Labor, and alter
the quality of their Food.

The best Food for Horses, is good Rick-Hay, that is about three quarters of a
year old, which is much better than Hay out of the Barn. And Corn in the Straw
is much better than that that is only thresht, or that that is both thresht and
cleansed from its Chaff. And Beans, Fitches, Pease, Barley, and Oats in the
Straw, is not only the most hearty Food, but cleanses the Stomach from all
Superfluities; but threshed Corn of any sort, is good Food for working Horses
that go to Grass, especially in Winter, giving it them Morning and Night. Put
your Stable-horses to Grass from May to July, which will cleanse their Bodies,
and cure their Feet and Legs of Diseases contracted by standing in the Stable
all Winter: Rain, River, and Spring Water, are best for Horses and other
Cattle, much better than Pond-water.

As for Sheep, any disorder wounds their Health, if they are driven too hard,
or coursed with a Dog, or the like, if they be suffered to lie down whilst hot,
and this be done often, they will break out with the Scab or Mange; when about
Michaelmas you put them into fresh Pastures, if they are close folded it will
do the same: If in hot Weather they be often removed from place to place, it
will hinder them from Thriving, and make them Scabby, much wet likewise makes
them Rot. In the Morning betimes drive your Sheep into fallow Fields, or Downs,
where Grass is scarce, and take notice of the Situation of the Field; then walk
your Sheep gently on the driest and highest parts; if there be Cornfieldsd, let
them feed about two or three hours by the Hedges. About 11 a-Clock, turn them
from the edges of the Cornfields or Pasturage, into the lowest Clay-ground or
Valleys you have, and let them lie at ease, and as scattering as you can: Use
them at all times tenderly, and less Food will serve; observ^ this method from
May till August, if the Weather continue warm, and it will prevent Scab and
Mange, when they come into fresh Pasture. In May or June, I think is the best
time for Shearing. If the Summer proves wet about June or July, let your Sheep
continue in the Fold till eight in the Morning, if the Morning be moist; and
again, let them be folded before the Dew falls: Observe these Rules, and you
will prevent many Diseases, as Choler, Phlegm, Stoppages, Red-water, Coughs,
Pains in the Joints, Lameness, and the like: You ought to be most careful of
Sheep from Midsummer till Michaelmas. Therefore keep your Sheep till 9 a-Clock,
or till the Sun have dried up the moist Vapors and Humidity from the Earth,
and then let them out, and keep them on the high and dry Grounds; if the day
prove dry, feed them three Hours in lower Grounds, and about Evening put them
in higher places and besure Fold them before the Dew falls, and Fold them on
dry Ground; from July to September, Sheep are most subject to Rot, and is
occasioned chiefly by too much moisture at the Season, and not from licking up
Snails, etc. which I omit for Brevity.

If wet Weather happen about July, August or September, or when it is generally
a wet Summer, and continues till Michaelmas, a Rot is greatly to be feared. In
wet Weather, give your Sheep Hay at Night and Morning, or give them three times
a Week Oats, or other Grain, mixing a little Salt with it, and this will
prevent the Rot: Low wide Houses like Barns, open on all sides to house Sheep
in wet Weather, preserves them from Rot; this is a General Rule in Flanders.
Those that live, where the Rot is often, ought to change their Sheep for
Hill-Country Sheep, which will thrive, and prove less subject to this Disease.

Diverse other Notable Things.
How to harden LEATHER, that it shall last much longer than it does unprepared.
THis Secret is so necessary for the whole Land, that I shall discover it. Lay
such Leather as is well taw'd to soak in Water, wherein there has been store
of Filings of Iron a long time, or else in Water that has lain a long time
under a Grindstone, where Iron has from time to time fallen, and there settled.

To beautify SHOES, and keep them dry and beautiful, and to preserve them.
Take two ounces of Beeswax, a penny worth of Lamb-black, twelve or thirteen
drops of Neats Oil, or a little Grease; let them boil, and stir them well
together, then take it off, and when cold, make it into a Roll, and rub a
little of it upon a hard Brush, then heat your Brush, and rub your Shoes;
observe that your Shoes must be rubbed from Dirt clean, before you rub your Wax,
and likewise dry; and this will keep out wet, and set a Gloss, and preserve
your Shoes.

To make COALS last much longer than usual.
Take your smallest Sea-Coals, and mix them well with large pieces of Clay, as
big as large Balls, and lay them upon your Fire.

To save SOAP in washing Linen.
Infuse Spring or River-water, two or three days in open Vessels in the Air, a
quantity of Chalk, and it will save a great deal of Soap. It purges, being
drank by Urine, brings away Gravel, and slimy offensive Matter. Put Chalk into
stale Beer, and it immediately takes away the eagerness of it: Drink it with
Water, and it cures the Heart-burn; it is good to brew-withal.

Directions to Dress HATS.
Smear a little Soap upon the places of your Hat that is filthy, and then with
some hot Water, and a hard Brush, rub your Hat, then scrape it with the back of
a Knife, what filth sticks, and it will bring both Grease and Scap out.

Another. Some take the Grounds of Beer, and boil it, and with a Brush rub
their Hats, and so clean it.

To make Powder INK, or White Powder INK.
Take of Gum Sandrach two ounces, and beat it well to a Powder, then sift it
through a fine Sieve, take as much Calaminthus, which the Druggists sell, mix
them well, beaten to Powder, and a quarter of an ounce of this will turn a pint
of Water or Vinegar into good Ink presently.

To make COFFEE of Horse-Beans.
Take Horse-Beans and roast them, then grind them as you do Coffee-Berries, and
put a small quantity of Coffee to them, then take a little sweet Malt tied in a
Rag, and put into your Water, and boil it as you usually do Coffee; I am told,
it will answer the end for Color, Taste, and Virtue.

Another. Take 12 ounces of Horse-Beans unhusk't and roasted, 2 ounces of
Coffee, 2 ounces of Wheat parched or roasted, and powdered in your Liquor; you
may boil some sweet Malt tied in a Bag, and make your Coffee with that Liquor.
This I had from a Friend. I am told, that Pease does the same thing.

If you cast Salt into a Lamp of Oil, it makes the Oil last twice as long as it
will without it.

A pleasant, wholesome, and cheap Way to make Wine of Cherries, Gooseberries,
Apricocks and Plumbs. Take Gooseberries, Cherries and Plumbs, or any other such
like Fruit, bruise them, then put them into a Tub, such as is used to mash Malt
in, with a Tap in it, then put in it as much good Water as you think fit,
either to make it small or strong, let these infuse 11, 13, 17, or 20 hours,
then you must draw it; if you would keep it, put some bitter Herb or Seed 3 or
4 hours in it; for present use, Balm, or any good Herb; then to every Gallon
put two pound and a half, or three pound of Honey, Sugar or Treacle, the more
sweetning, the stronger it will be, then put some Yeast to it, and let it work.

Grease the edge of new Shoes, or new-soled Shoes, then with a hot Iron seer
them well on the edge, and round the heel, it preserves your Shoes from
spunginess, and makes them last much longer.

How a Man may Advance his Corn 5 d. or 7 d. in a Bushel; and that is by
cutting down his Corn before it be over-ripe, for if it is over-ripe, the Straw
becomes so brittle, that it hardly supports the Ears, by that means it sheds
more than was sowed, but especially Barley; it likewise makes the Bread eat
husky, therefore take care it stand not too long, nor you cut it over-soon, but
observe a Medium.

How to Brew Ale.
Take your Water as hot as you can, without boiling, then put it into the
Mash-tub, or other Vessel, let it stand a small time before your Malt be put
into it; for if you put your Malt into the Water hot, it will make the Wort of
a red color; but the cooler the Water is, the paler will your Wort look. You
may put into the Ale a small quantity of Hops, but they must not be boiled; but
you may do thus, fill your Vessel or Copper that you use with your Wort, make
it boiling-hot, then what quantity of Hops you will you may take, infuse them
nigh half an hour, when that is done strain them out, not letting it boil at
all, then you have all the virtues of Hops that are necessary for the Body; you
must likewise let your Ale be thoroughly wrought or fermented, that it may be
well cleansed from its Yeasty substance, for if not, it quickly grows sour;
likewise you must take care that you don't set it working whilst too hot, for
that weakens the original heat, and if your Ale work too furiously, it will not
keep, but turn sour sooner than the other that is set a working in such a
degree of heat; neither let your Wort be set a working too cold, for that makes
the spirituous quality become dead or flat. You may Brew as wholesome Ale, or
wholsomer, and not boil it at all; try before you judge, and speak as you find.
Read an excellent Book, called, The Way to Health, Long-Life and Happiness,
page 154, 155, 156, 157, etc.

To take Ink out of Paper.
Take Aquafortis, and dip a little of it upon the blot or writing you would
take out, and immediately it will disappear; then take a little Water steeped
in Alom, and wash it over with it, and when dry, it will make it look as clear
and white as at first; otherwise the Aquafortis alone will make a yellow Stain.

How to cure Chilblains. Take some Beef Brine, and heat it as hot as you can
endure it, and rub your Feet with it, holding them to the Fire: This do Morning
and Night, or wash your Feet in your own Water Morning and Night.

Chops. Anoint with Capon and Goose-Grease.

Dimness of the Eyes, or sore. Wash your Eyelids with your own warm Urine
Morning and Night.

Teeth Hollow. Stop them with burnt Alom and Beeswax, mixed.

Canker in the Mouth. Mix Alom, Honey and Vinegar together, and wash your Mouth
often with it.

For the Scurvy or Dropsy. Drink your own Water Morning and Evening.

Of Water. The first sort in goodness, either to drink, or dress Meat, or Wash
withal, or for other uses, is R^in-water; the best Season to receive it, is
March, April, May, June and July, put it into Glass-Bottles, and in Airy
places, and let it stand unstopped, that the Air may have a free influence. The
next in goodness is River-water, whose original is Fountain or Spring Water,
and is generally better in the River, than at the Fountainhead. Thames Water
is an excellent Water too. The next is Spring or Fountain Water, and the best
is that that proceeds from a Chalky Earth. Pump or Well-waters are of a cold
hungry nature generally, and not so good as the others. Pond or Standing-waters
are worst of all Waters, for either Man or Beast. Pump or Well-water, so much
used of late, whose Purgative qualities proceed from Coldness and Weight, and
the not being accustomed to Drink Water, I look upon them to be dangerous,
especially when drank in such great quantities. The first Finders and Drinkers
did use them more temperately and regularly, which by degrees most have
degenerated from all sober Methods, into the highest degrees of all kind of
Debauchery.

For the Gout. ^ake a quart of Rainwater, half a pint of Ale, a little M^nt,
Parsley and Balm, of each a like quantity cut small, and as much good Bread as
will thicken it, add to this two ounces of white Sugar, mix them well together,
then just boil it up, stirring it all the while well together, and it is done;
spread this pretty thick on a Linen Cloth, and apply it every two or three
hours, as warm as Milk from the Cow: This do three or four days.

In several Shires they put a cold Iron-bar upon Barrels which preserves Beer
from souring by Thunder.

To hinder the Nightmare from Riding Horses. Take a Flint and make a hole in
it, and put a String through it, and hang it by the Manger, or about the Beast's
Neck, and it will prevent the Nightmare.

It Is said, That a Horse being Bewitched, they filled a Bottle with the Horses
Urine, stopped it well with a Cork, and bound it fast in, and then Buried it
under Ground, and the party fell ill that was suspected to be the Witch, and
could not make Water, of which she died.

To cure an Ague. Write these following Words in Parchment, it must be writ
triangularly, and wear it about your Neck; it is said one Cured above 100 with
it.

Abracadabra Abracadabr Abracadab Abracada Abracad Abraca Abrac Abra Abr Ab A
To cure the Biting of a Mad Dog. Write in a piece of paper these words, Rebus,
Rubus, Epitepscum; give it to the Party or Beast bitten, to eat, in Bread. This
never fails.

To make the best Spirit of Scurvy Grass.
Take Scurvy Grass Leaves, and some Horseradish Roots scrap't small, put them
into an earthen Vessel or Glass, then put as much strong double Spirit of Wine
as will cover it, then stop the Vessel close, and let it stand 3 days and 3
nights; then you must pour it off into Bottles; when it is settled, you may
pour it off into other Glass-bottles, and then it is fit for to use. You may
take of the Spirit in a Morning, from 60 to 70, 80, or 90 drops in Beer, Ale,
Wine or Water, fasting two hours after it, then eat some Water Gruel with Bread.

How to make this Plain Spirit into a Purging Spirit.
You must take a quart of the Plain Spirit, and put to it Rosin of Scammony one
ounce, and of Rosin of Jallop half an ounce, both beaten to powder, then let it
stand 6 days, and it is done.

Take 50, 60, 70, or 80 drops of this in Ale, Beer, or Wine; then drink a great
quantity of Water Gruel after it, and stay within. It will purge you very well.

Wormwood smoakt in Pipes, if it is well dried in the Sun and put into
Paper-bags for use, is much better than Tobacco, for any Diseases.

To make Wormwood supply the place of Hops, to all Intents and Purposes, and
please the Drinker's Palate.
Let your Wormwood be well dried in the Sun, then take as much of it as you
please, and put it into your hot Water in your Mash-tub, (put a quantity in, as
you have occasion to keep your Drink a longer or shorter time) then presently
put your Malt in, and stir it together as usual; when it has stood the common
time, draw it off, then take the Wormwood out, and add fresh to your Liquor
that you put up the second time, do so again when you put up the third Liquor,
if you mash more than twice; this is much better than Hop'd-drink, and will
keep five year good; the same we shall observe in any other Herbs. If t^is
makes the Grains unfit for Cattle, by reason of bitterness, get a thin
Canvas-bag, and put your Wormwood into it, and when your Drink is working in
the Tun, hang this Bag in your Working-drink 3 hours; then take it out, and
it is done. This Drink refines the Blood, strengthens the Stomach, and purges by
Urine; and moderately drank, is good for the Head and Eyes.

Take a peck of Meal, and divide it into two parts, and in the one part put a
pennyworth of Turnips boiled, and work it and knead it by it self; the 2d
parcel being baked, that Meal that had the Turnips in it proved the better
Bread by far, and whiter, and more toothsom, and it is the Opinion of Physicians
it is very healthful; besides, it cuts better, and will continue moist as long
again: The parcel of Bread that had the Turnips in it, was 5 pounds in weight
more than the other; this must needs be of great Advantage to the Public; when
Cattle, Swine, and Poultry may be fed with little Charge. Hackney Turnips are
the best for Bread, a Paste may be made with Turnips to continue long, which
all sorts of Poultry would like well of, and excellent Horse-bread may be made
of it: All sorts of Cattle and Poultry will take it sufficient without farther
trouble; the Paste is excellent Food for Rabbits. With Turnip-tops and
Rape-cakes, or Linseed-cakes and Grains, you may make Potage and wholesome Food
for your Cows, which being warm, they will eat greedily, and give Milk in
abundance. Holland Merchants have bought up our Rapeseed after the Oil was
pressed out, and made it into great Cakes, which is a great Commodity in Holland.
The Roots and Leaves made clean and stamped together, then boiled in Water and
given to Cows, make them give much Milk, and grow fat, if all the year you keep
them up.

Turnips, with small addition, makes very good Cider, and an excellent Oil has
been made thereof, Probat. est. Boil Barley-chaff in Turnip-liquor, together
with the Turnips and the Leaves, which make it as fatning as any Food: You may
keep Rabbits with Turnip-bread all the year; the Roots and Leaves will feed
Sheep and Calves very fat. The like benefit, as with Turnips, may be made of
Potatoes; they make good Food, and very good Bread, Cakes, Paste and Pyes, and
are both Crust without, and Food within: The like benefit you may make of
Jerusalem Artichokes, for Poultry and Swine.

To make Clay burn as clear as any other Fire, and as useful.
Take of Sea-coal, or small Pit-coal, one third part, and mingle them together
as you do Mortar; make them up in Balls less than your Head, and lay them to
dry; then put them on the Fire one upon another, and observe the conclusion.
There is a sort of Loam, which is combustible of it self, and will, with a few
Charcoals added, burn very clear, and prove very useful. Probat. est.

To make very large Crops of Corn to Admiration.
Sow Bay Salt on the Corn-ground.

To prevent Blasting of Corn, under God,
(...) change the Seed; or by soaking it in the best Muck-water, or mixing Lime
and Water with it as before, and the Corn being steept seasonably, add to it
the Lime, or Ashes, or both, and being thereby fixed into them, and so sown,
has been an excellent Remedy.

To increase Corn.
Put into quick unslacked Limewater, as much as suffices to make it swim 4
inches above the Lime, and then pour it off; and unto 10 pound of the Water mix
one pound of Aquavitae, and in that Liquor steep Wheat or other Grain 24 hours,
which being dried in the Sun, or Air, steep it again in the same Liquor 24
hours more; then do the same a third time, afterward sow them at a great
distance the one from the other, about a foot 'twixt each Grain, and one Grain
will prove 30 or 40, or 50 Ears, and the Stalk will be as tall as any Man.

Take Pumpions and boil them, and use them as you do Turnips, and they will feed
Cattle, Swine, and Poultry: Cabbages and Coleworts will do the same.

To get Smut from Wheat.
Lay first a layer of Barly-chaff, then a layer of smutty Wheat, and then a
layer of Chaff again, then thrash it, and it will break very fair.

Choice OBSERVATIONS.
OF Perilous Days, and most dangerous in the Year, in which if any Person be
let Blood of Vein or Wound, they shall die within 21 days following; or
whosoever falls Sick on any of these days, shall die; or whosoever takes a
Journey, shall die e're he comes home again: Or whosoever Weddeth, shall soon
be parted, or live in Sorrow; and who begins any great Work, it shall not
come to a happy End; they are in.

January 7 Days. 4, 5, 10, 15, 17, 19, 27. February 3 Days. 8. 9, 17. March 3
Days. 15, 16, 21. April 2 Days. 15, 21. May 3 Days. 7, 15, 21. June 2 Days. 4,
7. July 2 Days. 15, 20. August 2 Days. 19, 20. September 2 Days. 6, 7. October 1
Day. 6. November. 2 Days 15, 19. December. 3 Days. 6, 7, 11.
Dog Days begin the 19 Day of July, and continue to the 28 th Day of August: In
which it is dangerous to all Sick to Purge, or let Blood; but if need be, let
it be before the midst of the Day.

To sow Wheat in less quantity, and more increase.
Take Wheat, and put it into Water and Salt a Day and a Night, then before you
sow it throw it into new slacked-Lime, then sow it as you do other Wheat, and
the increase, God willing, will be much more, and the less Seed may be sowed.

A good Rule for Blood-letting, and proved True.
Whosoever lets Blood upon the right Arm the 10th Day of March, and the 11th Day
of April in the left Arm, shall never lose his sight; and if you let Blood on
the right Arm or left the 4th or 5th, and so to the latter-end of May, shall
have no Fever that Year; but whosoever lets Blood on St. Lambert's Day, from
hence he shall not have the running Gout, nor Palsy; and who lets him Blood
in the same Month, and the 3d Day before the end of the same Month, he needs
not let himself Blood on the 11th Day of April, in the which Day to let himself
Blood on the left Arm, is good for the Palsy. Also these 3 Mondays, if any let
Blood of wound or vein, he shall die within 3 Days; and who is born in these 3
Days, he shall be encumbered through a strange Death, viz. the first Monday in
August, the Monday next the end of the same Month, and the last Monday of
December.

To make Flumery.
Take half a peck of white Bran, not overmuch boulted or sifted, let it soak
three or four days in two gallons of Water, strain out the Liquid part,
pressing it hard, boil it till consumed a third part, so that, when cool, i^s
like a Jelly, and will keep long; when you eat ^y of it, season it with Sugar,
Rose, or Orange-Flower-water; put a little Cream or Milk to it, and its
pleasant and wholesome nourishment.

To make Milk-potage.
Put two quarts of Water to four quarts of new Milk, and two handfuls of fine
Flower, let them sees gently, keeping it stirring to prevent burning too, and
this sweetened is very cooling and wholesome.

To make abundance of Cream.
Take a Skimming-dish full of the top of the Milk, add to it four Spoonfuls of
scraped Sugar, and a drop of good Runnet, then stir them together, that they
may thicken a little, then set it in a warm place, and a great deal of Cream
will rise in an hours time.

Silent Language, or to speak by Signs.
A for Arm, stretch it forth. B for Brow, Eye-brow, touching it with the
Forefinger of your right Hand. C for Chin, touching it with your Forefinger.
D for Dimple, thrusting your Forefinger against your Cheek. E for Ear,
touching it with the Forefinger. F for Forehead, touching it with the
Forefinger. G for Gullet or Throat, touching it with the Forefinger. H for
Hair. I for your Eye. K for Knockle. L for Lip. M for Mouth. N for Nose. O make
a Circle or O with the Forefinger of the right Hand, on the Palm of the left
Hand. P for Pap or Dug Q for quivering or shaking your Forefinger of the right
Hand. R for Rib. S for Shoulder. T for Tongue, putting it out of the Mouth. U
for Vein, pointing the Finger where you let Blood, in the middle of the Arm. W
for Wrist, grasping the left Wrist with your right Hand. X Cross your
fore-Fingers. Y two Fingers of the right Hand, cross the first of your left
Hand. Z three Fingers of the right Hand, cross the first of your left Hand.
The Use. Would you signify to your Friend privately, such a Man is a Sot, you
point or touch with your Forefinger, the top of your right Shoulder, that is
S, then make an O, or round Circle on the Palm of your left Hand, with the fore
Finger of your right Hand, then put forth your Tongue which is T; and thus you
may discover your Mind to any Friend by the help of the Alphabet: This must be
understood by you both, which may be learnt in half an hour or less, and all
other Bystanders ignorant of what you do.

Rules for Blood-letting.
January.
These days following are perilous to let Blood on, except the Sign be right
good for Blood letting; let not Blood on the 1. 2 5. 10 15. 19. 20. nor 25. A
Glass of Whitewine fasting, is wholesome and good to Drink.

February.
Bleed not on thy Wrist nor Arm if thou have need, the 4. 6. 8. 16. nor 18 day,
except the Sign be very good.

March.
Eat Raisins or Figs, or sweet Meats, and Drink and Eat hot Meats, and let
Blood on the right Arm, the 5. 12. or 17 day to prevent Fevers; but the 1. 15.
16. 19. nor 28 day, except the Sign be good.

April.
Bleed on the left Arm the 3. 11. or 15. it prevents the Headache, and loss of
Sight, Eat hot Meat, and fresh. Bleed not the 7. 8. 10. nor 20 day.

May.
Let Blood the 1. or 10 day, 27. or 28 day, it helps all Evil, but beware of
the 3. 6 and 25 day. Rise early and eat betimes, but eat neither Head nor Feet
this Month.

June.
If need be, Bleed the 28th day, but forbear the 7. 10. 15. 16. and 20 day;
drink cold Water fasting, and eat temperately.

July.
Keep from Venery, and Bleed not this Month, except thou have great need, but
beware of Bleeding the 13 and 15 day, it being dangerous.

August.
Bleed not the 1 day, nor the 20. 29. nor 30. the rest of the days; Bleed if
need require, forbear all manner of Worts, Meats, and Drink with Spices.

September.
Bleed not the 3. 4. 16. 21. nor 22. Bleed in the 17 or 18. for Frenzy,
Dropsy, Palsy, or Falling Evil, and it preserves thee that Year, ripe Fruit
not infected is good to eat.

October.
Bleed not, except great need, and beware of the 3. 6. 14. good Wine is
wholesome, if moderately drank.

November.
This Month all the Blood is gathered upon the Head Vein; therefore Bleed not
but for great need, Bath not, but vent a little of Grafing, for then the
Humors of the Body are over-quick to Bleed, but beware if thou must Bleed, of
the 5. 6. 15. 19. 28. and 29 day.

December.
Bleed not except great need, but beware of 5. 7. 16. 17. and 22 day. Bleed the
26 day, that is not hurtful. Sleep from the Fireside.

To Cure the Hickup immediately.
Drink a Glass of fair Water.

For the Heart-burn, scrape a little Chalk into some Water, and drink it.

To know what Years shall be plenteous.
Sunday.
That Year that January enters on Sunday, there will be abundance of Flesh,
great News shall be spoken of Kings and Bishops, and of great Princes, great
Wars and Robberies shall happen, and many young People will dye, the Winter
will be Cold and Moist, the Summer Hot and Rainy; abundance of Corn, Wine and
other Grain, Garden Fruit and Herbs, and but little Oil.

Monday.
If January enters on Monday, many Ships shall perish, diverse Sicknesses shall
reign, Changes of great Lords shall be made, many Women will dye in Childbed:
The Winter will be peaceable, and the Summer very temperate, and great Floods
shall happen.

Tuesday.
If January enters on Tuesday, Summer will be dry and hot that Garden-Herbs
cannot come forth, many Men shall dye of a Bloody Flux, all things but Corn
will be dear, no Thundering nor Lightning, nor Tempest. Wines will turn and
spoil. Winter shall be unsteady and changeable, great Frost will happen in the
Spring, which will hurt Rye, Vines and Flowers.

Wednesday.
If January enters on Wednesday, Summer will be a little Cloudy, great Sickness
will happen, many Thieves and Robbers, great War, Battle and Slaughter in the
middle of the Year, at the end of the Year diverse pestilent Botches and falling
Evils, the Winter will be temperate, at the end Snow and Frost, the Spring
shall be Rainy, great store of Hay, Corn, Grass and Fruit, and plenty of most
good Things.

Thursday.
If January enters on Thursday, Summer will be temperate, Harvest most part
Rainy, Wheat cheap, Plenty of all Grain, great War and Division, Taxes easy,
Women very bad, Winter will be dry and wholesome, and the Spring very Windy.

Friday.
If January enters on Friday, Summer will be unwholsom, Harvest dry, Corn dear,
Winter long, store of Hay, Grass and Garden-Herbs, great Sickness, Thundering,
Lightning and Tempest, Earthquakes heave thee up, many Beasts will dye.

Saturday.
If January enters on Saturday, Summer pretty temperate, Herbs and Flesh cheap,
old People dye, many Fevers and Agues, many Murders and Villainies shall
happen, Winter temperate, the Springtime Frost, which will hurt Trees and
Fruits.

The Signification of Thunder.
Thunder on Sunday shows that many Judges and Clerks, and diverse other People
will dye that Year. If on Monday it chance to Thunder, many Women and Children
will dye, and the Sun will suffer Eclipse. If on Tuesday it Thunder, there will
be great store of Grain. If on Wednesday it Thunder, Whores and Rogues shall
dye, and there may be great Bloodshed. If it Thunder on Thursday, Corn w^ll be
very cheap. If it Thunder on Friday, it betokens a great Man shall be slain,
and diverse Murders and other Evils. If it Thunder on Saturday, it signifies
there may be a great Plague, whereof many shall dye.

On St. Paul's Day.
If Saint Paul prove Fair and Clear.
It does betide a happy Year;
But if it chance to Snow or Rain,
Then will be dear all sorts of Grain:
And if the Wind be then aloft,
Then Wars shall vex this Realm full often;
And if the Clouds make Dark the Sky,
^
To settle your Estate with Prudence.
1. Make your Will in your Health. 2. Make a Christian Will. 3. Make a Prudent
Will. 4. Make a Just Will. 5. Make a Charitable Will.

1. He that neglects to make his Will in the time of his Health, but defers it
to a Sickbed, may possibly never make it at all, because Men are often
suddenly and unexpectedly snatched away out of this World.

2. By a Christian Will, I mean, you should compose or frame it so as to
declare your self a Christian.

3. By a Prudent Will, I mean, you should distribute your Estate, as Christian
Prudence will direct you, by observing the different disposition and Behavior
of your Children, your Friends, and Dependants.

Some are Brisk and Active in Business, will look to themselves and secure
their own, others are of a Quiet, Sedate and Easy Temper, and it may be of
weak and tender Understandings, who do not love trouble, or do not understand
it.

Some are Frugal and Thrifty, who will both keep and improve what you give
them, others are Wild and Extravagant, who will not be confined, nor live by
Rule and Measure.

Some perhaps have been Sober, Regular, Dutiful and Obedient, others Rude,
Insolent, and Disobedient and Affronting in their Behavior toward you.

Now consider with Christian Prudence, and duly examine the several
Circumstances of these Dependants, and distribute accordingly.

If your Relations are Vicious, make Provision for them in Trust, in such a
manner, and with such Circumstances, as may relieve their Necessities and not
their Lusts: But by no means do not cast them quite off, for that hardens them
in their Wickedness.

Those that are Quiet and Easy of Temper, encumber not with any thing that is
li^igious or perplexing. Those that have been Dutiful, should have a mark of
kindness set upon them, yet not so as to disinherit your Firstborn, or to
deprive him of his Birthright: Say not, your Estate is your own, and you will
do what you list, for you are but Stewards, and must give an account to
Almighty God, how you have distributed and bequeathed your Estate.

4. Make a Just Will, I mean, you must be fully satisfied, that you have a Just
Title to what you dispose of as your own: You must not rob Peter to pay Paul,
wrong one Person to favor another, which is too frequent.

But know, O Man! there is a Duty called Restitution, whereby all injurious
Persons are obliged to make a reconciling Acknowledgment, and also Reparation
and Satisfaction for the wrong they have done, as far as they are able; and let
me tell you, more is required to perfect our Repentance of Sins against our
Neighbor, than of Sins against God only. For Sins against God are pardoned by
Reformation and Amendment, and returning to our Duty by Sincere Obedience.

But Sins against our Neighbors, are not only against God, but also an injury
to Men; and though (upon Repentance) God will forgive so far as its against
him, yet he will not forgive the Affront and Injury against Men, till we have
sought reconciliation with those we have offended, and made restitution to
those we have wronged, by giving satisfaction for the damage done them. St.
Augustine says, if a Man restore not ill-gotten Goods, being able, his
Repentance is Counterfeit, and not Sincere.

5. Make a Charitable Will, that is to say, give such Gifts to the Poor, or
other Charitable use, as thy Christian Prudence will direct thee: But do what
thou can in thy Lifetime, for one Pound then given will yield thee more
comfort than a hundred on thy Death bed; for though it be a sign of Charity and
Good Will, on a Deathbed to give to the Poor, its believed by most People,
that it is only parted with because it can be kept no longer.

The Age of Man
Man by Course of Nature may Live Seventy two years, says the Shepherd in his
Calendar; his Reason is, so much time as a Man has to grow in Beauty, Length,
Breadth and Strength, so much time has he to wax Old and Feeble to his End:
But the Term to grow in Beauty, Height and Strength is Thirty six years, and
the Term to wax Old, Feeble and Weak, and turn to the Earthward is Thirty six,
in all Seventy two years, so long he ought to Live by Course of Nature; and
they that Die before, its commonly by Violence and Outrage done to their
Nature, and they that Live above, its by the good Government of themselves.
Shepard's Calendar.

Of Measures mentioned in Scripture.
A Cab is a Quart, an Omer is a Quart and a half, a Seath is a Gallon and a
half, an Epha is half a Bushel and a Pottle, an Homer or Cor is fourteen
Bushels and a Pottle, half an Homer is seven Bushels and a Quart, a Chemix a
Quart.

Liquid Measures.
A Log is half a Pint, a Hinn is three Quarts, a Bath is nine Gallons three
Quarts, a Pot or Sextary is a Pint and a half, a Firkin is four Gallons and a
half.

Measures.
A Cubit, a Foot and a half. An holy Cubit is a Yard. The Kings Cubit, a Foot
and nine Inches. A Sabbath Days Journey, six hundred Paces. l. s. d. A Shekel
of the Sanctuary half an Ounce, worth 00 02 06 A Shekel in weight a quarter of
an Ounce, worth 00 01 03 The Kings Shekel weighed three Drams, worth 00 01 10
The Kings Talent nine thousand Drams, worth 281 05 00 The Common Talent six
thousand Drams, worth 187 10 00 The Talent of the Temple 375 00 00 The Common
Shekel of Gold, worth 00 15 00 The Kings Shekel of Gold, worth 01 02 06 A
Shekel of Gold of the Temple. 01 10 00 A Common Talent of Gold. 2250 00 00 The
Kings Talent of Gold. 3375 00 00 A Talent of Gold of the Sanctuary 4500 00 00 A
Mina of Silver sixty Drams, worth 01 17 06 The Kings Mina 02 10 00 The Mina of
the Temple. 03 02 06 A Gerah. ^0 00 01 A Dram. 00 00 07 Two Mites. 00 00 00

A Mile is a thousand Paces.
Directions to cut a Shift out of two Else of Holland, as long and large as
most People shall do out of two Else and a Quarter.
If you will cut but one Shift Ell and half long, take two Else of Holland and
flit it through the middle; let it be Ell wide or Yard wide, according as the
bigness of your Body requires, and when split through the middle, instead of
taking one half breadth, and just the same length of the other half breadth for
the Body, cut an Ell and a quarter off one of the half breadths, and just the
same length off the other half breadth, which take for the Body of your Shift,
then take the Remainder of one of the half breadths and double it, then lay it
across and cut it for your Gores, then take the other Remainder of the breadth
and double it, and cut it in the middle, which makes just a pair of Sleeves,
then you want only for the Gussets, which will come out of the hollowing of the
Neck of your Shift; which rule you may observe in cutting out four or five
Shifts, for when you cut out two, take a Body off one of the half breadths, and
a Body off the other, and when you cut six, take three off one of the half
breadths and three off the other, and by that means you may cut them what
length in reason you please; whereas if you take your Bodies all off one piece,
you can make them but two Else long, and by this means you save a quarter of an
Ell in the cutting out of each Shift.

A Treatise of BEES, and their management, that they may redound to Profit and
Advantage.
Bees are not only delightly to behold, but very profitable if well managed, in
order to which I shall briefly give directions.

If you have no Stock of Bees, but must be obliged to purchase them, you must
be sure to carry them gently in a Sheet between two Persons on a Pole in the
Nightime, that they be not disturbed, nor their Combs disordered or put out
of frame; and the best time to remove them, is in April, not carrying them from
a pleasant to an unpleasant place, least through that dislike they leave you;
nor must you open them after you have placed them in your Garden, till you find
them at rest, which you may do by the Cessation of their noise and humming, and
be sure so to place them, that the Hives mouth may stand toward the
Rising-Sun; observing that the Air and Waters, as well as Herbs, Trees and
Flowers about them be very wholesome; for those they most delight in, are
Rosemary, Cassia, Thyme, Savory, Sage, Violets, Lavender, Balm, Marjoram, wild
Thyme, Saffron, Beanflowers, Mustard Seed, Flowers, Pinks, Melilot, Poppies,
Roses, etc. And those they dislike, which often makes them leave their Masters
and wander, are Wormwood, wild Cucumbers, Cornels, Elms, Spurge, Laurel,
Southernwood and all bitter Herbs and Trees, delighting most in Valleys near
pleasant purling Streams; and the best Honey is extracted from Thyme, the
second best from wild Thyme, and the third from Rosemary, though there is good
Honey where none of these grow.

In the beginning of April the Bees look out and begin to work, and if they
stand in a pleasant place, they will work so cheerfully, that they will afford
Honey three times in the Summer, viz. about the latter-end of May, the
latter-end of July, and the latter-end of August, if the Summer be temperate;
though if you would have them subsist well in Winter, to take their Honey in May
and July is sufficient.

If it happen that by reason of a young Brood, the Hive be overcharged, which
by their clustering about the mouth of it, and their great noise of humming,
you may plainly discern, prepare a new Hive in readiness rubbed with sweet
Herbs, and observe the coming forth of the young Bees for several days, from
eight of the Clock till twelve in the Morning, lest coming out on a sudden, and
taking the Wing, they bid you farewell; and if they delay to come forth, you may
with Galbanum and Rosin drive out the whole Stock; and if there happen to be
two Master Bees, they will divide and settle apart, and so you will have
opportunity to Hive them; and in Winter, if their Stock of Honey fail, you must
put in Honey, Sugar, Raisins, Figgs etc. gently with a slite Cane, and cover
them with warm Housings of Straw, and they will greatly increase to your Profit.

Lessius his Directions for a right Course of preserving Health.
Diverse have written on this Subject, but they charge Men with so many Rules,
so much Observation and Caution, about quantity and quality of Meats and
Drinks, about Sleep, Air, Exercise, Bloodletting, Purging, and the like, that
it makes it perfect Slavery to perform what they enjoin: And Men on the other
hand will please their own Mind, and eat of every thing they best like, to
their fill; so that neither Precepts nor Observations signify any thing at all
for matter of benefit. Hereupon they bid adieu to all Physicians or Counsel,
and leave all to Nature, eating perhaps two or three times a day, without
restraint in measure or quality of Foods, but as their Appetite leads them on,
so fall to business instantly; neither can they be persuaded to Purge at
fitting Seasons, or before Diseases oppose them, supposing all well when they
feel nothing to the contrary: Here upon their Bodies in time are filled with
ill Humors, which are increased by length of time, and become putrified and of
a malignant Temper, so that upon every light occasion of Heat or Cold, Wind or
Weather, extraordinary Labor, or any other Excess, they are inflamed, and
break out into mortal Sickness and Diseases. Many People beside my self have
found benefit by the Observations following, which consists in a Right ordering
the Diet, and in a ^ertain Moderation of our Meat and Drink; such a moderation
I mean, as brings Strength and Vigor both to Mind and Body. So that what is
here intended, will furnish Religious Persons with such a way and manner of
Living, that they may with ^ore Ease, Cheerfulness and Alacrity, apply
themselves to the Service of the Great God, for it is scarcely to be believed,
what Alacrity and inward Consolation they find that addict themselves to
Sobriety.

What is meant by a Sober Life, and what is a fit measure of Meat and Drink.
I call that a Sober Life or Diet, which sets bounds both to Meat and Drink, so
that a Man must not Eat nor Drink more than the Constitution of his Body
allows, with reference to the services of the Mind, and this I term an Orderly,
Regular and Temperate Life or Diet; this will also reach unto Care in ordering
all other things, such as immoderate Heat or Cold, overmuch Labor and the
like, through Excess whereof there grows any Inconveniency in Body, Health, or
disturbance in the Operation of the Mind.

Now this measure is different, according to the diversity of Constitutions and
Ages. For one kind of proportion belongs to Youth, another to Consistency, a
third to Old Age; the Whole and the Sick have also their several measures, as
also the Phlegmatic and the Choleric, because that in these Constitutions,
the Nature and Temper of the Stomach is very different: Now the measure of the
Food ought to be exactly proportioned, as near as may be, to the quality and
condition of the Stomach; and that measure is exactly proportioned, which the
Stomach has such power and mastery over, as it can perfectly concoct and
digest in the midst of any Employment that is of Body or Mind, which withal
suffices to the due nourishment of the Body. I say in the midst of any
Employment of Mind or Body, because that a greater measure is requisite to him
that is occupied in Bodily Labor, and continually exercising the Faculties of
the Body, than to him that is always in Studies, Meditation, and other like
Exercise of the Mind: For half so much commonly serve^ their turn, who are
employed in Study and Affai^ of the Mind, as they that apply themselves to
Bodily exercise, though equal Age and Temper might otherwise perhaps require an
equality in both their Dyets.

Now the difficulty lies in finding out this measure, the non-observance
whereof causes Catarrhs, Coughs, Headache, pains in the Stomach, Fever and the
like, which many People will hardly believe, but lay the fault on Wines, ill
Air, Watching, too much pains-taking and other like outward causes, but
questionless, they are in the wrong, for its a want of a due measure in Eating
and Drinking, that causes these before-named Distempers; and its impossible
that any one certain measure should be found proportionable to all sorts of
different Complexions and Stomachs, so that what is reasonable to a Young and
Strong Body, is twice too much for an Old or Infirm Person.

The Allowance then for all, is to keep within the bounds of Temperance, for
whatsoever exceeds this measure, is to be accounted Vice, be it on what
occasion it will, whether of Marriage, Feasting, or any thing else whatever;
now that is always Excess, which proves more in quantity than the Stomach can
perfectly digest without leaving Crudities behind.

Rules for finding out the Right Measure.
The first Rule is, If thou do usually take as much Food at Meals, as thou
art thereby made unfit for the Duties and Offices belonging to the Mind, such
as are Studies of Learning, Prayer, and the like; its evident thou do exceed
measure. So that whenever so much Food is taken, as proves of any Remarkable
offense or hinderance to the Operation of the Superior Faculty, to wit, of the
Senses, Imagination, the Understanding or Memory, then it is a sign the ^itting
measure is exceeded: For they who follow a sober Course of Life, are as ready
for all Services and Employments of the Mind after their Meats, as before.

The second Rule is, If after Meat and Drink thou find a certain kind of
Dullness, Heaviness, Sloathful weariness, whereas before thou wast quick and
lightsome, its a sign thou have exceeded the fitting measure, except it come to
pass by Sickness, or the relics of some former Disease. For Meat and Drink
ought to refresh the Body, and make it more Cheerful, and no ways to burden or
oppress it. They therefore that find their Constitution to be such, as they
feel oppression after Meals, ought to make abatement of their daily allowance,
having first used diligent Consideration, whether this Inconveniency arise from
the Abundance of their Meat and Drink, or both together; and when they have
found out where the Error lies, its by degrees to be amended, till the matter
be brought to that pass, that there be no more feeling of any such
Inconveniency. Therefore, if a Man desires to be always quick, apt and ready to
motion, and every other use of his Senses, these Humors are to be lessened by
abatement of Diet, so that the Spirits may have their free Passage through all
parts of the Body, and the Mind may find them always ready to every motion and
service of the Body.

The third Rule is, Do not pass immediately from a disordered kind of Life, to
a strict and precise course, but do it by little and little; abating from that
quantity we had been accustomed to, till at last we come to a just measure,
which does not at all oppress the Body, nor offend and hinder the Operations of
the Mind: This is the Opinion of all Physicians, that its dangerous to be
driven off forcibly from that which a Man has been long accustomed to; but we
must break off old usages by degrees, and not all at once, going backward step
by step, as we grow on toward them, so the alteration will be less difficult in
performance.

The fourth Rule is, That though there cannot be a just quantity set for all,
by reason of the great difference of Age, Strength, and other Dispositions in
Men, and also in respect to the great diversity in the Nature and quality of
several sorts of Food; yet I think for those that are stricken in Years, and
those of weak Cnstitutions, thirteen or fourteen ounces of Food a day should be
enough, accounting into this proportion, Bread, Flesh, Eggs, and all other
sorts of Victuals; and about as many ounces of Drink would suffice; this is to
be understood of those who use but little Exercise of Body, and are altogether
addicted to Study, and the like.

I could instance diverse that have observed this measure, that have lived to an
extreme old Age, that have passed their Lives only with Water, Bread, Pulse,
Herbs or Fruits, about sixteen ounces of Water, and sixteen ounces of Bread and
Herbs: How much more then, may seven ounces of Bread and seven ounces of other
choice Victuals suffice, which yields double the Nutriment, considering withal,
instead of Water which served their turn, we now drink Beer or Wine, which
yields much Nutriment.

And although I speak now of weak Persons, and those that are declining in Years,
yet I hold it probable that the aforesaid measure is large enough, for the most
part, even for those that are in Health, and Strong, in the Flower of their
Age; if they be such that give themselves to Study, and the like.

The fifth Rule is, That touching the quality of the Food, there is no great
care to be had: If so be a Man is of a healthful Constitution, and find that
the Meat he eats does not offend nor harm him, for most sorts of Meat agree
with healthful Constitutions: If so be right a quantity and measure be kept, so
that without question a Man may live long, and in Health on Bread only, with
Milk, Butter and Cheese, Beer or Water; especially if he has been accustomed
from a Child to them, but from all Foods thou find a prejudice; abstain,
though the relish and taste be never so well. Of this sort are most fat Meats,
which are to be used sparingly, and eaten with store of Bread; that the Damage
they bring may (in part) be avoided: And in a word, all Victuals that breed
Damage to the Constitution of the Body, or Impediment to the Functions of the
Mind, are to be avoided.

Of DREAMS.
1. By Dreams the Natural Temperament and Complexion, and the secret Diseases
of Persons, are as soon or sooner found out, than by any outward Signs.

2. By Dreams scarce any thing discovers the secret bent of our Minds and
Inclinations to Vice and Virtue, these Nocturnal Sallies discover Pride,
Covetousness, Sensuality, or the like, more free and undisguised than when we
are awake.

3. Dreams are the clearest Natural Arguments of the Immortality of the Soul,
as also one of the usual ways that God revealed himself by, of Old, to Holy
Men: Its also one promise, that under the Gospel Dispensation their Young Men
should see Visions, and their Old Men dream Dreams. Therefore, whosoever will
consider what is here written in short, may find some remarkable cause to
consider, that such a Treatise is not altogether useless.

Sometimes Dreams are the effects of the Planets Influences, and carry with
them the Resemblance of that Planet, from whence they proceed. As, 1. If the
Saturnine property carry the upper Dominion in Barthy Signs, then those Dreams
are Dull, Sad, Heavy, Frightful, and Filled with Fear and Sorrow. 2. If Mars,
or the Martial fierce Fire, have the chief Government; then Dreams are Fiery,
filled with Wrath, Passion, Fear and Trembling, Amazing and Affrighting,
causing the Person often to awake, as also his Limbs to tremble for Fear. 3. If
Jupiter, or the Jovial Nature predominate, then Dreams are more Mild, Grave and
Moderate. 4. If Venus rule the Complexion, Dreams are pleasant and delightful.
5. If Mercury rule, Dreams are mixed and ofttimes confused. 6. If Sol rule,
Dreams will be of great Light, Honor and Dignity and of Splendid Things. 7. If
the Moon predominates, Dreams are unconstant, mixed with Truth and Falsehood,
and confused.


FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books, sold at the Gold Ring in Little-Baittain.
THe Anglers sure Guide, Showing when and how to gather the best Materials for
Fishing. The most Proper Baits, and how to Order them, and your Tackle. 1. The
names of Fish, their Haunts, Spawning time, etc. The way to take them and,
Various ways of dressing them; to Store Fish, Ponds wherein the Angler is
Punishable by Law, Presidents and Licenses for Angling, etc. Adorned with
Copper Cuts, by R. H. Esquire 40 Years a Practitioner. price 2 s. 6 d.

2. The Complete Fisher, being a speedy way of taking all sorts of Fresh Fish,
with Baits Natural and Artificial, their Haunts, Seasons, and how to Angle for
them in all Weathers, at top or bottom, Night Baits, Oil and Ointments, to make
Oil of Asper, and many other Secrets in any bug, also to Fish in Hackney River,
by J. S. a Brother of the Angler the 3 d. Edition. price 6 d. 3. The way to get
Wealth, directing to make 23 sorts of English Wine equal to French, Cider equal
to Canary, to make Wine of all sorts of Herbs, to make 40 sorts of Ale in a
Minute, to remember all you Read or do, to make Corn produce a Treble Crop, A
book of Knowledge, for all Persons of all Countries Containing Accounts Cast
up. Rates of Carmen, Watermen and Coachmen, Receipts, and to Recover bad Debts,
to Preserve the Eyes, and diverse other Rarities. price 1 s. 6 d. 4. The way to
save Wealth, to Live for 2 d a Day, a Hundred Dishes of Meat, without either
Fish, Flesh or Fowl, Bread of Herbs and Roots to make, Cheap Liquor to Brew, to
feed Horse without Hay. Vermin to destroy, Silkworms to Order, Assices of
Bread, Cattle and Poultry to order, to make Cider, Perry, and Artificial Wines,
Land to Improve by Hops, Flax, Liquorish; Arithmetical Questions, Sports and
Pastime, the way to Live long, and diverse other Curiosities, etc. price 1 s. 6
d. 5. 1000 Notable things, directing to Read Write and Indite Letters, to speak
any Language in a short time, as fluent as a Native, Customs of London, modern
Curiosities, Monthly observations in Gardning, etc. Birds to Catch etc. The
Virtue of Dullidge-water, to take spots of Oly Pitch, etc. out of Linen
Woollen, etc. German Ball^ to make, to Live long, Dreams and M^es,
Signification, etc. Ink to make of all sorts, Sealing Wax and Wafers. Bees to
Preserve, Cov^ (...) ^url and Butlers Ale to make, short Writing, with above
with 900 other (...)

