Jerusalems Glory, OR, THE SAINTS SAFETY In Eying the Churches Security,
wherein is showed the Captives Redress:

Being an Invitation to all the different minded men in the World to become
one; with the advantage of Unity, and the danger of Variety from the Example of
the Saints and Servants of God, as well in former as these latter times.

Offered to the View of the 97 Builders employed in that Work, for the Building
of the True Temple, and all others.

By THOMAS WATSON, a lover of peace.

Romans 2.13, 14, 15. For not the Hearers of the Law are just before God, but the
Doers of the Law shall be justified, for when the Gentiles which have not a
Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law, these having not a Law, are
a Law unto themselves, which show the work of the Law written in their hearts,
their Conscience also bearing them witness, and their thoughts in the mean
while accusing, or else excusing one another. London, Printed by J. C. for the
Author. 1661.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Having presented these few following observations to your view, desiring
your serious meditation, and your moderate sensure on what I have here
inserted; and if I have offered nothing more to thy view then what was
manifestly known to thee before, yet do not disdain it, nor the day of small
things; but rather rejoice to see the same light break forth in me, as thou
have prised in thy self; and know that he that goes up to Heaven by Jacobs
Ladder, must not disdain the first step; but suppose that this my small
Treatise should meet with no acceptance within thy more solid fiction, but that
it may seem altogether oposite to those thy friendly guests, that have had
admittance granted to asociate themselves within thy more noble confines; yet
seeing I have tendered my mind to thee so freely, expecting rather to involve
thee in the circumference of my love, than any ways to render thee the object
of my envy; let it suffice thee, rather to pass by those things that may seem
opposite to thy understanding, with a dubious sensure, and not conclude rashly,
that all things that may scem difficult to thy apprehension, must enforcedly be
false; but rather imagine there may be wrong construction enforced upon my
endeared intention, as well as an ignorance in my writing; for many things may
possibly seem current to thee in thy own agitations, when it may be, if they
should but be brought to the Touchstone of Christ, and his Apostles, would
prove no better then held by custom and use from others, rather then from the
real grounds of the Scripture: even so it is very probable, that several
constructions will be concluded upon this my small Treatise; for he that does
appear in print to the open view of all men, must not think it harsh to receive
the retorting frowns of a disliking spirit in some things, wherein it may be he
may be void of offense, or at least of offending them. And as for my part, had
I not learned to have born such a burden, it had been in vain for me to have
taken a Pen in my hand, seeing I intend not my present to any particular
person, yet to every one, and amongst so many several imagined ways of
worship, I am necessitated to be looked at awry by some, and in case my
dislikers should take a Pen in hand with any other intent, it is very probable
they might be frustrated in their aim; and if I had looked for an applause
from men, I might have enjoyed more in silence then in manifesting my mind, and
laying my self openly to the view of my enemies, if any such there be; but let
all men conclude, if they expect any answer from me in that nature, they will
be far mistaken in their intentions for I have not so learned Christ, as to
make him my stalking horse, to carry my envy; but rather desire his assistance
as an aid, to admonish all men; for love has so much of the nature of truth,
that it will abolish all envy, and pride, and self-conceitednesse and fear, so
that I would have all men to understand that I account it below me to take
notice of any any ones praise, or dispraise in this thing, yet not below me to
manifest what I have received, and to contend for the truth, and not to bind my
Talent up in a Napkin, least I should neglect the doing of the will of my
Master, and so be called to an account for it: therefore I do not prise the
sensures of any, I having such a freedom in my intention as to my writing this
my weak and more real information.

And as for what any one is pleased to state me, either their friend or enemy,
I have this hope, that as I shall not be much moved by any various
manifestations in men, so likewise I shall endeavor to keep my self from
deserving any envy from any one, knowing that truth may have many Batteries,
yet the Fort will be resigned fully to it at the last; happy is he that is a
Soldier in this undeprivable conquest, great will be his reward above all the
endowments of this life, he need not press after the enslaving rudiments of
this life, to serve where he ought to be served, so as to Captivate that noble
grain of wheat, by any unseemly tares of man's inventions, but his delight is in
a more higher and bright luster far transcending any enjoyment in this life, or
of this fabricating, what though his time here in this his earthly Tabernacle
seem as it were a pilgrimage of distress to what others do enjoy, yet when he
looks homeward, he has more cause to rejoice then to mourn; for what
pleasure can any man assure himself of in any thing that is decayable, if he do
but cast his eye toward the Rock from whence he was hewn. Suppose thou should
be made heir of all the promising delights that the whole earth could afford;
yet if thou do not improve them to the advantage of thy Lord and Master, it
had been good for thee if thou had never known any thing of that nature, but
suppose thou should make a right use of them, yet can thou not assure thy
self of any continuance with them; for thou art not at thy own disposing, but
must give up thy power to him of whom thou rentest or borrowest thy time since
thy appearance in thy first State. O loose not the substance for a few fading
vanities, which are but as dry Husks, that can never satisfy any, though they
have never so many of them, it is the nature of them to breed desire, and not
to quench desire, nor to enrich your Treasury of content that is but a Pearl;
but that must be received from the Bridegroom, when he comes to welcome his
guests, and to adorn each of his friends with a Crown of glory and
immortality, and eternal life, which every one shall receive that has the
wedding garment on, when he shall appear in his glory, to show us the heavenly
mansions that he has prepared for us; therefore let us use all endeavors
possibly we can to nourish that more noble Seed, and let us beware we do not
stifle it in its womb, but rather seek to cherrish it by feeding upon
moderation, that so its Birth may be hastened, and its glory manifested, and
then thy pleasant pastures will be beautified with that incomparable Lilly,
even righteousness, that so it may produce the effectual crop of peace and
holiness, without which no man can see God, and let us not become only hearers
of the word, but doers of it also, knowing that the time past may suffice us to
walk as we have walked, in the vanity of our minds, therefore now let us seek
to lay aside all such superfluities of naughtiness that we may learn to receive
the grafted word in meekness, that is able to save our souls, and not to spend
our time in eying the seeming delights of this world, but rather manifest your
selves to be such as seek a Kingdom whose foundation is laid in truth and
righteousness, and to lay up our Treasure, where neither Moth nor Canker can
polute, nor thieves break thorough to steal away, that so we may aim at that
mark in which we may have just cause of joy in the end; for where our Treasure
is there will our hearts be also: so shall we approve our selves to be the
friends of God by doing the will of God, and then our beauty will become
perfect thorough his comeliness, and we shall receive an unction from the Holy
One, whereby we may come to know all things, yea, even the deep things of God;
and to persist from one degree of righteousness to another, and to treasure up
for our selves that hope that will purge out all uncleanness, and cause us to
walk more wisely, and to mourn over him whom we have pierced, that neither
grave nor death may have any more then what was assigned them from the
beginning, that so we may joyfully and conqueringly sing, O death where is thy
sting, O grave where is thy victory? This is the conquest that we have gained
if we Love God, we shall not want that spiritual food, because he loves us,
and hereby shall we know if we love him or not, for he that loves God keeps
his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous unto him. Thus
desiring each one that shall peruse this my vulgar yet more loving present, to
wholly uncloath themselves of all envy, least whereas they think to dart my
weak endeavors with any envions dart, they over-strein their hand in venting
it, and so make themselves altogather unfit for their more expedient war, by
seming to inflict any former grudge upon this my present Treatise; but I would
advise any one that has any thing against me, to let me suffer for that, in
that nature that they do suppose me to be guilty in, rather then to defame any
one thing here, that their conscience may tell them is truth, and let them
render me what they please, I hope I shall have love enough to banish all
thoughts of envy, that may seek to encroach into my delightful Treasury, from
whence this small Treatise did proceed. I know many may be retorting upon me
for the vulgarness of my Speech, but let them conclude, had I had as much
leisure to indite as they may have to peruse each word, I might have mended
some of those expressions that they may judge correctible, but let not any envy
my mean instructions, knowing that they might proceed from as effectual a
fountain of fervency as if they had had the gloss of more curious wits,
assuring themselves it is an easier thing to correct an error in another Book,
or to think they can, then to write a Book void of others sensuring the same by
them, if not proving it, thus let it suffice each of my superiors, that I have
not any ways hindered the building of the Temple intentionally, but rather
endeavouted to lend them my helping hand, to hew one small Stone fit for the
builders use, and if I find that my endeavors may any ways further or hasten
the work, I shall have great cause to rejoice, and it will be a great
encouragement for me to persevere in my intended work, and to continue, seeking
to pleasure you with one more effectually wrought; therefore let me entreat you
not to despise the workmanship of this, I knowing my self altogether unworthy
to be employed so far as to take these work in hand, yet if my willingness stir
up the Spirits of any in the persuance of this work, let them attribute the
honor of it to the chief owner of the work, by whom I was both employed and
instructed, and if any thing may prove advantageous to you in this my
invitation of love, repay it to my Instructor, and do not set up an Image in
your hearts to bestow any thing of obedience to it, but sacrifice your whole
heart to him from whom you receive your life, and being, that so we may press
forward toward the mark of the price of the free calling of God, by yielding
him all the pre-eminence of what he has wrought for us; and let us manifest
our selves to be his servants by planting the fruitful Vine of Love, that so
our Lords Vineyard may yield him its propper fruits in due season; and as he
has demonstrated himself to be a God, and a Father to us: so we may resign up
the strength of our minds, to serve him in his commands, and then we shall
receive the reward of good servants, which will be unto us of more value then
all the delightsome Husks of this life, which at the best are but transitory
and changeable, as in respect of our more durable riches. What though all the
unfrequent gusts of persecution may meet us in our progress, into the several
Revolutions in this world, whence possibly we may receive the loss of all
other seeming pleasures, by those that are contradictors of the truth, yet here
will be our comfort, that we have a treasure that no man can take from us; if
we keep close to the truth, no one can take away that treasure that is laid up
for all those that shall be found Conquerours, by the overcomming of the lusts
and pride of this world, in their exactness in the ways of truth, their
pleasure will be in desiring to be at their home and center, knowing that there
they shall take their repose, whereas before they are dissolved from their
earthly tabernacle, or house of this life, persecutions and afflictions are, or
ought to be as welcome guests as joy is expedient in that that is to come, and
herein is that ancient saying verefied, that the way to Heaven is through a
Hellish state of persecution; therefore in thy highest aspirings let this be
thy aim, that Gods pleasure may be thine, and take up thy Cross and follow
him, not valuing all the lets and impediments that may seek to hinder thee,
from returning to thy constant and abidable rest, by desiring thy beloved to
make have to involve thee in his arms, where thou may sing unanimously all
praise be to thee O God; And in the mean time desire thy beloved, to set thee
as a seal upon his heart, as a seal upon his arm; for love is strong as death,
and jealousy is cruel as the Grave: the Coals thereof are coals of fire, which
has a most vehemene flame. Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the
floods drown it: if a man would give all the substance of his house for love,
it would utterly be contemned, the 8. of Canticles or Solomon's Song, the 6, and
7. verses, This is the Jewel that when a man has found he sells all that he
has to purchase it, even the hidden Manna, that a man may eat, and satisfy
himself with all; which is food, only for those that have the white stone given
them, and a new name, written in it, that no man can read save he that
receives it; this is the new Commandment, and the old, even that which was
from the beginning, Love works no evil, neither renders evil for evil; but
contrariwise good and forgiveness to his Brother, yea, if he offend seventy and
seven times a day; this is perfect love that abhors slavery by casting out
fear, he that gets this pearl insureth to himself a safe hiding place,
where his Enemy cannot dert him by his rejoicing over him; for though he seem
to fall, yet he shall arise, and the Lord will be a light unto him; and Psalm
30.5. For his anger endures but a moment, in his favor is life: weeping may
endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

Farewell, T. W.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. line 19. read their for our. p. 17. l. 13. r. this Lawgiver for the
Lawgivers. p. 22. l. 2. r. may for nay. p. 27. l. 20. dele as. p. 29. last
line, r. need for more. p. 40. l. 5. r. end of a for end a. p. 58. l. 25. r. a
righteousness for for righteousness, and the true wheat for thy wheat. p. 59.
l. 8. r. hide for hid. p. 62. l. 12. r. and under for that under. p. 64. l. 2.
r. he had for had. p. 63. l. 2. r. aspiring for aspirations. p. 97. l. 26. r.
your Father for our Father. p. 94. l. 26. r. but contrariwise for contrariwise.
p. 70. l. 25. r. so say for say so.

JERUSALEMS Glory: OR, The SAINTS Safety in Eying the Churches Security.
PSALM 137.3, 4, 5, 6. For there they that carried us away Captive, required of
us a Song, and they that wasted us, required of us mirth, saying. Sing us one
of the Songs of Sion. How shall we sing the Lords Song in a strange Land? If I
forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not
remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not
Jerusalem above my chief joy.


THis Psalm in general, was a repeatal of the Children of Israel in remembrance
of their Captivity, as you my read in the first and second Verses, and has
relation to their weeping and being oppressed for the decays and wastings of
Sion, and also their sensiblenesse of their enemies Derision, both in deriding
them for their present sufferings, and for their former mentioning of Zion, and
that their deliverance should be by the hand of him, who had been manifestly
known to them in times past, by the name of the God of Zion. This text was
Isreal's repeatal, and it is, or may be any one man's or any peoples, that can by
experience condole these sad essects. I shall not stand to repeat a further
rehearsal or Catalogue of the general discourse of the Repeaters of this Psalm:
but I shall in particular insist upon the words before mentioned in my Text, in
which I shall only observe these Five particular heads.

1. The People demanding.

2. The People demanded of.

3. The thing demanded.

4. Their answer to the thing demanded.

5. And I astly, the answer of God to them in the thing Answered.

1. The People demanding were the Babilonians, or men of Babel; for so it is
plainly understood in the first clause of my text, for there they that carried
us away captive, If any one be so scrupulous as to know where it is detracted
from, let him but cast his eye to the first words of this Psalm, and he may
answer himself, it was by the rivers of Babylon, or the rivers in Babylon, for
there was it that these prisoners of hope were carried.

2. The people demanded of was the Jews, as is instanced in the 5 verse, If I
forget thee O Jerusalem.

3. The thing demanded is mirth, or one of the Songs of Zion, as is plainly
instanced in the last clause of the 3 ver. saying sing us one of the Songs of
Zion.

4. The peoples answer to the thing demanded, that is plainly understood by
these words, How shall we sing the Lords song in a strange Land? or rather as
some do read it, How can we sing the Lords song in a strange Land? judging it
an impossibility so to do.

5. The answer of God to the Jews in the thing answered; the thing answered
you have plainly in the 4 verse, How shall we sing the Lords song in a strange
Land? but do but mark the answer of God to these cast down and dejected Jews,
in the 5 and 6 verses, If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget
her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.

The Doctrine in general will be this, That Gods dearest and choicest people
may be left in such a straight, that they may not know how to sing the Lords
Song. I say, that those people whom God intends chiefly to make use of to
manifest himself to in love and kindness, and to set his name as a pillar in
the midst of, may be driven to such a straight, that it may seem impossible in
their apprehension to sing the Lords Song.

But before I proceed any further, let us consider these 4 particulars.

1. What this Song of Zion signifies, or rather what is here meant by the Lords
Song?

2. What it is that disinables or captivates a People from singing this song of
Zion?

3. In what Land or state this song of Zion may be said to be really
experimentally and truly sung in.

4. By what means a people may be said to be made capable, or learned in this
School to sing the Lords song?

1. What this song of Zion is, or what the Jews enemies might here mean by the
demands of Israel? Zion is the City that God does accept of for the improvement
of all those that are of the stock of Ahraham, and the Lineage of David, in that
state wherein it is witnessed that Abraham was Gods friend, and David a man
after Cods own heart, and therefore God gives this restimony of it, as he
witnesses, that he would and did delight himself in them, to wit, Abraham and
David, even so he witnesses that his dwelling is in Zion, and that He has
desired it for his habitation, Psalm 132.13. and as he has it Psalm 76.2. Zion
is the City of the living God, and Psalm 84. and 7. They go from strength to
strength, every one of them in Zion appears before God. And so the song of
Zion arises from the occasion of Gods dealing with his people in that
dispensation, that he shows and manifests himself to his people in.

But it is generally observed, that wheresoever there is any mention made of
Israel singing of Zions songs, there is mention made that the occasion of their
song has relation to some conquest or other that they had gained, either over
moral enemies as men, or spiritual lustful wickedness in their hearts, wherein
they had experienced Gods love in some way or other more then usual, but I
suppose the song that these Baby lonians did require of them, was only that
song sung unto God at the time of their deliverance from the Egyptians, and
other such like enemies: therefore I shall not speak of the former in this
place, but shall refer it till I come to open my text further, and shall
chiefly insist upon this part, because it is most suitable to this our purpose
in this particular; for that song that was demanded of Israel, was such a Hymn
wherein was mirth to be used, as their enemies did understand mirth, not that
they thought that the Israelites should ever again be delivered forth of that
servitude that they by conquest had subjected them under, as is plainly
instanced in Nehemiah 4. and the beginning of the Chapter, by Sanbalat and
Tobiah the Amonite, who stood and mocked them, saying, What will these feeble
Jews do? will they fortify themselves? will they sacrifice? will they make an
end in a day? will they revive the stones out of the heaps of rubbish, that
were burnt? Even that which they build, if a Fox go up, he shall break down
their stone wall; which words was spoken by the same enemies that Israel is
here in this Psalm making mention of, as you may read in the 2d Book of
Chronicles the 36 chapter the 5, 6, and 7, verses, and that these were the
people that were carried away captive in the time of Jeremiah, and is made
mention of in the 1. of Ezra, and the 1. that the word of the Lord by the
Prophet Jeremiah might be fulfilled. I say, these are the People of whom is
required a song.

Now let us search what song it is that Israel had used to sing to the God of
Zion, if we do but turn to the 15 of Exodus, we shall find what it is that
Israel makes their mirth, and what is the occasion of their mirth or singing.
The cause of their song was chiesly occasioned, by their being delivered from
the hand of Pharaoh, and the fury of the Egyptians, the song chiefly consists
of praises to their God, whom they owned to be their strength and their
salvation, and their deliverer, as is manifested quite through the whole song:
therefore I say the song of Zion that is here made mention of, is praises to
their God, for their deliverance from their open and manifest enemies, and in
Deuteronomy the 32. there we have Moses singing another song, of the same
nature as this, praising God for all his mercies in keeping and delivering his
people, saying, it was the Lord alone that had delivered them, and that they
had not in the least deserved it at his hands. Again we have Debora and Barak
singing a song of the same, in Judges the 5. in remembrance of what the Lord
had done for Israel, in making use of so mean an instrument as a woman to take
a King prisoner, It was God (say they) that went forth to fight the battle,
yea, the Stars fought in course against Sisera, yea they fought from Heaven.
Thus I say, the song of Israel, or the Hebrew song as some translate it, or the
song of Zion, as is here spoken of, and demanded of these Jews, is praises to
our God for their deliverance, and ascribing of him the honor; and now they
being taken and carried captive by their enemies, was deprived of singing this
song, by being deprived of the victory: and so the Egyptianish or Babylonian
deriders might justly laugh at them, and deride them by reason of their
restraint, saying, Sing us one of the songs of Zion or praises to your God, for
your deliverance from us, when God had given them into their hands as
prisoners. I will not say but there may be more gathered forth of these words
in a higher nature, but I suppose, I may safely avouch this to be the song that
was demanded, and so I shall pass it over at this time, I having not time to
enlarge my self so far as I could wish I had; or then I should open every
particular clause, so plainly as God has given me ability, but I shall
scarcely give a touch to each thing that I have intended.

Secondly, or the second things is this, What it is that disinables or
captivates a people so that they cannot sing this song? I shall be very brief
in this place, I shall only give you these 3 particulars, and so shall pass to
the third particular of my text.

The first and greatest debarment that a people can meet withal, that may
hinder a people from singing this song, is chiefly their sins; this I am sure
will hold with the opening the text, to the full scope of these words. I say
that sin is the first stumbling block that occasioneth a peoples unsufficiency
to sing this song of being delivered from the hand of their enemies as you have
it in the 1 of the Lamentations of the Prophet Jeremiah, and the 8 verse,
Jerusalem has grieviously sinned, therefore she is removed, all that honored
her despise her; yea this Prophet was the messenger sent oftentimes, to bid and
warn these people to teturn from their evil ways, as you may read at large in
his Prophecy, as in the 36 chapter and the 20 verse, and so to the end of the
chapter, is very plainly declared, that his love and zeal for Jerusalem, is not
a little manifested; for though the King did burn the Role that he had
presented, in defiance of his words, yet is he as willing to write another at
the command of the Lord, as ever he was to write the first, that if it had been
possible to have wrought any good upon them, he would not lack means to entreat
them to repent, but all was in vain, the people were altogether bent after
their own willfulness, even from the King that sat upon the Throne to the
Priest that sat in the Temple, as the Prophet lamenteth sorely in the 2. of
Lamentations 14. verse, thy Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for
thee, they have seen for thee false burdens, and causes of banishment. It
seemed a pleasing and melodious Vision, that these Prophets did see for Israel,
as indeed it is too to frequent with most, if not all people, if they once bend
their minds to any one vanity, to hear such Prophesies as will secure them, as
they think, from being in any guilt if they should practice and follow that
vanity: therefore it was the opinion of an ancient. Heathen, that if any man
did speak well of any of his practices, that he would ask him what it was that
he asked him for? for he supposed, that if any man did speak highly of him, it
was to deceive him, that he might gain honor or a reward by it: and therefore
he had a fervent affection for those that did most seem to envy him, saying, He
had none that instructed him more then his enemies, for be sure that if they
knew that he did offend, they would not hide it, but would reproach him for it,
whereby he came to know in part, how far he did offend in the thing, I wish
many Christians have not a worse rule then this.

Secondly, Gods sury is the second cause by which a People are made destitute
of singing this song; for as sin is the first motive cause: so Gods fury is the
effected cause of their unsufficiency, for when God is moved by sin to afflict
a people, and that he has waited a long time, it may be day after day, and
week after week, and year after year, and yet can see no hope of their return,
then his fury is moved, and it may be he will slay some of them with the sword,
and give others to the famine, that so he may revenge himself of them for their
high provocations, wherewith they have provoaked him to do it, so that they
shall know if his sword once be gone forth in fury, it will tot return void of
effecting the cause of its being moved: so that whilst God is a taking
vengeance upon a people, they cannot in any wise be said to be sensible of
singing this song; for the song is praises to God for deliverance, and no
people can sing this song, unless the Lord be reconciled to them as a friend
in love and peace.

Thirdly, Or the third thing that hinders a people from singing this song, is
the want of the Lords presence in times of trial; for though his love may be as
great to them in the time of trial as in peace, yet if it be not manifestly
known to them to be so, they are very much disinabled to sing this song, as it
is recorded of Job, in the 19 chapter of Job and the 6 verse, and so along, the
Lord has overthrown me (says Job) and has caught me in his net, I cry out of
wrong, but I am not heard, there is no judgment. He has set darkness in my
paths, I am destroyed on every side, I am gone and my hope has he removed like
a tree. And as Solomon instances elsewhere, Oppression makes a wise man mad:
so that I say, whosoever does not see the Face of the Lord to shine
victoriously in his sight, cannot experimentally and knowingly sing this song,
but is (as it were) a stranger to the real and punctual harmony that the
singers sing in, by whom this song is and must be sung by, but I shall speak
more fully to this in my following discourse.

The third particular is, In what Land or State this song may be experimentally
and really sung in? for this, first we must understand, it is only to be sung
in the Land of deliverance; and herein does it answer with a perfect coherence
to the text, as it is opened, for it is not the place that hinders them from
singing this song, but it is the want of Gods power to assist them in any
place, that makes the Land seem strange for a people to sing this song. Israel
could not account the wilderness a strange Land, by reason they could sing it
there, and though it was as strange a Land as Babylon, as in respect of their
acquaintance with the place, but as in respect of their participating of the
love and favor of God in the place, the Land of Babel was stranger to them
then the Wilderness, for in the wilderness they were delivered from their
enemies, and in Babel they were restrained from their liberty by their enemies,
so that they cannot say, but they were restrained from singing this song, so
long as they were confind to be prisoners; and therefore did they complain of
the decays of Zion, because Zion was the City of their deliverance, and that
being wasted, they were by that means made Heirs of a strange Land, by being
strangers to the song of Zion, for this song cannot be sung out of Zion, or the
Lords fortified City: and therefore says the Prophet Zachariah, in the 2 of
his Prophecy and the 12 verse, And the Lord sholl inherit Judah his portion in
the holy Land, and shall choose Jerusalem again; the Lord is pleased to call
Judah his portion, and he will inherit him in the holy Land. Now there is no
place that can be said to be unholy, as to what it was made at first, but by a
peoples pollutions in the Land, as you have it in the 102. Psalm, and the 19
verse, The Lord has looked down from the height of his Sanctuary, to hear the
groaning of the Prisoners, and to loose them that are appointed to death, well,
for what purpose did he loose these Prisoners; it follows in the next words to
declare the name of the Lord in Zion, and his praises in Jerusalem, and as you
have it in the 99 Psalm, and the 2 verse, the Lord is great in Zion, and he is
Hie above all people, that is as much as if the Prophet should have said the
Inhabitants of Zion have set the praise of the Lord High above all people, or
the praise of all people, yea even the Lord to Reign in their hearts, and so
you have it in the last verse of that 2 of Zechariah, be still or silent O all
flesh before the Lord, for he is raised forth of his holy Habitation; for when
the Lord is raised forth of his holy Habitation, it is to Conquer and subdue,
and silence all flesh, that he himself may be lifted up in Zion, in Judah, or
in Jerusalem, or in the Inhabitants of those places that are Jews indeed, and
in action, and not by being Jews, or Sons of Zion by name, or profession only,
for those are the true Jews, and Sons of Abraham, that build up the decays of
Judah, and do the works of Abraham, for as Paul said we desire to know no man
after the flesh, yea though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet
henceforth know we him so no more, and as you have it more plainly, Romans the
third, the 28, and 29. verses, he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, neither
is that Circumcision that is outward in the flesh, but he is a Jew that is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit, not in the
letter, whose praise is not of men, but of God, so as I said before, the people
that willingly and joyfully do seek to repair the breaches of Judah, are such
as must inherit the promises of God made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
shall surely be Inhabitants in this Land, where this song of Zion may be
really, and experimentally, and truly sung in; but I shall leave this
particular at this time, and shall desire every one that is desirous to be an
Inhabitant of this Land, to take notice of what his duty must be in Zion or in
Judah, to which I shall speak more fully when I come to show you the Laws and
the Ordinances that are in this Land.

And so I shall proceed to the fourth particular, by what means a people may
be said to be made capable or learned in this school to sing this song.

I shall endeavor through Gods assistance to make manifest unto your view
these two following Observations.

First, It chiefly concerns us to search who is the Lawgiver in Zion, or who
it is that instructs Jacob or Israel.

Secondly, What these Laws or Statutes are, that are taught or ought to be
taught in Israel, and how to be observed.

First, Let us consider, that God is made mention of in several places to be
the Instucter of Israel, as Psalm 78.5. He established a testimony in Jacob and
a Law in Israel, and in Isaiah the 48. and 17. verse, Thus says the Lord, thy
Redeemer, the holy One of Israel, I am the Lord thy God, which teaches thee to
profit, which leads the by the way that thou should go. And in the 51 of
Isaiah and the 4. verse, Hearken unto me O my people, and give ear unto me O my
Nation; for a Law shall proceed from me, and I will make judgment to rest for
a light to the people. If any one be not satisfied that it is spoken to Israel,
the foregoing words will certify him better, and as you have it in the 40 of
Isaiah and the 9 verse, O Zion and Jerusalem that brings good tidings, lift
up thy voice and be not afraid, and say unto the Citys of Judah, behold your
God. I might instance hundreds of places more to prove this truth to you, but I
suppose it to be needless; for wherever there is any mention made of the Author
of Isreal's Laws, and Statutes, God is made mention of in some one degree or
other to be the giver of them, if it be mentioned of Israel as Israel, or as I
have defined Israel in my forementioning of them, which is not Israel in name
or show, but in truth and verity, it may be some one or other will be
inquisitive to demand of me What God is? as I have oftentimes had objected
against me, but I shall speak very little to that in this place; but in case
any one be desirous to know farther, if I find him willing and desirous to be
satisfied, in this or any other particular that I shall make mention of, I
shall endeavor to satisfy him (if it be possible) at any time or in any place
convenient. First, God is said to be the Alpha and Omega, the first and the
last. Secondly, God is said to feed his flock and that he is their Shepherd;
and in other places to be God of fury to the wicked, it is one thing to look
upon him as he is in himself, and another to look upon him as he is in us, or
in his manifestations; but I shall deferr this discourse in this place,
supposing the unfoldng of it would be rather a stumbling block then any thing
of edification to many: therefore I shall advise every one whatever, to assure
himself that there is no iniquity in him, and that he is a hater of lies, and a
destroyer of all the devices of the wicked. Thus I shall proceed to the second
particular, What these Laws or Statutes are that are given to Israel in Zion,
or the Holy Land, as some read it, or Judah, or in Jerusalem, and how to be
observed.

First, let us consider that as the Lawgiver is holy, so are his Statutes and
Laws holy also, as you have it in the 119 Psalm. the 137 verse, Righteous art
thou O Lord, and upright are thy Judgments, thy testimonies that thou have
Commanded are Righteous and very Faithful, and as you have it in the 7 verse
of this Psalm, I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have
learned thy Righteous Judgments, so that you see plainly that the Statutes, and
Laws, and Commandments of the Lawgivers to these Inhabitants, is
Righteousness and Truth, and Equity, and Love, and Faithfulness; and as you
have a Righteous Lawgiver, and Righteous Laws, so you must observe to serve
him in Righteousness, if you intend to be a Subject in this Land, as you have
it in the 118 Psalm, and the 19, and 20. verses, Open to me the Gates of
Righteousness, and I will go into them and praise the Lord, this Gate of the
Lord, into which the Righteous shall enter; Thou must not stand to frame a
service to seek the bounty and gifts of men in it, but the Commands of God;
happy is that people that is brought to that uniformity, that it may be truly
said of them, that the Statutes of the Lord are duly observed in their land:
But before I proceed any further, let us consider what danger may ensue upon
those that are Inhabitants in this land, if in case they should obey and keep
the Statutes and Laws in this land.

First I say, That no man as man, but is very apt to deserve the being cast
forth from inhabiting in this land, but the Lawgiver is a God of Mercy as well
as Justice; but in case thou art as strict an Observer as may be, yet thou
can assure thy self of no constant content in all things; for whilst thou art
in this thy decayable and frail Building or House of this world, there will be
strivings and turmoilings in the several revolutions and changes; and whilst we
are striving to conquer them by our more high aspiring, the World, the Flesh
and the Devil will be striving to show us their present seeming delights,
thinking to intermingle out more serious and reasonable undertakings with those
things that have nothing but a show only of godliness in them, and nothing of
the power: This is the great warfare in which you must engage as a Combitant,
if you come into this land; for the flesh will be striving against the spirit,
and the spirit against the flesh, and those two are contrary: So that if you
will seek after any dutable riches, any treasure that the moth and rust will
not destroy, but it will abide all trials that are of this life, and will be
the purer each time that it is cast into the fire; I say, if you seek to deal
in such commodities, you must expect the frowns of these your enemies, nay,
your King will be trying you, how your Zeal is agreeable to your Profession.

But least you should think to escape this scourge or correcting hand of God, I
will endeavor to show you that it is good to bear it, and continue steadfast to
the end, though there be a twofold Affliction incident to the peculiar and
chiefly beloved of God, yet they shall receive a Diadem at the last, that will
cause them to acknowledge it was good for them they were Afflicted.

First, There is an Affliction that God suffers his Children to be exercised
withal, as in respect of their having to do or dealing with things of this life.

Secondly, There is an Affliction as in respect of our dejections in things
appertaining to our chiefest content, as when we are hindered of our commerse
with our God, and ly sighing and complaining as Job and several others of his
Servants have done, Job says, I look for him on the one side, but he is not
there, and behind me, but I cannot find him, no he hides himself. He would not
appear to answer Job in what Job did desire, neither would he plead with him
till his time was come, Job cried out of oppression, as you have it Job 23.3.
and 19.7. This is the burthensomest Affliction that may befall the Children of
God, yea, yea, it seems so burdensome sometimes, that they may be brought to
question, their condition to be worse than mere worldlings, that have no joy in
any thing else but what they grapple after in this life, as David plainly
instances, I said it fares better with the wicked than with the Righteous, but
when I went into thy Sanctuary, I found it was better to abide one day within
thy Courts than in the presence of wicked men for ever, Psalm. 7.73. How does
God see them, say the wicked, though we scourge them? Nay, David says,
therefore are his People brought thither, and water of a full Cup are wrung out
to them.

But let not any man mistake me herein, and think that I speak of Gods
withdrawing his affection from his People; but my meaning is only thus, that
God withdraws himself in love to us, even as the Apostle has it, Heb. 12.6.
Every son whom I love, do I rebuke and chasten; to keep our thoughts from vain
constructions, that all men are very prone unto, to have high thoughts of their
own strength, and their own ability, and their own righteousness, and
peradventure never dive into our own hearts to acknowledge to whom we are
obliged for it, but forget the fountain from whence it flows and springs to
us, as the Apostle Paul says of the Romans, They had a zeal to God, but not
according to knowledge, Romans 10. and the beginning of the Chapter, They being
ignoraut of Gods Righteousness, went about to establish a Righteousness of
their own, and did not submit to that Righteousness that was of God: Even so we
are apt to conclude with our selves we have this good qualification, or this
good blessing, or I am so Just or more Righteous in such a degree than such and
such are, when we do not consider if we are so, that it is Gods mercy to us
more than our deserving, but rejoice in our selves far above our Sphere, and
look not back to him that gave it us; for this take one Scripture more of the
same Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. verse, If ye have received it, why glory ye as though
ye had not received it? Let him that glories, glory in the Lord.

Be sure of this, That whosoever does receive any gift of grace, or any benefit
to his spiritual refreshment, or any enjoyment to his Souls happiness, or in
general any blessing from the Lord, and does not attribute all the praise, all
the glory, all the pre-eminence and honor to God that gave it him, it had been
better that that man or woman had never received it, for he does nor here in
forget God that gave it him, but robs him of that praise and honor that is
due to him also, or employeth that to his own praise, or the praise of some
other thing that is due to God alone; so that that which might through due
obedience and thanks to God have been a blessing, nay, herein become a curse to
him that employes it thus, for to whom much is given, much will be required;
and if that servant shall be accounted an evil servant, That laid up his talent
in a Napkin, and restored it safe to the owner again, without any loss, Mat.
25.24. What will he be accounted that robs his Master and devideth the
talent, and takes part of it himself for his own use, and yet has the face to
say, I have improved my talent better than such and such men, and does not
account? But it is well enough with him, and that he has not been behind with
the Lord in giving him what is his due, and if any man make any thing fit for
his use, he will look to have the pre-eminence of it to himself, and yet he
will not render the same to God.

O learn of the Beasts of the Field, and do not envy their service, unless ye
will act above pretense, The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters
Crib, but Israel has not known me, my People have not known their God, Isa. 1.
And as you have it in the eighth of the Prophecy of the Prophet Jeremiah, and
the 7. verse, yea, The Stork in the Heaven knows her appointed time, and the
Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming, but my
People know not the Judgments of the Lord: And I remember, the Prophet Ezekiel
being showed the transgressions of the People in his time, that the Lord showed
him some that did not let to work abominations in the Temple of the Lord, as
you have it Ez. 8.16. And he brought me into the inner Court of the Lords
House, and behold, at the door of the Temple between the Portch and the Altar
were about twenty men with their backs toward the Temple of the Lord, and
their faces toward the East, and they worshipped the Sun toward the East; By
the East, as some Translate it in this place, is meant these peoples looking
for the chiefest light to consist in the worshipping of the Sun: This is a sad
Omen of the stirring or awaking of Gods fury, when a people shall bend their
minds to idolize any imaginary conceit of their own devising, and bestow that
honor to it that is due to God; he will have thy whole heart if he has any
thing of thee, and that in the right worship too, and not in any way that we
think is most rare, because it is most harmonious in our sight; but in the
exact way of the foregoing Admonishers, even Christ and his Apostles, and the
Martyrs that were made to seal it with their blood, and not by praying to
Saints and Martyrs, but to observe and do the things that they did; I mean the
works that they did, and to praise God in the same way as they did, and in the
same thing; and let us seek to press forward toward the price of the high
Calling of God, and ascribe honor to whom honor is due.

I desire you my beloved Friends, yea, every one to whom this small Treatise
shall come to, seriously consider with your own hearts, how far you are behind
with the Lord in this Particular, by reason of our unthankfulness, that we have
secured our selves with, under the banner of forms and customary services, and
have not looked into the inside of things, to eat the kernel of the Nut as well
as gather the Husk and the Shell; as the Nut can in no wise grow without the
Shell and Husk, so no man can experience the taste of the Kernel by eating and
feeding of nothing but the Leaves and the Husk of the Nut; God looks as well
to thy heart as to thy tongue, therefore if thou prayest to God, look that thy
heart be joined to thy tongue, and that thy tongue speak no more but the real
Symptoms of thy heart, and that thy heart be chiefly bent upon the doing of
the Will of God, and not upon the beggarly rudiments of the world; for if
through practice or custom of others you frame any Prayer only, so learned as by
Book and not by heart, you might justly think your selves far short of the
receiving any benefit by them from God; I do not say but learning is very good,
take it in its place, for we can be no servants of God, but by utterance and
manifestation: But this is my end, that no man set a higher price of words than
they should do, but consider the word is chiesly to thy self in thy heart, and
therefore consider that thy heart be joined with thy tongue, especially in
Prayer and Praises to God; for if thy Prayer or Praises to God be builded upon
no more durable a Rock than formal or customary uses, it will be in danger of
being blown up by the incroaching gusts of covetousness and hopes of worldly
honor and preferments of men's applause, and these will get uppermost in thy
agitations, and so thou will cause the more noble and excellent Wheat corn to
be choked by the Tares and Thistles in thy more worthy Land or Vineyard; for
if thou have no deeper root in Religion than this, thou will soon be brought
and easily be won to leave this upon any small occasion; for if one must be
left, then farewell Prosession, for I must leave thee to embrace honor, and
riches, and pleasures, I and the good words of men, thou shall have the name so
long as my better Friends can have their free entertainment; but if one must be
left, then farewell Prayer, and farewell Praises, for I can Pray as well in
another Dispensation, but I shall get nothing but the ill will of men, and the
loss of honor and estate if I continue in this way, it was good and
honorable, but now it is base, I have have had the company of my Friends
wealth, and honor, and applause, but I must now follow them further, or else
they will leave me; O it is a sad thing when Religion, says God, is one thing
to day, and a contrary the next day, only for money and self ends: This is one
way of worshipping God, so called; but I fear it is no better than a worshipping
of thy self, and that in the worst sense too, for thou do but herein toil to
gather Coals and Faggots to consume thy self in the last day without the great
mercy of God, for this manner of serving God or rather thy self; it may be
performed in any Dispensation, or any sort of profession; but if thou take up
thy rest in any such like abess or Centerest thy self in any fabric of this
nature, know assuredly, God will blast it in the end, if it be builded upon no
surer a foundation than selfends and notional expressions; it may be God may
let thee alone for the time that thou have to spend in this world, but the end
will prove the bitterer; the wickedst of men may seem to have a rest, yea, a
pleasant one to their minds and desires it may be, but it is not lasting, it is
not abidable, as the Prophet has it, Esaias 48. the last verse, There is no
peace to the wicked, says my God; That is, no abiding nor continuing peace;
therefore value thy future peace beyond any present seeming content in this
life, for thou must give an exact account of all thy actions in the end; do but
mind what Solomon says of it, Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth,
and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways
of thine own heart, and in the sight of thine eyes, but know thou that for all
these things, God will bring thee into Judgment; therefore remove sorrow from
thy heart, and put away evil from thee: Therefore I say, look well, yea
narrowly to thy ways, lest whereas you think to build a Tabernacle fit to
entertain the Holy Ghost in your Professions, you deceive your selves, and
build an Altar to sacrifice to the Prince of datkness, in deceit to thy Souls
ruin, and eternal torment: But toshew you more plainly the description of the
Afflictions that Gods dearest and choicest Children are incident and liable to
in this life, I shall only give you as brief a definition as I can, only to
give you an introduction into the rest, it being my intention to speak more
fully to the duty of a Christian in this life, as well as in other things, how
to bear the afflicting and trying scourge of Gods lovely chastisements; but
before I proceed any further, give me leave to lay this down as a maxim
undeniable, that God never tries a Nation or a People generally with such
trials as to deliver them into the hands of their enemies, unless it be for
their sins; but these trials that I intend to enter further into, are such
which the Children of God are liable to in particular, when their Father does
withdraw his presence from them, as in respect of showing them what he has
done for them, although his love may be as great to them at that time as ever,
and these are many times in many things not only struke at, but overturned in
their expectation; not that I ever read, that God did ever hide himself to any
of them so far, but that ere long time was over, they found it was not in vain
to serve him, but that he did appear one way or other to them, to manifest
himself a loving and a tender God; as Solomon has it in the Canticles 5. and
the 6th verse, speaking of Gods withdrawing himself from the Church, for their
high thoughts of their own Righteousness, as you may read in the third verse, I
have put off my Coat, and how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how
shall I defile them? She thought her self secure enough, and clean enough, yea,
too clean to entertain her Beloved, though he told her, That his Head was
filled with dew, I but his Locks was filled with the drops of the night; So
that his Calls was too dark for her to understand, although his voice seemed to
be like the voice of her Beloved, yet she could not think by the drops of the
night that hung upon his Locks, but she was too clean to entertain him then;
but when Christ had put in his Hand by the hole of the door, then her Bowels
were moved for him, and presently her Hands drops with mirh; as soon as Christ
put his Hands into the holes of the door, she desired to have more Society with
him; but when she opened that door, she could not find him, for he had
withdrawn himself, and was gone from her view, and would not appear to her in
that door or manifestation, although she acknowledges that her Soul failed her
when he spoke; which is as much as if she should think that that Dispensation
was not so efficacious to her in which she thought her self so clean in, as
that in which Christ did desire admittance in, and therefore her Soul failed
her, or her confidence, and she sought him but could not find him, she called
for him but he gave her no answer; So that she seemed to be at a loss now,
whereas before she thought her self to be clean.

The Watchmen found her as they walked about the streets, and they smore her
and wounded her, and the Keepers of the Wall took away her vail from her: This
is the greatest trial that can any ways befall the Church of God, to want the
presence of God to answer them in their Afflictions; and indeed, it is no more
but the absence of God, or his not appearing to answer them in what they think
to find him in, that causes this Affliction to be so great; as this Church did
not perceive, that she had any need of such guest as Christ, seeing he did not
appear in that cleanness that she thought her self blessed in; but when she had
smelt of the pleasant odor that proceeded from him, then she falls to enquiry
after him, and charge the Daughters of Jerusalem to tell her Beloved if they
found him, that she was sick of love; When she had experienced the smell that
he left behind him, then she could not be satisfied without him, and she does
not go to expect him in Babylon, or to bear tidings of him in Egypt or Edom,
but of the Daughters of Jerusalem, and there it was that she found him
examining her what her Beloved was more than another beloved, as you have her
Demonstrating or Anatomizing of him from the 10th verse of that 5th Chapter of
Solomon's Song to the end; and when she has set him in as magnificent an
Applause as she could well manifest, then she comes to sum all up in one word,
He is altogether lovely; But before Christ appeared to manifest himself to this
Church to open their eyes, they were laid down to sleep securely, supposing
themselves Righteous enough, and clean enough, and pure enough in that which
she had received: Look well to your selves all you that profess your selves to
be Actors upon the stage of Religion, that you do not entertain this guest of
self-conceitedness, and so shut Christ out of doors; for this Church had not
long before as high a sight, and as sensible an understanding as any that ever
I read of in the Old Testament, as is instanced in the second Chapter of
Solomon's Song, and the seventh verse, I charge you O ye Daughters of Jerusalem,
by the Roes and Hinds of the Field, that ye stir not up nor awake my Love, till
he please; And yet now he is awaked, she will not open the door to him, nor
give him any entertainment, and all is occasioned by his Locks, being filled
with the drops of the night; but when he had shaken them off, then she comes to
find the same truth again to feed of, as is instanced in the eighth Chapter of
that Song of Solomon, and the fourth verse, if you do but mark the third verse,
you shall plainly find how she is enabled to let him take his repose, His left
hand should be under her head, and his right hand shall embrace her; These
words are mysteriously spoken, for the left hand of God is seldom made use of
to administer his embraces to the People or Church of God, unless it be such
embraces as he bestows upon them when his Locks are filled with the drops of
the night; for God does most gloriously unvail our minds with the strength of
his right hand, when he has laid his left hand under our head, and then he
shall not be awaked, till he please: Oh! it is one of the fullest sayings in
the whole Scriptures, it is as much as if they should have said; not my will,
but thy Will be done O God, and yet this Church not to know her Beloved: Now
this is a sad and sudden alteration, as I remember the Prophet Jeremiah has
something of this nature concerning the Daughters of Zion, Jeremiah the fourth
and the last, I have heard a voice as of a Woman in travel, and the anguish as
of her that brings forth her first born, the voice of the Daughter of Zion,
that spreads forth her hands and bewaileth her self, saying, Woe is me now,
because of Murderers.

Why what is the matter Zion? Why do thou cry out? What need is there for
thee to complain, thou that art the Spouse of Christ? Can the Husband forget
his Beloved Wife? No surely, he has promised great things for thee, look what
the Lord thy Redeemer has promised to do for thee, Esayah 33.5, 6. The Lord is
exalted, for he dwells on high, he has filled Zion with Judgment, and
Righteousness, and Wisdom and Knowledge shall be the stability of thy times,
and strength of Salvation, the fear of the Lord is his strength; and in the
20th verse, Not one of her stakes shall be removed, nor any of her cords
thereof be broken; and in the eighth of the next Chapter, For it is the day of
the Lords vengeance, and the year of Recompenses, for the controversy of Zion.

Oh Zion, Zion! what need is there for thee to fear, the Lord is exalted in
thee, yea he has accepted to dwell with thee, and to be lifted up in thee, he
has set the two Pillars of his Name in the midst of thee, yea what greater
Pillars is there to manifest his Name upon the earth, than Wisdom and
Knowledge, and then to give this Character of him, The Fear of the Lord is his
strength: Oh! what stronger Fortress can thou have Zion, than the fear of the
Lord, than the love of thy God? For thus it is here meant, for this is not a
slavish fear, nor a dreadful fear, nor a terrifying fear; no this is such a
fear that is here made mention of, that may well be compared to that that the
Apostle calls love, yea perfect love that casts out all such slavish fears;
and God promises further to be her security, No one shall ever move any of her
stakes, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken: And he will not only
be her safety to keep her secure, but he will take vengeance of her enemies
also, and plead her Controversy with those that rise up against her; surely,
any one would think that Zion might sleep securely, I but Zion is here
spreading forth her hands, crying, Woe is me now, my Soul is wearied, because
of Murderers; as if she should have said, my Comforter has left me, my Beloved
is gone, my joy is turned into bitterness, my melody into sadness, my mirth
into sighing and sobbing, yea as she plainly expresses, Esai. 49.14. The Lord
has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me: Yea, just now was this Prophet
a proclaiming her Deliverance, and the opening of her eyes, as you may read in
the following Verses, Though a Woman forget the Child that sucketh at her
Breasts, yet will not I forget thee; No, he then shows her, that He had engraven
her upon the palms of his hands, and ^id her behold it: So that as I said
before, the Church of God and the People whom he loves with an unmeasurable
and ever abiding love, may be at such a loss, that many times they may think
the Lord has withdrawn his affection clean from them; but I seldom find, but
God stays up their hearts so, as to trust in him, that their Deliverance must
be through him, though many times he tries their fidelity and zeal to him and
his Name, and at other times does afflict them for their backsliding and
careless walking, to bring them to a more clear understanding, that so they may
walk worthy of such a God, who has laid up so good things in store for them: I
might speak a great deal more to this manner of Gods dealing with his choicest
and peculiar people in this life, but I shall forbear to speak any more in this
particular, but shall refer what my intention is to speak further, till we come
to speak of them, I mean the Children of God, yea those that are dear unto him,
jointly in their duty.

There is a second Affliction incident to these beloved ones, but whereas you
have them conquered in the former as it were, you now have them Conquerours and
Champions, for now the Captain of their Salvation bids them go on and fear not,
so that now neither life, nor death, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come is able to separate them from the love of God,
which is in Christ Jesus: Now here you have the Shepherd leading forth his
Sheep into the pleasant pastures of content, and now they know his voice so
well, that they will not give ear to strangers, what though they be tempted
with all the strangers seeming delights, with his rich rewards according to
appearance, with all his promises of preferments, and all the enchantments that
he seems to present them withal, yet all these will not entice them from
those fruitful pastures, nothing can allure them from this contented meadow,
where they have the presence of their delightful Shepherd, giving them their
meat in due season, so that stolen waters do not seem sweet to them, nor bread
eaten in secret, pleasant to them; no, they know that the assotiates and
resorters thereunto shall have their portion with Unbelievers, in a place or
degree far remote from their rest, from their content, from their delight, For
their delight is in the Law of the Lord their God; and to manifest his praise
and his glory in working wonderfully amongst the sons of men, and to declare
unto others what God has done for them, and for the welfare of their Souls,
And all sorrow and sighing will flee away from them, neither the voice of
mourning shall any more be heard in the midst of them, for the Lord that is
their Redeemer is also their Husband, who bideth them awake and put on their
strength their beautiful garment, for the uncircumcised and unclean shall no
more come into thee, what though thou have drunk the Cup of the Lords fury in
times past, yet thou shall henceforth drink it no more, but it shall be taken
forth of thy hand, and given to them that spoiled thee, Esa. 52.1, 2. and the
last verse of the 51 Chapter So that now thou may arise from the dust and sit
still, for the Lord will redeem you from all your captivities that have been
the occasion of your distressedness, that have caused you in times past to howl
and weep, you shall be delivered from all your burdens that ye have unjustly
born, for the Lord has taken upon him to plead the Controversy of his People;
So that now they need not fear what befalls their bodies, for they have a
sufficient and satisfactory content, that it shall fare well with their Soul,
They fear not him that is able to kill the Body, and can do no more, but him
that is able to kill both Body and Soul, and to cast them into Hell: What
though the world rage against them, and their neighbors envy them, and their
kindred, and chiefest of their Relations here below do make a mocking and
scoffing at thee, is it any more than the Captain of your Salvation has
engaged you to by his sufferings? Know you not that if you will be his
Disciples, you must wear your Masters Livery? Yea, though it be dyed in as deep
a Crimson as his was on the Cross, Is it not sufficient that the servant is
made equal with his Master? I am sure, any earthly servant would account it a
great favor, that he should be admitted to have a garment made of the same
piece of cloth that his Master does wear himself, even so will all these that
have experienced the honor and reward that is laid up at the end of their
journey, which no man can prevent or hinder them of receiving.

Therefore I say, these are not at all amazed at these things, no they are no
more than the honorable garments that all the guests of the Bride-chamber must
put on, yea and that with much willingness too, if it be laid down for you, or
tendered unto you; for surely, there is no man but will rather choose a Diamond
than a Cornelian if he has experience of the worth of both in men's esteem,
even so will all those that have experienced the love of Christ Jesus, and the
content that is in his ways, and the reward that shall be received by owning
of him in Truth and Righteousness upon the face of the earth, in the presence
of all contemners of it, and all contrariers of it they will show themselves to
be Children of their Father, and servants of their Master, and Stewards that
will manifest their Master to be one that is not only able, but willing also
to give unto all those that will labor in his Vineyard of the abundance of the
pleasant fruit thereof, yea they will tell unto others what a loving and tender
God he has been to them, and what content they have had in obeying him, and
what safety there is in his paths, as Solomon has it Proverbs 37.7. All his
ways are pleasantness, and all his paths are peace: Yea surely, the way of the
Lord is great pleasure to them that know the plainness, and the evenness, and
exactness of it aright, to them it is a great pleasure to walk in this way; but
the slothful cries out, There is a Lion and a Bear in the way, and therefore
he will not venture, he will lie down and take his ease, and fold his eyes a
little more in sleep, or in his dark and obscure rest, I he will rather put
things to the hazard, as men had use to say, then he will encounter with this
Lion that will meet him and bereave him of all his lustful desires, and of all
his worldly pleasures, and of heaping together the unrighteous Mammon of this
world, by couzening and defrauding the simple, and by usurping the just
privileges of the poor, the innocent and the harmless; I but here is something
more yet, for here is a Bear also which he must meet, if he will take his
progress into this way, that he must encounter with, which at the best will
affright and scare him, if not tear him in pieces and devour him.

Whereas those that have been exercised to such a manner of walking in this
way, as to enjoy the pleasant Sunshine of Gods most glorious and unfathomable
love, they know after the dimest and darkest night, the morning will produce
light again, and dispel the darkness; so that though they see never so dark a
cloud of Gods fury in the way, yet this shall not be a Bear to them, no, they
know that the Sun will break through it, if it be so that they keep constant in
this way, and do not run astray from the punctual rules thereof; it is not a
Prison or a Dungeon that will fear them. nor any earthly power, that is
contrary to the truth, that will daunt them; no, they know that if the powers of
men do not stand, according to the truth of God, I say, their lives will not be
dear to them, not so dear but that they will rather part with their lives than
part with that portion of truth that they have received, so as to call light
darkness, and darkness light, to dishonor him whom they know is able to keep
them safe in their evillest and worst of days, look well to it I beseech you
every man and woman, and lay not any burden upon one another, by unjust and
unrighteous walking, for this is the end a Christian, that God shall have no
dishonor by his walking, for if you deny God in this particular, pray that he
may not deny you before the Angels in Heaven.

But before we proceed any further, let us consider what observation we ought
to take in the performance of these holy Laws; for as I have showed you in the
forementioned Laws, you must observe that as the Lawgiver is Holy, Just and
Good, so are his Laws Righteousness, and Peace, and Love, and Faith, and
Truth, and Patience, and Equity, and Justice, and Forgiveness, and whosoever
does not observe and fulfill these Laws, will lie liable of being cast forth of
this land, and from participating of the benevolence and fruition of this
Lawgiver.

Therefore let us walk wisely in our station, for this short time that we have
to abide in this our frail house or fabric of earth, that when we come to give
an account of all our actions, we may approach before his Throne with all
boldness, by laying fast hold upon him that is our Righteousness, Peace, and
Sanctification and Redemption; knowing nothing of evil by our selves, and yet
knowing nothing of Justification in our works or by our works, as proceeding
from them that is, there is no one that is an Inhabitant in this land of Zion,
but must observe and do the Will, of him that is the Lawgiver, and these are
the duties of the subjects in this land, the which when Israel did discern,
they had broken, and that it was only the decays of the Statutes and Laws of
Zion, that had been the occasion of their Imprisonment; the which now
considered, causes their grief, yea, and that in such a nature too, that they
could not keep it in, but it burst out.

Therefore that all Captives that are in captivity, in any respect as to their
inward freedom, may know which way to ease and release themselves, let them
observe and keep these following Invitations, that in case they have broken
these Laws, they may mourn for the decays thereof, and amend their ways by
walking more wisely, that so they may be delivered, for that is repentance to
amend your ways, therefore take my advise, and press forward.

First, let us consider what these Laws are, that so ye may know how to keep
them, the first and greatest Commandment is, to honor the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy Soul; and the second is, To love thy Neighbor
as thy self, on these two depend all the Laws instanced in the Law and the
Prophets, Mat. 22.37, 38, 39, 40. Not that they are differing, but hold all in
one, or both in one; for thou can not honor God more in any one thing than
by loving thy poor Neighbor, it is the poor God as I may so say, or rather the
sons of God, that has need of thy charity, and not he that is the Creator of
all things; for Christ says plainly, biding them to stand on his right hand,
for I was hungry and ye gave me meat, and a thirst and ye gave me drink, and
sick and in prison, and ye administered unto my necessities; verily verily I say
unto you, inasmuch as ye did it unto these little ones, ye did it unto me, Mat.
25.34, 35, 36, 40. verses: So that I say, if thou art minded to praise God on
the earth, or whilst thou live here, deal justly with all men, and as near as
possible thou can make that thy direction, to deal the same bread to others
that thou would have God deal to thee, for fear thy heart should so far
deceive thee in doing to others as thou would they should do to thee; I say,
that is a Rule of Rules, if truly observed, but beware thy heart do not deceive
thee in this, and thou think thou do it, when thou fallest far short of
it, and so deceive thy self.

For I account it the one and only way to set forth Gods praise, to deal
faithfully with all men in all things, especially to them that are without or
of another mind, for who knows but hereby thou may gain him to do the like,
whereas if thou should do to the contrary, he would not only be imboldned to
do the like, but would reproach and defame thy way of worship, and bring a
scandal upon all others that walk in the same profession as thou walk in,
and not only so neither, but dishonor thy God also; I would desire all
professors whatever, to be wary in this respect, lest the Heathen condemn us in
that great day of Trial, and do not enquire concerning the unconstancy of the
times, nor the evil of the days, but take the Apostles direction, If any man
desire to live long, and to see good days, let him refrain his tongue from
speaking evil, and his lips that they speak no guile.

And as it is beneficial to us, to speak and act the Truth, so as I said
before, it is the only way to manifest Gods praise, for as for what is done in
private, is done only upon the account of our Souls, it is only a conference
between God and us, so far as concerns our Souls welfare or reward; but what we
do before men, is either to set forth the praise or dispraise of God; and
whereas Christ says, Give not your Alms before men: He does not command you
to hold up your charity before men, but not to give it only, because men do
behold it, we must not make it our chief end, to give it to be praised of men;
for if we give it thus, we have our reward; but if we give it before thousands,
and could as freely give if there were no man by, and give it only to nourish
their bodies, knowing that we are but stewards of it, and our Master may take
it away from us when he pleases, for it is given us but for this intent, to
feed the hungry and cloth the naked, and to administer to the necessities of
such as are in distress, and in such cases it ought to be as really theirs as
ours, for we are but stewards of it, and if the Lord of the Husbandry do find
that we do not distribute faithfully according to his Will, he can take it
forth of our hands in a moment, and call us to an account for our stewardship;
do but mark what the Apostle John says, If any man has this worlds goods, and
sees his Brother in want, and shuts up the bowels of compassion from him,
How dwells the love of God in him? the first of John 3. Chap. 17.

Not that I conclude, that the love of God must be in every man that does
relieve the needy; but be sure, these are the manifestations of God in his
people; there are some it may be will relieve the poor, because their fathers
have done the like before them, and so they will not have their name decay, but
will seek to uphold it amongst men.

And others it may be will give to the poor, because they will exceed such and
such men that have as great estates as they have, that they may have more
praise than their Neighbors: But alas! all this does not reach the mark of a
Christian, for thou may give all thy goods to the poor, and thy body to the
fire to be burned, and yet have no charity, and it profits nothing, 1 of the
Corinthians and the thirteenth Chapter, and the third verse, no the poor widows
mite, Mark the twelfth, and the forty third and fourth verses, is more than all
this, and that is as little as may be, if it be so that you cast your gift into
this Treasury with any acceptance; therefore do not stay your selves upon this
as any sure foundation, that it is enough to give, but you must give it with
all your heart, yea, even as to the Lord, knowing that it is one of the
greatest presidents of a Christians verification.

2. And as you must be willing and cheerful, so you must be careful too in your
Alms, you must not do it as if you did not care how you did it, or when you
did it, or as though you did not care whether ever you did it, or not as there
is too many do now a days, it is to be feared they do the work of the Lord
negligently, Religion is too too commonly looked upon with too careless an eye,
only for outward shows and ceremonial traditions, as I shall show you more
hereafter.

I say, you must study to do good works, yea, how to do them, that you may
glorify God in your doing of them, and advance his Interest, and magnify his
Name, and that he may have the pre-eminence of all; and therefore Christ bids
them, Math. 6. in the beginning, Take heed when you give your Alms, and that
you must not let your left hand know what your right hand does: So that it
seems there is a left hand that is contrary to the right, that is prying into
thy giving of thy Alms, yea, it seems such a left hand, that is apt to declare
thy bounty to be praised of men; and therefore Christ bids thee take heed, as
in the next verse he plainly intimates so much, That thy Alms may be in
secret, and thy Father that sees in secret, shall reward thee openly: This
left hand is a member of that body of which you have mention made of the right
hand in the former Chapter verse 30, that if it offend thee, you must cut it
off, lest it should be the occasion of the whole body being cast into Hell: I
wish that we have not too too many such hands in our professions in these
times, that rather administer to our applause in Religion here before men, than
to the glory of God, or the relieving of others that are in distress.

Look well into your hearts I beseech you, and examine them thoroughly, that you
may repent if any such thing be while it is day, for God will find you out in
the end; therefore I say, you must be careful in your deeds of charity, if you
intend either to glorify God, or reap any benefit to your selves in it; do it
with all diligence and fervency of spirit, even as Paul charge Timothy, so
ought every one to make it his charge and duty to be careful in this
particular, lest you deceive your selves and wait for a reward when you have
had it already of men, from whom you sought it in your intent of parting with
your gift: I must confess, in this thing or particular you may come very near
to the mark in your own conceits, for to feed the hungry and cloth the naked,
and relirve the oppressed, that is, a very good work, if done to a good end;
But how can thou say, thou do it to any good end, or aim at Gods glory,
when thou set thy self in the highest and first degree in thy Alms, and
have respect unto thy own praises, that men should adore and praise thee for it?

No no, do not not mistake thy self, for no man can serve two Masters, for
either the one or the other must be neglected and not honored, God will admit
of no partners, he will either have all thy service, or else he will not accept
of any; I say, he will have no partners, but as he created and formed all
things, so he will have the pre-eminence of all things, both by thee and all
others, either to your eternal happiness, or else by showing his power upon
thee, to thy destruction; therefore you must resolve to be careful, if you
expect the praise of God, or have any love to his Name, to do his work
willingly and zealously, and to be wary that the Devil do not deceive thee in
any one thing, and so take away the efficacy of it from thee by any of his
cunning wiles, for he will watch all opportunities to ensnare thee in thy
charity, knowing it to be one of the grand Pillars of a Believers warfare.

3. As you must be willing to give your Alms, and careful how you give them,
so you must be ready to give them; for if you say, you are or would be willing
that any one that is in distress, should be relieved, yet many times when your
conscience tells you, that such and such poor people are in distress, you are
not so ready as to give them that relief that may in any competent measure
diminish their grievances, as the Apostle has it, Do all things with all
readiness and 2 Cor. 9.2, 3. For I know the forwardness of your minds,
therefore I boasted of you to them of Macedonia, that Achia was ready a year
ago: The Apostle does make his boast of their readiness, to administer to the
necessity of such as were in distress, yea, he urges it to others, that they
might walk by this Example, as not knowing any of more use in this life, it
being one of the needfullest effigies of a Christian, as Paul says of it, That
your zeal in it had provoked very many to do the like: Therefore I say, as you
profess your selves to have received the love of God, so let your love abound
toward your Brethren, as Christ says, Let your light so shine before men, that
they seeing your good works, may glorify your Father which is in Heaven,
Matthew. 5.16. For God is the Father of such love, and he will not be ashamed to
own those that do this work with willingness, and carefulness, and readiness,
for we do herein as it were represent him on earth, for he bestows his
blessings upon us merely of his own willingness and freeness, as it is
expressed, Of his own will begat he us in Christ Jesus; and he is also careful
of us, And shall not we be careful to serve him? As you have it, The true
Watchman of Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps; and he is also ready no bestow
his mercies and blessings upon us, for it is expressed Matthew. 6.8. He knows
before hand what we have need of; as if he studied to know our wants, and to
keep those things ready for us against we have need of them, For he that asks
receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it is opened
unto him, Matthew. 7.8. So that if you will but go to the Fountain, you may drink
freely, it is not locked from you, unless you bring a poisoned Pitcher with
you, to destroy your selves and defame the Fountain, and then I hope you will
acknowledge his love to be as great in this as in any thing; surely, men would
be willing and careful, and ready to serve such a God who is so good to them,
if they did or do any waves render their own welfare; I wish you could but
experience the Apostles words in this particular, although he was speaking of
another when he uttered the words, which are these, The love of God
constrains me, yea, I am accursed if I do not do according to his will.

So surely, any one that does profess himself to have received more than
others, he will and must enforcedly man fest it in the sight of men, upon every
or the most part of his occasions; I do not put this most part in, to keep any
from striving, to walk in the highest and exactest manner that may be, but
knowing the choicest of Gods People may be overtaken in a fault, but not that
any of them can pass by this fault without great remorse and grief of heart for
it, and they could willingly redeem the time, if it were possible, either by a
private Repentance, or public instruction to others; but this is a style too
high to speak of in these days I fear, and yet assure your selves, it is no
more than ought to be in every professor, for if you do but seriously consider
in your own hearts, you will find it is not a careless thing to profess Christ,
and acknowledge your selves to be his Servants, for you must expect to do his
Will, if you will be approved worthy of such a Master as I shall show you more
plainly hereafter.

4. As you must be willing to bestow your charity, and careful how you do it,
and ready to bestow it, so you must be bountiful and liberal, in your deeds of
charity you must not lay up in your corrupt treasuries, to buy such a Lordship,
no nor such a small Cottage, neither if you see that your poor Brethren are in
necessity, or want: It was an excellent Observation of a late deceased Scholar,
who when the Officers of the Parish came to him for moneys, they argued the
needfulness of men's bounty in such a good work, saying, There was none of more
concernment than to repair the Temple of the Lord; he answered them, It was
both needful and justifiable before God and man, but he bid them beware they
did not respect the dead Temple for the living Temples, and so fail in their
intent in both: So I would entreat all those that profess themselves to be
religious in their actions here, of obedience to Gods Will, that they do not
mistake themselves and adorn the dead Temple with superfluous varieties, when
the living Temples wants a sufficiency to keep themselves alive, look well to
your selves: I account it my duty to deal plainly with you, I fear it is too
too common in our days, for that love I beat you in Christ Jesus, I could wish
it were otherwise with many of you, for if you neglect the repairing of the
living Temples, there is nothing that will hold in any harmonious tune in
religious obedience, it is not enough to say, the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord, but you must show your selves to mind the Temple of the
Lord, for it is not a fained profession nor a gilded ceremony that will serve
your turn, nor mine in the last day, but as we profess our selves to have
received more than others, so let us walk more righteously and more faithfully
than they do, that we may not condemn them with our tongues seemingly, and
condemn our selves in our actions in the sight of God and men, for we may seem
here before men to be zealous for the Lord, and it may be think really that we
are so; do but mark what Solomon says, There is a way that seems right, but
the end is the end of death, Proverbs 14.12. And in Esayah 1.11. Unto what
purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices to me? I am full of your
Burntofferings and your Sacrifices, I desire not so much of this manner of
ceremonial services without you will work the effects of them; that is, To
cease to do evil, and that they would learn to do well, and seek Judgment, and
relieve the oppressed, and Judge the fatherless, and plead for the widow, and
then come unto me and I will reason with you, and though your sins be as red as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, yea, though they be as red as crimson,
they shall be made as wool: If we bring these Sacrifices before the Lord, he
accepts of them, and will delight himself in us, but if we forget to bring
these with us, we had better to stay away than come before God in vain, to
expect a Blessing when there is none assigned for us, it is to as much purpose
for a man to think he has a true Faith in Christ, when he has not charity, as
it is for a Builder to think to build a Tower, when he has but one stone to
build it; do you not mind what the Apostle James says to such sort of men,
James 3. and last, As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without
works is dead: It is true, thou may have a faith to believe there is a God,
even so Pharaoh King of Egypt, Exodus 9.27. He did believe there was a God in
Israel, yet he would not obey him, nor leave the worshipping of Idols, till the
Lord did overthrow him and his Host into the midst of the Sea; and as you may
read of Nebuchadnezzar, Daniel 3. He did believe that the God of Daniel was the
God of gods, and Lord of Kings, Dan. 2.47. yet he did set up an Image contrary
to what Daniel did worship, and commanded all people to fall down and worship
it: So as I said before, it is not enough to have a faith, but you must have a
working faith, a living faith, a steadfast faith, and an upright and charitable
Faith, for as Paul says, 2 Cor. 9.6. He that sows sparingly, shall reap
sparingly, and he that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully, let every
man give as he has purposed in his heart, not grudgingly or of necessity for
God loves the cheerful Giver: Not but that God is able to provide a sufficient
satisfaction for his Children without your aid or help, but know, he will try
thee O man, how far thy charity will extend toward thy weak and helpless
Brother, God does not make use of us for need, but for his pleasure that he
takes in seeing us improve our talents, and that we should manifest to all the
world, that we are a People that have a God exceeding all other gods, in love,
and tenderness, and bounty, and strength, how would all people stand reviling
of our God, and disdaining our way of worship, if they should see us walk
undiscretly and loosly, they would be apt to say, lo, behold how profane and
vain a thing it is for such and such men, who profess they walk in a higher and
more clearer light than they have done or than we do, but they can let their
Brethren lack bread and clothes, and can wear such needless tryphles, and build
such and such brave Houses that we can live without, and content our selves
without; I say, these things may be done, if that thing that is more needful
be not left undone, but if one must be left undone, I say look that you leave
the less needful and useful undone, for know the life and body of thy poor
Brother is altogether as precious in the sight of God as thine, this thy
undiscret and vain carriage does give thy enemies advantage to revile thee, and
to defame thy Brethren, and to blaspheme the worthy Name of our God, whereas if
we walk more strictly, more wisely and more charitably, the mouths of all such
people will be stopped, and they will be ready to commend thy way of worship,
and to praise those that you do associate your selves withal, and to glorify
the Name of God, by which you are called: So that if you will profess your
selves to be Servants of God, you must walk in the ways of godliness; and
think not that it is the performance of your duty, to talk of charity and
love, but you must make it your business to administer and distribute your
charity to all such as are in distress and want, knowing that if you will
manifest your selves to be employed in his work, you shall receive a recompense
worthy of your labor, For if God spared not his only Son, but delivered him
up to death for us, that we might be freed from the power of death: Surely,
thou will not think thy sabout too much, to serve him in thy estate, or rather
in his own; I say, thou vvilt not be so unjust a Steward, to let thy Masters
servants dye for want of food, when he has provided enough for them, no
certainly, thou will rather walk up and down from one end of the Vineyard to
the other, to see that all thy fellow servants have their meat in due manner
and due season, if thou do respect the love of thy Master, and the praise of
it will redound so far to thee in the end, if thou performest his Will, as that
he will make thee one of his Family for ever, and thou shall reign in joy and
gladness to eternity: Now he which does this work of charity, must observe that
he have not more respect for himself than for God in his heart, for look for
it, for the Devil will never leave searching, to find out one tradition or
customary self setting up, to find out some one devise or other, if thou take
this work in hand, to represent thee unstable in thy undertakings in one
respect or other, knowing it to be one of the greatest Forts that a Christian
can acquire, for his unattemtible and unanimous residence, if truly and exactly
built, for without this uniformity it is impossible to put on the whole Armor
of God; nay, I dare be bold, that no man what ever can assure himself, to put
on any part of the Armor of God, and not take up this with it; For how can it
be said that you have armed your selves with Truth, when you have not obeyed
the God of Truth? Or how can any man say, That Righteousness is his
Breast Plate, when he has neglected to do his Masters business, and has left
his Masters Commands unobeyed? Or how can any man say, His feet are shod with
the preparation of the Gospel, when he walks in obscure and dark ways? If
you have your feet shod with the Gospel, you will walk in the path and way of
the Gospel: Now Christ is the True and Righteous way, described in the Gospel,
and he thought it not too much to sacrifice his life for us, and greater
charity thou can not have, than to yield up thy life in obedience to the God
of love, and no man can come to the Father, but by and in him.

And as for thy taking Faith to be thy shield, when thou go to withstand the
Devil, thou will be overcome, if thou do not take love along with thee, for
the Devil will quickly find out a place to dart thee in, if thou leave charity
behind thee; for this take what the Apostle says, Show me thy Faith by thy
works, and then thou may put on the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the
Spirit, for as he that redeemed you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation; 1 Pet. 1.13. and elsewhere, hereby shall all men known that ye
are my Disciples, if you love one another, John 13.35. And the fruits of the
Spirit are love, joy, peace, etc. Gal. 5.22. So that I say, it is in vain to
think of withstanding the Devil, but that he will wound thee in one respect or
other, if thou do not put on all thy Armor, even the whole Armor of God.

2. He that undergoeth this duel, or makes war against this enemy, had needs
be very studious to know, yea, knowing what it is that he is to encounter
withal, for thy enemy goes about daily to seek to circumvent thee: So that
when thou make war against lying and deceit, beware he does not overcome
thee, by imputing a strength to thy self in thy striving, and so get into thy
harbor, and weaken thy strength and fort; likewise, when you fortify your
self against unrighteousness, he will be presenting thee with a seeming
righteousness, that if you are not very watchful, shall give you more content
seemingly than any that you have chosen, if you do not know experimentally the
odor that is in your choice, for he will endeavor either to delude thee that
thou art more righteouss than such and such men, and so set thee a judging of
others, and a taking Gods Office forth of his hands, that he may bereave thee
of the efficacy of thy labor that way, or else endeavor to Sow some tares
amongst thy wheat and make you delight your self in embracing, for
righteousness for some one self end or other for his tares are many times so
like thy wheat, that it is hard to gather them out of it, without it be so that
thou art very well insenced of the nature and taste of them; and as for thy
fervency for the Gospel of God in opposing all his assaults, for this likewise
he will not want endeavors to stir up enemies both of thy seeming friends and
known enemies, that if he cannot entice thee to a false understanding of them,
he will endeavor to screen thy mind to abuse thy knowledge in matter of
action, if it be possible, and so hid it from thy discerning of it; but in case
he finds thee so watchful that he cannot make a conquest of the, according to
his will or desire this way, then possibly he will try thee further, if God
permit him power, so as to put thee into Prison, nay, it may be to take away
thy life also, for thy servent zeal for the Gospel; but know if thou art
brought so far, thy God will not leave thee then, though thou may seemingly
have a Cloud for a season, yet the Sun will presently break through, and expel
the darkness of the time at an instant, yea, in a moment of time; happy is he
that overcomes all the rest, to give Testimony of his fidelity in this to all
Beholders; but I shall speak somewhat more to that hereafter, so I shall defer
it at this time.

But you must press forward still, you are not yet come to discern the
difficulty of this your urgent and needful care, for we are now to discuss the
grand part of his enmity, in seeking to keep us from believing in the Captain
of our Salvation, and in relying upon him for all out strength, now he is
laboring to deceive us of taking up this Wapon of Faith, so he will endeavor
to fix our minds upon our own strength, and to trust in what conquest we have,
it is merely of our own care, and of our own watchfulness, yea, he will not
leave any corner of thy heart unattempted, if he see that there is any
possibility of getting within thy vvalls under a pretended notion of
friendship, that so he may deceive and rob thee of this thy Weapon, it being
the chief Weapon of our defense, if truly fixed, by which we are enabled to
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, and so keep our rare Jevvel from all
his demonical delusions, for if he once get this shield of Faith from thee by
any deceitful contrivance, he will make a conquest of thee at his pleasure,
for he knovveth it is not for him to assault any that have this shield in their
hand to defend themselves vvithal; I say, it is not for him to attempt the
overthrovving of these by any ordinary way that is contrary to their way of
worship, or to stand in opposition to maintain a pitched battle against such
who have their Faith truly grounded and fixed upon the love and strength of
Christ Jesus, but he will not lack flatteries, such as may seemingly
sympathise with the true and grand emulations of truth in show and profession,
though it shall differ in the intent or end of their doing it; therefore I say,
he that is a Warrior in a Christian warfare, must not war only against known
waverings, and unconstancy, and unstability of mind, but against seeming
stedfastness, and seeming confidence, and seeming unmoveableness also, for you
must stand upon your watch and examine every thought that comes by you, and
try it whether it will abide the Touchstone or not in every particular, before
you grant it admittance, for you may be deceived if you do not take great heed,
for the Devil may appear in the likeness of an Angel of light, and do many
things unlikely it may be as thou think for him to do, for he can be as
faithful and as religious as the Scribes and Pharisees, but he will not be
willing that you should attribute any thing to God as proceeding from him, or
that you should aim at his glory in the performance of it; but as I said
before, though your work of Faith be seemingly, the same in show or ceremony,
yet it will not be the same in event and effect, yet it has been so like the
true Faith, as that the People of old have cried, Peace, peace, when the Lord
has not said it: Yea, he has been so subtle in his end, as that he has
deceived both Prophet and People, and he did appear very subtily with these
Scribes and Pharisees, for they did give the effigies of true Faith in many
respects seemingly, for it was built upon Alms and the fulfilling of the Law
and Prayers for their success in it, but they gave their Alms to be seen of
men, and therefore they had their reward, for as they gave them to be praised
of men, even so they had the praise of men for their gifts, and as for their
aim to fulfill the ceremonies and rites of the Law they were very exact in many
respects, as to pay Tithes of Mint and Anise, Mat. 23. But to relieve the
oppressed, and plead the cause of the needy, they had small care of that, and
they would make a conscience sermingly to God, as to pray often to him, that
under a pretense of Religion in this they would devour Widows houses; so as
they seemed to be exactly religious in the fight of men, they were not
religious hardly in any one thing before God.

For it is not so easy and idle a thing as many think it is to be a Christian
or a Christ-like man, for if you build your Faith upon any other Rock than
Christ's Death and Resurrection, I say if you do not war against all other
fabrics, you cannot exercise your Faith with any good warrant; I say, if you
do not pull down and root up all other appearances that are not one with this,
and hold in concurrance in this as proceeding from the same root and center
which Christ's undergoings have meritoriously crowned us withal, you can in no
measure exercise a Faith with any good Warrant, but we shall yoke our selves
with burthensom impediments in our more higher agitations and Divine
aspirations, for no clear eye can discern things of so bright and clear an
appearance, so Divine manifestation much less believe them, it is not to
believe that it is any thing of our own merits that a true Faith must be built
upon, but all such thoughts and conclusions strike at the original grounds of a
true Faith, as and is contradictory an enemy to it as may be; do but mark what
the Apostle Paul says of the grounds of a true Faith, Romans 3.24, 25, 26. Being
justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ,
whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood, to
declare his Righteousness for the Remission of sin, through the forbearance of
God, to declare, I say, at this time his Righteousness, that he might be just,
and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus: Christ will not look upon you
as partners in the grounds of your Faith, for as he has conquered all such
enemies who did lead us captive at their will by his suffering for us, to
pacify the Devine fury of his Father, and to be a propitiation for to
interceed with his Father for us, that he might reconcile all differences that
did hinder us from having a peaceable and complete union and ownness with our
God, that so he might be our Father as well as his Father, and our God as well
as his God, and that he might rejoice in us as Brethren, being united and
annexed with him by what had undergone for us, that so we might jointly declare
the manifold love of God, and sing praises to his Name; I say, this was the
intent of Christ in his interceeding to the Father for us, only he would not
have us slight his undertakings for us, and so deceive our selves, and
dishonor his mockings, and his scoffings, and deridings that he did bear for
our offenses, when we should have perished to all eternity, had not he stepped in
between our sin and his Fathers wrath, and did that for us that we were not
able to do for our selves; so that he will have us to own him to be the Author
and Finisher of our Faith, Heb. 12.2. So as I said before, you must War against
every appearance of evil, and every thing that seeks to oppose this way of
grounding your Faith; but I shall leave it to your study, to examine how many
such guests you have given entertainment to, as thinking them to be your
Friends, intending to speak a word or two more of it in some of my follovving
discourse, if God permit time and leave.

And as you have resisted and must resist all the foregoing invocations of this
your invious, yet more subtle enemy, so you must engage against all his
extrinsical and seeming vvayes of ensnaring you in your charity, for he will
not leave striving to conquer thee by craft, if it be possible, if he see that
it is in vain to tempt thee otherwise, he will promise thee great gain and
great content, yea, he will give thee all the inticements and the allurements
that the whole world can afford, and he will persuade with thee that thou may
keep all these and be charitable too, he does not care how fair a pretense thou
make of being charitable, but be sure of this, he will strike at the very
root of it, if it be put in practice with any true intent to Gods glory, and
that if you are not very exact in your deliberating your selves, he will be too
hard for you in one respect or other, for if you war against him in maintaining
your deeds of charity, and do not war against his ends in your charity, or
against your own pride and selfseeking, you had as good lay your weapons down,
and do not pretend to withstand him when you go about to fortify his strength,
for he had as live have you profess and practice both, so as he can but delude
you to set up an Idol to offer it to, for it is no better if we offer any
praise to any imagined thing that is due to God, for an Image or an Idol is no
more nor less than to set up any thing in our Devine worship, and attribute
more honor to it, and have more esteem of it than is due to it by Gods
appointment; this will be a hard saying for many professors to pass by, and yet
it is no more than you will find to be true in the end; the Prophet Jeremiah
has a notable expression to this purpose, Jeremiah 44.25. the people would not
be beaten down from offering spiced cakes to the Queen of Heaven; not that you
read any thing that they had any formed substance, but an imaginary fancy; and
as the Apostle said in his time, There are Gods many, and Lords many, bue unto
them there was but one God and Father of all things; and as he has it in
another place concerning others, They worshipped the creature more than the
Creator, who is God for ever, Amen, as you may read Romans 1.25. as he plainly
expresses in the foregoing verses, that they changed the glory of the
incorruptible God into an Image made like corruptible man and birds, four
footed beasts, and creeping things; Even as if the Apostle should have said,
that they worshipped themselves, and bestowed and attributed that glory that
was Gods own by due right to themselves, and gloried in so doing, and delighted
themselves in birds, and four footed beasts, and creeping things more than in
the Creator, from whence they had their being; and therefore he says, God gave
them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor
their own bodies between themselves: Besure, that when they came to that degree
of apostasy, God would not leave them without punishment for it, but lets them
run into all unseemly behavior, as you may read the 20, 30, 31. verse. of this
Chap. when God gives up a people to their own lusts and desires of their own
hearts, they run on from one degree of unrighteousness to another, till at last
they are so captivated by their own lusts, that though they come to see that
they act contrary to the rules of natural reason, yet they have small or no
desire to leave it, but run on still and persist from one evil device to
another, from committing fornication with their own lusts, to covetousness, and
malignity, and so to murder and debate, and having no understanding, they
become Covenant-breakers; as the Apostle instances, They were without natural
affection, implacable and unmerciful: Therefore I say beware of Idolatry, and
do not make it your business to worship these and such like Gods, as the
Apostle has it plainly, Phil. 3.19. Whose gods are their bellies, and whose
glory is their shame; but fix your Faith aright in Gods prescribed rule, and
then you will be able to wage war with the Devil in his cunningest designs, but
it will require your fervent care continually to watch, that you may know and
be sure to be provided for his coming.

For if you seek to do the Will of the Father, which is Holiness and Purity,
you must observe what his Commands are, and do not think to secure your selves
by notional pretenses and literal expressions, rudely reasoning with your
selves in the worst of senses and the extravigants of courses, accounting it a
small sin to offend God, or to walk contrary to his Commandments of Love and
Chartly, Peace and Truth; for if you walk contrary to this, you may profess
what you please, but if your actions and intentions do not answer what your
pretenses seem to blaze forth into notional extremes, as I may so account them;
I will not value that opinion, though they pretend to be Saints or Angels, for
if they walk so loosly as that their own hearts condemn them in their
intention, much more may God condemn them, who sees in secret and knows in
secret, happy is he that can try all things with Solomon, and yet not be linked
in his affection to any thing; I speak as in respect of his serving or
idolizing any thing below God, he can rejoice with a Heroic spirit, not only
that Devils are made subject to him, but that his name is written in the Book
of Life; he can try and search into the secondary powers of the world, and yet
not like to the Philosophers of the Heathen conclude, That the Images of them
should be worshipped, because, as they say, they represent their Gods to them,
and that the reverencing of God is the uncovering of the head, or the
sprinkling with holy water, and exterior expiations, and exterior ornaments
for our Devine praises, as musical harmony, and burning of wax candles, and
light, and ringing of bells, and adorning of temples, altars and images, in
which, as they say, is required a special reverence, and comeliness.

This is not a Garden for such to plant their Vine in, who by the Spirit of
Jehovah can like the Be suck Honey out of the Thistle, and yet account the
Honey-suckle the more rarer flower; he that is truly grounded in this, will
well know what I mean in all the rest, it is not the Sun, Moon nor any
inferior light by which they walk or act, but acknowledge a more supreme and
splendant brightness to be their guide in all things, and that they can try all
these, and make it experimentally appear that they seek the honor of him which
governs and rules all things, even as he pleases, and when he pleases to
alter them? They are made subject to him at all seasons, yea, he gives them a
brighter splendour at one time than at another to our appearance, And what is
the glory of any thing, but in the manifestation of it? Oh! happy is he that
like the Be can go to Thistles and suck virtue out of them, as well as forth
of the sweetest Flowers, though they are more in esteem in their sight, it
argues the spirit of discerning as well as the Spirit that tries and
searches, he needs not fear the being deceived that knows honey when he
tries it, much less he that knows it by sight, he will not like the Waspe
lie prying after the Bees Nest, when he can suck the purest forth of the
Flower, and peradventure there may be a more bitter sting in the Nest than he
brings power to expel, as the Snake does commonly keep both Be and Waspe
away, though they have both stings, yet let this be your observation, that the
lesser must be swallowed up of the greater, or else be put to flight, thrice
happy is he that is truly conquered by the true Swallower up of all things.

He can plead a true and certain interest with any man or all men, for whatever
does branch forth it self, if really engrafted into this Stock, it will be
abidable, although the winter frosts may seemingly eclipses the beauty of our
professions, yet it cannot reach our root, but we shall retain so much sap
there, as will cause our branches to flourish again in their season; for as the
Philosophers conclude, the Sun will not spend all his year in a sign, where he
has his detriment or fall, but will by his progressive motion in his
exactness, in his line or circuit go strait forward, and does not look backward
as though he was afraid of those captivating powers, that have, as I may say
so, dominion over him at such times, as is apparent in our Horizon, that that
power that he assures himself of in March, he is deprived of in September, and
that glorious show of heat, yea even to scorch us as it were in July, is
overswayed by the unequal frequenting of a Januaries approach; yet say they,
the Sun does continue going forward still, notwithstanding all his repulses by
the unfortunate solicits of his most potent enemies.

Even so he that does really know the worth of grace, and the benefit of his
endeavors, that Christ has purchased for all them that will believe and lay
fast hold upon him in his Death and Resurrection; I say, such a one that is
truly sensible of what worth and value Christ's Death and Life is to all those
that enjoy a portion of it, effectually operating, over all the lets and
impediments that are in the way to hinder his true discerning of it, he cannot
but press forward, accounting himself happy in each step that he adds to his
journey, wherein he discerns that he gets ground, you need not to urge
such a one to be wary, for he cannot but discern when he gets ground, and
when he has lost, for if all men speak well of him and assure him of peace,
yet if he in searching find any corner of his heart not swept, be sure he will
not cry peace to himself, but will take the Besom of righteousness and truth,
and will carefully sweep it out, and make all clean within, for he cannot sleep
in quiet till he has got his house clean.

As no earthly man can take his rest when he knows that there is a thief
within his house that will take all advantage to rob him, but will rather rise
and lock up his chiefest Jewels, that they may not be taken away from him, if
in case he cannot get him forth of the house; but though they are locked never
so fast, and there be not any thief within his house, yet if he has any
treasure that he takes much delight in, he will be watchful, lest any one
should break into his house unexpected, and bereave him of that in which he so
much delights:

Even so a discerning Christian that knows there is a thief within his house,
he cannot but dread the worst of things, so long as any suspected enemy is
within his confines, but if he know that there is none but he has tried all of
them thoroughly, yet he will stand upon his watch, and keep his doors locked
about him (when he is at home and when he goes abroad) he is wary with whom he
does confer as associates fit for his result, so that whether he is with the
Lord at his home, or whether in the turba of the mind, yet he will be watchful,
that strangers do not intermedle with his joy, in any way to deprive him of
that enjoyment by which he can convey his soul to its most fixed bliss, no man
can beat him off of this his watchfulness, when he has once tasted the love of
God, so as to witness that he is satisfied with it, not that I think it is
enough to seem satisfied or to talk of being satisfied, but I speak of them
that are really and indeed satisfied; you have a notable Text of Scripture in
the 4th of John, Christ tells the woman of Samaria, that he that drinks of
that water that he shall give them, shall never thirst again; and in the 6th of
John he tells the Jews, that their Fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness and
were dead, but whosoever shall eat of that Bread which I shall give them, shall
live for ever: I will not say but many may taste of this Bread in some measure
in many degrees, and yet never hardly stand upon their watch, to keep Dogs from
eating of it out of their mouths, as I may so say, and carrying it away out of
their sight, and bring them some of their old diet, even Garlic and Onions;
these are such as were taken in the Parable for the stony ground, in which the
seed wanted root, yea, the heat of the Sun caused it to wither, but that which
fell on good ground, brought forth plentifully, even unto the harvest:
Therefore I say, he that warreth in this life, must be sure to watch when the
enemy does seek to assault, and batter down his Walls, and to defame his
Weapons, and to poison them with his intermingled seeming delights, whereby he
does lie in wait to infect us, even as a Fisher does lay bait for to catch his
intended prey.

So that you shall have baited hooks, such as you will think are very rare and
agreeable to suit with your disposition as near as may be, and to advance his
own ends, he will fit you if it be possible, for he has variety of pleasant
dainties, if you will but be persuaded to deal with him, he will deal for small
profit rather than loose your acquaintance, if it be but a making slight of
your word, or a self-conceitedness in your worship, or to worship for custom,
or to believe, because others say, it is true, when it may be you have no
warrant in your own hearts that it is true, but because others say, it is so,
therefore you will believe it, for you are sure that such men would not say it,
if it were not so, as I have heard many say, when they have had no other reason
to believe it, but because other men have affirmed it.

Alas! my poor Friends, you that have no other ground for your Faith than what
another does give you; I say, that you that satisfy your selves with what
others say, and do not enquire whether it be according to Gods Holy Word that
is left us for an Example, you are far from knowing what you fix your Faith
upon, and you will be like to the Children of Israel that could follow Moses,
because they saw that God did work many Miracles by him, but when Moses was
longer in the Mount than they supposed he would have stayed, they are presently
at a loss, and charge Aaron to make them a God to go before them, Exodus 32.1.
and as we read they were forty years under his Preaching to them, and yet it is
recorded of them, that they knew not the ways of God; there is many Writers
that affirm them to be a peculiar and absolute People by their deserts, but I
find no such thing recorded in Scriptures, therefore I shall speak what is made
manifest to me, though I know it will seem harsh to many, to believe what I
have here inserted, but I would have them to take notice, that it is one thing
for a People to be made happy by desert and obedience, and it is another to be
made happy by Gods infinite mercy and forgiveness, as you have Israel made
happy by Gods love and compassion to them in the Wilderness, but not by
desert; there is a great difference between Gods loving a People, and a Peoples
obeying God, therefore I would desire every one to seriously consider when they
read or hear what is the occasion of the words spoken, and the time when it was
spoken, and the dispensation that the People were under when it was spoken, and
what degree of faith the People were heirs of by knowledge, that it was
effectually to be made theirs, for if your enemy can but entrap you, he will
soon be more potent, if it be possible, for he has an apple for Eve, and so to
betray Adam, and a discontended pride in Cain to bring him to murder Abel,
Genesis 12. and a fear in Abraham, to make him deny that Sarah was his Wife, and a
Feast for Noah, to make him commit fornication with his two Daughters, and a
Covetousness in Jacob, to deny his Brother a Mess of Pottage, unless he would
assign him his Birthright, Genesis 25. and afterward he feared that God was not
able to help him to the blessing of Isaac without his deluding of his old
Father, and belying the truth, and a pride for David, that he might number the
People, and so displease his God, 2 Samuel 24. and a lovely Delilah for Sampson,
that he might take away his life, Judge. the 16.

I might instance several things more of these his forementioned stratagemes
and cunning devices which he has made use of, as is apparent in the Old
Testament and New, to which I shall refer you; happy is he that keeps his
watch and stands closely armed, ready to answer him in any of his attempts,
that he may rejoice over all his works, that has gained the Victory by
keeping close to the rule of his preserving and defending Savior, knowing that
it is by his strength that he does stand, by giving heed to the narrowst and
difficulst of his Command, observing it merely for the glory of his Father,
knowing that he can no ways show himself to seek a Kingdom that is not of this
life, unless he renounce the pleasures of this life, For whosoever calls God
Father and abides in sin, is a Liar, John the first the 1 Chapter and 4.
Because he calls God Father, when he has not known God in his
manifestations, neither does God own his actions.

There is a People whom I have heard much of, that when they are going about
any thing that they imagine, will hardly bear the raste of the Scripture, they
will say, that they will enquire of God, whether they may do it or no, and so
will through the strength of the desire of their own wills, draw the sense and
intent of the Scriptures to what they please, or what pleases their fancy
best, and think themselves secure enough too, if they have but framed a Prayer
for God to direct them in it, though it may be they will not hearken to what
God puts into their minds at that time neither, but adhere rather to what
is more beneficial, as they think, for their own ends, not that they will blot
the Scripture clean out in show, but it shall seem difficult to them in such
cases, and so will under a pretense of Religion, do those things that neither
Reason, Equity nor Scripture will bear them any Testimony of; This is as much
as if they should go to enquire of God, whether they might freely murder a man
or not, and if their desire be drawn out to it, and in case God do not show
them some wonder or sign, or presently pour down some Judgment upon them, they
should be free to do it.

This is as a great a delusion of the Devil, to draw any man's mind to Prayer,
for God to direct them in any thing, when their minds are absolutely bent to do
wickedly; I say, it is one of the highest provocations to provoke Gods fury
that you can invent, as the Psalmist has it, The Prayers of the wicked are
abomination unto the Lord: It is a thing too common in our days, for many men
to content themselves with a form of Prayer, when it may be they understand not
any one petition of what they require, nor that the thing that they require be
according to the Will of God or not, which he has left for our instruction,
but rather seek to bring the Will of God to those things that may stand with
their advantage and their benefit, and if they can but keep themselves from the
Laws of men, taking hold of them, they think they shall be safe enough, so that
they can but have the praise and applause of the great Rabbis of the times,
they look no further; but it was Moses choice, Rather to suffer afflictions
with the Children of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb.
11.25.

But those that seek a Kingdom in this world, they take little or no care for
their future joy, but think it shall always go well with them, because they
imagine it is rather better with them than with the Righteous at present, and
they see no alteration, but Gods love is as much to them as to any one sort of
People, and they flourish as David says, like a green Bay Tree, and have no
frowns from God, neither see any change, therefore they go on securely as they
think, and they will persist in their own ways still, as the Psalmist has it
Psalm. 55.19. God shall hear and afflict them, even he that abides of old,
because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God: It is not enough to
think of being secure, because they see no change, God may let thee alone it
may be for the time that thou art to live or abide in this life, but be sure of
this, you must come to give up your account at the last day, where all your
actions will be tried by the fire, whether they will abide or not, and whatever
we have done in this life, must be brought before the Judgment Seat of God,
where great men's words will not serve our turn, nor all our former seeming
Friends can bail us, but Justice will be Justice, as well as Mercy will be
Mercy, God cannot lay neither of them aside; therefore stay not your minds upon
great men's ability, neither upon the pretended friendship of any man or men,
for it is thy own conscience that must appear to excuse, or else accuse thee;
so that I say, rather loose the friendship of all other seeming friends than
wrong this thy chief Friend, which if he be forced to be thy enemy, will do
thee more wrong than all thy other friends can do thee good, setting Christ's
sufferings aside, and they will be of small or no effect to thee, if you give
admittance to any unrighteous guests; therefore rather loose all the friendship
that may any ways seem to prefer thee in this life; yea, thy right hand, than
endanger the being shut forth of Heaven; it is not any other friend, save thy
Conscience, that must give an account for thy actions in this life, it will lie
upon thy self, either for good or evil, The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a
Pearl, that when a Merchant has found, he sells all that he has to purchase
it, Math. 13.45, 46.

Even so he that has ever experienced the love of God, will leave his Father
and Mother, and all other seeming friends whatever, rather than loose this
Pearl, or act contrary to the Truth; yet Christ does not any ways advise
Children to be disobedient to their earthty Parents in respect to their
obedience, if it be possible to content them or obey them, but rather advises
them to be just obeyers of God, by keeping the Commandments of God, commanded
to be kept in the presence of God and men, and not that any one can imagine
himself to be an approved fulfiller of the Laws of God, so long as he acts
unjustly between man and man, as I remember it was historically expressed of
the judgment of some Heathens, concerning the opinion of the Christians, that
they judged the God of the Christians was not a good God, by reason of their
unfaithfulness one toward another, and their unhumane carriage toward them: It
is a sad omen of conversion, when they that should become a pattern to others
to walk by, become a reproach and defame to their God, or rather the God of
truth in their actions toward men; I never did read that Christ or his
Apostles did leave them any such example, but rather to approve our selves to
be examples of the Flock, and not Lords over Gods Heritage, and to offer no
offense neither to the Jew nor Gentile, 1 Cor. 10.32. but rather show our
selves to be such as seek to glorify the Name of God by our uprightness and
exactness to men.

Even as it is recorded of the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 6.4.5. Then the Presidents
and Princes sought to find an occasion against Daniel concerning the Kingdom,
but they could find none occasion nor fault forasmuch as he was faithful,
neither was there any error or fault in him; then said these men, we shall not
find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning
the Law of his God: Faithfulness is a happy ornament, though they that wear it
may be persecuted by men, yet they will be upheld by God.

Oh! let us not pretend to be spiritual Walkers, when we have not acted the
things that meet Moralists account no less than their duty to do, lest we
become heirs of that woe pronounced against the Seribes and Pharisees, Math. 23.
for pretending to be more righteous than any one sort of people in their time,
and under a pretense of long Prayers, devour widows houses, and pervert the
cause of the needy: Oh! let me entreat you, to look to your Souls, and do not
make your liberty a cloak of maliciousness and deceit, but go to the light,
that your deeds of darkness may be reproved: And know, you can no ways tempt
God more than to pray to him with any self-endedness, you do no better than
seek to pull a curse upon your own heads, but whenever you would be directed to
pray, take these three Directions:

First, Desire with the help of God, to banish all self ends and self-aims,
that so you may come to understand the Will of God in the Scriptures.

Secondly, Consider really with your self, that the thing that you do desire,
is not to the prejudice of any one, but that you do as you would have others do
to you, in case they were in your condition.

Thirdly, Be sure that you use as much mercy in your undertakings, as you would
have God use to you in the last day, and then if you find that all these agree
in and with your undertakings, you may expect an Answer assuredly from the
Lord, that is to say, a Blessing.

For do but mind the strange appearances of men in our times, in their
intercessions to God in Prayer, one prays for the restoring of one thing, and
another prays for the throwing of that thing down, and one will persecute
another, because he will not worship God as he would have him worship him, and
another will seek to take away the life of others, because they will not be
conformable to what they conceive is the right way of worship, so that Religion
may but be your cloak, you value not what rule you have for your actions; Oh
England, England! have thou forgot a People that the Prophet complains of, That
drew near to God with their lips, but their hearts were far away from observing
his ways: Oh! that I could but cause thee to understand the things that belong
to thy peace, before they are hid from thy eyes; then surely you would own God
to be a God of peace and love, and not such an imagined fancy as most men
imagines him to be, and then you would come to understand that obedience is
better than sacrifice, and to hearken is better than the fat of rams, and to
cry, Who is Paul? and who is Apollo? and who is Cephas? Paul plants, and Apollo
waters, but it is God that must give the increase, 1 Cor. 3.

It is far better for us to leave off professing our selves to be religious,
than to pretend to a great height of Religion, and walk in the unhumane
rudiments of the world, for whosoever will be a Disciple of Chirst, must take
up his Cross and follow him, in his ways as he walked in; he must not turn
back to fetch any self-end to carry along with him, for if he do, he will
endanger the being shut forth of the Bride-chamber, neither may he be freed
from many encounters with the perverse enemy of all mankind, but must take up
his Cross and march forward through persecutions, and afflictions, and crosses
in this life, and the more he seeks to serve his Master, the more he will be
had in disdain, not that any can tax him with injustice either to God or men,
but wherever Christ has a Church, the Devil will be laboring to lay one stone
or other, you may go on a great way, and build a very fair Tabernacle with
moral stones, and have the love of men, and not the hatred of the Devil; but if
you come to understand your task, what it is that you are to build, be sure he
will seek to torment you, and make your wages as uncomfortable as he can, he
will have a Cain to persecute Abel, and a Ishmael for Isaac, and an Esau for
Jacob, and ten Brethren against Joseph, and whole Cities and Nations against
the Prophets and Apostles, nay, he would not leave Christ unattempted.

So that as I said before, if you will enter into this Company to be one of
their Society, you must not think it too much to be a false prophet in others
esteem, but as all your Fore runners have done, count it your joy that you do
not deserve it at their hands, what though you are counted a Magician with
Moses and Daniel, or a worshipper of a contrary thing with the most part of the
Prophets, or a changer of customs and a profane person, or a wine-bibber, or a
mad man, or a breaker of the Sabbath with Christ and his Apostles, account it
your joy to bear the reproach of these things, but be sure to keep your selves
free from deserving any of them, but approve your selves to be his friends, by
doing what he has commanded you, and then let the world rage, and the Devil
spit his venomous poison how he please, God will provide you that that will
expel it.

And whenever you are brought to that maturity of knowledge, as to experience
the love of God as it is in Christ Jesus, you will not sell your Birthright
for all the seeming preferments, and advancements that any unrighteous tempter
shall seek to betray you withal, look to the branch and you will most commonly
find what it is that nourishes the root, if it be nourished by any inward
spring, or grow by the River side, it will flourish, although the showers of
rain do not come so frequently as they were used to do, for he that knows not
how to suffer with him, never knew how to rejoice with him, and he that is his,
knows how to do both.

But let not any one mistake me herein, and think that I conclude that every
one that suffers, must suffer for Christ.

I must confess, I hardly did ever read that any Moralist could suffer for what
he did maintain, or seek to maintain, if he could any ways prevent his
suffering; but in case he could not avoid suffering, any man will rather choose
that in which he has had most experience, as a Philosopher for his Philosophy,
and a Marshallist for his Adventures in War; but happy is he that can lay down
his life as freely as keep it, upon the account of his Lord and Master, in due
respect to his honor and glory, and not for self ends, or self-glory.

Many I know will be harping at these expressions; but let them know, that as I
do not conclude the Scriptures to be void of reason, so also I conclude, that
it is beyond the moral reason of men, to find out the depths of the Scripture.

And as concerning War, I must count it is a thing in fashion in our days, and
for me to seek to alter this fashion, I shall lie liable to the censures of
men, yet let the Scriptures be true, and have that respect to them that you
should have, and then let me be what you please, I shall be brief in this
particular at this time, only refer you to those words of Christ that he left
with his Disciples, Mat. the 26. and 52, and 53. verses, Put up thy Sword again
into his place, for all they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword,
Think thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall give me more
than 12 Legions of Angels, but how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that
thus it must be? and 2 Cor. 10.4. For the Weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting
down imaginations and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God; This is beyond the work of a moral sword: And Epkes. 4.3.
Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bonds of peace; and James
4.1, 2, 3. From whence comes wars and fighting amongst you, come they not
hence, even of your lusts that war in your members, ye lust and have not, ye
kill and desire to have and cannot obtain, ye fight and war, yet ye have not,
because ye ask not, ye ask and receive not, because you ask amiss, that ye
might consume it upon your lusts, he that is a Friend of the world, is an enemy
to God; and as you read in the first Book of the Chronicles 28. and 3. But God
said unto me, thou shall not build a house for my Name, because thou have been
a man of war, and have shed blood; So that if that Temple of God could not be
builded by blood that was but a Type of the true Temple; surely, the true
Temple cannot be builded with blood or war, but in peace; it is not that Egypt
is righteous enough to build the Temple of the Lord, though they may be made a
scourge to Edom, as Nebuchadnezzar was to Israel, I will not accuse a defensive
sword, because I have seen that the manifestations of God are not all of them
made known to any one man; but I cannot find that any Disciple of Christ should
use a morral sword, as he is a Disciple of Christ, or a Builder of the true
Temple, for he that is a Builder of the true Temple, ought not to take revenge
against his enemies, but commit his cause to the Lord, to whom vengeance
belongs; and therefore Christ bids us to forgive our enemies, least we should
seek vengeance where God seeks none, for we are apt to condemn where God
justifies, and to set our selves upon his Seat; Where is any of Gods Messagers,
but have received this censure from the men of their times? Therefore lest we
should be liable to this failing, Christ warns us not to judge our Brethren,
lest we be judged, for to his own Master he stands or falls: Nay, we are
forbid to judge, according to what it appears to us, John 7.24. judge not
according to appearance, but judge Righteous judgment: And no man can judge by
appearance in many things, but he will doubt whether he judges right or not;
therefore as we cannot measure Gods love, let us forbear judging our selves to
be better than others, lest we undervalue Christ's sufferings.

But as concerning an offensive War, I find not any grounds in Scripture for
it, and if any man can show me any Scripture for it since the death of the
Testator, at which time the Testament was of force, I shall not take it ill at
his hands, for I have not so learned Christ as to flatter any one, Job 17.5. He
that speaks flattery to his friend, the eyes of his Children shall fail;
Prove. 27.5, 6. Open rebuke is better than secret love, faithful are the wounds
of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful.

But some one may Object, Why did not Christ bid the Soldiers lay down their
Arms, that came to ask him what they should do, he did not disencourage them
in their undertaking, but bids them do violence to no man, and be content with
their wages?

I Answer, That any man that is a perfect Performer of this part of his duty,
may give a just account of his actions, but you must observe that he that
advises them to that, commanded also that they should love their enemies, and
bless them that curse them, and pray for them that despitefully use them, Mat.
5.44. So shall you approve your selves Children of your Father which is in
Heaven.

But I suppose that Christ did never advise any of his Disciples to go to War
with the worst of their enemies, nor to fight for a Kingdom of this world, but
rather suffrr by the men of this world, if one must be; and as for his advise
to the Soldiers, I suppose it was rather that they should not break their
engagements in what they were engaged in, as in respect to their Governors, or
their loyalty to their promise, rather than his owning of the War to be
according to the Will of God, for those for whom they fought were such as
Christ does condemn to be mere worldlings; And therefore how could their cause
be good? And yet he would not advise them to break their engagements, but to
act truth, that those whom he had spoke against for doing of injustice, might
not have any thing to accuse him of, neither in advise nor action; For what
difference is there between the Righteous and the Wicked? But only in their
actions, as in respect of their honoring or dishonouring of God: It is a very
vain thing for any one to think they are spiritually Righteous, when they are
not morally just; For how can any man spirituallize himself, and not use
morality? For whatever is manifested to be acted between man and man, is
external, in respect of decayableness and noncontinuance; therefore God
expects, that as you have received a Talent of Righteousness and Truth, so you
should act truth and deal justly with all men, and not to boast of a Talent of
Truth and Righteousness, when you act contrary, and do not improve it, but
abuse the true use of it, for God is better pleased in the just demeanor
toward men, than with thousands of sacrifices by your pretenses in Religion,
even as that is instanced of the Children of Israel in the time of Joshuah, as
you may read Joshuah 9.19. they could not kill the Gibeonites, because they had
made a Promise, that they would not destroy them, although the Lord had
commanded to destroy all those people and places, showing them the danger of
making a league with them, as you may read Deuteronomy the 7th. Oh! how would
many in our days swallow such an Oath, and never think themselves hardly the
worse for so doing! should such a thing extend to their own ends in any one
particular, these people might have pleaded that they could not disobey the
Commands of the Lord, who had commanded them to destroy both young and old, and
that they entered into Oath with them upon no other account, but as being a
people that lived at a distance from the place which God had given them, and
that it would be a great danger of their, sons marrying with their daughters,
and their daughters with the Gibeonites, and so entice them to follow other
gods: Therefore being forewarned by the Lord, they would prevent the worst,
being it was upon a spiritual account, as indeed it would have seemed with many
of our most zealous Professors; but the Princes of Israel say, They may not do
it, for they had entered into Covenant with them, to let them live: Therefore
they would not become Covenant-breakers, but would make a Covenant to be a
Covenant in deed as well as in words; I will endeavor to show you 3 Reasons,
why the Princes of Israel would not break this Covenant, when the people did
earnestly desire it.

First, In respect they had not broken the Command of God willingly or
knowingly, and in case they should break this League with the Gibeonites, they
should offend against him in both, for that God that is the God that bid them
keep those Covenants and Commands, bids them also act truth, and lie not one to
another; that they may demonstrate to all people that they worship a God of
Order, and a God that will not lie: Therefore seeing that they could not keep
both, but that they were circumvented in one, they would be as exact as they
could in the other; many look at what God says in one respect, but not at
others, it had been good if Israel had not entered into League with them, to
the contrary to have destroyed them, but seeing they had, though it was upon an
account, as they thought of strangers, nay, they asked them if they did not
live amongst them, and they said no, they came from a far Country.

I fear very few Professors in our time would be so exact in their carriage,
for the praise of their Master.

Secondly, They knew they should very much dishonor their God in not
confiding, that he was able to keep their sons and their daughters from
believing or worshipping the gods of the Heathen, if they should marry one with
the other, it would seem a very dishonorable part for Israel, when they had
engaged to Gibeon to break their Covenant, for fear the Gibeonites should draw
them, or their sons or daughters from worshipping that God whom they served, it
must needs argue that they give evident witness, that their God is not strong
enough to encounter with the god of the Heathens, and that is the way to
worship a god that is not; but in case thou art engaged, I find no Scripture
grounds that you should ever falsify your word for others, being worse than
you, for that is the way to make thy self worse than they, whereas if Gibeon
live with Israel, who knows but Israel may convert Gibeon; however, Israel
will be Israel so long as they keep in this mind; It was the opinion of an
ancient Heathen, That no man could be spiritually good, if he was not morally
just; and his reason was, That the spiritual God was a God of Order.

But some one may Object, Suppose that those that I have engaged to, should
give me any just occasion to break my Covenant, they being as deeply engaged as
I was, it is they that became Covenant-breakers, and not I; I hope I may freely
break mine, without wronging my Conscience at all?

I Answer, It is one thing to be found an Offender in the sight or judgment of
men, or their customary Institutions, and another to be found an Offender in
the last day before the just Judge of Heaven and Earth, the Laws of men it may
be may clear thee, and so thou can not be said to be an Offender of them; but
if thou approvest thy self not to be guilty of refusing the advice of Christ
and his Apostles, thou must look further than what the Laws of men do
intimate; in some things the Laws of Nations are differing, many Kingdoms
allow that which others condemn, but God is one entire being, and his Law the
one edifying Truth, which teaches us not to render evil for evil, contrariwise
but good; suppose you are but engaged conditionally, even as by indenture,
where there are Obligations laid upon both sides, and thy Partner breaks his
part of the Obligation, thou can not but account it evil in him; And will thou commit the same evil by breaking thy part, when thou condemnest the same
thing in another? Christ advises, us, that if any man compel us to go with him
a mise, to go two; and if any man strike thee on the one cheek, turn to him the
other, thou shall not answer for this offense, but for thy own. And I must
confess, it is my opinion that no one can with any safety break their
engagements for the time they stood engaged at first, though you may receive
great in juries by the other parties default; the Apostle Peter does plainly
intimate as much in his first Epistle 2. Chapter 19, 20, 21. verses, For this
is thank worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully, for what glory is it, if when you are buffeted for your faults, ye
take it patiently; but if when you do well and suffer for it, ye take it
patiently, this is acceptable with God: The Apostle does not advise the servant
to break his Covenant to his Master, because the Master does break his, but
rather suffer what punishment the Master shall inflict upon him; yea, herein is
a Believers joy, that he is accounted worthy to suffer for maintaining the
truth in any one particular, for all are not called to suffer in one manner or
way, though flesh and blood may not seem satisfied with it, by reason of the
present anguish of spirit, for no affliction seems joyous for the present, but
grievous, yet after ward, it yields the pleasant fruit of righteousness, Heb.
12.11. So that though it may seem to terrify thy outward man, yet thy inward
man will be strengthened, the which ought to be rather nourished than
neglected, and though it may seem to prove disadvantagious to thee in this
life, yet here will be thy joy that thou have obeyed the Truth, and can look
death in the face with great boldness, by thy exactness in thy word to all men,
even as David speaks in Psalm 15.4. concerning those that shall be Inhabitants
in Zion, amongst which one thing that is found needful, is to keep his Word,
Though he swears to his hurt, yet he changes not; revenge belongs to the
Lord, if you receive any wrong, commit your cause to him, and do not seek any
revenge upon any man; but let not any seek to circumvent me in this my
description, I put a difference between the People of God promising, and a
people that are in darkness, but I speak of them that engage, when they are in
the tuition of the Lord, or at least ways own themselves so to be, and a
difference between the promises of the Law or under the Law, as they were
understood, and the promises under the Gospel, for under the Law any man might
put away his Wife, only giving her a Bill of devorcement; but Christ tells us,
that it is adultery, to do it in the Gospel, and causes them to commit
adultery also, that are put away in that nature; so it is not every thing that
is customary with men, that is justifiable in the sight of God.

3. Israel had experienced, that God did make it his desire to keep those
engagements that he had made to them, as it is often mentioned in the
Scriptures, though they had broken their engagements as to their particular and
general failings, yet God was so tender, least he should break his part, as
that he does as it were stand and meditate, before he will any ways insist
upon any urgent or austere punishment, and does often invite them to return and
review their ways, and turn to repentance for their backsliding, that he may
have mercy on them, and defer his anger; God is just and merciful, and it
cannot be said of him that he did ever break any engagement to any person or
people, for as his promises have been to his people many times but
conditionally.

For as he engages to be a God and a Defender to them, if they will keep his
Laws, and observe and do his Commands, so likewise he often engages, that if
they will not keep his Law, or perform their part, that he will punish them,
and leave them to their own wills and their own desires, and let them go on in
their own filthiness, until they have fulfilled the desires of their own ways,
and then he will take the Rod and scourge them; so as I said before in this
parricular, God is as just in performing this part of his Covenant, as he was
in performing the other, by reason of the entailment of Truth that did force
him to it, but in respect to those promises that are made absolute, he is so
exact in keeping them, where there is no entailment to the contrary, as that he
will keep his word, though a people do offend him and vex his Holy Spirit, as
is instanced by his promise to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in relation to his
causing their seed to inherit the Land of Canaan; and although his People did
oftentimes offend and vex his Holy Spirit, yet nevertheless, he being a God of
Truth, he would not be moved so far as to make his Promise null and void of
effect.

2. As he had promised that he would render up the only beloved of his delight
his Son Christ Jesus, to the mercies of wicked men, even to do after the
imaginations of their own hearts with him, so far as concerned life to their
appearance, so he did fulfill it to the full, although they had denied to own
him in his intercessions, for a condiscention of love and unity; yea, they did
not own him to be their God, they would have none of him nor none of his
instructions, but did beat his Messengers, and imprison and kill his Prophets,
and showed him all the unhumane respect that possibly could be, and did him all
the dishonor that lay in their power, yet nevertheless God had promised that
he would provide an acceptable sacrifice for the seed of Abraham, A Lamb
without blemish or spot: And though the People were never so wicked and
unhumane, and Breakers of all the Ordinances, Laws and Commands that he had
given them to observe and do, yet he could do no less than perform his
Promise; Otherwise how could it be said that he was a God of Truth?

So as it is plainly understood, that God has been compelled by Truth many
times, to bestow his gracious favors and mercies upon his People, when they
have deserved a curse, and oftentimes, though it might with true acknowledgment
and obedience become a Blessing to them that receive it; so it proves to those
that are obstinately bent, even a curse by their not prizing of it as they
ought to do, even as Christ was to Judas, and several other of the Jews.

Besides, The Israelites durst not break their promise with Gibeon, for fear of
dishonouring their God, and provoking him to anger, by making him odious in the
fight of the Heathen, who do hold of this judgment, That if they do once
promise a thing, their gods will afflict them, if they do not effect it, And
should Israel act below the Heathen? The very Heathen would condemn their God
of injustice, as indeed it was Jacobs answer to his sons, Simeon and Levi, Ye
have troubled me, to make me stink before the Inhabitants of the Land, and I
being few in number, the Canaanites and the Perizites will gather themselves
together and slay me, and all my household; As you may read at large in the 34th
Chapter of Genesis, and the 30th verse, Jacob accounted it a greater offense
for Simeon and Levy to break their Covenant, than to let their Sister remain
with Hamor, as indeed seeing she had been the occasion on the one part of
working the defame in Israel; even so they had made Israel to stink before the
Nations on the other side, and so consequently the God of Israel.

And if you do but mark in the following Chapter, you shall find that God does
take notice of it in the first verse, God calls to Jacob to go up to Bethel,
and dwell there: If you do but turn to the 28th Chapter of this Book, you shall
find what Jacob did promise in Bethel, whether he is commanded to return, that
is, to his promise in Bethel, That if God would bring him safe to his Fathers
house, he should be his God: Now God had performed his promise, but Jacob had
failed in his, in that his sons had broken their Covenant with Shechem and
Hamer.

Object. Well, but what does God call Jacob to go to Bethel, or to his promise
in Bethel to do?

Answ. It was to take notice, that he had broke his promise, and therefore he
commands Jacob to build an Altar there, for he would not answer him on that
Altar El Elosie Israel, or in the breaking of the Covenant, but in Bethel, or
his owning of him to be his God, and therefore Jacobs first work is to cleanse
and purge his house of Idols, as you may read in the 35th Chapter, and to bury
them in Shechem, before he could go up to Bethel, and tells his Family, that
they must change their garments and be clean, and then arise and go to build an
Altar in Bethel, and seek the Lord that answered him in his distress, and by
that means a terror did strike into the hearts of the neighboring Cities that
they journed safely.

Secondly, Israel had purchased Gods displeasure not long before this
engagement was made with the Gibeonites, as is instanced in the 7th Chapter of
Joshuah, and the 11th verse, Israel has sinned says the Lord, in breaking
their Covenant which I commanded them, they have also stolen and have put it
amongst their own stuff, and therefore they could not stand before their
enemies: So you may see plainly, that God is very exact to have Israel keep his
Law and Commandments, and had they not entered into Covenant with the
Gibeonites to let them live, they durst not have preserved any of their lives,
but seeing they had engaged to do it, though it was unknown to them of their
living in that place, God was pleased better with it than if they had broke
their Covenant, and Gibeon is not the last in process of time that laid their
helping hand to build the Temple of the Lord in Judah, as you have in the third
Chapter of Nehemiah and the 7th verse, which shows that God was well pleased
with Israel for their keeping their Covenant, in accepting of the Gibeonites
into his favor for Isreal's sake, whereas Achan offending against him, when
there was no Obligation to urge him to it, he will not be friends with him nor
with Israel, till they have destroyed him, but Israel must fall before the men
of Aie, yea, and those that have not offended with polluting themselves in the
forbidden inticements; therefore it is not that men do fall before their
enemies always for the sins that they commit themselves, but for the
pollutions of others Israel is said to sin in that one had sinned, even Achan,
and God would suffer even 36 of the Israelites to dye before the men of Aie,
and the rest to flee for Achans offense; therefore I would entreat every man
whatever, that professes himself to be a Christian, to take heed of offending
God in this, or any other thing; for be sure, if God do not take up a
controversy against us for our backsliding, yet we may be the occasion of his
fury against others that are more innocent than we; for God will not be friends
with Israel, till the Babylonish garment be burned, and Achan stoned.

Look to it as well as you please, you know your pay will be according to your
work; I need not tell you, that there are more Babylonish garments than one,
and I sear some that profess high Notions, have clothed themselves with them
from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, only wearing a religious
cloak over it, to deceive; O men, look well to your selves, and let not your
own hearts condemn you before God, and before I will not condemn you, but I
speak my mind plainly, because there is too too many that heal your wound too
slightly, even as the Prophet Jeremiah complains in the 6th Chapter of his
Prophecy and the 14th verse, They have healed the hurt of my Daughter
slightly, crying, peace, peace, when there is no peace: So it has plainly
appeared in our time, that we have pretended to a great measure of light in
Religion, But where is the man that cried, We are all fell short? But rather
accounting that the Judgment that is fallen upon thee O England belonged to
Rome and the Beast, accounting of Christ's Reign in person, and not minding to
set up his Power in our hearts, just as the Children of Israel did account
themselves happier in the Land of Canaan whilst they were in the Wilderness,
than they did in the pleasure of God, by which they were to enjoy it, and so
fell to murmering and repining at Gods dealing with them according to his
pleasure; therefore he slew that generation of men, and would not suffer them
to enter into the Land at all; so may I say of thee O England, that have had
more discourse of the throwing down of Babylon, than thou have had zeal to the
God that should throw Babylon down into the bottomless pit; if pretenses could
have done it, I must confess thou might have gone a great way in it, but you
sought to cleanse only the outside, and did not furbish the inside to answer
it; it would be a very small satisfaction to thee to have Christ reign a
thousand years upon the earth, and to begin his reign, before he has been
lifted up in thy heart, therefore first seek the Kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof, and then ^e sure all other things shall be added unto
you; and do not think to dwell with the Father, unless ye eat the flesh of the
Son, and if ye eat the flesh of the Son, ye shall live by him, even as he
lives by the Father, John 6.56, 57. Therefore do not think of satisfying your
selves with any thing below him, but be sure to eat that which the Scriptures
does manifest to be in him: Thus wishing the one Almighty and infinite being to
direct both you and I, that we may not look at things as they appear customary,
but as they are in reality and truth, that we may believe in him that is our
peace, By adding virtue to our Faith, and to Virtue Knowledge, and to Knowledge
Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and to
Godliness Brotherly Kindness, and to Brotherly Kindness Charity, and if these
things be in you and abound, you will neither be barren nor unfruitful in the
Knowledge of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. For so is the Will of God, that
with well-doing you might put to silence the ignorance of foolish men as free,
and not using your liberty for a cloak of malitiousness, but as the Servants of
God, 1 Pet. 2.15, 16. And if you have so learned Christ, as ^o observe and do
these things that you are invited to, you need not fear what man can do unto
you, but you will get into a stronger harbor, and take your repose, and wait
till you hear the voice of the Bridegroom, crying, Come my People, enter thou
into thy Chamber and shut thy doors about thee, hide thy self as it were for a
little moment, until the indignation be over-past, Esaias 26.20.

FINIS.

