THE WELSHMANS ANSWER, TO THAT FALSE PETITION Which was printed of her
Reputation, and Protestation made in her Vindication of her defamed Reputation.

Written by me, Shon op Shones, by the consent of her Cosins of creat quality;
Wilham Powell, Shonny Morgan, and her Cousin Cadwalladore, and her Cousin
Criffen, and her Cousin Shenkin.

Cots plutter a nails, if her tid put know how tid so apuse us, her would
would have them py their long tusks, and pumble her nose soundly.

LONDON. Printed for T. Reinor. 1641.

THE WELSHMANS REPLICATION, To a Petition and Protestation made in vindication
of her defamed Reputation. Ann. Dom. 1641.
FOr, whereas to her creat disgrace and defamation, a Petition and Protestation
has bin made and framed py idle and frantic wits, tat reflects not only upon
her own proper person, but her whole Country, as well of te Shentility as
Commonalty, which her cannot hear in such deriding and sheering manner cried up
and down te streets, but her was enforced to vindicate her reputation therein
publicly by writing, and if not by te same prevented, it may in time coming
be an occasion of creater trouble.

Put it is not her particular case only, to pe apused and scandalized py such
Pamphlets, put te Autors thereof have pin so prodigal, as to apuse not only
her self, and te rest of her cosins Countrymen, put also tivers teserving
members of te English state as well creat persons as lower, whose dispositions
have not agreed to every ones humor; yea, they have not pin ashamed to apuse
her King, queen, and Prince, put Nobility and High Court of Parliament, which
if they pe suffered without punishment, such danger may arise poth to City and
Country, as was hard to appease.

These foul apuses in printing such pooks, under color either of Parliament
proceedings; or Irish News, has produced a creat scandal over te whole
Kingdom, which her hears is also taken notice of py Outlandish Nations. Her
also was never read such printing in former Parliaments without power of the
same, put now poor fellows and pretended writers pends their endeavors to
devise scandalous pooks, pe they of what Nature or quality soever, pe it of
never such ill consequence, be it against never so creat and venerable Pishits.
Is there put te least thing done in Parliament, nay put a tale or thought of
such a thing of proceeding against any man whatsoever, pe he Lord or Peer, if
not py them fancied, put present a pook is made of them, if they have put te
name of the person, it was to her a cood reason to make and create a Pamphlet
of them. Put please me God, this is not all, her tivelish and mortal enemies
perform; te waters are acquainted with the affections of the people, how they
stand inclined, who was ready to take part with her foes and who not; py which
such remote enemies tat have intelligencer in her Kings Provinces, may know te
better how to compass their designs in agitation against her Person and
Country, which is of creat advantage to her enemies poth public and private.

Her was therefore earnestly entreat, tat this her writing, showing her
intention to defend her reputation may be respected, tat such pooks which tend
only to te stirring up strife and dissension, may not again pe ritten or
published to her discrace and discredit. Her affections are no ways tardy to
any thing tat may prove profitable and necessary to her advancement in her
Country and te English people in their Britannicall glory and fame. Her
endeavors shall always comply with her cood King and his high Court of
Parliament in in settling of peace and quietness, which her was ever apide in
all her Kings nations, her shall pe willing to loose her own dear person and
coods in any service when her was commanded in maintenance thereof. Her was
sensible with cood feeling, tat te authors of these pooks are sheering and
pabling poor rogues, desirous in their tivelish works to please the times, pe
it crooked or straight. Her is so well literated in latter examples, tat py
examples her can make manifest what her say, and defend it to pe cood.

Te troubles petween England and Scotland, which nation has since approved
themselves loyal and faithful subjects to their cood King, and tat all they
did in taking up Arms, was only in defense of their Religion, Laws, and
Liperties of tat Kingdom, which tivelish persons seeked to testroy. And during
these troubles, what evil pooks and scandalous papers were printed and
published in disgrace; and contrariwise, what pooks were devised in praise and
honor of te Pishits, and others in creat places of Authority in Church and
State, that were incendaries in those dissentions. And since the meeting of
this plessed Society, tat there is by the wisdom thereof a Peace concluded
petween poth Countries, her perceives contrary pooks made in honor of the
Scots, and defamation of malefactors, py which her well sees these fellows
will do any thing, right or wrong. Put her will say no more put this, if her
desires pe not py this writing considered, her was intend in humility to pe a
Petitioner in pehalf of her self and Country, to the Parliament for relief, and
punishing te Autors of these abuses.

FINIS.

