The Malignants Conventicle: OR, A learned Speech spoken by M. WEB, a Citizen,
to the rest of his Society, Which did consist of Citizen-Malignants, Papists,
Priests, Apprentices, Wenches.
At their common Tavern meeting house in Lincolnes Inne-fields.

In which are many things very necessary to be observed, and of so great
concernment, that if you will not believe, then take what follows: For now all
is out.

depiction of Mr. Webb giving his speech in the tavern

LONDON, Printed for Anti-Dam-mee, in Tell-troth Lane, at the sign of the
Holly-wand. 1643. Jan: 28th 1642

THE Malignants Conventicle: OR, A learned Speech spoken by M. WEB, a Citizen,
to the rest of his Society, at their common Tavern meeting house in
Lincolns-Inne-fields.
Gentlemen,
I Have a great matter to impart unto you, therefore I pray you prepare your
ears to attend what I shall say, we are none here (I hope) but such as are
faithful.

You may remember that at our first meeting we adventured on a far more
dangerous work then now we sail by: The Cavaliers were not then so well backed
with a popislt Army, that will stand sure to us against the King and
Parliament, and all the honest prefessors of the truth in the City, but now
they are grown strong, and that distracts the Parliament, and makes all the
true Protestants in the City at their wits end; You know how careful I have
been to accomplish the expectation of all our hopes, though our bad cause has
had as bad success, yet let us not leave off: for if ever we do but gain an
opportunity to plunder the City, our cracked fortunes may gain estates, and
though we are now so poor that all we about an hundred of us, are not able to
pay for these two gallons of Wine we have called for, but must score for one of
them, yet would that pray replenish all our wants and fill our purses.

Gentlemen, I know you expect that I should speak something of what is past,
and therein I shall endeavor to give you the best satisfaction I can: You know
what fair promises Father Andrews and Father Bullock and the rest of the
Priests and Friars made us if we could (...) most damnable design they set us
on, besides the great rewards of many; you know that my Brother Toll-taker is
to be quafferer to the new Cardinal, and my Brother Cheese-monger the Clarke
of the Kitchen; the bonny Porter shall be made a great Doctor by a special
Writ: and his consen John the Cardinals chief Secretary, and for the rest you
know what was faithfully promised, though they never mean to pay it; Brethren,
you know our case is desperate; therefore desperate designs do best befit us,
if we ever expect advancement.

You know the first design was to frame a cunning Petition in pretense of
peace, to gain an opportunity of mutiny in the City, and this was carried very
discreetly, we got many thousand of hands to it in a short time, for we made
them believe (poor simple fools) that it was for peace, and there were (as we
thought) three quarters of the City ready to back us, for trading was grown
dead in the City, and the Parliament caused them to pay money for their own
good and safety, and gladly might they pay it to prevent us if they understood
themselves well, what with our dissembling words, and what with our fained
hands we flattered, and forged names enough to our Petition, and with a goodly
attendance we came to Guild Hall, with good cudgells in our hands, we passed
the guard of Soldiers, and entered the Hall; and thinking the City to be our
own, we fell upon the Soldiers and beat them terribly, and had not those
without broke in upon us, we had gone up to the Parliament men that was above
with the Aldermen, and we had made a bloody day of it, but when we saw that our
side was not so strong as we expected, we was feign to run some one way, some
another to hide us any where, yet some very manfully stayed and delivered the
Petition, and it was read, but here was the mischief of it, the cunning paces
that read it discovered all our intents, and understood by the Petition that we
did but jeare the City with it; and so they sent us away like fools as we
came, and some of us were committed to Prison as we justly deserved; For I must
confess unto you Gentlemen, that it went extremely against my conscience, and
so it does still, to abuse the Parliament: but what will not such desperate men
as we are do for hope of profit and honor? This makes us forget religion,
love, liberty, conscience, and all that does not conduce to our profit. Nay
they were so cunning to discern that we would have peace without truth, and
indeed you know it was so; fo we did not desire truth, only pretended to
desire peace, aiming neither it peace nor truth. Desire truth! No: if you would
have the truth of it, we could with that all truth and Peace work at an end in
the City, that we might come to plundiering and pillaging, for there lies our
hopes, if we could once set them together by the Ears, we would part, the
spoil.

Gentlemen, you know that when this project had so bad an issue, we caused our
Apprentizes to combine as we did before them, that they might see if they could
cozen the Parliament by violent petitioning, we our selves would be near hand,
if they wanted aid, and indeed poor silly souls they were as earnest for us as
we could desire, they got thousands of Hands to their Petition presently, and
to Westminster they went several times with it, and stood so stoutly to our
Treachery, that they were ready to fall foul on most religious Members of both
Houses, they cried for Peace on any terms, Peace, nothing but Peace, for you
know if the Parliament would let our Cavaliers have Peace on what terms they
would, then they would (as we) give them good words till we had gained an
opportunity to take away all that they have from them, then we would advance
our fortunes, enrich our selves, and murder them; then Nine-penny-Moll, nor you
sarah, nor my Cozen Besse there, would command us, as we how are glad to
subject to you, but the spruce Citizens Wives and daughters should satisfy the
lust both of them and us, as the Northern Lasses have done to some of them
already.

Well our poor prentizes had but a cold Answer, the House found that it was but
a fallacy, and respected them accordingly, and our hopes was twarted in this
also.

So we drew up a most damnable abusive Book amongst our selves, to scandalize
the Parliament, I know you have all seen it, it is called the Cities Complaint
to the House of Commons, etc. This Book we got a foolish Printer that did not
know what he did, to print, for it was such a most wicked, invective Pamphlet,
that had he had either Conscience, Religion, Obedience, or humanity, if he
knew what it was, he would not have meddled with it, nor indeed would I
Gentlmen, had I any other hopes to rest on.

But we got it perfected, and thousands of them printed, and it beguiled the
Affections of many, and was applauded, and generally amongst our brethern
malignants, and Newtrals believed, we scattered them about the Palace at
Westminster, about the Hall, and in the City, and did it so cunningly, that we
were none of us taken, only the Printer was suspected, and sent for, but we got
him off, because he so handsomely fained the Author thereof to be a particular
man, slipped out of the way, and so it was hushed over, then we fell to printing
of them again, and got some spending money, by them, which has kept us ever
since, but here was a mischief fell out in this too, for some cunning pate or
other has put the same Title upon an other Pamphelet that discovered all our
knavery, and did us as much hurt as our own did us good; surely God is against
us, for we strive directly against the prescript rule me are taught in his holy
word. But let us not be weary, but run till we come to the end of the Race,
perhaps we may win the Garland, but I must tell you it is very unlikely.

I know you are not ignorant how my brother Towler played Bo-peepe with them,
when he run like a hunted Hare, (being the more fearful because his
Conscience smote him, for his knavery) but he was taken and carried to Prison
(as well he deserved, and my brother Cheesmonger was as faithful as he, for he
had furnished his house with good store of Ammunition for our design, if ever
we gain an opportunity to plunder, but I know not how God that brings all
wickedness to light, in due time discovered that to the Parliament, and it was
all taken, and we deprived of him too.

Afterward we wrote two pretended Speeches, one of the Earl of Pembrokes, the
other the Lord Brooks, and sold three times as many of them as of the former,
nay we forged the Clearke of the Parliaments hand to it, and an order for
thanks be given to the Lord Brook for the same, and this project took
bravely, for there were thousands in the City did verrily believe it to be
true, but at last it was discerned, and the Printer committed, but this
business passed well, if may call it well, being such a base Action.

The Cavaliers by this time in the Countries were confident that we had made
London our own, and so we our selves thought too, but that our consciences
told us that such courses could never prosper.

They fell to pillaging, robing, and killing the Country Protestants, and
harkening daily when an opportunity would envite them to London, but amongst
the rest of the Cavaliers that came from Oxford into Nottingham shire; were
basely served at a little Village near Newarke upon Trent, there was about
forty of them that had made a vow to ravish all the pretty maids in the Town,
this Protestation they made at an Alehouse in Newarke, and was over heard by a
Boy that drew Beer in the house, who went to this Village, and gave the People
of the Town notice thereof. The Cavaliers not knowing hereof went upon their
design, and when they came thither they espied a very handsome nut-brown
Less, standing near a great house that was at the Towns end; who seeing of
them come toward her took sanctuary in the house: and about twenty of the
Cavaliers after ^er, expecting that they had gotten a prize, but when they were
come into he Hall, they found above forty good stout fellows that were ready
provided for them, who shut fast the door, and cudgelled them soundly, that
they were not able neither to go nor stand, so that they had little list
afterward to wenching; the other twenty hearing them cry out ran all away,
fearing they were betrayed (for the least suspicion in the world fears an ill
cause) and about half a mile off they came to a Farmers house, which stood at
the end of another little village, where was no body at home but the good wife
and her maid, who seeing them come, left their dairy and went into the Town,
the mean while the Cavaliers seized upon their Butter-milk and curds and whay
and cream, and such white meat as was in the dairy-house, where they filled
their bellies so full that they could scarce go, and when they had done,
carried with them such Hens and Ducks and other poultry as they could well, for
indeed their bellies were so full they could scarce carry themselves.

At last the good wife was returned with her maid and above forty women with
her, for the men were soon gone to the other village to prevent the plot, and
the rest were at plow, or some husbandmens labor; and all the Cavaliers were
gone out of the Dairy-house, but one of the women espied two or three of them
together untrussing in a ditch, who lay as close as they could for fear the
women should spy them, she gave notice to the rest, who fell upon them with
Spits, Forks, Racks, Spades, Staves, and such weapons as they could get, and
basted them welfavouredly, and the Buttermilk and Whay did so work with them,
that they were so troubled with the squirt, that the women trased them by the
smell, and so met with most of them, for they were not able to fly fast before
them, so that they were soundly paid before they got to Newarke, and had little
list to boast of their success, or to attempt the like after.

But to go on concerning our proceedings here, you know there was a Common Hall
called at Guild Hall, and we did hope then to have cried down the Lord Major
and to have raised a mutiny against the Parliament men that came thither, my
cosen John be was appointed to stand in the Court yard, and rail against the
Lord Major and the rest, and call them Traitors; and curse them soundly, which
he performed excellent well, and indeed had many fell in to side with him as he
thought, but one that knows him (who hates our base courses) took notice of
him, and has discovered him, and I fear he will be apprehended if he do not
fly for it, therefore we must be careful to cherish him all we can, least he
discover us, and so we be all hanged for abusing the King and Parliament, and
indeed the whole Kingdom.

We had a great deal of care to take the opportunity of this day, we had many
scours, and prevailed with some Common-counsell-men to be ready to assist us in
the making of an uproare, which was attempted at the first but soon dashed
again, and (indeed) whereas we thought to gain great advantage that day, our
bad cause sustained loss.

Such care had we to make all things sure that we went to the Brokers, and
hired Gowns that we might be entertained like Common Council men of the City
without suspicion, and there we rusht in and stood amongst them in our borrowed
Gowns (I wonder indeed that the Broakers would trust us, it may be that they
will want the return of some of them) but here was a mischief befell us too,
for the Proctor was known, and is like to answer for it: I tell you Gentlemen,
me thought when we were in our grave fur'd gowns, that we were in too good a
posture to betray, or to do the least hurt to an honest cause, as you know
theirs is; I know not (what was the cause) but I am sure that we were ashamed
of our cause, and so we shall ever be, we did as much as nothing.

Yet I conceive that we have now gained a good opportunity to plunder the City
if our Apprentises can but obtain this present opportunity of equal power
with the best Citizens to dispose of State matters, which will be a great means
of mutiny, let us be wise to raise a strong commotion, least delay discover all
our treachery.

Gentlemen, you see hitherto we have not prospered nor our cause, it is bad and
thrives accordingly, what shall we do in the next place, I desire that every
one may freely speak, that we may conclude what to do, for now is the time or
never, we and all our business is more and more discovered, and the more we
delay the weaker we shall now be, therefore let us conclude at this time
concerning the next design.

The Answer that was made to this Speech is not yet discovered, when I hear of
it, I shall publish it.

FINIS.

