OF BAPTISM.
Your Quaeres about Baptism are three: and these, 1. What warrant you have from
the words of Christ for your baptising of Infants before they do actually
believe. 2. Whether Baptism makes a Man or Woman a Christian, without Faith
and following of Christ in all his Commands and steps left upon Record for our
Imitation. 3. Whether the baptising of Believers, is not the Command of Christ,
practiced by the Apostles, yea or no, and left upon Record for us to follow and
Imitate till his second coming.


I Will begin with this your Last Quaere. For I perceive, that the baptising of
Believers, does keep such a buzzing in your ears, that till it be granted you,
nothing will be heard: Sir, for quietness and brevity sake I grant it, and
this is all my answer to this your Quaere. Yea I granted as much to you, in the
beginning, if you remember: and so thus also briefly, and quietly I have
answered almost a side of your second sheet, wherein are four Considerations
brought, to prove the lawfulness, the usefulness, the necessity of this
practice, of Baptising Believers, with these solemn words, at the end of every
consideration, four times repeated, Judge ye, and Judge Righteous Judgment,
for God will.

Section I. Of Baptism of Infants.
I hope you will think me to judge Righteous Judgment, if I Judge according to
your Judgment, That the Word of God does allow and authorize, baptising of
Believers; but then I must differ from your judgment in another, That the
Baptising of Believers does not disallow, or exauthorate, the Baptising the
Infants of Believers, and that the one leads in the other, as it were by the
Hand; if you had no more to say and dispute against the Baptising of Infants of
believing Parents, than against the baptising of believers, the difference
betwixt us had never begun.

If I speak Parables unto you, it is because you know not the Scriptures, not
the very Scriptures your self does here quote, Matthew, 28.19. Acts 238. Acts
8.38. Acts 10 47. Acts 22.16. etc. What do they all import, but that, Those
Jews or Heathens, who were grown persons, aliens from the Covenant, had
embraced the Gospel and became believers, were presently baptized, or became
baptiseable: And now that this is no bar, or contradiction to the Baptising of
Infants, appears, for that the Infants of those believers baptized and entered
into Covenant, if they had any, had likewise a right unto baptism, being in
the same Covenant with their believing Parents, and either were in present
baptized, or were of right baptiseable: So that the baptism of believers,
makes way and gives ground for the baptism of their Infants, whence in other
texts, such and such believers were baptized, they and all their House; which
is according to the Tenor of the Cov nane, in which God is, the God of the
believer and his seed, so that the one has as good right to the Seal thereof
as the other by virtue of the Covenant, God having Covenanted with both
together.

I have formerly suggested unto you the only word, that must help you here, to
make the baptism of believers strong against the baptism of Infants; and it
is, the Word only; for if there were such a precept or practice to be found in
Scripture, of Baptising Believers only, then you would write something near the
matter (but yet should not so carry it away, to the overthrowing of the
baptising of the Infants of believers, the Scripture no where calling them
unbeleevers): But none of the Scriptures you cite, none of your considerations
you mention, do so much as mention, much less infer the baptising of Believers
only; Therefore now, Judge you, but Judge Righteous Judgment, even as Good
does, you see, in your own Texts.

Or do you mean another matter, as I guess it, That Infants of believers born
within the Church and Covenant, and baptized in their minority, when afterward
they attain to some ripeness of knowledge and profession of faith of Christ,
should then, as believers themselves, be baptized again, Then I must tell you,
that which you call the first and great Ordinance of the New Testament, is
neither great, nor first, nor Ordinance, namely such Baptising of Believers;
Nay then I must tell you, such baptising of believers, is not only to be
neglected and omitted, but slighted and rejected, yea preached against and
confuted, as now in present it shall be. For what is this your baptising of
believers, but a rebaptising of them who were baptized before rightly, and (for
any thing you know) believers also?

For first, God having given the Infants of believing Parents, Right unto the
Sacrament of Baptism, by special privilege of their Birth within the bosom
of the holy Church, and the Minister having administered the Sacrament of
Baptism unto such in the true Element of Water, with the Evangelical words, In
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, according to
Christ's institution, Containing in them the matter and form, and so the very
essence of outward baptism, such baptism is good, sufficient, effectual and
avayleable to Gods Children, and they ought not to be rebaptised: especially
there being the devout invocation made to God for his blessing, also a serious
application of both, the Element, and Word unto the party who receives both,
and that secret reference which this action has to life and remision of sins
by virtue of Christ's own compact made solemnly with his Church, there is not
any thing more required to the mystical perfection of baptism outwardly
within the Church of God, constituted and planted.

Now that such Baptism is not to be reiterated, that Infants thus baptized,
are not to be rebaptised, I shall prove unto you, both by the Word of God, and
some reasons thence deduced: Ephesians. 4.5. There is one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one Baptism, not only, 1. Because it has every where one and the
same substance, consisting in one and the same matter; one and the same form;
for we are not to use any other Elemental matter, but Water, if it may be had,
nor any other verbal form but this, I baptize thee in the name of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost; not only, 2. Because it offreth unto all men one
and the same grace, even one says of one Lord into which we are baptized, but
One also, for that it ought not to be received of any one man above once, even
as we serve that Lord, which is but one, because no other can be joined with him,
and embrace that faithwhich is but one, because it admiteth no inovation; so we
receive haptism which is but one, because it cannot, and must not be received
often. Thus all the Pious, and Learned, and Primitive Professors have
interpreted this Text, and conceived of this matter, the Iteration of Baptism
once given, to be a manifest contempt and violation of this Apostolical axiom
and Aphorism, insomuch, that though the baptising minister were a Scismatick
or Heretic, or a wicked one, they held their baptism good and valid, and
would not repeat it being performed in the true Essentials, the form of Words,
and matter of Water (as before) yea and when such were converted and returned
into the Church, they did note rebaptise them, but received them and held them
in that baptism which they had in their Schism and Heresy, knowing the same
to have been according to the form prescribed.

I have no reason I confess, to put a weapon of an objection into your hands,
out of 19. Acts 5. but if I do, it is to take it out of your hands again, both
to give you a blow in present, and prevent an after-blow. It is indeed there
thus said, When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus; and its said before Verse 3. that they were baptized unto John's Baptism:
This Text has been much and mightily urged, and pressed, even to the Vexation
of the Spirit, by your torturing Anabaptists, and truly the words lie
doubtfully and ambiguously at the first hearing, as if Paul baptized the
Disciples of Ephesus with the Baptism of Christ, who had before received the
Baptism of John, and were never full and well cleared and explicated, until
Beza took them in hand, who ingeniously confesses that he received the same
interpretation, from that Noble, Pious, Virtuous, and Industrious Divine
Philippus Marnixius, that singular ornament of the Belgic Church; who was born
in 1538. and dyed in 1598. and lies in body buried at Leyden. I say this,
because his name ought to be precious in the Churches even for this
interpretation, (though he wrote Commentaries upon diverse other books of the
Bible:) and so ought the name of Theodorus Beza, to be venerable with us, as
that singular ornament of the Gallick Church, for the like Piety, Industey,
Learning, and Virtue, as by whose means this interpretation, came to our hands
of this Church.

I remember I have read it or heard it, written and spoken, and I may (I think)
write it and speak it again, that as when God found David, he sound a Man after
his own heart: So when David found Mollerus, he found an expounder, according
to his heart, and I may apply it thus here also, That when Christ found Paul,
he found a chosen vessel and beloved Apostle, after Christ own heart, and when
he found Luke, he found a choice Historiographer of the Acts of the Apostles,
after his heart, and a beloved Physician, besides; so when Luke found Beza,
(and Beza Marnixius,) he found interpreters of them, after his own heart, and
Beloved Divines moreover. But what need such a Trumpet before hand? The Alms
given, the interpretations given by these woe thies, will deserve it, and I do
not blow this for your sake, Sir, but others that may (perhaps) read it.

The sum of the Interpretation is this, that in the 5th. Verse above cited,
Luke speaks not of any Baptism done by Saint Paul, But Saint Paul speaks on
still of John's Baptism, and so you and all Anabaptists are blown away from
this Text, as to any Anabaptisme or Rebaptisations hence to be had: This is a
short and sweet interpretation, if it can be proved; Yes learned Beza proves
it, and that from the two Greek Conjunctive Particles, (...) (I pray Sir, stand
aloof, if you be afraid; but you shall not need, I do not Conjure; It is no
Heathen Greek, no humane learning, be content, that for this once, or twice (If
I did it before) that I may write or speak a little Greek, it being, the
Christian Greek, and Divine Learning.) These two particles, ever have relation
one to the other, knitting together the parts of the Verse or Verses, and make
them answer fitly one to the other. Therefore the particle (...) in the 5.
Verse, must necessarily answer to the particle (...) in the 4th. Verse, and so
in no wise does or will suffer, that the series of the speech be broken of, as
if the former in the 4th. Verse were to be attributed to Paul the speaker, and
the latter part in the 5th. Verse, to Luke the Writer: So then the words in the
5th. Verse, are the words of Paul, who (having before related and approved of
John's Doctrine and Baptism, as true and Evangelicall, does here also relate
and approve of the peoples hearing his Doctrine and receiving his Baptism; and
so laying his hands upon the 12. Disciples here present (baptized after John's
baptism, but not by John, as who deceased long before, 30. or 40. years; In
Judea, a place also far distant from this City of Ephesus, where these twelve
Disciples dwelt, baptized (in all likelihood) of some of John's Disciples.) And
the gifts following thereupon, which before Paul signified by the name of the
Spirit, and of which he had questioned them, He confirmed and established the
Ephesine Church: And so (to show yet farther) that Beza and the other above
named are intepreters after Lukes heart (as I said) see again Luke himself in
Acts 1.6. and 7. verses, where both are joined together in like manner by the
same Particles (...), and (...)

Yea moreover, if Paul had here baptized these 12. Disciples of Ephesus, sure
he would have made mention of it in the 1 Cor. 1.13, 14, etc. where of set
purpose he reckoned up such as were baptized by him, not only at Corinth, but
else where; Yea and writing from Ephesus to Corinth, he does not mention them
amongst the rest, whom if he had baptized, he surely would and should

I wish indeed, that those of our excellently Learned Translators, who took
this part of the Acts of the Apostles in hand, had expressed the meaning
thereof in some playner and more perspicuous English, and had made it plain
upon the Tables (Verse or Margin) that he might have run that reads it, and
he that reads it might have seen and understood, that, they who heard ( John,
when living, and believed his Doctrine) were here spoken of to have been
Baptized of him, and not the 12. Disciples of Ephesus hearing Paul to have been
baptized of him as the words now read seem to show, which occasioned (though
through their ignorance and wilfulness) this error of Rebaptising. But I will
not be so presumptuous, as to proscribe or prescribe any thing here.

But, it may be, you, and the Anabaptists, who comply with the Papists in
diverse other of their Tenets, do also hold with them in this also, that John's
baptism was much different from Christ's baptism, and not a like effectual,
(like as you say the same of our baptising of Children, that it is invalid and
contrary to Christ's baptism) and to therefore dream stlll of Paul's rebaptising
these 12. Disciples, baptized of John, that so you may ground your dipping
again, of grown persons, baptized before of us. I must in a word tell you, That
John his, and Christ his baptism differ not in the nature and substance, which
is one and the same in both, and both but one and the same baptism; as to the
Essence, (they differ indeed in Circumstance, John baptising into Christ, as to
come and to suffer, and Christ's Apostles baptising into Christ, as come and
suffered.) If you allege the words of John, against this, Matthew. 3.11. I
baptize you with Water, but be that comes after me, shall baptize you with the
Holy Ghost and with Fire, it is but a poor shift, to shift off that to the
baptism of John and Christ, which is put upon the persons of John and Christ,
for the words carry only a difference of the Ministers of one and the same
baptism. John dispencing it outwardly in Water by the hand of Man, and Christ
dispencing it inwardly by the Finger of his Spirit, which is as Fire Its but
Popish sophistry to compare John's baptism with water, and Christ's baptism with
Fire: John's baptism with water, is only to be compared to Christ's baptism,
with water, and then both the baptism of John and of Christ are but one, both
in Authority, for Christ, Authorized and Appointed it, John 3 3. H^ that sent
me to baptize with water, etc wa^ God: as also in Essence (as I hinted) for
John used the right Element and matter, and baptized with Water; and the right
Words or form, invocating the sacred Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (is
appears, both because it was the form known to John, and the Apostles who
certainly baptized many before the death of Christ, and before that form was
solemnly and publicly declared, Math. 28.19 after Christ's Death, and
Resurrection: besides, that in the 19. of the Acts, Saint Paul testifies that
John baptized into faith, on Christ to come, and so knowing Christ, he could
not be ignorant of the Father and the Spirit, yea John 1.33. there is a
manifest Testimony of the Father, sending to him, and telling him of the
Spirits descending like a Dove upon him, who was the Son of God. So thirdly,
they were the same in effect and efficacy. For John preached (and practiced)
the baptism of Repentance, for, or unto, the Remission of Sins, Mark 1.4. the
same which the Apostles did in and by their administration of baptism.

And Christ himself testifies, that the baptism of John pertained to the
fulfilling of righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. and that the Publicans and People
being baptized of John, Justified God; But the Phariseet despising the Counsel
of God, were not baptized, Luke 7.29. Whereby it appears, that John's baptism,
was a part of that All Righteousness; a piece of the whole Counsel of God,
which they that partaked of, Justified and declared God to be good and
righteous.

Were it not so, the Apostles themselves might be questioned, whether truly
baptized, as who were no doubt baptized of John, some of them being first his
Disciples: for where else should they be baptized, seeing Christ with his own
hands baptized none, unless one of them should baptize another, which is not
probable? And Lastly, If John's baptism were not one and the same with ours,
that we have of Christ's, how do we enjoy the same common baptism with Christ,
who was baptized of John? It will follow, That Christ was baptized with another
baptism than we are, and so that our baptism was not sanctified in the person
and flesh of Christ, (like as the Jews circumcision was) and so it will abate
much of our Comfort that we have Christian Baptism, the members one and the
same Baptism with our head.

Thus I have driven you off this shore of Jordan John Baptists Wharf, where you
see you cannot land or ground your dipping of Christians, or your Rebaptising
of Christened people (as we speak.) Though I must withal prompt you here, that
our Quaere is in these terms twixt Anabaptists and us. Whether the baptism of
Christ, (which is given to and received by infant Caristians or Christian
infants) may be iterated, and you and they bring a Text to show that the
baptism of John was iterated, which as it is not to the scope and purpose, so
neither can you show the same was iterated ever in the twelve Disciples, or any
other baptized of John. I say, so long as you hold the baptism of John and
Christ, to be two different and repagnant baptismes, you cannot enforce upon us
from John's baptismes iterated, (suppose so;) Christ's baptism to be iterated: It
will be best for you therefore (see how still and ever I am ready to give the
best counsel I can) to yield to the identity of both John's and Christ's baptism
as to the nature and substance of them, and so indeed you may argue from the
one to the other. Hale in therefore again, your Fly-boat, to John Baptists
shore, and see if you can land there, any thing to your purpose, cast on this
right side your net again into Jordan, and catch a frog: Whatsoever you get,
you then and thus will lose your new and true friends, the Papists and
Jesuits; for they row hard against you, and these throw their nets on the
other side, holding that John and Christ's baptism are very far asunder and
different in the very Essentials; and do and will accurse you with Tridentine
Book, Bell, and Candle, and Lantern too of their ship, (none of which, I know,
you can abide, especially not the Book and Bell) and Anathematise all, who say
that John and Christ's baptism are the same for substance, and of the same force.

It is like to be a hot sea fight, (as most an end, the hottest fights are upon
the water, and there is most fire spit out) or rather a cold River skirmish
twixt you; which, I for my part, do not intend to stand looking on, though I
have set you together by the ears, but will thus leave you to fight it out to
the last man; and will pass away, and on to another Text, pressed and squeezed
by some of your party for the Rebaptising of baptized ones.

It is Heb. 6.2. Where there is mention made, amongst other Principles of the
Doctrine of Christ, The Doctrine of Baptismes: Lo, say they, Here are
Baptismes, in the plural, as well as one Baptism in the singular, and if your
reason were good, why the Apostle called it, one Baptism, because it is to be
but once given and received, may not we say (say they) our reason is good why
the same Apostle calls, Many Baptismes, two at least: and so, baptize you
your Infants in their Infancy, and we will baptize ours in their growth, when
they can make profession of Faith: And so here are baptismes. Truly this is
somewhat like the discourse the Saduces had with Christ, about one Woman, who
had seven Husbands, whose Wife she shall be of the seven in the Resurrection.
I say and answer in General as Christ did; Are ye not therefore deceived, and
do err, because you know not the Scripture? I could tell you here, of the
baptismes, that of John, and the other of Christ, to be here meant, and (you
may remember, if you have done fighting with the Papists) that we are agreed
about them two, to be but one and the same baptism: I could tell you, that the
Apostle here writing to the Hebrews, alluded to their old Legal Washings,
Ablutions, and Baptismes, minding them of thens, but wishing them withal to
lay them by, and mind the one Evangelical baptism, and the sprinkling of
Christ's blood, the which they did but typifie or look at: So still but one
baptism. I could tell you, that the baptismes here meant, are those (I must
speak three words more of Human Latin, for the words sake, because of the
elegancy of them) Fluminis, Flaminis, Songuinis: But I will turn them into
divine English words for yoru sake, of Water, Fire, Blood: For there, as I said
before, is an outward baptism, which is the washing of the flesh with Water by
the Minister: and there is an inward baptism, which is washing of the Soul with
the blood of Christ by the Holy Ghost, these are baptismes indeed, and here
meant, but in all Gods true Children, they meet in one baptism, and they come
from God, as one baptism, entirely made up of these two sorts, the outward and
inward: for that baptism, which is of blood, mentioned by Christ, and mentioned
to his two Disciples, (are ye able to be baptized with the baptism I am
baptized with) and resolved for them (ye shall indeed be baptized with such
baptism) Matthew. 20.22. It is nothing but a constant suffering and conflicting
in Christ's cause, even unto Blood, and the suffering of Martyrdom for his sake.

But I will call in again for Beza, whom as before I styled an interpreter of
Luke, and that Text Acts 19.5. according to his heart, (Though he confessed, he
learned the interpretation of Marnixius,) so here also I may style him an
interpreter of Luke again, and of this Text, Heb. 6.2. according to his heart,
the which interpretation also he learned of Calvin, who says to this purpose,
an interpreter of those Apostles and Prophets he commented upon, according to
their hearts, (though here Beza does not acknowledge so much) There was a right
and Custom in the Church Primitive of administering many baptismes, upon certain
set days; which set days were after appointed, to be Easterday and Whitsunday
especially, when many Catehumens and New Converts were wont to meet together
for baptism; These therefore were called, Days of Baptismes, as appears out of
the writings of the Ancient both Greeks and Latins, so still it was but one,
and the same baptism was conferred upon every one, though called baptismes,
because so many received baptism together upon one day, like as sometime in
London, six seven, and more Children partake of baptism together at one time.

And now, Sirs, are you Masters in Israel and know not these things? are you
Dippers, and know not these Baptismes? and whereas for the time ye ought not to
be Teachers, for that ye have need that one Teach you which be the first
Principles of the doctrine of Christ, learn, that this doctrine of Baptismes,
is the third of them the principles, and that it contains nothing of two
Baptismes, our baptising Christians born in their infancy and your baptising
Christians born in their grown age, and least of all, for your rebaptising our
baptized Infants, when you have made them your Proselytes upon a confession of
Faith. What though our Children be baptized in ignorance of God, they are yet
baptized in Covenant with God; if that be a reason with you, they must be dipped
again, and rebaptised when they come to knowledge, why were not the Apostles
so, when better instructed, who were ignorant of the Messiah, and his kingdom,
the death, the resurrection of Christ? will you put your self Sir, or your
learned Dippers themselves upon the trial, and if you be found ignorant of
diverse principles of the doctrine of Christ, and even fundamental points, will
you be instructed, and Redipped? Alas, Sirs, if as often as God shall show
you the errors of your Minds, and the enormities of your lives, you must be
dipping and redipping, dripping and redripping, every Year, Month, and Day.
No, there is another baptism to be used in these cases, eye^ the washing the
soul with the tears of repentance, dip and re-dip, drip and re-drip in these,
and renew your repentance daily. With what a bold face, and high hand dare you,
Sir, be either dipped your self now twice, as I hear, or be a dipper of others,
again, (as you intend) of those whom you have inveigled and seduced away into
your Scism, and Heresy, being before rightly and validly baptized? is not this
a multiplying and so a vilifying of that o^e baptism?

What example have you in all the Word of God, of any Infant Jew
re-circumcised, when he came to an ability of professing Faith? and will you
tempt God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples of Christ, which
neither our Fathers, nor we were able to bear? Telling us, it is needful to
baptize baptized Christistians again, when they come to be believers, when it
was not needful, yea sinful, to circumcise Jews circumcised, when they came to
be the like? Even when Ziphorah a Woman had circumcised her child, Exodus 4.
Moses himself allowed it for good and lawful, and never did he or any other
iterate that circumcision in present, or afterward, upon the profession of its
faith; and when any went over from being Samaritans, who worshipped they knew
not what (as who knew not Jesus Christ) to become Jews, John 4.
or came over to Christ, and to the faith of him, none of them were ever
baptized again, as Believers. Your duplicate of baptism, does not only oppose
the one and single baptism of the Apostle, but brings Christans under a Tax,
and lays a new yoke upon their necks, as I said before.

Besides, To be baptized, is to be born anew, into the Church, and no man
naturally can be twice or often born, every Nicodemus can say, Can he enter the
second time into his Mothers Womb and be born? John 3. Why then twice baptized,
being once baptized sufficiently and truly?

By baptism, Children are admitted into the heavenly society of Saints; and no
man civilly can be adopted often into any ones stock or family; Genesis 48.
Ephraim and Manasses were but once adopted and assumed by Jacob, into his
stock for his Children; and why then twice baptized?

When of Married Persons, one forsakes another, and returns again into Love,
and both are reconciled, they do not enter into a new conjugal Covenant, by any
solemn Celebration of new espousals, because the first conjunction stands
firm, the reconciliation made; The baptism of Christians, is, as the
celebration of the Contract betwixt them and Christ the Bridegroom; when such a
one, through open abnegation, or other heinous sins departing away from Christ,
returns again, with and by a serious repentance, there will be no need of being
baptized again, and so a new sealing of that Covenant, which being once entered
into, is still in force and vigor, and by a pious recordation thereof, the
Penitent may confirm his Faith, as Peter did: and by virtue of the same, once
established Covenant, God receives such to mercy and grace; otherwise the
infidelity and impiety of man would frustrate the goodness and good will of
God, the matter testified in baptism, which it cannot, because it is constant,
and changes not, and therefore it is a horrible profanation of it, to
reiterate baptism.

In a word, Second baptism was ever abhorred in the Orthodox Church, as a kind
of incestuous Birth, and if you iterate it, and baptize your believers again
upon their profession of faith, you must be able to make their former baptism
void, and no baptism, which you can never do, as having all things therein
which God requires unto Infant baptism, Though Faith, a positive and actual
Faith, as you call for, should not be there, which is not required of God, and
therefore is denied of us to be a necessary condition requisite to be found and
manifest in every one that is to be baptized: indeed in an Ethiopian Eunuch,
an elder Gentile it is, and therefore when he said, see here is water, what
does hinder me to be baptized, Philip answered, If thou beleevest, with all
thine heart, thou may, who answering, I believe that Jesus Christ, is the Son
of God, and so Philip baptized him, Acts 8 36, 37.

The only Argument the Anabaptists triumph in, I shall here give a short
answer to: Infants of Gentiles, are not of Abraham's seed, either according to
the flesh, because not Iowes; or according to the promise, because not
believers; therefore not to be baptized, whilst Infants, or if they be, to be
baptized again, when beleevere. But I answer, First, The consequent is denied,
for Simon Magus, and thousands more, even of them that you baptize, are
neither. 2. Nor is it true that only Jews, are Abraham's seed according to the
flesh; for that part of the Gentile- Galatians, who pleaded for Justification
by the works of the Law, and thereby lay under the bondage and curse of the
Law, are called the children of Hagar, and said to be born of the Bondwoman,
Sinai, and Jerusalem upon earth, as it is to be seen, Gal. 3. and 4. The
Apostle applying that part of the distinction to them, like as the other part,
the Children of Sarah, to those Gentile- Galathians, who were justified by
faith. Nor 3. Is it true that only believers, actually believers (as you
speak) are the Children of the promise, for thus they do not only at this one
blow, beat down all Christian infant from all interest in Christ, and title to
heaven, and make them like as the Heathens, and Pagans (who yet are not wont to
strike so hard) yea, and which is more, all Jewish Infants, Isaac, Jacob, and
Joseph; these must not be, with them, nor were by this reason, Children of the
promise in their Childhood, but only according to the flesh, until they did
actually believe, and so became Children of the promise: And more absurdity yet
does follow hence, that those Patriarks whom I named ( Abraham is to be here
excepted) by their infant-circumcision, had no promise of grace sealed unto
them, but were under a Covenant of works, and until the years of discretion and
actual fiath, were incapable of any interest in the Covenant of grace: If only
true believers and the Elect persons be under the covenant of grace, and have
right to the Sacraments, why is the same Covenant of grace inthe outward
administration thereof, both in preaching the promises, and applying the Seals
of the Sacraments, to be propounded by Gods appointment to all the outward
visible members of the Church? And why was Simon Magus baptized, as I said?
It Is true, the inward saving grace of the Covenant in both Administrations is
by the Holy Ghost conferred only upon the invisible members of Christ's
mystical body, which are the true believers and elect: But we not able to
discern of these, give the outward baptism to all those, I mean all outward
members of the visible Chruch; You must do so, for the Text before alleged out
of the Acts, shows, that all they who have any degrees of Faith, may and
ought to be baptized.

But Sir, will you stand to your own Tackling, The baptising of believers?
hereby you think and intend to exclude Infants of Christians; What then will
you make of them, Infidels, or Believers? can you show any Text of Scripture
old or new, where any Infant of Jew or Gentile in Covenant with God, is so
styled? or can you give any reason of it? That which makes an Unbeliever, must
be a positive habit of unbeleef; to justify this in an Infant, will be a task
too hard for you, and to say that Infants do not believe in act, or have not
the habit of faith only negatively, will not in the Language of the Scripture
denominate an Unbeleever.

Indeed those that are made Christians of heathens, they must give some
positive and actual expressions of their faith, before they be baptized, (so
Philip required of the Eunuch) and not till then are they to be accounted
believers: but for such as are born Christians of Christians, as our infants
are, being entered into and under a gratuitall Covenant with God, we admit them
unto the Initial Seal of that Covenant, which is baptism, without any such
Testimonial Act of Fath, as you require: for they are not Infidels or
Unbeleevers; but believers, and within the compass of your words (though not
your sense) the baptism of believers.

Seeing you can produce no scripture against their Faith, I will see what I can
do for their Faith, Matthew. 18.5, 6. (Turn to the Chapter and Verses, and read
them, and look to your Neck, in that Verse, it is a Neck verse) Whose shall
offend one of these little ones which believe on me, it were better for him
that a Mistone were hanged about his neck, and he were drowned in the depth of
the Sea. (Lord what shall become of those, that offend all thy little ones, by
dobarring and excluding them from their birthprivilege, and their
Right-baptism?) But that I aim at, as to you, Sir, is, that you would take
notice that our Savior Christ, who best knew, knowing the very secrets of the
heart, pronounces of some little ones, little Children, such as he took out
one of them and set down in the midst of the Apostles, for a pattern of
Humility and Harmlesseness, That they did believe in him; its apparent, that
(howsoever sometimes and elsewhere, spiritual Children are meant by little
Children, such as are of a meek spirit, little in their own eyes,) here and at
this time, very natural Children in age, and little in growth, or statute, are
spoken of, as the very context and Antithesis do show.

They who do so interpret this place, do make this not the same story with that
which follows, in Matthew. 19.13. Where little Children are said tob e brought
to Christ, it may be, in their Mothers arms, and so might be lesser Children
than these. But the word in the original, for little Children, is the same in
both Chapters (the like also in Mark 10.13. (and its acknow, ledged by all,
that both in Matthew 19. and Mark 10. Little Children in age and stature are
meant) and besides, such little Children in age and stature, were fittest to be
examples of Humility and Innocence (the thing intended) to the Apostles, than
either greater Children or grown men, who many times, are stubborn and
harmfull: And though in Verse 6. where they are said (To believe in me) little
ones be mentioned without little Children, it is to me an exegesis or further
explication of the word, Children, that they were little ones, and small oner,
(though such as could come to Christ upon his calling of them, which makes no
difference in point of the one or the others believing in him.) Lastly, when
Christ says, Who so shall receives one such little Child in my name, receives
me; But who so shall offend one of these little ones, etc. The very Antithesis
or opposition shows, that he speaks not of diverse sorts of little Children,
but one and the same. And so forewarneth, in this 18th. Chapter, his Disciples,
that they should not be, as he foresaw they would be, in the 19th. Chapter,
offensive unto suchdd little Children, who were so notwithstanding. But if this
be not a Text evident enough for their Faith (as I will not be contentious, but
subject my Spirit to the Spirit of the Prophets,) let another witness speak,
Acts 18.8. Crispus believed on the Lord with all his house. If there was any
Infant there or youngling (as most likely) it is said to believe. Yet our
Savior Christ's singling out of Children, to be examples of Humility and
Innocence, his accepting of savor showed to them as done to himself, his
prohibiting any offense to be done to them, all in this 18th. of Saint Matthew,
together with his checking and rebuking of his Disciples, for forbidding them
to be brought to him, or to come to him, his taking them up in his Arms,
laying his hands upon the^ and blessing them, Do not all these show a great
deal of Complacency that Christ had, and took in them, and that these little
Children pleased him very well; and therefore sure were not unbeleevers; For
without faith it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11.6. Besides that he
pronounces that of such also (little Infants in age and stature) is the
Kingdom of God: but the Kingdom of God is not of unbeleevers. Sure some of
these little Children, nay more, some of our little Infants, dying before they
are baptized, are saved, and received of God into his Kingdom, whither no
unbeleever, nor unclean, can come or enter.

Lastly, I read of two Examples, one in the old Testament of Jeremy 1.5. Of
whom the Lord says, Before thou came out of the Womb, I sanctified thee,
and I ordained thee a prophet.

Another in the new, of John the Baptist, who being but a Babe in the Womb of
Elizabeth, leaped for joy of the approach of Christ then also in the Womb of
the Virgin (which joy thereof, was an act of the Spirit in him) Add hereto,
Jacobs holding of Esau by the heel, which the Prophet Hos. 12.3. interprets
to be a kind of striving with him for the Grace and Blessing. We cannot think
these in the Womb, were in Christ and so sanctified one way, and when they came
to years of understanding by another way. If Chidlren of Believers may thus
have the Spirit of Grace and Faith, and that before the Seal of the Covenant,
then they are not unbeleevers, but believers: Howsoever there are some things
extraordinary in these two examples, yet I have showed, that the Spirit of God
is an internal ordinary Agent and means in the Church of God, and as to the
Infantile nature and condition, (which from the two former examples appears to
be capable of it) does where it pleases infuse Faith and other Graces, as
before, Humility, Meekness, Innocence, Patience, (whereof little Chnildren
were also set for examples by our Savior Christ) I do not say that any Infants
now have the Spirit and Graces of the same, in so ample and large a measure, as
those above named, as who were sanctified and consecrated in a more special
degree, for a more special work: nor do I say that all Infants, now under
Covenant, have the Spirit, and this Grace of Faith, and other, but that they
who are the Elect of God, and ordained to eternal life (of which there are
many) have Faith and the Spirit, so far forth, as is sufficient for their
Salvation, Acts 13.48.

But I will fall upon this point more closely; and if (as I have in part
already, out of the Texts all ged) I can evince this, of Infants-Faith (I mean,
and so must you, of Infants in speciality, or in kind some of them, such as he
purposes to save, and not of Infants individually, and in particular every
one) Infants Baptism must needs be also evinced. As Paul says to Agrippa,
about the Resurrection of the dead, so may I to you. Why should it be thought a
thing Incredulous with you, that God should give Faith unto Christian Infants?
They have knowledge and other Faculties of the Mind, and the Soul, and why may
not they have supernatural Grace, and so some seeds of the habit of Faith,
according to their model and measure, for the apprehending of Christ, and so
Faith it self in a kind, and in a like kind, unto that is in grown persons?
(Faith wheresoever, is alike, and but one in kind, the which how small soever,
suffices to Salvation.) What, does the weakness of the Organ of Body or Soul,
make it impossible for God to work supernaturally even in the little Children,
at least so much illumination of the Mind, (more than is ordinary for that age)
as may be fit to receive the Grace of Christ? I shall tell you more Sir, than I
believe you know, and I know you will believe. Such Infants whom deceasing, God
takes up into heaven, (for of such also is the Kingdom of Heaven, as Christ
said) he fills in a moment, and at an instant, with an inundation of
knowledge and understanding of Christ (for they come to sight and vision of
him) more than you and I have, nay more than all the Prophets and Apostles had,
whilst they lived upon earth. And now cannot the same God immediately before,
sprinkle their Souls with one jot of the knowledge of Christ, or one grain of
Faith (though but as Mustard Seed) and make them to touch Christ, though but
with the Tip, or Fingers and of that hand of the soul, which is Faith, whom
they shall immediately have the full fruition of, like as many as touched the
Hem of his Garment, were made perfectly whole? But I remember me, you must have
plain direct Scriptures for this point, one you have had; and so you shall have
more Scriptures, out of which, it may be plainly, and directly evinced, Infants
Faith and Salvation by it, which is all one.

Does not David say and testify, Psalm. 8.2. out of the mouths of Babes and
Sucklings, have thou ordained, or founded strength, or perfected praise? and
does he not, Psalm. 148.12. call upon and exhort old men and children, to praise
the name of the Lord? the which you cannot expound of spiritual children only,
(as sometimes it may, and somewhere) for Mat. 21.15, 16. they are real, and
bodily children, that cried Hosanna to the Son of David, and fulfilled David's
Speech: now if these had no Grace, Knowledge, or Faith in Christ, how could
they so glorify and praise Christ, and rejoice, and even Triumph in Christ?

I ask again, are any Infants in Christ? or ingrafted into Christ? or the
Children of God? if so, as you cannot deny it, for we are all one in Christ
Jesus, whether bond or free, male or semale, old or young, Father or Children.
And God the Father has given to Christ, Infants and Children, as well as
Parents and Fathers: and to those that Christ has received his Father, he
gives eternal life.

But now they are all the Children of God, by Faith in Christ Jesus; and if
they be Christ, then are they Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the
promise, Galat. 3.26, 28 if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none
of his, Romans 8.9. and he that is none of his, Christ Baptizeth not. But Christ
Baptizeth, with the inward Baptism also, unto Remision of Sins, many Infants,
and these are some of his, as who has taken them into Covenant, to be the God
of them, and them to be the Children of God. And surely if Christ should not
impart unto some Infants, Knowledge, and Faith, according to their measure
Competent to Salvation, but only to the Adule and grown persons, he might seem
to be an Acceptor both of Ages, and personages, which he is not, Deuteronomy. 10.17.
Romans 2.11.

See John 6.35. and 37. He that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that
believes in me shall not thirst, immediately Christ adds, whatsoever the
Father gives me, shall come unto me, or believe in me; I ask you now, and
Quaere you, has not the Father in his everlasting Counsel and Bounty given to
Christ, all his Elect Infants, and appointed them to be Christ's, when Psalm.
2.8. the Lord said unto him, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee,
ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession? if so, why then, they also,
Infants, being somewhat of that whatsoever given unto Christ, shall come, and
do come continually unto him, or believe in him, whatsoever you say, or write
to the Contrary, that they neither shall, or do believe.

See Galat. 3.22. The Scripture has shut up all things under sin, that the
promise by Faith, in Jesus Christ, might be given to those that believe; you
hear the disease, of sin, in Adam is spread over all things, that is all men,
and whatsoever is of and in man, even Infants; therefore the Remedy of Faith in
Christ, must be spread over them too, that this may be as general and large as
that, so Infants, who are saved, must and do believe in Christ.

See 17. John 3. This is life everlasting to know thee, the only true God, and
him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. Here is a General and universal Rule
given by Christ himself, the Author of Salvation, without any inkling, or
tinkling of exception, for everlasting life to be atteined, namely by knowing
and believing (for that is also included in it) as is specified and more
enlarged in the 1 John 5.10, 11, 12 He that has the Son, has life, this life
is in the Son, and he that believes, has this witness in himself, etc. Now I
Quaere you again, Have any of the Elect Infants, the Son of God, have they
eternal life? you cannot deny it, and therefore you cannot deny them some
spark of Knowledge and Faith.

See 2 Cor. 5.7. We walk by Faith, and not by sight, and 1 Cor. 13.12. now we
see through a glass darkly, but then face to face, whence it appears, there
is but one way of joining us all to Christ, and of our enjoying of Christ,
which is, Sight of him in Heaven, or Faith in him upon earth, to which Sight,
our Faith now is answerable, being of the same nature and quality, only
differing in the measure; for Faith is nothing else but a sight of him, John
12.44 and 4. Now I Quaere you again, do not you think, but the same way which
serves for all the rest of Gods Elect, does serve for Children also, to join
them to Christ? and that there is but one life begun here, which is perfected
in heaven, according to that, He that believes in me has eternal life, John
6.47. Then also must Infants have some light of the mind, to see and behold
Christ now here, as in a looking glase, so hereafter face to face.

See Romans 4 6. To all Abraham's seed the promise is firm by Faith, and his Title
is, the Father of the Faithful, the Scripture makes him the Father of us all,
and all the Children of the promise. (i.e.) The whole number of Gods Elect (for
of that Primary cause of our Salvation, Gods holy Election, Saint Paul there
disputes, Romans 9, 8. which is observable against the Anabaptists, who impute
the Salvation of Infants solely to Gods Election, which is acknowledged of us
to be the Primary cause) whereas in that very place, he mentions a secondary
cause of their Salvation, that they are the Children of the promise, and so
reckoned in Abraham's seed, because of that Interest they have in that blessed
Seed, in whom Abraham, and all his posterity are partakers of the holy
inheritance.)

Now I Quaere you again here, do you, or dare you exclude Infants from being
Abraham's Seed, you must then also bar them from having interest and part in
Christ; if not, why do you, or dare you to deny them Faith? seeing that in the
same manner as Abraham obtained the Blessing (which was by Faith) so must all
Nations of the world, Jews and Gentiles, and every particular person, all and
as many as lay under the curse before, even Infants therefore, obtain the
Blessing by Faith, according as it is, Gal. 3.8.13, 14.

What should I run on thus: your self will prove as much for me anon, and
agaiost your self, for in your confutation or rather consideration following
upon Acts 2.39. there you say, That nothing but Faith answers the promise;
and I shall tell you that Faith answers it, as the condition: If then there
be no other way or means for Infants to come by Righteousness, or Salvation,
but by Faith or believing, (the condition of the Covenant of Grace, and the
Gospel, as works and doing was of the Covenant of Nature and the Law;) you must
either grant some Infants to believe and have Faith, or else leave them
destitute of the ordinary way and means, or show from Scripture some other, of
their Righteousness and Salvation. Yea if Infants be saved without Faith, they
must then be saved without Christ: for as there is none other name or person
under Heaven given amongst ^^en, whereby we must be saved, than the Lord Jesus,
Act. 4.12. So there is none other means or grace under Heaven, given amongst
men, whereby we may apprehend the Lord Jesus, save Faith, Matthew. 3.16. and Heb.
11.6. Remember your own words, nothing but Faith answers the Promise: If
Infants have no Faith to answer the promise, nor works to answer the precept,
how shall they do for the answer of a good conscience toward God, or a saving
Baptism, 1 Pet. 3.21? Or what shall they do when God rises up? and when he
visits, what shall they answer him? Job 31.14. If he will contend with them,
they cannot answer him one of a thousand, Job. 9.3 unless in Christ by Faith
they be, and then all is answered. I could wish some others of a more vigorous
body and brain, would prosecute these and many other Scriptures to the proof of
Faith in Infants, Elect and saved, the which (as I take it) would best stop the
mouths of the gainsayers of Infant Baptism; who now, not satisfied with their
being in Covenant with God also, or his giving of spiritual grace to them,
never leave calling for Faith, Faith in Infants; so would it set opener and
wider, the way of Infants to their Baptism, even in the opinion of the
adversaries thereof.

If you question how such could believe in Christ? Christ who tells you so,
gave them to do so, and so may give to others. Is thine eye evil, because he
is good? may he not do with his own as him pleases? Take that thine is and go
thy way, it may be he will give unto this least, even as to thee. Though
Intants want the outward Means of Faith, which they are not capable of, as the
Hearing of the Word, by which Faith ordinarily is gotten, yet there are other
besides; what, you will say, extraordinary? and so, you will fly now your self
to extraordinaries, who have taxed us of extraordinaries? no such matter; for
besides the ordinary outward Menas of Faith in the Church, which an Infant
wants, and is not capable of, there are ordinary inward Means of the same
Faith, which it may find, and of which it is capable, namely Christ, the Author
of Faith, and the Spirit of Faith, both these are internal but ordinary Means
of Faith in the Church, and avaylable, when the outward are wanting, and the
outward unavay leable, where those inward are wanting. But you can discern no
such matter of Faith in Infants, these show no such thing as Faith, what then?
what evidence of expression do you see, or they show of a reasonable soul in
them? by this reason you may conclude them, unreasonable, as well as
unbelievers: Even Childrens souls are equal, and like as yours and mine are in
the essentials, which are as large and ample to all intents and purposes
(though pent up for want of room) as our souls are, and are capable of Grace.
They are Rational Creatures, Seminally, and in the inward Principle of human
Nature, which is a reasonable Nature, though through defect of age, they are
not Rational, Productively, and in the fruits, or external proceedings, or
operations of reason; and so they may be Believers, as to the Root and Fountain
of Faith, the Spirit of God, in the first act; though they may want the second
act thereof, which is the increase of it in themselves, and the deriving the
knowledge of it to others.

So then Infants in the Church, may have Faith, and all the Elect of them have
(fot it is called the Faith of Gods Elect, Tit. 1.1.) and you as you cannot
descry it in them, so you cannot decry it. Therefore by your own Tenet and
Rule, they going for Believers and Elect, may be Baptized; yea, all ought to go
so, out of a charitable persuasion, and opinion that ought to be in us and you,
(howsoever it goes with them, as to the Truth and Reality) and therefore all
should be Baptized: for by the same reason you Baptize any, of those you call
Believers, we Baptize all Infants of Believers; and unless it were so, none at
all were to be Baptized: Those that come to you, one by one, in a profession of
Faith, you have but a good and charitable opinion of his Faith and Election;
you can have no sure and certain knowledge of the same; (For this and that
Person, may be an Hypocrite and Reprobate) yet you Baptize him and him. Now
therefore, may not we do the like? there comes presented to us, this and that
Child, one and another, in the evidence of Gods Covenant engraven (as it were)
upon them by their birth of Parents in Covenant; we have also a charitable
persuasion of their Faith and Election, and can have no more, (for there are
also Infants born in the Church that are Reprobates) and so we Baptize them:
But if only the true Believers and Elect were to be Baptized, then you and we
must have a certain knowledge of every Infants and every man's Faith and
Election, as the ground of our and your Baptizing them; the which because
neither we, nor you, can have in any ordinary way, neither of us by this Rule
must Baptize any at all; You hope the best of all, and so do we; your old
Limitation may do well here, so far as man can judge (which in this case is
just nothing) and that is all can be said on both sides; but still, I must
prompt you, that it is not knowledge of the Infants, being in Election, and the
signs of it, or being in the Faith, and the prosession of it, but the being in
the Covenant and a relation to it, that is and ought to be the ground of
Baptism, in the Church of God; now because we find and know all Infants born of
Christian Parents, within this Covenant Relation (and know not which of them is
Elect or not, for if we knew who were Reprobates, we neither would nor ought to
Baptize them,) we do therefore Baptize all of them, lest otherwise we should,
and might deny the Seal of the Covenant to some of the Elect Children of God.

Me thinks you, who assume so much of the Spirit to your selves, (Take heed,
you do not presume too much of your selves therein) there be they who separate
themselves, having not the Spirit, Jude 19.) should not be so Covetous or
Envious, (and it may be, refistous, and then, it is, blasphemous) as to deny
some degrees of the Spirit and the graces thereof to Infants, when as the
Spirit blows where it lists, and thou can not tell whither it goes: when
as also the Dove-like Spirit of God, has a near compliance with, and a great
complacency in Child-like meekness, mildness, humility, patience (of which
graces he is pleased to style himself the Spirit,) more, than with your manly,
or rather unmanly pride, envy, uncharitableness, roughness, and presumption,
whereout it is, that you so despise and offend the little ones, withholding
them from their due of Baprism, and rail and revilethe Churches of God, and the
Ministers of Jesus Christ. These things (I tell you) grieve the good, and mild
Spirit of God, and send it away sad from such hearts, and at last, if
presevered in, will quench its holy fervours.

And I wonder very much, that any people should run after you, as they do, who
leave their Infants and Children under no better a condition, or denomination,
than of Infidels and unbelievers: for so you tell them, that their condition by
nature, and their seed, is the same which Pagan-Gentiles, and till they know
God and believe in him, open and professed enemies of God; whereas upon their
and our nature, that is, natural Generation or Procreation of Seed, there is
the Covenant of Grace established, and set up, which you see at large, Ephesians.
2.3. and 4, etc. That we were by Nature the Children of wrath as well as
others, when out of Covenant, You profess much Scripture, Learn to speak in
that Holy Language, and to call Children of Christians, Christians by Nature,
and not sinners of the Gentiles or Pagans; for so Saint Paul speaks, Gal.
2.15. We who are Jews by Nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles: (How Jewer by
Nature?) because they were the Children of the Prophets and of the Covenant,
born under it, Act. 3.25. So are our Children, Christians by Nature (how not
sinners of the Gentiles?) because born Jews had not their sins imputed to
them, (though born in original sin, as the Gentiles,) the Covenant being a
remedy appointed against it, and a means to bring them into Gods favor again;
and so are our Children, not sinners of the Gentiles.

You that are Parents, and are careful enough to keep sure your inheritances,
and joyntures of earthly things to you and your Children, suffer not your
Children to be wrangled out of their birthright, and joint inheritance they
have with your selves in the Covenant of Grace, under the name and notion of
unbelievers, when as the Scriptures never calls them so, but a holy Seed; and
God has made you, and you Children joyntpartakers of the Covenant and the
Seals thereof.

I have been the longer in this, for that I would lay therein some groundwork,
for something to follow. I will be very short in your next Quaere.

Section II. Of Baptism making Christians, and how.
YOu ask whether Baptism makes a man or woman a Christian without Faith, and
following of Christ in all his Commands and Steps, left upon Record for our
imitation?

This is a short Quaere, and therefore shall be soon answered, as not seeing to
what purpose it is for you or against me, I shall therefore briefly answer
something to it out of, Romans 2.28. and 29. distinguishing of the sorts of
Christians, and the parts of Baprism, as he does of the sorts of Jews, and
parts of Circumcision. As Circumcision which was outward in the flesh made
(though I do not here approve of this your word; and therefore I will use
another) showed or declared the Jew outwardly, or the outward Jew; so Baptism
which is outward in the flesh, shows or declares the Christian outwardly, or
the outward Christian; And both may be, without Faith and following of Christ
in all his Commands, etc. as in Esau; and Simon Magus, the one Circumcised, the
other Baptized.

Again, As Circumcision which is of the heart, in the Spirit, not in the
Letter, made (for here your word may go) a Jew inwardly, or the inward Jew; So
Baptism which is of the heart, in the Spirit, not in the water only, makes a
Christian inwardly, or the inward Christian; neither of these can be without
Faith which parifieth the heart, or the fruits of Faith in following of Christ,
etc. Now as the Apostle says surther, He is not a Jew, and that is not
Circumcision, so may I, He is not a Christian, and that is not Baptism, namely
approved of God, and avaylable to Salvation, which are outward only and
literal; and therefore every true Jew or Christian, must endeavor after Faith
and Following Christ (to speak as you do) and to find, and get the inward and
spiritual substance and nature of these Sacraments, which is, to worship God in
Spirit, to believe and rejoice in Christ Jesus, having no confidence in the
flesh, Phil. 3.3. to put off the sinsull body of the flesh, Col. 2.11. That we
may draw near with a true heart in full affurance of Faith, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our bodies washed in pure water, Heb.
10.22. and may have the washing of Regeneration, and the Sprinkling of the
Blood of our Lord Jesus within us, as Tit. 3.5. and 1 Pet. 1.2.

Again, There are Made Christians, and there are Born Christians, or a
Proselytical or Parental Christianity. As for such who are of the Pagan and
Heathen world by Nature, They can no otherwise be made Christians, or Members
of the Church, but by a lawful Baptism, upon their accession unto the Church
and expression of their Faith, so the Proselvtes of old were and did: whom
Baptism made Christians and outward members of the visible Church upon their
Confession of Faith, like as their Faith, if true, made them Saints and inward
members of the Invisible Church. But for them Infants, who are in the Church
and within the Covenant, descended of Parents and in Covenant; these are Born
Christians and Church Members visible. I mean not as born of Christian Parents,
but as born in and under the Christian Covenant; so that their Baptism does not
so much make them to be Christians, but only show and declare them to be such
(as I said) and seal them as Covenanters. And howsoever a Positive expression
of Faith explicitly be necessary unto a Heathen Born, for his Admission unto
his Christianity or Church Membership, yet it is not so unto a Christian Born;
for their Christanity, or Church Membership, is their Birth-Privilege; and
Baptism is but their Instalment or inrolment, and is but as the Inauguration or
unction unto a Prince Born.

Faith I confess, and I mean saving and justifying Faith (and so must you,
seeing you join thereto, the following of Christ in all his Commands and Steps
left upon Record for our Imitation) is absolutely requisite unto Born
Christians, as a Condition to their partaking and enjoyment of the Benefits and
Fruits of Baptism, but not absolutely required, as the condition to their
coming and engaging to the Covenant, to the which they have a good Title and
Right, without present actual Faith; unless you will affirm that all the Jews,
who came to Circumcision, had the like, and all the whole Congregation of
Israel, man, woman, and child, who Deuteronomy. 29. entered into Covenant with God, had
a saving and a justifying Faith.

In a word; Baptism without Faith may declare a visible Christian, but
incompleatly, as without Faith. Faith without Baptism, may make an invisible
Christian but incompleatly, as without Baptism: Faith and Baptism together,
both make a Christian completely, and that both Visible and Invisible.

Are not Children of the Heathens born Heathens? and why then are not Children
of Christians, born Christians? I mean, it is theiri Birthright to be so
esteemed; or they are to be esteemed such, by their Birthright, to be reputed
within the Covenant of Grace, or members of the visible Church. Is the
condition of a Christians Child worse now under the Gospel, than a Jews Child
was under the Law? the Children of the Jews were born Jews, and it was their
Birthright to be Israelites, visible members of the Church of Israel;
whereupon the Apostle calls them, Jews by Nature, Gal. 5.15. As before I have
said, and Romans 11.24. He calls the whole Nation of the Jews, the Natural
branches of the Olive Tree, in that they were the vifible Church of God; so the
1 Cor. 7. Those that are born of holy Parents are called holy, yet sinners but
in diverse respects; by Nature, and as generated of their Parents, so sinners,
for Parents do not generate by Grace but Nature: but by Grace, and as received
by God into Covenant, so Holy, for God said, I will be thy God, and the God of
thy seed, and if the root be holy, then are the brancher, no repugnancy here;
like as the Circumcised generateth an Infant with a foreskin; and as wheat
dressed and clean brings forh wheat with chafe upon it; so a Christian
brings forth one, that is not a Christian, who is therefore Baptized that he
may be made Christian, which is when he is Ingrafted into the body of Christ.

And whereas the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.3. That we were by Nature the Children
of wrath, as well as others: it does not contradict, we may be such, and yet
born Christians too, and Holy in an external Covenant, being born of believing
Parents; if you would but remember the ordinary distinctions that are given,
they would disperse this mist before your eyes, and clear them matter to you I
will give them you; as thus, as there is a Jew, so there is a Christian without
and in open view, of the Church and as Jew, so a Christian within and in
secret, and before the face of God; as none were born Jews, so none are born
Christians in this second and later senss, thus we must be made Christians,
neither could or can we claim it by Birthright: but in the first sens, which
is that whereof the Assertion is, we may; even all that have a visible Birth
and standing under the Covenant of Grace, are Christians, and Holy in the face
of the visible Church, though (perhaps) not so in the face of God, but many,
for all this, may be Children of wrath. Your mind, as your words, runs only
upon the Internal part of the Covenant, which are inward saving graces, which
belong only to the Elect; and because we know not, what these Infants are born
with, we say not, that thus they are born Christians; where you should take
notice of an external part of the Covenant, which is a true visible membership,
and Birth-Holiness, which known to us and appearing to all, we call them born
Christians as who from their Birth, are to be accounted and reputed visible
members and patts of the Church.

For the Covenant of Grace is largely to be understood and; Taken for the whole
dispensation of it in-outward Ordinances and under the Notion of its external
Privileges, as well as in inward Graces, and under the notion of its internal
powers. You most an end, and in this Quaere especially, use the Covenant, as
Hanun did the servants of David, sent to comfort Hanun, and to honor his
deceased Father, who shaved off the one half of their Beards, and cut off the
half of their Garments, and so sent them away, 2 Samuel 10.4. So do you, and
yours; you leave out in your writing and discourses, the one half of the
Covenant, and still restrain it to the inward and spiritual part thereof,
whereas it was sent whole and entire of God, with an outward and external part
also, for the further Honor and Comfort of the believing Parents and their
Children.

But I come to the last, your first Queare of the three about Baptism as you
propound them; but my last of the three, as I handle your matters; and this it
is.

Sect. III. Of Baptizing of Infants.
WHat warrant you have from the words of Christ for your Baptizing of Infants
before they do actually believe? What warrant? I thank you for this word, a
gentle and general word, I looked for no less, than what command or precept
have you, such a severe and special word, as a command, to be demanded of me.
Did you keep such a blustering in seven whole Quaeres together, about the
commands and precepts of Christ and his Apostles, and their examples, (which I
took as your preparative and Preface, unto this your particular Quaere of
Infant Baptism) and does the wind go down, in this soft and still voice, What
warrant have you for it? After all your former Thundrings out the Commands of
God against us, as if we of the Church of England had broken them all, and had
pieced them up with our Human Inventions and additions, as Infant Baptism and
the rest, is this your only Thunderbolt you have to strike us down with? what
warrant have you for it, out of the word? Your friends and fellows, lowes,
will give you no thanks for this word (if it were not they that gave it you,
word and work and all) who as the Jews cried, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord, so they go up and down, and cry, a Precept of the word, a
Precept of the word for your Infant Baptism; and do you come after them and
behind, and so softly speak, for fear they should hear you, a Warrant out of
the word, a Warrant out of the word for the same?

This made me look back over your other Quaeres about our Ministry, our
maintenance; and I find upon such Review, that this word, Warrant, is used and
prefixed before them all, and not a word of a Precept or Command. I see I have
been much mistaken, who, when I might have put off you and all your Quaeres,
with a Warrant, according to your demand, have put my self to such trouble, as
to search the Scriptures, and send you Precepts and Commands out of the same
for every particular. You are beholding to me, for I have gratified you herein,
in giving you more than you required, and in spending more upon you than you
desired, I will not say deserved. I hope you will make good use of my
Indulgence herein; and not expect for time to come, that I shall do the like
still. No, you will now give me Leave to take and make my advantage of the
word, which I have lost hitherto, and you have gained hereby.

For (I take it) there is a great deal of distance and difference twixt a
Warrant out of Gods word, and a Command or Precept out of the same; I shall (I
hope) bring you forth some warrants out of the word for our Baptizing Infants;
but for a Precept or Command for the same, I am not engaged, no nor required to
give by this your Quaere. Warrants enough, and those from the word, I shall
serve upon you; for though a Warrant from a Justice, be a Precept Missive, yet
a Permissive will of God, which is no Precept for it, may be a Warrant of an
Action; and such are and may be, any solid Reason, or good Consequence or like
example drawn there from, which though it will not be admitted for a Precept,
may serve for a Warrant.

A. first Warrant, shall be this Reason, which is but a recollection, or
recapitulation of somewhat immediately said before. If Infants of Christians are
all of them capable, and some of them partakers of the Spirit, and Faith, and
other inward Graces, Then they may and ought to be Baptized; This is warranted
out of the word and those Texts, Act. 8.36. Act. 10.47. The one warranting
Baptism, to a believer; the other to him, who has received the Holy Ghost,
whether young or old, Infant or grown person: If Thou believe ( says Philip)
thou may be Baptized; when the Eunuch asked, what does hinder me? so Faith
it was that made him capable, and removed the hindrance, though upon his
confession of his Faith, it being not otherwise discernable, he having no other
right pleadable, he being one of the Gentiles, He was actually Baptized. So can
any man forbid water, that these should not be Baptized, who have received the
Holy Ghost as we? and so he Commanded them to be Baptized.

That particular Hypothetical, (if thou believe, etc. thou may be
Baptized) may and must be resolved into this general Categorical, whosoever
Believes, may be Baptized, Man or Child, Young or Old; and howsoever,
Cornelius and the rest, their receiving of the Spirit, was in the extraordinary
gifts of the Spirit, then manifesting it self that way, yet any other
manifestation of the Spirit, any word or act of God declaring, that Persons do
belong to Gods Covenant, (as some or other way, the Spirit does manifest it
self in all that do belong to Gods Covenant) is to us and ought to be to you, a
sufficient Warrant without any danger of will worship to account them such, and
therefore to Baptize them, be it this pouring out of extraordinary gists, as
here upon Cornelius and others; or the Consession of Faith, as in Philip; or
Repentance, as in those that came to John the Baptist; or be it a promise to
believing Parents-and their Seed, to be their God, or Gods owning them as
Persons belonging to the Church, or any other ordinary Gifts and Graces of the
Spirit, or the Spirits supplying, their infirmities: in these cases can any man
forbid water, that these should not be Baptized? This Interrogative, and
quaestionipropounding Speech, may and must be resolved into a Nagative-Answer,
absolutely: No man can forbid water, rightly (for that is done, that is rightly
done, or done of Right) anless he will forbid that, which God has Commanded?
and some of these we have abundantly for the Infants of believing Parents;
where no man can forbid, there God Commands; that they, who have received the
Holy Gholst, should be Baptized; The resule also out of this, is this general
Proposition, whoseever (whether Infant or grown Person,) has received the Holy
Ghost (whether apparently or secretly, ordinarily or miraculously, whether in
sight or Faith) has a right to Baptism, no man can forbid it; and in one of
the particulars, Peter here Commands it. See, how I have gratified you, beyond
a Warrant, with a little less than a Command for the Baptizing of Infants, if
having Faith and the Spirit, as many, yea, all the Elect of them have, whom, we
not able to know one from the other particularly, do therefore Baptize all
under the Covenant with God.

More briefly and syllogistically thus take it, as I recollect it.

All Persons who have received the Holy Spirit, or have Faith, are Commanded by
God in Scripture to be Baptized; as appears by the two Texts here cited.

But some Infants of Christians have received the Holy Spirit, or have Faith;
as appears by many Texts formerly cited.

Therefore some Infants are Commanded by God in Scripture to be Baptized.

A Second Warrant, is This Reason. It Infants of Christian Parents, be in the
Holy Covenant of God, and have the same engraven upon them, and established
with them, Then they are to be Baptized, and to receive Baptism as the initial
seal thereof: This Reason is warranted, or this warrant may be reasoned out of
the word, Genesis 17.9. etc. and Romans 4.11. for its there apparent (and the light
there shining dazzles all Antipaedobaptists, they cannot abide to look thereon)
that as Abraham and his Proselytes, grown men, upon their profession of their
Faith, were Circumcised, so the seed or Children of Abraham and those
Proselytes, were Circumcised as Children of Parents in Covenant, and joined
together with them in covenant; and both these are there expressly Commanded;
and so this also, that the seed of Abraham, and his Proselytes should be
Circumcised, by virtue and reason of Gods Covenant with them, which was to be
sealed unto them by Circumcision. Now as the Being of Infants in Covenant under
the Law, made them capable of, and gave them a due Right to Circumcision, the
Initial seal of that Covenant under the Law; so the being of Infants in
Covenant under the Gospel, makes them capable of, and gives them a due or Right
to Baptism, the Initial seal of the Covenant under the Gospel; The Covenant
being the same, for substance, and in relation to the eternal well are of the
Soul (as in the n^x I shall show:) which being so, if Anabaptists passing by
this reason from the Covenant, will insist still upon the mere and sole
Commandment of God, I must tell them, the Text says not, Thou shall keep my
Command, but thou shall keep my Covenant; implying, that this Command of
Circumcision had reference to the Covenant, and was part of it. For here God is
to be considered, not in his absolute Prerogative commanding, but as God in
respective mercy Covenanting with his people, and all his Commands, are to be
taken as branches of his Covenant, and all prounded upon his Free Grace in
Jesus Christ, therefore Genesis 17.10. and 13. God calls expressly Circumcision by
the name of his Covenant, to teach you and all others that will learn, that the
Covenant made Infants capable of the Seal, and not Gods mere Commandment, as
you and your notional, and metaphysical Masters do abstract, who love to play
with your own Fancies and Imaginations, whereas the Seal is nothing but the
confirmation of the Covenant, and appointed and commanded so to be of God. But
the Covenant, in order of Nature going before the Seal thereof, their being in
Covenant, must needs be the ground of Gods commanding the Seal of Circumision.

It is acknowledged there was a special Commandment for circumcising in the
time of Infancy; but do not you blame God for his such Command, by the same
reason you blame us for our practice? Infants of Jews were as much in the
state of Nature, as ignorance, blindness, and under the same defects, that
Infants of Christians are; and why do ye not charge the wisdom of God with
folly, for Commanding the Infants of Jews to be circumcised? or excuse us who
being under the same Covenant, do Baptize the Infants of Christians, In
imitation of God, Commanding Circumcision, and also in obedience of God and
that Command, which was in part also Evangelical. For

That Commandment was for the Circumcising of such Infants in their Infancy,
whose Parents were under Gods seal, but there is no such command for Infants,
whose Parents were not; for these, Profession of Faith was needful, Abraham (in
whom the Church of the Jews began) therefore had Faith, before he took the
Seal, but no such thing was afterward required of Abraham's Seed, but the
contraty Commanded, namely that their Seed should be circumcised in their
Infancy.

And so I deny not, but God Commanded Circumcision; but this, that by virtue of
Gods Commandment only, they were Circumcised, I deny, for it was also and
chiefly, because of the foregoing Covenant in the 7. and 8. verses, to which
the words refer, saying, Thou shall keep my Covenant. Therefore (what Covenant?
verse. 10. Circumcision, is so named) He does not barely Command it, but with an
Inference or reference therefore, to show that, they being in Covenant, were
therefore to have the Seal thereof, Circumcision, which did but put the
Covenant under Seal, in which Covenant those Children were before by Birth,
being born of Parents with whom God had stricken Covenant. But I shall go near
to make use of it anon for the Baptizing of our Children, like as they and you
do now, for the circumcising of the Jews Chrildren, Though (the Truth is) that
was nothing but Gods word of Institution, whose incommunicable property it is
to appoint Sacramental Signs. The Covenant then especially was the ground of
Circumcising the Seed of the Jews, and the same is the ground of Baptizing the
Infants of Christians: and so Christian Parents, being in Covenant, their
infants are in Covenant with God, and therefore Baptizable; for Gods Covenant
written upon Children of Parents in Covenant, is no Blank to seal too, but a
just Title (or writ, as I may so say) for the Seal, and a very Commission given
out by the Holy Spirit, for the Baptizing Infants of Christians in their
lofarcy; and so these things appearing to the Churches of God, That Infants of
Christians are entered in Covenant with God, They ought to put the same under
the Seal of Baptism, as the Infants Due, and the Churches Duty.

More briefly and Syllogistically thus take it, as I recollect it.

All persons within and under the Covenant of Gods Grace, are Commanded of God,
to have the Seal of Covenant put upon them, which in the Gospel-administration
thereof is Baptism.

But all Infants of Christians, are within the Covenant of Gods grace.

Therefore all Infants of Christians, are Commanded of God to have the Seal of
the Covenant put upon them, which in the Gospel-Administration thereof is
Baptism.

The first Proposition is clear from Genesis 17. and God Commanding all Jews in
Covenant to be Circumcised; and from Matthew. 28. and Christ Commanding all
Gentiles, or Nations in Covenant to be Baptized.

The second Proposition, is the very Tenor of the Covenant, I will be thy God,
and the God of thy Seed; and so I have reasoned the Baptism of Infants and
Terms, into a Command of God, before I intended it.

A third Warrant is this Reason; If the Infants of Jewish Parents, were capable
of Circumcision, the initial Seal of the Covenant, which was Circumcision, and
were Circumcised, though they could show no Right they had unto it, but their
Birth of Parents in Covenant. Then also may, and must, the Infants of Christian
Parents, be Baptized and receive Baptism, the initial Seal, though they can
show no other Right to it, but their Birth of Parents in Covenant: This Warrant
is Reasoned out, or this Reason is warranted out of, Heb. 13.9. Jesus Christ
the same yesterday, to day and for ever. Jesus Christ ministered is the
Covenant, which is (as I said) the same for ever in sabstance, and in relation
to theeternal welfare of souls; Though the ministrations of him be different,
of him as to be exhibited and to come, unto the Jews, and of him, as come and
exhibited, unto Christians; And though some Ceremonial and Circumstantial
matters be changed, yet the substantial, and that which was purely a
Covenantall or Sacramental Part, abides, as being an everlasting Covenant made
with Abraham's Seed, all true believers: they differ not, the Two Sacraments, in
any substantial thing, or in any spiritual effect necessary to salvation, or in
any use to confirm the Covenant of Grace, and further a man in the way to
Heaven, and so, as an Initial Seal of the Covenant, they differ not, nor as a
Sacrament of entrance, into the Church; and so Circumcision was a Seal of the
same Righteousness by Faith, as Baptism is to us, Romans 4.11. and Circumcision
signified the mortification of the flesh, and the renewing of the mind, and did
bind over the Jews unto the obedience of Gods will, Romans 2.28. etc. Gal. 3.21.
and so does Baptism the same to us now, as Romans 6.3. and 11. 1 Pet. 3.21.
Insomuch that Baptized Christians are called circumcised Christians; and
Baptism is called by the name of Circumcision, Col. 2 11. and 14

4. Though we Christians are not to follow the Jews in things peculiar to his
own dispensation, which was Legal and Ceremonial; yet those actions that were
done by them upon such grounds that are of moral, perpetual and common
concernment to one person, as well as another, in one Church, as well as
another, for one age as well as another; none can deny such actions to be
binding and obligatory to all, as a standing Rule for after Generations; by
which may be answered that which is usually objected by those that except to
our Analogy of Baptism with Circumcision, as why do ye not plead a Baptism of
Males only; and that, particular of the eight day, and so carry on the whole
Analogy together and in order? why, because, these were but circumstantial
things, the two Sacraments may be one in substance for all these; besides they
were not of common, but peculiar use to the Jews, that Church, those ages; as
for the eighth day, it was both a Ceremonial and Physical reason, as to life
and health of the infant that thefore skin was not cut off till then; and for
the Females not Circumcised, it is enough against you and your opinion, if the
proportion betwixt Circumcision and Baptism holds but in the Males, for that
will infer the state of infancy capable of the Initial Seal of the Covenant of
Grace under the Gospel; and again, under the Law, because of the inconveniency
and unfimess of the thing it self to be done upon them, the Females were
Circumcised in the Males, as the Church is circumcised in Christ, the Males
bearing the Type of Christ upon their flesh; and the Males and Females in
Matrimonial conjunction representing Christ and his Church, to which the
Apostle alludes, Ephesians. 5 22 and 33. but now such a typical discrimination of
Sexes being removed, Christ exhibited puts no difference in Baptism between
Males and Females, Gal. 3 27 and 28.

Nor yet do we Argue for Infant Baptism, from the bare Analogy of
Infantcircumcision, but from the force of the reason, that lies in the
performance, which holds not in the circumstances of the eighth day and the
Females, as it does in this, of Infancy. Namely, that as Infants of the Jews
were circumcised, though they declared no right they had unto it, but their
birth; so may the Infants of the Christians be Baptized, though they make no
manifestation of their Faith, etc. but show their birth, as Children of Parents
in Covenant with God.

Yea the Foundation and occasion of both, Circumcision and Baptism, were one
and the same, of common concernment to all; (to add somewhat left out before,
wherein they differ not;) namely Gods free eternal Love to his Elect, and man's
misery by his fall in the loins of Adam, and his birth in pollution from the
loins of his immediate Parents derived to them from the loins of Adam, whence
also I may argue, the original sin, and the clensing of Nature by the Spirit of
Christ, are of Common concernment to Jewish and to Christian Infants: Therefore
Christian Infants ought to the made partakers of the Seal of Regeneration in
their Infancy, as the Jewish Infants were; and so there lies as much necessity
in substance, yea morality in the duty for believing Christians to Baptize
their Infants, as for believing Jews to circumcise theirs; but of this
particular, I shall say more presently.

5. If now for all this, you shall deny and withold Baptism from the Infants of
covenant-Christians, in their Infancy, notwithstanding that God granted, yea
commanded Circumcision to the Infants of covenant Jews in their Infancy, (but
by reason of the covenant, which God made with the Parents and their Seed,) You
must of necessity do one of these absurdities yea Impieties, i.e. either you
must deny Gods covenant of Grace under the Law and the Gospel, to be one and
the same for substance, and these, circumcision and Baptism to be the Initial
Seals of it according to the diversities of the administeations of the same,
which is unreasonable and unwarrantable, as is showed.

2. Or you must charge God with want of wisdom and discretion in managing his
affairs, for choosing such unfit and uncapabie parties as Infants to make a
covenant with and to Seal too; which is, Irreligious and Impious to do.

3. Or you must prefer the Typical Administration before the Evangelical, and
so advance Moses above Christ, and the shadow before the Sun-light, by denying
the Infants of Gods covenanted people under the Gospel, and since Christ's
coming the Initial Seal of the Covenant, and so making the Grace of less
extent, than that which Moses allowed the Infants under the Law, and before the
coming of Christ, which is unchristian and un-Gospel-like to do.

4. Or you must put our Children born in the bright day of the Gospel, and of
more abundant Grace, into a worse estate and Condition, as to the means of
their Salvation; if they be passed by the Seal and not baptized, then the
Children were, who were born in the Twilight of the Law, who were admitted to
the Seal and Circumcised; which is envious and malicious to do:

5. Or you must show, that a manifestation of Faith, and some personal
Righteousness, is now more requisite. (Which was only required of such, whose
Parents were not under the Faederal Seal) unto the baptism of our Infants, than
it was unto the Circumcision of their Children; or that their Children gave at
their Circumcision, such Testimony of their Faith and Righteousness more than
ours. Which is even foolish and childish to think.

This Warrant of our Infant Baptism, from its Analogy with this
Infant-Circumcision, lies as such a Block in your way, as neither you, nor any
of yours, could ever get over, as Christ crucified on the Cross, was unto the
Jews a stumbling Block. So Christ ministered in Circumcision, unto the Jews in
Covenant and their Infants, is to you and all Antipaedobatists, a very
stumbling Block, which whilst they have endeavored to lift at, and leap over,
they have strained and stretched and wrested Scriptures more than their Arms,
and have broken their shins, I mean, their first Faith and a good Conscience,
making shipwreck of both, whilst they slit upon this Rock, or stumble upon
this Block.

But, Sir, I hope better things of you, and I have better things for you, as my
Friend and Neighbor: I will not leave you in the maze of the five-went way of
the Anabaptists that they must walk in; I have a single path and a plain way
for you, if you please to take it, and it is this, or none.

6. You must yield in Modesty and Humility, at it becomes you, to believe such
parties, Infants of both Testaments to be enabled by God, with some
proportionable Grace, for the Covenant and Seals, in a way acceptable to
himself. Though you cannot see it, nor have Capacity, (I will not say
Inpenuity) to acknowledge it, and to clear off all Clouds of Doubts and
Quaeres, which you or others have raised up and gathered together, about the
manner and manifestation thereof, and for this purpose read, Esaias 40.13, and
14. Esaias 55.8, and 9. Romans 11.34, and 35. To. 12.3, and 16 And of this I have
largely before discoursed, more briefly and Syllogistically thus take it, as I
recollect it.

If all Infants of Jews are commanded in Scripture to be circumcised, and
their Parents thereupon bound to bring them to Circumcision, Then also all
Infants of Christians are commanded to be baptized, and their Parents bound to
bring them to baptism.

But all Infants of Jews are commanded in Scripture to be circumcised, and
their Parents bound to bring then to Circumcision, Therefore all Infants, of
christians are commanded to be baptized, and their Parents bound to bring them
to baptism.

The first Proposition is clear from the cited Texts of Hebrews 13.9. and
Colossians 2.11. and from the Analogy of Circumcision and baptism, and the
samenesse or identity of the Covenant of both Administrations, in the
substantials, as to the good of Souls.

The second Proposition, is the very Letter of the Text, in the seventeenth of
Genesis, and elsewhere as has been showed: and so I have reasoned
Infant Baptism into a command, before I intended it.

A fourth Warrant is this Reason; If Baptism be a means and Remedy to free
Christian-Infants from original sin, as to guilt and punishment, and the
dominion thereof in them, that are E^ect and Believers, Then such are and ought
to be baptized, The Church or Minister of it, knowing nothing of this and that
particular Infant, but he or she may be such. This Warant is reasoned out of
Gods Word, or this Reason is Warranted out of Gods Word, Romans 6.3.4, 5, 6.
verses. We as many of us, as were baptized into Christ, were baptized into his
death; therefore we are buried with him by baptism into his death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead, so we should walk in newness of life, etc.
Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin
might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.

I must here add a little explication, lest there may be a misconstruction
construction of some Popery: The Popery in this point is this, That baptism
takes away original sin, that it cease after baptism to be a sin properly,
and is nothing but a defect or weakness which makes the heart fit and ready
to conceive sin, like Tinder which is not Fire, but is apt to conceive Fire:
This I abandon, as Popery and an Error. But this I aver, as Truth and
Protestancy.

1. That after baptism, in the Elect Infants, original sin is taken away, as to
the punishment of it, for there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ,
Romans 8.1. 2. As to the guiltiness of the person, there being nothing to bind
them to punishment, if no such condemnation. 3. As to the dominion of it, it
shall not reign in their mortal bodies, nor they serve it. 4. As to the
Imputation of it, it shall not be imputed to them, but be pardoned, and in that
respect, be as if not.
But for all this, original sin or concupisence, remains in the Elect Infants,
even after baptism, and ever after, and is still sin and properly sin, some
limbs and portions, of the old man, and the body of sin remain, even where he
is said to be crucified and destroyed, in the manner above, and there are and
will be defilements in them that are washed: I must enlarge no farether here.

However this may be a comfort to Believers, that in Christ the promised seed
(who should and did break the Serpents head, which in some good sense, I may
call original sin,) there is pardon of this sin, to their natural seed; and
therefore Christ was also born, not in the ordinary way, as others of Mankind,
but of a Virgin, as conceived by the Holy Ghost, that so being free himself
from original and all sin, He might procure the pardon of the same, and be a
plea against it. Yea, though Infants in present have no actual sins, yet their
baptism extends its virtue to the taking away also of the guilt, punishment,
dominion, and imputation of sins to come, so the party baptized stand to the
order and terms of Baptism, which is to turn to God, believe actually in
Christ, and continually renew repentance, as the place above mentioned imports,
Romans 6.4. and thus baptism saves, 1 Peter 3.21. (So does baptism seal the
Pardon, as of original, so also of actual sin, Acts 22.16. Ananias said to
Paul, Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling upon the name of
the Lord. Oh but we commit sins daily after baptism, and that after
justification, and will the Lord continue to pardon such sins? yes if we
continue to repent of, and purge away sich sins. So 1 John 1.7, 8. If we
confess our sins he is faithful and just to forgive us, how faithful and just
to forgive sin? it implies that he has somewhere bound himself by promise to
do it, and where and when but in baptism, and to whom but the party baptized,
so far as sin is repented of? when the Conscience makes any question, whether
God will continue to pardon sin, the washing of Baptism does seal the assurance
thereof; the person baptized may say, I am assured of it, I have it sealed to
me, so many years ago, at the time of my Baptism.

It is also a popish device, who tell you that Baptism only serves for
Remission of sins done before, and therefore for sins does after they must have
a Sacrament of Penance, distinct from Baptism, appointed for a remedy: For the
Sacramental force of Baptism does extend it self to the whole life, that is, to
be a Seal unto them of Remission of sin in the blood of Christ: And the
confession of sin is but a more effectual application of the force of Baptism,
like as the people who were baptized of John, confessed also their sins; And
therefore there needs no Sacrament of Repentance, or Penance, to be set up for
this purpose after Baptism, to be a second Table, for Refuge after sins
actually committed, like as they say, making Baptism but the first Table for
Refuge after original sin contracted: For Baptism it self, is the Baptism of
Repentance for the Remission of sins, Mark 1.4. (Christ's baptism being not
different from John's Baptism, as is showed) as which teaches and ingageth us
to dye unto sin, and rise unto newness of lie, Romans 6.4. Which is nothing
but Repentance, which is called, Repentance from dead works, and so a rising
from them, Heb. 6.1.

It would therefore much promote the good cause of Infant Baptism, if the
Doctrine of original sin especially, (and also actual) were pressed and urged
upon People and Parents, especially a little more, and they heard oftener, how
all Men, and Women, and Children, born in the ordinary way, sin Adams fall, are
born in the guilt of original sin, and have a sinful and polluted being,
whosoever have any being, and may and must every one confess with David, I was
born in sin, and in iniquity has my Mother conceived me, (it is plain that he
confesses not his Parents but his own sin, this being the scope of the whole
Psalm,) and so with Job, Who can bring that which is clean not of that which is
unclean? and that which is born of the flesh is felesh, and flesh and blood
cannot inherit eternal life, and that by Nature we are the Children of wrath,
and all Infants, as that in Ezekiel 16. polluted in their bloods, their Fathers
are Adamites, their Mothers are Hevites, etc.

This if preached and pressed, would show to Parents what great need there is
of a New Birth for their Children, and so would lead and drive them to procure
for them the outward washing in Baptism, as a Seal of the inward washing away
of that natural pollution of sin by the Spirit: Thus our Savior Christ
inforces it unto Nicodemus, John 3.5. and that not so immediately in reference
to actual sin, as original or Birth sin, the natural pollution in which Infants
are born, and I can see, no good reason to the contrary, but that the outward
Elementary Baptism of Water is here intended as a Seal of the inward washing by
his Spirit, which is also called the washing or Laver of Regeneration, Titus
3.5. Because the inward washing of the Spirit in Regeneration, is sealed with
the outward washing in Baptism.

Therefore I find it, in the Ecclesiastic Histories, That in those ages and
places, where and when the vileness of original pollution was best understood
of Parents of Children, as most preached of by the Fathers of the Church, as in
Augustins days, what running there was od Parents with their Children in their
arms, to Baptism; and why not? there being no other visible ordinance
appointed of God in the Church, but Baptism, for the washing away the guilt and
filth of that Birthfin and pollution; And was it not so of old? wherefore did
God command the Infants of the Jews to be circumcised, and wherefore were they
so circumcised in the fore skin of their flesh? but to show tht the very nature
was defiled, which they received by carnal generation from their Parents, and
which they were like to traduce and conveigh to their Children, and to testify
what need they had to have such original Corruption, and uncircumcision of the
flesh, to be done away by the clensing and Regeneration Spirit of Christ,
sealed in their outward Circumcision: And that Circumcision in the former, as
Baptism in the latter dispensation, do both point at this one and the same
thing, the Cleming away of the pollution of the natural birth, by the Spirit of
Christ, there is a clear Text, Colossians 2.11, 12, 13.

We now are fallen into those days, wherein there have been not only shaken but
rased many foundations and principles of the Doctrines of Christ, especially
two of those six in Hebrews 6.2. Which are Repentance from dead works, (a
chief of which is original sin,) and the doctrine of Baptism; and wherein a
Spirit of Pelagianism has entered into many, and goes about preaching unto
Parents a freedom from original sin and pollution in their Infants, as derived
from Adam, and so proclaming a liberty from baptifing of them (just as the
impostors foretold of by Saint Peter) whilst they promise them liberty, they
themselves are the Servants of Corruption, 2 Pet. 2.19. It concerns us
therefore so much the more, who are Master Builders in the House of God, or but
Repairers of the breaches, to uphold and maintain these two foundations of the
Christians Faith, and to teach the people first, that as themselves were, so
their Children are defiled with original sin and pollution by their natural
birth, and then next, that there is no other ordinary way of clensing and
washing them, but by the regenerating and purifying Spirit and Grace of Christ
Signified, Sealed, and Exhibited in andby the outward washing of Water in
Baptism, as pleases God.

Again, I say not that Baptism does all this, from or by the deed done, or work
wrought, which is their Popish phrase, but (as our Protestants say) either as
it is a means to give and exhibit Christ with his benefits, the which it does
by signification, as a particular Certificate assuring forgiveness of sins; or
as a token or pledge of the Grace of God, confirming it. Or as an instrument,
because in and with the right use of Baptism, God confers Grace where and when
he pleases (for it is no Physical but a Moral Instrument) and sets his image
or mark of Regeneration upon the party, whence Baptism is called the Laver of
Regeneration: God is at liberty, and may, when and how he pleases, let his
Grace accompany his ordinance of Baptism, Which way soever God does work these
great things, by or in Baptism, Methinks, it is, a potent and invincible reason
and warrant for the bringing Infants upon Baptism, the only outward
ministerial remedy in the Church, for the abating and abolishing the malady of
original sin, of which even Infants stand guilty, born, and conceived in it,
unless you would involve Parents in another guilt, of neglecting the means
and cure of that disease, which they were instrumental to the bringing their
Children into; or else that you are of the opinion of the Pelagian Heretics,
who held no original sin at all in Infants, but actual, which they also
contracted by Imitation of other wicked; whereupon all the Ancient and Orthodox
Divines, urged and pressed them, with the Baptism of Infants, and made it a
foundation and proof, of original sin in Infants; like as I now go the other
way, and urge and press original sin in Infants, as a proof and plea, or
warrant (as you call it) for the Baptism of Infants, as being the only outward
ordinary way to begin their cure and Rogeneration; more briefly and
syllogistically thus take it as I recollect it.

If Baptism be commanded of God in the Gospel for the washing away the guilt
and filth of original and birth sin, then all Infants, who are Partakers of
these, are commanded Baptism.

But Baptism is commanded of God in the Gospel for the washing away the guilt
and filth of original and birth-sin.

Therefore Infants who are Partakers of these, are commanded Baptism.

The first proposition is not questionable; the light of Nature and Reason,
commands the use of means and medicines, to the end and for maladies: the
sick need the Physician, etc. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy
laden, etc.

The second proposition, is the matter of the Texts, Romans 6.3, and 4. and Acts
22.16. as has been declared, and so I have reasoned baptism of Infants into a
command before I intended it.

Sirs, (I speak to you Parents) are you willing, your little pretty babes
should be saved? you should be very willing and desirous of it; and the rather,
in that you have been means of conveighing into them, a corrupt seed, you
should labor, they might be born again of the incorruptible seed, by the Word
of God, and the Seals thereof, one whereof which is fit for them in their
Infantile Estate, is this Baptism, I am speaking of and for.

If you would have them saved, it must be either without, or with Regeneration;
without Regeneration they cannot be saved, For Flesh and Blood cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God. That which is born of the Flesh is Flesh, a degenerate
sinful corrupt thing; neither can corruption iherit incorruption: Therefore
they must be saved with Regeneration, for except a man be born again of Water
and the Spirit, John 3.3.6.
He cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. That which is born of the Spirit is
Spirit, a Regenerate sanctified and clean thing. If so, the, Sirs, bring forth
your Infants and Babes unto the Laver and means of Regeneration, present them
to the Water of Baptism, and wati and pray for the Spirit of God, that it would
move upon the face of the Waters, (as it did in the first Generation) and so
form a spiritual Light out of or in a natural darkness, That the Baptismal
Water may be effectual (by and through that Spirit of God) as Waters of Jordan
were, to the washing the Leprofie of original sin, and as the Waters of
Bethesda, to the healing of other diseases whatsoever, even their actual sins
also, when afterward committed.

It is true, that your Children dying without Baptism may be saved, by the
Coverant and Promise of God and his Grace, many are so, all are so, that are of
the Number of Gods Elect.

Yea, I confess the hope of salvation does no lie so much in the Seal, as in
the Covenant and Promise to which the Seal is annexed. Indeed the Lord having
made a promse to you believing Parents, concerning your Children born in
original sin, (That he will be your God and the God of your seed) in this case
you must believe this his Word and Promise: But where he has ordained a Seal
for the confirmation of your Faith, you must take heed how you neglect to apply
it; you must not (as more than too many do in these days) think it a
superfluous and idle figure, and some also hold it a superftitious and
Idol-service, That which I may and do plead with you for, is this, that you
would so account of it, as it is, that there is a necessity lying upon you to
baptize your Children born in original sin, I mean a necessity not absolute but
conditional; in case your Children be prevented of Baptism by death, you may
well hope of the salvation of them, by the Promise and Covenant only, as I
said, of God and his Grace: and if after Baptism they be taken away from you by
death, you may better hope of their salvation, from both, Covenant and Seal
also: But if you be careless and negligent, and do also (it may be) purposely
and profanely omit your duty, to put your Children in Covenant with your
selfs, under the initial Seal thereof, you will very hardly answer such your
course either to God himself, or his Church, yea, or to your Children, and (I
think at laft) to your own Consciences. But in the mean time what blindness
and presumption is this in you, Parents, to tempt God, and to cast your
Children, only upon the hands of his Spirit, when he has also appointed
Water, for their Washing and Regenerating? this is as if you should throw up
your Children unto the top of the Pinnacle of the Temple, when as you have a
Ladder standing and reaching up thither to carry them up by or upon; upon this
glosie, God shall give his. Angels charge over them, so his Spirit order over
them, and in their hands shall they bear them up, and on his finger shall he
hold them, lest at any time they perish, and come to destruction bodily or
ghostly.

What Profaneness and impiety is this, in you Parents, to slight and refuse the
outward ordinary means of your Childrens spiritual and eternal good, as it may
be the freeing of them from the Guilt, Dominion, and Condemnation of original
pollution, etc. and to refer them over wholly to the inward ordinary means,
Christ Jesus and his Spirit, when as these have appointed and dedicated the
former, to be used and applied also?

What carelessness, yea cruelty is this in you Parents, to leave and let your
Children lie in the pit, and under the bondage of original and natural
pollution, into the which your selves have been accessory to their falling, and
not to suffer a hand of Gods ordinance to be reached out unto them, which is
Baptism, for their raising up unto newness of Birth and Life?

And whereas, God has made a Covenant with you, for your selves and your
Children, yea a joint Covenant with you both, to be your God, and the God of
your seed, what ingratitude is this, and ungodsiness to God, what inhumanity or
apparent imparentnesse is this, to withold your Children from the Seal of
that Covenant, and so in a manner, to disinherit them (as much as in you lies)
of their just and due Jointure and inheritance spiritual and eternal?

Well, be it so, your infants dying without Baptism may be saved, (and I pray
God, they may be saved) through the Riches of his Grace, but you have not
delivered your own souls, because you gave no warning to have them baptized, as
you ought to do, seeing the evil come, and more a coming upon them. But,
suppose, you withholding them from their means of Baptism, blow no Trumpet,
give no warning to have them baptized, God should also withold his Spirit of
Grace from your Children (which God forbid) and your Children be taken away in
their infancy and minority, They shall die in their iniquity, or original sin,
But their-blood will he require at your hands, for your negligence and
contempt, you have broken his Covenant, Genesis 17.14. and Ezekiel. 33.

A fifth warrant or reason is this; If Baptism now under the Gospel does
succeed Circumcision under the Law, Then are the Infants of covenanted
believing Parents, to be baptized, like as Infants of the covenanted professing
Jews were circumcised; this warrant is reasoned out, or this reason warranted
out of Collossians 2.11, and 12. Where the Apostle plainly shows, that there
is no need of their being circumcised, who were baptized, Jews or Gentiles,
because such baptized ones had received the Circumcision made without hands,
namely Baptism, the better and great Circumcision, as the Ancients call it.

If you deny this, you must affirm, that the Churches of the Gospel and all the
Gentiles converted to the faith of Christ (of whom especially they consist) are
left without a Sacrament of Inititiaon or admission thereinto for their
infants, and so without one Seal of the Covenant of Grace, which ought not to
be, nor is indeed, For the Condition of Christians and their Infants is better,
at leastwise as good under the New Testament as the Old; and the Grace of God,
by the co^ing of Christ into the world, is more ample and clear, as ample and
clear at leastwise, to us living under the Gospel, as to the Jews living under
the Law: To deny these things, were to cast foul dirt into the bright Sun, and
to shoot Arrows of Contumely and Reproach into heaven against our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom came Truth and Grace, 1 John 17. as the Law was given by Moses:
and to grant these things, is to yield Infant Baptism, under the New Testament.

And whereas it is, or may be replied, that in that Text above, and others
where Biptism is conjoined to Circumcision as its substitute and successor,
there also are conjoined with Baptism, Mortification of the Flesh, Newness of
Life, Faith and other Graces mentioned: its easily taken off, though one of
your most difficult Replies, as thus.

1. They are no more conjoined with Baptism than Circumcision: and therefore as
their Infants were commanded to be circumcised; So ours are commanded to be
baptized, notwithstanding their iuoability and incapacity of doing such acts,
or having such Graces, which is equal and alike in both.

2. In such Conjunctions, if the Texts speak of Actual Faith and Actual
indeavoring after Mortification, etc. And require these in persons baptized,
they must be limited to such as were Adults, grown in years, converts from
Heathenism, such as Cornelius and the Eunuch; for therefore does the Scripture
name them, to show the same, when it mentions their Baptism, and the
conjoined duties as required in such; which is nothing against Baptism.

3. Or if Infants should be meant, it suffices, that these have them;
Mortification, etc. not in the Act, exercising and manifesting themselves in
any deed, or word professing the same, but only in Habit included and lying in
the principle of Grace, the Holy Spirit: and why, because infants are sinners,
not by any proper Act of their own, but only by an Hereditary Habit. Now who
amongst you can or will say, that infants have not thus the Spirit of God,
which blows where it lists, and has listed to blow in some of them we know
of, and thousands more, where it lists, that we know not of, effecting and
producing in them this habitual principle of Grace. Of this see more before.

4. Nor is it necessary that Baptism, in that very moment it is received,
should effect all things it figureth out and does signify: (no more was it,
that Circumcision should do the like) but it may fall to working them
afterward, wherein present there is an impediment and hindrance, that lets
actual fact, mortification, Repentance, etc. as in infants, the want of reason
does: Those Actuals are not for the present required in infants to be baptized,
who yet are required to be in present actualy baptized, for they are required
to be partakers of the death and burial of Christ, that is, the merit and power
thereof, to the killing and burying of sin and natural corruption, of which
Baptism is the sign and means.

More briefly and syllogistically thus take it, as I recollect it.

If Baptism do succeed, and is substituted of Christ now, instead of
Circumcision, in the Church of the Gentiles, then, as infants were commanded to
be circumcised then in the Church of the Jews, so are Infants commanded to be
baptized in the Church of the Gentiles.

But the Antecedent is true, being the very matter and substance of the Text
above.

Therefore also the Consequent is such; and so I have reasoned Infant Baptism
into another Command, before I intended this, as reserved for the latter
argument.

But I serve too large warrants upon you, Sir, to whom I now return, I have
another or two brief ones, yet to serve.

A sixth warrant therefore is this Reason, If infants of Christian Parents be
capable of all the good ends, effects and benefis, that Baptism brings with
it, and works or offers them, then surely they are both capable of Baptism,
and their Baptism is warrantable and justificable. This warrant may be reasoned
out of the Word, or this reason warranted out of the Word, 1 Gor. 4.15. 1 Cor.
9.1. The Apostle warrants and reasons his Apostleship and the Gospel he
preached, to be true and right, from the good ends, effects and benefits that
came thereby to the Gorinthians, and they received, That he had begotten them
through his Gospel, they were his work in the Lord, and the Seal of his
Apostleship, were they in the Lord. So may I hence warrant and justify our
ministry, and even the Baptism which we minister, to the infants of Christian
Parents, to be good had true, from the many good ends effects and benefits
thereof, of which Infants are capable and receptive, and which are wrought and
sealed in them thereby: Our Ministry of the Seal of Baptism, with such effects
and success, may be also the Seal of our Ministry.

Now the ends, effects, and benefits of Baptism are these, for which it was
appointed.

1. To be a means of entrance and admission into the visible Church, and a kind
of engrafting the party baptized into the body of Christ, and an enrolling of
him amongst the household of God, as Members and Servants of Christ, Acts 2.37.

2. To be, instead of Circumcision, an annexed Seal and assurance, yea
conveiance of the good and grace of Christ's word and promise covenanted, the
sum whereof is this, of being the Parents God, and God of their seed, Romans 4.11.

3. To be a representation and Collation of the washing and clensing of the
Blood and Spirit of Christ, and of the Regeneration and New Birth, Titus 3.5. 1
Peter 3.21.

4. To be a Tie or Obligation of the baptized to stricter Obedience of God and
his Truth, to make the parties more diligent to serve God, and careful to
abandon sin, Romans 6.1. to the 9. 1 Cor. 1.13

5. To be a means of Union with Christ, and of Unity amongst themselves,
knitting them faster, and bringing them nearer unto Christ, 1 Cor. 12.13. Ephesians.
4.5.

6. To be a badge of Christianity, and for distinction of Christians from
Unbelieving Jews and Gentiles, as the stamp and Character whereby they are
known to belong to Christ, being a kind of partition wall betwixt Christians
and Jews and Heathens, Ephesians. 2.14.

Now Sir, tell me, which of all these our infants are incapable of, that you
should thereupon deny them Baptism; in the mean time, I tell you, they are
capable to them all, and therefore are not to be denied. The promises of the
Covenant, the washing away of sin by Christ's Blood and Spirit, the admittance
into the body of Christ, etc. may be sealed unto them, as wherein they are but
Passive; and if you say, so are they capable of the Graces, signed in the Lords
Supper, and therefore may communicate, I say, how know you that? you have no
rule for that, no glimpse of light from the Word for that, whereas I have given
you evidence enough of light for the other, if you will see there is a
Scriptural light, that infants are capable of the Graces signed and sealed in
Baptism, we may be sure of it, and therefore may admit them to Baptism; there
is but your supposal light (which is below Traditional, you so much write
against) that they are capable of the Grace signed and sealed in the Lords
Supper; are you sure of it, and will you thereupon admit them thereto?

The Lords Supper is no initial Seal, and for Reception into Covenant, which I
only plead for, for infants, yet this Seal which is Baptism it servesto
confirm all the benefits of the Covenant, as the baptized grow capable of them,
and are made partakers of them, and so is a good preparative, unto the
Christians Passover, or the Lords Supper afterward, in due time and order;
The Lords Supper is a Seal of Augmentation, appointed for the nourishment and
growth of those Graces which the Covenant promises, and requires particularly
and expressly of all partakers of it, That they must discern the Lords Body, and
try and examine themselves, and therefore Infants are not capable of the Graces
of the Lords Supper, like as they are of them of Baptism, for that they must be
Active in that, whereas they may be but Passive in this.

Those that are capable of all the good ends, effects, and benefits, of an
Ordinance, they are not to be forbidden to come, or to be kept back from it, as
being a good and valid Ordiance to such.

But Infants and little Children are capable of all the good ends, effects, and
benefits of the Ordinance of Baptism.

Therefore Infants and little Children are not to be forbidden to come, or to
be kept back from it, it being a good and valid Baptism, and beneficial to them.

The first proposition is clear, from the 1 Cor. 4 15. 1 Cor. 9.1. already
cited, to which I add, Matthew. 19.14 which clears it as to this particular.

The second proposition is not questionalbe, that they are capable, as having
reasonable souls, belonging (it may be) to election; and so having the Spirit,
and Grace (as before) and the Letter of the Text shows it, For theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven, etc. Except ye become as one of these little ones, ye shall
not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

To shut up this reason, the sum and result is this; That Infants of baptized
parents, are in capacity to partake of the ends, effects, and benefits of
Baptism, and of the inward Graces of the same, and many of them are actually
and really partakers of them (as well as grown persons, who are visible
professors) and there being in us no infallible ground of certainty, but of
Charity, that either the one or the other have those inward Graces, yet they
may be accordingly baptized; And the visible right to the Covenant, and the
many promises made to the seed of the faithfu, added to their Capability of the
Graces of it, are as good evidences to ground a baptism of Infants, as the
external professions of grown men can give, yea, and to ground a judgment of
their partaking of the invisible Graces, like as the others.

And Experience has, and does show it, that of those that have been baptized
in their infancy (our Ministry of the Word, afterward following upon our
Ministry of Baptism, sweetly winning upon them, and drawing them, to grow in
Grace, and to bring forth other fruits and duties of the Covenant, to which
they were bound by Baptism, as the Jews were by their Circumcision, to be
obedience of the Law, Gal. 5.3.) there have been; as humble and meek, as
mortified and sanctified Christians, both Men and Women, as any amongst you,
(to say no more, not to say, more) sound in the faith, sorrowful for sin,
zealous in love, fervent in prayer, religious in their houses, and devout in
the house of God, sincere in their dealings, grave in their behavior, modest
in their attire, exemplary in their lives, mourniful in Spirit and vexed in
Soul, for to see the unclean conversations, and the erroneous courses of
others, as well as you, nay far better than any of you, in many of these are,
or do.

Now though it be so, that God sometimes does bring good out of evil, as light
out of darkness at first, yet usually and ordinarily God does it not, and
therefore in a visible constituted Church, (where he proceeds ordinarily) he
does not from a false Ministry and an unlawful Baptism, produce such good
effects, and lightful converses. (I do not mean your new light, so full of
darkness) the which let it be, to the stopping of the mouths of all
gainsayers, with whom nothing is more rife and frequent, than to revile our
Ministry and Baptism, as false and Antichristian, evil and unlawful.

A word more, from hence, to you Parents; That, if you regard the abovenamed,
good ends, effects and benefits, and now know your Children capable of them,
and desire indeed, they should be partakers of them, bring them to Baptism, a
means to those ends, a work to that effect, an office to such a benefit. (So
whom God destinates to an end, he destinates to the means, whom (...) appoints
to an effect, he appoints to a work, whom he designs to a benefit, he designs
to office.) What? (moreover and above) are you not willing, your Children
should have the privilege to be accounted as belonging to the family and
household of God upon earth? That they should have an obligation upon them to
bind them to the duties of the Covenant of God as they grow of capacity to
perform them? that they have a good Title afterward to that other Seal of
growth and nourishment in spiritual Graces? Why then do you withold them from
Baptism? are you not desirous, they should, as members of the visible Church,
have a place in the Communion of Saints, and a share in those prayers that are
put up to the throne of Grace, for the welfare of the Church, and
(particularly) for a blessing upon the Ordinances thereof? and that they should
have a Seal to plead, not only in the persent day of their initiation, but
throughout all their life time, as to the Covenant, for all those good things
whereof it is a Seal, so to the Condition, for fulfilling the good duties, and
so gaining the answer of a good Conscience, and in which case it is said, to
save? Why then bring them forth and present them unto Baptism. Be not like unto
the Ostrich in Job. 39 16. She is bardened against her young ones, as though
they were not hers; her labor is in vain, without fear, because God has
deprived her of Wisdom, neither has he imparted to her Understanding, which
leaves her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in dust, and forgets that
the foot may crush them, and that the wild beast may break them: it needs no
application, but this; Be not so hard hearted to your Children, as to leave
them in the earth and dust of their natural Generation (so every foot they may
be crushed, and your seed not only bru^sed of the Serpent, but broken) but
bring them out to the water and (it may be) the fire of Baptismal Regeneration.
The Apostie tells you, (and you are (I beleve) very expert in that Lesson, and
experienced in that matter) that if any provide not for his own, and specially
for those of his own house and kindred, he has denied the faith and is worse
than an infidel: but if you provide not for your own Flesh, and Children, and
their Spirits: (not only giving them bedily provision, but not giving them also
such provisions as God has made ready for their Souls) you leave them as bad
as infidels in a manner unbaptised, denying them a means of faith, and the Seal
of the Covenant.

I say no more, but what Man is there of you, whom if his Son ask Bread, will
be give him a Stone, or if he ask a Fish, will be give him a Serpent, as Psalm
147.9. The young Ravens cry to God for their food to be given them, So your
young infants (methinks) cry to you, and in their crying and weeping, seem to
call to you for their Water of Baptism, as their milk of the Breasts, to be, the
one, the relief unto their Souls against original guilt and misery, as the
other against natural hunger and infirmity.

But if you regard not your Children, do you look to your selves and your ends
and benefits, and amongst these, your Honor first? Is it not a great honor to
you, to have a Child, counted to some great house, and of the Household, and
under the Protection of some Nobleman? and is it not a great deal more honor
to have a Child, counted to the House of God, the Church, and of the Family,
and under the safeguard of Jesus Christ? why then, baptize your Child. If you
stand not so much upon your Honor, or theirs, yet, I am sure, you are willing
to have comfort of your Child, and good hope (here is not substance and
evidence enough for Faith) of its well being, whilst it lives spiritually,
and after death, eternally? the way is, enter him into the Church of God by
Baptism. So you hope, your Child is preferred and made for ever (as you speak)
when once you had gotten him into some great House and noble Family, which are
but Cottages to the Church, and ignoble to the Family of God: Whereas if you
withold him from Baptism, you do leave him to have his visible actual
standing and abode in the House of darkness, and continue him in an outward
case and condition, as an alien from the Covenant, and a stranger from the
Common wealth of Christians, (what in you lies) which must needs be both
dishonorble and uncomfortable to you the while. True indeed, you may have
comfort from the Covenant only, if by some invincible, and unvoydable act of
Providence intervening, your child be prevented and deprived of the Seal
thereof which is Baptism, full against your will and purpose; but if through
your default and wilful detaining of him, and Contempt of this Ordinance, it
so fall out, that your Child dye unbaptized, He may be saved without the Seal
of the Covenant, I believe; but I dare not promise you herein Salvation, or
Comfort, without Repentance of this your fault and sin against God in his
Ordinance.

And so this shall be my last reason to you Parents, for the bringing of your
Children to Baptism, for that thereby you shall not only get honor to your
selves (as I said) but give honor to God, by your submission unto the Seal
also for them, to God, I say, who took order for your Childrens honoring you,
yea, honored you both by entering into Covenant with both, and annexing the
Seal of Baptism thereto for your further Comfort and Confirmation. When our
Savior offered himself to be Baptized, John forbade him, saying, I have need
to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? but Christ took him off, saying,
suffer it to be so now, for thus it becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness,
Matt. 3.13, 14, 15. as John the Baptist thought Christ above the Ordinance of
Baptism, by reason of his great perfection (and there be also others as say,
they are above ordinances, in a high conceit of themselves:) So some of you
Anabaptists think Infants of Christians, below the ordinance of Baptism, by
reason of their great Imperfections: Me things our Savior Christ in this place
answers, and resuteth both them and you; them by his example, who being the
Highest in perfection, yet stooped down, and condescended to the Ordinance of
Baptism, Therefore none sure, not the highest and perfectest amongst men in the
Church upon earth, are above Ordinances; and you by his Doctrine, and
Exhortation, suffer it to be so now for thus it becomes you to fulfill all
Righteousness; a part, and act whereof is, the Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith, which Baptism is now under the Gospel, as Circumcision was under the
Law; Romans 4.11. and therefore as the Jewish Parents were diligent to fulfill
that Righteousness, by putting their Children in Covenant under that Seal of
Righteousness, Circumcision, so ought ye Christian Parents to be careful to
fulfill this Righteonsness, ousness, and to put your Children in Covenant also
under this Seal of Righteousness, Baptism: Suffer it to be so now, suffer
little Children to come unto Christ, and forbid them not, for they have need to
come to him, and now in his absence, to his Ministers to be Baptized; For thus
it becomes you as them, to fulfill all Righteousness. Make not a Nullity of
the Seal of Righteousness, lest you come at length to make Righteousness it
self a Nullity too.

and now that I am fallen upon this matter of Righteousness, I shall turn to
you again Sir, my Quaerist, and ask you, if you do not deny Baptism to Infants,
upon this ground, that you think, the efficacy of Baptism is seated and founded
upon the practical Righteousness of a Professor, or Member of the Church,
manifested in words and deeds, Confession and Conversation? which if you do,
(as indeed you do, and all that stand out against Infant Baptism:) it is a
groundless ground. For the Text I just now cited, shows that it is not so
grounded, but only upon Covenantal Righteousness, and the free grace of God in
Christ; for so Romans 4.11. He received the sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith, which he had being yet uncircumcised, that he might be
the father of all them that believe, etc. that Righteousness might be imputed
unto them also: where you see it, or hear it in the very Terms, Righteousness
of Faith, not Life or Works, Imputed-Righteousness (not inherent or practiced,
which both Abraham had, and his Children must have.) Now though our Christian
Infants, have no inherent Righteousness, or practical manifested unto us by
their words or deeds (as you require in those you Baptize; and therefore put
off your Christian Infants until years of discretion to profess true Faith,
and years of action to practice good works) yet we present and dedicate them in
their Infancy by Baptism, to Gods mercy and fatherly love in Christ, their and
our Ruighteousness and Atonement, for that we know, God has Righteousness to
be imputed unto them, by virtue of his Covenant of Grace.

I come to my seventh and last Warrant, which (I foresse) will bring you to no
Justice, yet I will serve this also upon you, for though now and then in your
letter, you let fall such a word, as Primitive Practice, and the good old way,
yet I know, you cannot in your heart abide Antiquity, and the Primitive
practices of the Church of old, for that they are point blank against your
blank point, of Baptizing only such believers, as can and do make Profession
of their Faith in Christ, which is but a novel New Light of those Blazings,
Comets, and Meteors, that sprung out in Germany some while ago, but yesterday,
in comparison of the Baptisin of the Infants of believers, which has brightly
shined out throughout all the Churches, in good and full Luster Sun-like,
until the Man in the Moon Muncer his Lunaticks, or Moon-Sirs, interposed, and
made some Eclipse thereof in the Churches: This therefore is my sixth and last
Reason.

If it has been an ancient practice, and constant custom of the Primitive, and
the succeeding Churches, throughout the several ages to Baptize the Children of
believing Parents, in their Infancy; then it ought to be so still continued,
accustomed and practiced: This Warrant may be Reasoned out of the word, or the
Reason warranted out of Matthew. 19.4.9 where Christ in case of a point of
difference about divorce, himself argues and reasons, from the Ancient
times, and the beginning of the Church of God. So out of 1 Cor. 11.16. if any
man seem to be Contentious, we have no such Custom, neither the Churches of
God: Where you and I may see, the case there and here to be much alike: The
Corinthians had got up a fashion of their men's praying covered, and in their
long Hair, and their women praying uncovered, and in their shorn Hair; you
likewise have taken up a practice, of baptizing only believers, when grown
persons they make profession, and have shut out Infants from their right to the
Seal of Baptism, being Covenanters with their Parents. Saint Paul refuteth that
their fashion by diverse arguments drawn from the headship of man over the
woman, from the dishonouring of the head, from the shamesulness and the
uncomeliness of it, from the Presence of the Angels, from the light of nature,
five good and sound arguments; and when he perceived for all those, that they
were contentious and quarrelsome with him about and for their fashion, He
clappeth upon them as his last argument, this taken from the Churches of God
that have been before us. In like manner I have refelled your Practice by
sundry Warrants and Reasons raised out of the word, from such Infants, some of
them having the spirit and faith in some degrees; from their being in the same
Holy Covenant of Grace with their Parents, from the proportion and succession
of Baptism unto Circumcision; from Baptisme's being a remedy against Original
sin especially; from Infants capableness of the ends, effects and benefits of
Baptism, five good and warrantable reasons out of the word: and supposing for
all this you will not be conquered though overcome, but will still strive and
contend, contrary to 2 Timothy 2.24.

Now I urge upon you, in the last place, this Reason, which is the Custom of
the Church, both Modern, (we have such a Custom of Baptizing Infants of
Believing Patents, and we have no Custom (approved, or General) of Baptizing
only Grown Believers:) As also Ancient, (Neither the Churches of God have had
any such.) For so though Saint Paul argue N gatively, only; the Reason is of
as much force and weight affirmatively, and the Custom of the Ancient and
Modern Church's is good and pleadable, both against the New Lights of late
scismatical Innovators, as also for the old Light of former and present
Orthodex Professors.

As for the Negative, the Not, or No Custom Primitive, and practice Apostolieal
of Baptizing again at their growth, upon Confession of Faith, such as had been
Baptized before in their Infancy, I do reserve it for at other Place, your
Dipping Pond, of which I shall speak at last: only here I shall bring in the
Affirmative, That the Ancient Prinritive Churches succeeding the Apostles (what
the Apostles themselve did do and practied shall hereafter soon follow) did
hold and practice the Baptizing of Infants; And though I think, it will but
disturb your Brain, and cause you to stop your Nostrils and Mouth, who small no
sweet Savor or Odor of Antiquity, as being one of the New Sent, or unsent
rather, yet notwichstanding I shall, and relate the Dictates of some of the
Ancient Apostles succeeding Pastors and Fathers of the Church of old; and I
will do it, for others sake, who are Lovers of Antiquity, but I will do it in
English for your sake (whom I am Instructing) who are no lover of Languages,
more than you can speak.

I know, you will not take this General Custom and Practice of the Church upon
my bare word and present Assertion, nor do I desire you should; Therefore
Remember the days of old, consider the years of many Generations; ask thy
Father and he will show thee, thy Elders, and they will tell thee; ask now of
the days that are past, which were before, whe^^er there has been any such
thing, as the Baptizing of Infants of Believers. You shall readily find the
same, attested by the Reverend Fathers of the Church, the Bishops and Doctors
of the days of old, and years of former Generations, to have been so, to be
the Custom and Practice.

In a matter of Fact or Practice, one Good and Creditable witness is
sufficient: and that I am sure I have Saint Augustine, I mean not only for the
General Practice of Infant Baptism in his days, and those present tim's
wherein he lived; as might easily be showed our of his Books of Original Sin,
Chap. 40. Third Book of the Merit of Sin and Remission Chap. 9. Third Book
against Julian, fourth Book of Baprism against the Donatists, etc. But also for
the former and praeceding Churches, up to the Primitive days.

For so Augustine who lived in the year after the Nativity of Christ, 39^. and
was Presbyter first, and after Bishop of Hippo, says thus in his third Epistle
to Volusian. The Custom of the Mother Church in Baptizing little ones is in no
wise to be despised, not to be thought needless, and were not to be believed,
but that it was as Apostolical Tradition. This is a very full and clear
evidence, of an Ecclesiastical Custom, an Apostolical Tradition, (whether
written or unwritten, that infringeth it not, according to that of the Apostle,
2 Thest. 2.15. hold the Traditons which ye have been taught, whether by word or
Epistle;) not to be despised, but believed.

Nor did Augustine utter this suddenly, but advisedly, and therefore upon
second thoughts, says it over again, and the more Resolutely; in his 15.
Sermon, of the words of the Apostle. Let no man (says he) buz or whisper into
our ears, any Doctrine to the Contrary; This Practice of Baptizing Ghildren,
The Church always had, this it has, this it always held, this it has
received from the Faith or fidelity of our Ancestors, and this it keeps
Constantly to the end.

Therefore does the same Father so often and so much press this Argument, The
Churches Practice of Baptizing-Infants upon Pelagius and his followers (who
were Contemporary with Augustine) holding Infants were not taken, or tainted
with original Corruption and Sin, by propagation, but only contracted the same
by Imitation; as in his 150 Epistle unto Sixtus; in his second Book of Marriage
and Concup. 18. Chap. in his first Book against Crescon. the Grammarian, cap
30. in his fourth Book against the Donat. c. 23. in his sixth Book against
Julian, one of Pelagius his Scholars, or his opinions.

Now if this had not been truly and undeniably. The Custom and Practice of the
Church, even up to the first and Primitive times, as Augustine affitmed,
Pelagius and his Disciples would soon have fallen foul upon him, as the
Pharisees did upon our Savior, and have said, thou bear witness of thy
self, (and for thy self) thy witness is not true, they would have given a check
or denial, to such a Custom, accused it of Novelty, or but of Yesterday, and so
have turned off easily that Argument (which of all other lay most heavily upon
them) the Ancient Churches Custom and Practice in Baptizing Infants. But they
never did that, as who could not deny this.

And so that other exception against Augustine, as if he should utter and urge
this in Heat and Passion against Pelagius his Adversary in point of Baptizing
of Infants, and speak more of the Custom and Practice of the Church, than was
true, falls of it self. For they differed not in that point of
Infant Baptism: no nor in the matter of the Custom of the Church herein. For so
Augustine affirms both in his first Book of the Merit and Remission of Sin.
The Peloagians themselves do grant, that little Children are to be Baptized, as
who cannot come in (or stand up) against the Authority of the Universal Church,
delivered without doubt (or Traditioned) by our Lord and his Apostles.

And again in the eleventh Book against Caelestius and Pelagius, He affirms and
cites, that Caelestius in a Book of his written at Rome acknowledged, that
Infants in a Book of his wirtten at of sin, according to the Rule of the
universul Church, and according to the sense and meaning of the Gospel: and
Therefore Pelagius not daring to deny (though otherwise impudent enough) the
General Practice of the Ancient Church in Baptizing Infants, as who then, and
that way, might have slipped his neck out of the Collaror Yoke, Augustine held
him to, was feign to shist off that Fathers Argument as well as he could, but
very poorly and pitifully, That the Church Baptized indeed Infants, but not
for the washing away of original fin (which he denied in Infants) but for the
better bringing them to the Kingdom of Heaven, which Christ said, was of such,
as theirs.

And truly, this makes a great Addition to the Truth of this, The Custom and
Practice of the Universal Ancient Church in Baptizing lnsants, that Pelagius so
great a Scholar and Travellour, who had seen the Customas and Practices, the
manners and fasthions of the Affricane and Asiatiqne, yea and Europaean
Churches, being also himself a British born, should not, as indeed he could
not make any denial, or take any exception thereto as who by his own eyes and
experience, saw and found it to be most true and uniform; and so I may say, our
Baptism of Infants, is a true Baptism; and the Ancient Churches Practice
hereof, is a true Practice, even our enemies themselves being Judges; as Deuteronomy.
32.31.

(...) why then was not, Augustine himself Baptized in his In^y? who was such
as strong Advocate for the Baptism of Infants? the Reason is plain, and makes
nothing against our Infant Baptism, or the General Practice of the Church; for
neither his Father nor Mother were Christians or Believers when himself was
born and they continued so, until a little before their death; Augustine
himself was not converted from his Manichean Haeresies and other vices until
the 31. year of his age, who two years continuing a Catechumen, and in the mean
time writing somethings, to give proof and testimony of the truth of his
conversion, or of his conversion to the Truth, was Baptized himself, and his
Son Adeodate together, like as Ahraham was circumcised with Ismeal his Son, on
the self-same day: These things may be seen, in His Confessions.

I shall need to add no more, for the showing Infant Baptism, to have been the
Custom and Practice of all the former Ancient Churches: Augustines Testimony of
the same, is to me instead of all, and as Goliahs Sword to David, there is none
like that, Give it me. 1 Samuel 21.9 I have taken it, and I give it thee, not as a
single Testimony of one Father for it, but as a Quadruple witness of the
Universal Church, and its Custom and Practice for the point of Paedobaptism,
being four times expressly deliveced, though by one and the same Father, Saint
Austin: Yet I may, for more perspicuity sake, follow up this General Testimony
by one Father unto its Particulars, I mean, the Covattestations of other
particular Fathers in their several ages.

You have heard what Augustine has said and written as for that Century, For
the year, 390. 384.
and those years wherein he lived.

Hierom, In his Epistle ad Laetam, having told her, that the good and the evil
of little once, are imtured much to their Parents; he adds in the middle of
that Epistle: unless (perhaps) you think, the Sons of Christians, is they
receive not Baptism, They only are guilty of sin, and that the wickedness also
thereof is not to be referred or to redound to the Parents, who would not give
it, especially at or in such a time, wherein they could not contradict, who
were to receive it. In his Book against the Pelagians toward the end, he is
for Infant Baptism, and confirms it by allerdging the Authority of Cyprian, and
his Colleagues: In the same third Book against Pelag: it is thus Crito (i.e.)
Pelagian, says grant me thus much, at lest, that they are without sin, who
cannot sin, speaking of Infants: To whom Atticus (i.e.) Hieronimus, Answers;
I will Grant it, if they have been Baptized in Christ; and again, They are
without any Sin, through the Grace of God, which they have received in Baptism.

Chrysostom Archbishop of Constantinople, For the year, 382.
in his Homil. to the Neophytes, is for the Baptism of Children; and in his 40.
Homil: upon Genes. calls Baptism our Circumcision, His being not Baptized
until he was 21. years of age, does not prejudice here, as whose Father and
Mother were not Christians, at his birth; and who himself was brought up under
Libanius, an enemy to, and a scoffer at Religion: but after he was instructed
in the Divinity knowledge by Miletus a Bishop, and Baptized of him.

In his Homil: ad Neoph: having spoken of the Honors and Benefits of Baptism,
he says a little from the beginning, For this cause we Baptize the little
Infants, that they may not be defiled with sin, that to them may be added,
Sanctity, Righteousness, Adoption, Inheritance, Fraternity of Christ, That they
may be all his Members, and the Habitation of the Spirit.

In his 40. Homil: upon Genes. having spoken of Circumcision appointed to the
Children of the Jews, and the pain of the Incision, he adds, but our
Circumcision, or the grace of our Baptism, brings the medicine without without
such dolor, and Innumerable benefits with it. It has indeed no definite time
set down for it, as that has; but it is lawful to receive both in the first,
and in the middle, and in the last age, this, not made with hands Circumcision:
in which there is sustained no great pain, but the weight of sins are put off,
and Remission of them is found, even of all which are done throughout the whole
life.

Ambrose, the Bishop of Millain, by whom Augustine was Converted and Baptized;
in his Book of Abraham the Patriark, lib. For the year, 381.
2. Chap. 11. writing upon those words, unless a man be born again of water and
the Spirit: See (says he) Christ excepts none, not the Infant, not the
prevented by some necessity, etc. Every age is obnoxious to sin, therefore
every age is fit for the Sacrament.

So also in his Epistle ad Demetriadem Virginem, he mention, eth the Baptism of
Children, Epist, 84. lib. 10. speaking in that Epistle against Pride, and
Boasting of some especially Hearetiques, and showing the evil effects thereof,
to the defending false opinions, extenuating of evil and sin, and the
evacuating of some good, gives these two Instances, amongst others: Hence the
sin of Adam is affirmed to hurt his Posterity, by example, not by passage, or
transition into them: Hence is that Evacuation of the Baptism of little
Children, as if they should be said, to have Adoption given there, but not to
be absolved from their guilt: and again, Though little ones not Baptized, may
or should be saved, yet great is the negligence of those that hindeed their
Baptizing.

In his Book de vocat. lib. 2. cap. 8. he mentions Baptism of Children three
or four times; and once thus, They speak very ill and unjurly of little
Children who say, Grace has there what it may Adopt but the water has not
there what it may wash away, speaking of such as deoyed sin in little Children.

Paulinus Bishop of Nola in Camqania, For the year, 379.
a man famous for Poetry and Eloquence, Piety and munificence, a good
acquaintance of Augustine, and Hierom, betwixt whom and Him there passed sundry
Epistles, a great favorite and familiar of Ambrose whose life he wrote, as also
of Sulpitius Severus, to whom he wrote 14. Epistles: As the Beginning of the
twelfe Epistle, to the same Sulpitius Severus has these two verses, whhich for
your sake, I must be fain to tranflate into English.

Thence from the Sacred Font the Priest did lead it
The Infant white in body, heart, and habit.
Epiphanius, For the year, 376.
In his first Book Haer. 8. The Figures were in the Law, the Truth in the
Gospel. Circumcision, which served for a time, gave place to the Great
Circumcision, which is Baptism, which Circumciseth us from sin, and Seals us
into the Name of God; In His Book against the Cerinthians. Circumcision had its
time, until the Great Circumcision came, that is, the washing of the
New Birth, as is manifest to every one. Surely he meant that which the Apostle
calls so, that is Baptism, the washing or Laver of Regeneration; and by calling
Baptism the Great Circumcision, he must intend, Infant Baptism, as
Infant-Circumcision; and speaks of them as of things manifest and wel-known,
the Carnal or fleshly Baptism as Circumcision: In the end of his work, calls
Baptism and other mysteries observed in the Church, which are brought out of
the Gospel, and settled by Apostolic Authority, Traditions; and then, in his
Time, Baptism was ministered to Infants, and observed.

Gregory Nazianzene, For the year, 375.
In his 40. Oration of Holy Baptism, largely speaks of it; the brief is, in
the Question and Answer, What say ye of those who are of tender Age, and
perceive neither damage or Grace, shall we Baptize those? Yes surely, if any
danger be; it is better to be Sanctified without sense and feeling, then to
depart without the Seal, and Initiation: Circumcision bearing in a manner the
figure of Baptism, was offered to them, who were void of Reason, etc. calls
also Baptism, the Seal or Signet to such as enter into the Race of Life.

Basil the Great, For the year, 372.
Bishop of Caesarea, 1 Tom. Exhortation to Baptism; wherein though the Baptism
of Infants is not named, yet I find these words. There is a proper and peculiar
time for this and that, as for sleep, for watching, for warring, the Time for
Baptism, is the whole life of man; which he proves at large; and again, without
Baptism there is no light to the Soul; and then adds, the Jew was compelled or
forced to Circumcision, because every soul which was not Circumcised the eighth
day, was to be cut off; and will thou defer the Circumcision, not made with
hands, which is performed by Baptism, in the putting of the flesh; When will thou be a Christian?

Athanasius Q. 91. For the year, 325.
Of the Sayings and Interpretation of Scripture, We dip or put the Infant
thrice into the water, and thrice bring it out, insignification of the death
and resurrection of Christ upon the third day. I shall also here set down an
answer of his Quest. 2. to Antiochus, because it confirms what I have writ
before, of Infants having the Holy Spirit; How shall we know, that the Infant
was truly Baptized, and received the Holy Ghost in Holy Baptism when it was a
Child? but the answer is long, and shall not need, because I would be short,
The Question is enough to the purpose, and shows both, that Athanasius held
both Infant Baptism, and therein affirmed them to receive the Holy Spirit; the
very question, makes it unquestionable as to him.

Again in his Treatise of the Sabbath and Circumcision, He calls Circumcision,
a type of Baptism.

Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, and a Martyr. For the year, 247.
The higher we go, the cleerer the light shines for the Baptism of Infants; for
now here, Cyprian, with 66 Colleagues, all Bishops, do in a Council at Carthage
decree for it; and so Certifieth his Friend Fidus, in an Epistle to him, third
Book of Epistles, Ep. 8. Yea that whole Epistle, written by Cyprian and his 66
Colleagues sitting in Council with him, The Title of it is, of Infants to be
Baptized: and the subject of the whole Epistle is to justify the Baptizing of
them, and answers the objections of Fidus. As to the Cause, (the Baptism of
Infants) we all have judged that the mercy and Grace of God is not to be denied
to any Child born of man, etc. and that there is the same equallity of grace
for the young Infant, as the Elder. God is no respecter of personages nor ages,
Yea he gives diverse reasons, why Infants, and the rather and the sooner,
because Infants should be Baptized, which for brevity sake, I leave out here,
as who am only upon the showing (having proved the Baptism of Infants before)
the Custom and Practice of Antiquity herein.

This Epistle also, is owned and avouched both by Hierome Au-Augustine, to be
the true Epistle of Cyprian: by Hierom as above is said; and by Augustine
Epistle 28. unto Hierome saying, Cyprian did not here devise a New decree, but
kept and observed the true Faith, or the faithful Practice and Custom of the
Church. Yea this Epistle of Cyprian was a very strong ground for them both to
stand upon, and they very much relied upon it for the strengthening themselves
in their own opinion of Infant Baptism.

Origin, the Scholar and Disciple of Clemens Alexandrinus, For the year, 204.
so forward a Scholar, that at eighteen years of his age, he set up a School
and taught others; in his fifth Book to the Romans 6. c. the Church has received
the Tradition from the Apostles, even, or also to little Children, to give
Baptism, because in them, as in all, are the Genuine; (or ingenerated) filths
of sin, the which ought to be washed with water and the Spirit.

Somewhat more of this, there is in his eighth Book upon Levit. 8. Homil. and
upon Luke Homil. 14.

Tertullain whom Cyprian read so diligently and esteemed so highly, For the
year, 195.
that in all matters of doubt, he would have recourse to him, saying, Give me
my Master, meaning Tertullian, in his Book of Baptism, chap. 18. According to
the Condition, disposition, and also age of every person, the delaying of
Baptism is more profitable, especially in and about Infants: for what
necescessity is there, (if it be not so necessary,) to bring the suerties into
danger, of not performing their promise, and whether this be meant of the
Children, which were not born of Christian Parents, as some will; or of the
Children of believing Parents, as others say, its evident, that Baptism was
administered in all ages, and he intimates the Custom, and practice of the
Church in his age to Baptize them, even Children as well as others; Though he
seems not to be so well pleased with it; and yet again, the words import no
other, then, that he denied the Necessity only of Baptism, to them, being out
of danger of death, not simply the Baptizing of them rather (as in another
place) he does imply, they ought to be Baptized, if there be danger or fear,
that afterward they may not or cannot be Baptized, in his Book of the Soul,
Chap. 39. and 40. where he says, that Infants of believing Parents or one
Parent, have such a Sanctity, and that from the Privilege of their Birth (not
the discipline of their bringing up) as gives them a Right to Baptism;
Therefore Tertullain calls the Children of Believers, The designees, or
destinates of Holiness, or as elsewhere, the Candidates of Holiness; and so
here is an evidence for that Birth, Holiness, or foederal Holiness, of which I
shall speak anon out of the 2 of Acts.

Irenaeus 2 Book, For the year, 170.
Chap. 39. He came to save all by himself, I say all, who are born again by
him, into God, Infants and little ones and Children, and young men and old men,
etc. The intention of the words is of Christ Jesus, who (as it follows there,
went through every age, to Infants made an Infant, Sanctifying Infants, to
little ones made a little one sanctifying those of that age: but you see there
is an expression of Infants, of whom he says, they are born again into or unto
God, that is, Baptized; for so Baptism is usually styled by the Ancients,
especially the Greeks, a Renascence or New Birth, or Palingensy, as might be
showed out of Athanasius and Basil, who took it, from the Apostolic manner
also of speaking, Tit. 3.5. as before I mentioned.

I can go no higher: for Irenaeus was the Scholar and Disciple of Polycarpus;
and Polycarpus was the Scholar or Disciple of John the Evangelists; and to you
see, I am come up to the very skirts and thresholds of the Apostolic
Churches, and Primitive Times, with the Custom and Practice of Baptizing
Infants. Some go yet higher, to Justin Martyr quaest and resp ad orthod. qu.
For the year, 130 90 60
56. and so to Clemens the Roman Bishop in his Apostolical constit lib. 6. cap.
15. and to Dyonisius Areopagita in his Eccles. Hietarchy. Chapter last. And indeed
there are pregnant places in them for Baptizing Infants, if the Authors, were
Legitimate: they are so good and sufficient against the Papists, who own them
and maintain them for true and Genuine: but with us they are held to be
suppositions and spurious, and though many good and true things are in them, as
Infant Baptism, etc. Yet they are not belonging to such venerable Names as
those I have rchearsed, and therefore not of that Antiquity with them, and so
impertinent to my purpose.

Only one thing I must ad, to satisfy the Reader, why, on this side of
Augustine toward the Apostles, I have mentioned no more of the Fathers, and
Doctors of the Church, seeing there were many more, or what! were they
discrepant in their opinion about the Baptism of Infants? no sure; the reason
must needs be this they all lived long before Pelagius came out from the
British Seat, and gathered to himself a Sect of Locusts which spread over the
world, and troubled the Churches with this matter for one they denying the
Traduction of original sin in Infants. Therefore those Ancient Fathers of the
Church, having no occasion to intermeddle with any such matters about
Infant Baptism, kept close only to such controversies and questions as were on
foot in their days (save only that Cyprian, as I touched before, was
questioned hereabouts:) the silence of those Fathers, that touched not upon it
gives consent to the Practice as unquestioned by them; but God would put words
of it it to the mouths of some of them, to be witnesses unto posterity, of the
Antiquity of Infant Baptism, and the Churches Practice.

The like answer may be given, why in those two General Councels, the Nicene
and the Constantinopolitan, and some other Provincial ones, which were before
Augustine, nothing is touched upon in their Canons, about Baptism of Infants
(except that of Cyprian and his 66 Colleagues before mentioned) because it was
at a thing never in question amongst them, never opposed by any; and yet that
was a very sruitful age of haeretical weeds springing up, in those purer times;
witness the Munichees, Arrians, Donatists Macedonians, Aaerians, Eunomians
Luciferians, etc. amongst all which, not an Antipaedobaptist, not any that so
much as made scruple at it, which sure some or other, in malice or envy to the
Church, would have done, if they could have found, how to have shaken that, as
they did all other Foundations of Christinaity.

But after Augustines time, when Pelagius arose, Then the Councils came in
against him, thick and threefold; as the Milevitane or Council of Carthage in
the year, 402. 418. Canon 11. and the Gerundense Council held in Spain, 518.
Can. 5. and the Bracarense Council the 2. 572. Can. 7. And so the Fathers and
Doctors of the Church, are ever and anon storming of Pelagius and his
adhaerents.

And now Sir, I know all this Labor is lost, as to you, who are and desire to
be but a man of to day, and for ever; but for yesterday, or Antiquity, there
you will leave even Christ, and his Church, and go no farther; you are none of
the old Martiald Soldiery, but the New Modeled Militia: and yet you may
remember, how you began in your first Leaf, with the good and old way of the
Baptism of believers; stand now therefore in the way, and see, ask for the old
paths where is the good way, and walk therein (such a one, I have showed you,
without your asking, even this, the Baptism also of Infants,) walk therein, and
ye shall find rest for your Soul, as there it follows: but if ye say still,
as there it follows also, we will not walk therein, then I shall look upon
you as Saint Austins miracle and wonder (that I may end with him with whom I
began this,) who believed not when the world believed, Practice not, when the
world Practices.

Seeing then you care not for looking behind you to Antiquity, look before you,
and see the Reformed Churches, in France, Dutchland, Scotland (why not England?
if Infant Baptism be not now in present the practice and Custom (and so has
been of old, of these and other Reformed Churches, what then is your Church (if
you have any) but a deformed one, but a New upstart one, who oppose this so
General Custom both Ancient and Modern, and have quite cast it out of your
doors, introducing, instead thereof, and setting up, the Man-Baptism, and
Infant Rebaptism, crying out daily for these your Great (little Nothings
Diana's of the Ephesian, first love and first Baptism forsaking Anabaptists.

Let the advice you to lay your hand upon your mouth, and cease declaiming and
clamouring against this Infant Baptism, (for therein you reproach God and his
Church, God for appointing, Infant-Circumcision, and his Church, for using
Infant Baptism:) yea to lay your hand upon your heart, and in love to the
Truth, to return unto your First Love, and Truth, to enter again into
Communion, and fellowship with your Mother Church of England, and those other
her Sister-Churches of the Protestants, giving unto us the Right of Fellowship,
who are ready to reach forth the same to you, and also to embrace you.

And if this be any Blook you stumble at in the way to our Churches, that there
are Rents and Divisions still amongst us, (whom may we thank for them? even
about this Infant Baptism; I answer you in a word, that our differences are not
about Baptizing Infants, but about Infants to be Baptized, and so, in the Point
of Paedobaptism, or Infant Baptism, we are all agreed, and agrieved only at
your Schism and Division, which you have made in our Churches, which are all
against you, therefore our care must be, if we cannot hold fellowship with you,
to keep our Communion notwiststanding with all Christian Churches; and if you
will separate and depart, from us and them, we must let you depart, a Brother,
or a Sister is not under Boadage in such Cases, But God has called us to
peace, peace, as Christ's Legacy left to his Church, we are willing to have with
all man, so we may withal retain Truth. And seeing whilst we speak of peace,
you are still for dissension, whilst we propound truth, you will still hold
errors, our care must be, (and shall be, I hope, in our particulars) to
maintain and preserve our peace and Truth, and our Communion in both, withal
the Reformed Churches abroad, in this point of Infant Baptism, which Churches,
(as ours at home) God has blessed in this way, with great increase of heavenly
gifts, and infinite numbers of renouned professors, and Saints of those that
have bin baptized in their Infancy, And that knowing the time that now it is
high time for you to awake out of sleep, To. 13.11. and to repent of those
sinful Scismes, and Rents, and Separations you have made between your selves
and us, and other true Churches, to give over your charging us, and them with
iniquity, wherein we show piety, and your putting a divine restraint upon
Infant, Baptism, wherein God has given them, and us liberty, and in excluding
Christian poor Infants, those privileges, and helps to heaven which Christ has
indulged them.

And thus I have answered your last Quaere, showing unto you, what warrants we
have out of the word, for our Baptizing of Infants, namely the six warrants
reasoned out of the word, which are six Reasons, warranted out of the word. Now
join all these reasons together, with the Scripture out of which they are
deduced, and will they not make that Analogy, or proiportion of Faith, as to
this point of Infant Baptism, according to which we are to proceed; nay, may
they not all arise to a Tantamount Command, or a virtual or implicit Command,
or a consequential Command of the same, yea I have made two or three of them to
be such in their particulars, I have been so used to give you Commands out of
the word, for our former practices, being called ever upon by you, for such
Commands, which so ring still in my ears, that, though, the word, warrant, do
not put me upon such a hot service as a Command: (which I believe
notwithstanding you meant, your Tongue either outrunning, or short-running your
wit,) I shall interpret your challenge, or Quaere to aim at, what Command out
of the word have you for Baptizing Infants? And first, what Command have you
out of the word, against Baptizing Infants of Baptized Parents, if none, Then
you deny Baptism to those, to whom Christ denied it not, and so, in a manner
you deny Christ, to be your Master, and if you deny him, you deny also him that
sent him; if none, then you have no authority to infring or Counter-command the
liberty of the Church herein: ye take too much upon you Sone of Muncer.

Secondly, What Command would you have out of the word for our Baptising
Infants of Baptized Parents? do you mean an express: and praticular Command? in
calling for this, you grant an explicit Command for it and a general one; I am
glad of this, and will make much of it, as to my purposes: for as general
propositions are enough to infer their particular, all Children of the Church
and in Covenant, are to be baptized, and therefore the Infants of Baptized
Parents are to be baptized: So implicit Commands, which are but folded up and
wrapped in good reasons or good consequences, are sufficient for all true
Subjects and Disciples of Christ, to do a work, and this, of Baptising the
infants of baptized Parents, as if it had been more expressed; The words
intimation, or a deduction from the Word, is to me and ought to be to you, the
Words, Expression, and an injunction from the Word. For if you be so streit
girdled, and queasie-stomacht, or narrow throated, that nothing will down with
you, or can be digested, but only express Commands, in so many Words,
Letters, and Syllables, as Infant Baptism does consist of, Then I pray, produce
such an express Command out of the Word, for Children of Believers, when they
are grown, to be instructed and baptized upon the Confession of Faith, or for
Baptism of Believers only, in Christian Churches (to use your own words)? or
for Woemens eating the Passover, and receiving the Lords Supper, or, for the
first day of the week to be the Christian Sabbath, or for diverse other such
things that I name not.

And yet I have something more to show you, than a Rational and Consequential
Command for Infant Baptism, There is also an Analogical (I had almost added,
Typical) Command for the same, our Infant Baptism, For Go a Command to Abraham
and the Jews to circumcise their Infants (the Seal then in force, and for that
time of the Law) The same Command binds us Christians, to baptize our Infants,
(the Seal now in force, and for this time of the Gospel) binds us I say by the
just Analogy and Proportion, that is between the two Sacraments and Seals of
one and the same Covenant, especially, the one, Baptism, succeeding the other,
Circumcision. Suppose a Jesuit, (who is of late in many points Anabaptised,
like as you Anabaptis are in as many Jesuited) should oppose you, and deny your
Baptism of Believers only, to be a Seal (as indeed he does so, denies both
your and our Baptismes and the Lords Supper, to be Seals or Signs) will you
not look back to Circumcision in the Old Testament, where it is called a Seal
and Sign (for in the New Testament they are no where called, either) and thence
fetch an Analogical proof, that ours are also Seals, our Baptism ard their
Circumcifion agreeing in the General-Nature of a Sacrament. By the like
Analogy, being questioned by you for a Command of Infant Baptism in the New
Testament, if there be none there, I may go over to the Command of Infant
Circumcision in the Old Testament, and thence prove ours, also our
Infant Baptism to be commanded, and us therein bound and obliged to put the
Initial Seal of the New Testament upon our Children.

Once more, Do you think that Gods Command to Abraham, and the Jews to train
up their Children in manner of worship which was then in force: does also
command and bind us Christians to train up our Children in conformity to such
Ordinances as are now in force: I believe you think so; and therefore I think
you will believe at last, that Gods Command to Abraham and the Jews to
Circumcise their Children, and to give them the Seal of Circumcision, then in
force, is also a Command upon us Christians, binding us to baptize our Infants,
and to minister unto them, the Seal of Baptism now in sorce.

And so now this is the use I told you besore I was like to make of your
answering, That the Jewish Children were circumcised, only by virtue of a
particular Commandent of God for the same, I say this use I may, and shall make
of it, that by Virtue or Vice of such you answer, I infer also there from, yea
therein, a particular Command for baptising Christians Children, there being
such an Analogy and proportion between the two Sacraments of one and the same
Covenant, in the Essentials, of it, and the Rationals of it unto the eternal
good of Souls. This might be good enough against you, because it answers you in
your kind, and meets with you in your own way, howsoever my self still hold,
that the Jewish Infants were circumcised, Circumcision being the Seal thereof,
and so both enforced by a Commandment or Word of Institution, as I have said
before. But romember this also, that Gods Commandment being out for
Circumcising Infants, whose Parents were under the Seal, and no farther, by the
same reasons you blame our practice of baptising Infants, you blame God for
such a Command, which you plead for the Circumcising Infants: because Infants
of Jews were as much under state of Nature, as Infants of Christians are, and
Infants of Christians are as much under the state of Grace, as the Infants of
Jews. If God were wise and good in commanding circumcising of Infants, then we
cannot be evil and foolish in practicing Baptism of Infants commanded also here.

But because you New-light men, regard not much the Old Testament, for that it
holds forth the Old-light of the command for circumcising of Infants, by the
which walking, there may be proportioned out, or Analogised a command for
Baptising of Infants; I will set upon a Text or two of the New Testament; and
that famous one first, wherein you much delighted of old, and from whence you
would seem to have your New light; it is Matthew 28.19, and 20. Methinks I hear
you saying already with Nathaniel, Can there come any good thing out of 2
Nazareth? John 1.46. and 7. Chap. any command out of these words, for Infant
Baptisms, Come and see, and hear, and whilst I am as Philip, bringing forth
some good thing hence for poor Infanrs, be you as Nathaniel, An Israelite
indeed, in whom there is no guile, and not an Ishmaelite indeed, in whom there
is naught but mocking at young Isaacks devotions, and young Childrens Baptisms,
Genesis 21.9.

1. I may safely say, here in this command of Christ, is nothing meant or
minded by him, about your taking Children of Believers already baptized in our
Church, where the Gospel is planted, and your rebaptising them again after your
teaching them and their professing: For the Baptism here commanded and to be
executed, was only of Nations, where the Gospel was not yet planted, to be
taught and baprised once.

2. I may as safely say, That the state of those Pagan Gentiles, being not the
same in point of Religion, as is the state of us Christian Gentiles, (as is
said above) how can their, as yet, untaught and ungospelised, their
uncovenanted and unbaptised condition, and be a rule and precedent to a Taught,
Guspelised, Covenanted baptized Nation already? So Christ's command here, does
not infringe or counter command our Infant Baptism, yes you may say, for does
not Christ command all Nations to be taught before they be baptized? He does
so, all pagan Nations, who were without Christ, being aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of promise, Ep. 2.12.
Without God in the world, being carried away to dnmb Idols, 1 Cor. 12. What is
this to us? but yet,

3. I must tell you; That this Commandment of Christ, placing teaching before
baptising, does not pronounce Christian Infants, unbaptisealbe, because
unteachable: if there be any such force of Argument from the order and placing
of words, I pray argue so out of Mark 1.1. Where Repentance is placed before
faith; and out of John 3.5. Where the Water is set before the Spirit: Saint
Peter will tell you, that the Spirit goes before the Water, Acts 10.47. and
you can tell your self, that Repentance follows after Faith, as the fruit
thereof; again it is not to be read here, first teach, then baptize. Christ
does not show here, which ought to go first, and which last, but leaves both to
be done according to the condition of the Church; for if it ba a Church
planted, and Christian, as ours it, then they are to be baptized, and after
instructed: if a Church to be planted and Heathenish, then they are to be first
taught, and then baptized.

Now the condition of the Church of God, which the family of Christ chiefly was
in the Apostles times, at the beginning of their preaching the Gospel to and
throughout the world, was much after the manner, of the Family of Abraham
(which was then the only Church representative:) As therefore Abraham in his
family, had both adult, and Infants, himself being circumcised at 100. years
old, Ishmael at 14. years, the Proselytes at other several ages, Isaac at 8.
days, and so taught Ishmael and the Proselytes of his house of this covenant
and the Sacrament thereof, before he circumcised them, but forthwith baptized
Isaac before and without any foregoing instruction: just so does our Savior
Christ appoint to be done in his family the Church, which was now to be raised
in the greater part, and gathered out of the Nations; So as the adult Heathens,
aliens from the Covenant, void knowledge, were first to be taught before they
were baptized, but the Children of such taught and baptized Heathens, were
forthwith to be initiated by the Sacrament of Baptism, before they were taught
in the heads of Religion Now the condition of our Churches, is a constituted
and planted Church, already formed, and therefore according to the intention of
this Text, the baptising of Infants is to precede, and the teaching them to
follow, when by reason of years and capacity, they can hear the word.

4. Christ indeed gave Command, that whom his Disciples had taught, they should
be baptized; but that none should be baptized but suchf as were first taught,
that is your Addition or Tradition, wherein you resemble the old Separates of
the Jews, the Pharisees (as I have told you, the name of a Pharisee, is in
English a Separate) For as they transgressed the Commandments of God, by their
Traditions of the Elders, Matthew 15. So do you corrupt this Commandment of
Christ, by your Additions, and the inventions of your Youngsters. But in vain
did they worship God; Teaching for doctrines, the Commandments of men; and in
vain do you worry us, bringing in for proofs, the glosses and expositions of
Children.

But look again upon the Text in Matthew, and see, if Teaching do not also
follow close after Baptising, and Baptising so goes before Teaching; thus with
your own Argument retorted, I have slain you, as Goliath with his own Sword.

But, sure, our Savior Christ, being the God of Order, and the Wisdom of God,
did not thus place the words, and order them up and down, to no purpose. Yea, I
conceive, that in so doing, he purposed to give a full and universal Precept or
Command for Baptism, both to the Apostles and others, the Pastors of the
Church, unto the worlds end, that so, when they ceased, committing their
converted Churches unto these, succeeding them, these might proceed, where they
left to build, upon their foundations, To Baptize and Teach where they had
taught and Baptized: And thus the words are very orderly placed and ranked, the
first file (as I may so speak) being, of Teaching and Baptising where the
Apostles w^^^, as Amb^ssidours in Extraordinary, Teaching the Cown Men and
Women of the Nations and Pagans, the Gratuital Covenant of God, and baptising
them, or giving them, the initial Seal thereof.

The next file, or order, is, of Baptising and Teaching, where went, either
they also, as Pastors in Ordinary, or other Ordinary Pastors, Baptising the
Children and Infants of such converted, Nations and Pagans, being in Covenant
with their Parents, and teaching them afterward to observe, whatsoever Christ
commanded, etc. So that here seems to be Christ's Commandment in this Text,
both for Adult-Baptism, and also Infant Baptism, or (if you will) for
Parental-Baptism, upon their being taught the Covenant and their embracing and
professing Christ, and also for Filial Baptism, upon their being in Covenant,
as being Children of baptized Professors, after which is to follow teaching and
instructing of them, as they are able: which is punctually observed by us, who
do, or should, having baptized them (by order) Catechize them afterward, that
so they may be fitted in due time for that other Sacrament, the Lords Supper,
according to that of Hebrews 6 2. Where the Apostle speaks of Baptisms (The
Baptisms I mentioned which are plural or Two, in respect of the subjects
capable, the grown men of the Nations converted, and their Infants or Children,
but yet but one and the same Baptism, as formerly I have showed) Baptisms I
say, and imposition of hands, and alludeth to the practice then and since in
use with the Church, That such Children as were baptized in their Infancy,
should afterward openly in their own persons and with their own mouth, own the
Covenant, confirm an ratify the promise and condition, make Profession of
their Faith, and so be, by imposition of Hands, farther confirmed and admitted
to the Lords Supper.

Now you, Sir, quite contrary to the order of these prinicples of the doctrine
of Christ, as they are called in the 1. verse of Heb. 6. You begin at
imposition or laying on of Hands, before Baptism, or the laying on of Water,
and so do but impose upon us, as the Children, (Impostor-like) requiring first
Confession of Faith from them, before they have from you Administration of
Baptism, as if your Children born Christians, had no more privilege, were in no
better condition, than the Pagans and Nations, Christ sent his Apostles unto.

5. I shall tell you, that the word translated, Teach, all Nations, (in which
lies all the force of your arguing against Childrens Baptism) it signifies
(see your want of skill in, and your folly in declaming and clamoring against
University and human learning in the divine languages, for so are the original
ones) signifies in the original, not only to Teach, but to make Disciples of
the Nations, to admit them to be Scholars, to be taught, This is the end
wherefore the Apostles were sent out, namely to make Disciples, and the
Actions, whereby they were to attain this end, were Baptising and Teaching, and
if it were not thus, there would be found a Tautology in Christ's words, and you
must read them thus, Go teach all Nations, baptising them, Teaching them. Such
an Exposition as this would put you to your shifts, Go ye, make Disciples to me
out of all Nations by Baptising and Teaching; and such a one, may do well
enough, very well against you, who when you come to this or any Text, do but
shift up and down for your self, but sift not at all for the sense. And
therefore (to puzzle you a little, for there is no farther hopes of any of you
I fear,) I will tell somewhat more that our Divines have added to justify this
Exposition; Christ says not, go make Disciples and baptize them, but make
disciples baptising them, implying, that by baptising them they made them
Disciples; Like as it is said, that John did baptize in the Wilderness and
preach, as though he did baptize first, and then preach: So all Israel is said
to be baptized into Moses, not as already taught, but to be taught by him, for
the future, 1 Cor. 10.2.

But I will not stand upon this Discipling the Nations, by baptising them and
their Children. Though the word (disciple them) be a general word,
comprehending in it both kinds of conversion, both by the preaching of the
word, and the initiation of baptism. This is that though, which I can press
hence, That all Disciples of Christ are to be baptized, there is a Command for
this, Go, Disciple the Nations and baptize them.

And that this discipling the Nations, was a making them Scholars and Disciples
of Christ, not as taught, but to be taught of him as before, the force and
energy of the word in the original imports as much, as may farther be
declared in Matthew 27.57 Where Joseph of Arimathea, discipled himself (the
same word is there that here is) entered himself to be of Christ's school: and
out of John 9.27 Where the blind man says to th Pharisees, Will ye be also his
Disciples, and be initiated to learn of him? and may be farther instanced from
the manner of the Jews, amongst whom, to become a Disciple was to be initiated
into a Master, to be taught of him, and therefore the very day any one
initiated themselves to learn, they were called Disciples, as Christ's were, and
so called his Disciples, from the first day he called them and said, Come
follow me; And like as men are called the Soldiers under such a Captain, from
the time of their listing them, though they be not as then taught the skill of
Arms.

Now then Sir, are not Children, may they not be called Disciples? Acts 11.26.
you may as well deny (...) be Christians, as to be Disciples. For (I take
(...) and Christians are Synonymas, that is, (lest you (...) symony in that
word) words of the same name and (...) fixation; so that all Christians are
Disciples of Christ, and ano^ Disciples of Christ they are Christians: and
howsoever Disciples were called Christians first in Antioch, they may be so
called after in any place; and Christians wheresoever may be called and are
Disciples of Christ. In the mouth of two witnesses this word may stand, to bear
you down for Acts 15.10. Children, upon whose necks those false Teachers would
have put the yoke of circumcision, are called Disciples, I say, they would have
put it upon the Infants of believers, as well as the believing Parents, for
they would have done it after the manner of Moses Law, pressing it still to be
of force. And why not Disciples, I pray? do they not visibly belong to the
family and school of Christ, yea and his Kingdom, and so why not subjects also?
are not the little Children of a kingdom, subjects thereof, though they know
not the Laws of the same? is not the promise made unto our Children, and the
Covenant of God upon them, and do not we Parents offer them to God, giving up
our Names to God, both for our selves and all our Families, and undertake for
them, and their instruction and education in christianity, and will this work
nothing to the declaring them Disciples? I will shut up all these
interrogatories with this Assertory, that because if children of Christian
discipled parents be also discipled, why then they are within this commandment
of Christ, and may and ought to be baptized; and so you have a commandment for
their baptizing out of that word, Go disciple the Nations; our children are as
capable of being Disciples.

Or (if you will not go from your English) of being taught, as the children of
the Jewish Parents were; which if you yield unto, as you cannot do otherwise,
then show me some reason why our children are not as capable of Baptism without
such teaching, as the Jews children were of Circumcision without the same.
Besides that. I will mind you of this, that though they be not capable of
receiving actual teaching from men, they are not incapable of Gods own
teaching, even in their infancy, no more than children of the Jews were, that
hereupon you should debar ours from Baptism, when as theirs were not kept from
Circumcision upon any such account.

6. The same, or rather another, Commandment for our Infant Baptism, may be
fetched out of those words, Baptizing them, for whom does our Savior design
here for the Subject of Baptism, or persons to be baptized? why, the Discipled,
or taught Nations, Parents and Children, they have a right to the Gospel
preached, as Nations, but a right to Baptism, Parents and Children, as
discipled, taught, and brought into Covenant. So that when Christ commanded the
Apostles to baptize the Nations so discipled and taught, he did not look only
to the time then being, but to the continuation of a Christian Progeny and
Posterity of Believers upon earth. So that as S. Paul says, 1 Timothy 1 16. For
this cause I obtained mercy, that in me, first Jesus Christ might show forth
all long suffering, for a pattern to them who should hereafter believe on him
to life everlasting: so these Nations obtained mercy, that in them first, Jesus
Christ might show forth Baptism, for a pattern to them who should hereafter be
discipled and taught of him in the everlasting Covenant; namely, that Baptism
belongs to them, all other Nations, so far forth as they consist of discipled
Parents and Children, Parents professing Christ in their own persons, and their
Children under their Christian Education; both together make up a discipled
Nation, commanded here to be baptized, as the proper and adaequate Subject of
Baptism, So that if I can show that the Children are contained in the word
Nations, the work is done, a commandment here is for their baptizing. I shall
do it briefly, yea it is done to my hand already.

1. It is a general rule in Scripture, That children are always included in
every administration, whether of promises or threatenings, mercies or
judgments, privileges or burdens, unless they be excepted; and in the very
constitution of it, children make a great part of a Nation.

2. In this particular, of these, all Nations here, some think it to be spoken
emphatically, in opposition to the one Nation of the Jews (and so it is in a
sense, this was the only taught and discipled Nation, but now, go and teach
and disciple all Nations?) I should rather, or as well, think it to be spoken
in apposition and relation unto the one Nation of the Jews, that like as the
Nation of the Jews has been a long time discipled and taught in the Covenant,
and circumcised, the parents with their children: so now all Nations are
commanded to be likewise discipled and taught in the same Covenant, and
baptized, the parents with their children, the which S. Paul shows clearly,
Gal. 3.8. and 9. namely, that the Doctrine of the Gospel delivered to Abraham
in the nature of a Covenant, was preached now to all Nations, and so the
blessing of Abraham's family was here conveyed to the believing families of the
Nations, and so the Promise and the Seal Baptism were here applied to the same
families, father and children, as the promise and seal Circumcision were to the
particular families of Abraham, father and children, and so here came the
Nations to be blessed in Abraham, and Abraham here began to be the father of
many Nations.

The which may be yet made more to appear, if the time be looked upon, when the
Apostles were sent to teach or disciple these Nations, just when Circumcision
lay a dying (as I may so say) and expiring, or ceasing to be a seal of
administration unto the Jewish Church, a very fit time, the very time for the
Lord to appoint Baptism, and to enlive it for the seal, to come in place of the
other, and perform the same office in the Churches of the Gentiles, as the
other did in the Churches of the Jews, namely, to let in the believing parents
with their children.

Look again into Romans 11.23. and 24. these Gentile and Pagan Nations were to be
taken into the place of the Nation of the Jews; now upon this their cutting off
and casting out, and these wild olives were to have the same engraffing into
the good Olive, as the natural branches had: but they and their children were
graffed in, and now they and their children are cut off; so these and their
children, of the Nations here, were in the like manner here engraffed and
implanted into Christ, and therefore baptized, Romans 6.5. like as the other
circumcised.

Lastly, what a great change would there have been else in the heart and love
of Christ, if now he, who rebuked the Apostles for hindering the little children
of the Jews to come unto him, yea who embraced them in his arms, laid his hands
upon them, and blessed them, should now himself in this commandment unto his
Apostles, to teach, disciple, and baptize the Nations, not mind them the
children of these Nations in the like manner as to Baptism, as he did the
children of Abraham as to Circumcision, but leave them out, or forbid them to
come, or be brought unto him, as if he had now no delight, or took no pleasure
in the Infantry of the Gentiles, whereas himself long before spoke of this very
time, Isa. 49.22. Behold, I will lift up my hands to the Gentiles, and set up
my standard unto the people, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms or
bosoms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders. But why did
not Christ here put in, baptize the Nations and their seed, as he did in the
first administration, Circumcise the Jews and their seed? The Answer is made in
the very Question, Because he did it in the first administration of
Circumcision, there was no need of doing it again; and besides, children having
once a right to be accounted as belonging to Christ's Church, and to be reputed
visible Members thereof, and no forfeiture made thereof on their part, or bar
put In by Christ or any other person of authority, they are always so to be
reckoned of, yea they are here put in again and mentioned, in the discipled
Nation, and comprehensively included in Them, baptize them, the Nations
discipled, which consist of parents and their children, which make them up.

Again, if the children had not been included here, in these Nations, what a
great change had here bin made in the latitude and extent of the Covenant, as
to the subject thereof, I mean this particular of children, and that without
warning given, whereby some other provisions or course might have been sought
for and supplicated at Gods hands, for the good of their souls? for by this
your rule of shutting out children from Baptism, by the power of this
commandment, according to your interpretation, if a Jew should convert to
Christ, and become a Christian, and believe in Christ come in the flesh, he
should be in a worse condition as to his child than before, as who may not be
baptized, whereas before he might be circumcised, and the parents faith in
Christ will be a loss and prejudice to his child; and both parent and child may
think it to be a worse Covenant than the former, whereas it is but one and the
same, and therefore when he was a Jew, his child was circumcised, so when he
becomes a Christian, his child is to be baptized.

And thus I have, out of this Text of Matthew 28.19. wherein your party
glories so much, (though I forgate to tell you, that herein is not described
the primary Institution of Baptism, but only an enlargement of the Apostles
Commission) I have evinced a commandment for baptizing of Infants of
Believers: you (perhaps) looked for a command, expressed in so many letters and
syllables, Go, baptize the children of Believers; but is it not good and
effectual (it ought to be) if included in the sense and meaning of the words?
are not Magistrates and Ministers too (by your leave) meant in that
commandment, Honor thy Father? are not envy and hatred likewise comprised in
that command, Thou shall do no murder? yet neither those nor these are expressly
literally or verbally commanded; where is the Bishop of Rome mentioned in the
Revelations? yet he meant, and his universal headship, by the Beast there and
his mark. I could give you many more instances. And why not Infants also
comprised in this command, Disciple the Nations and baptize them, though not
set down there by name, amongst the Nations and Disciples to be baptized. But I
have writ enough of this Point before.

I will only (as formerly, now also for a conclusion of this Point,) leave
with you another Syllogism, supposing that now, having been used to them,
(Syllogisms I mean) you will not be much afraid of them, though you think them
the bug bears of the Universities, and limbs of humane Arts and Sciences: fear
not, for unless you come nigh them, which (I believe) you will not, or dare
not, they will not bite you: otherwise, they have teeth in their mouths.

The sixth Syllogism is this:

The discipled or taught Nations, and so brought into Covenant, are commanded
by Christ to be baptized, Mat. 28.19.

But the Parents and their children are the discipled or taught Nations, and so
brought into Covenant.

Therefore the Parents and their children are commanded to be baptized.

The first Proposition is the letter of the Text, as is said.

The second is largely proved before, and who need doubt but that children are
included in the word Nations? being a part, and a great part of them, and
comprehended in every administration of grace and mercy especially.

And now leaving the commandment of Christ for Infant Baptism, I proceed to
the second kind of Warrants you call for; namely, the example of Christ and
his Apostles; for so these two you yoke together in your Quaeres, and impose
upon my neck to bear up and carry out in this and all points, Commands and
Examples, when your self, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke, neither do,
nor can show either of the two, for your wild, untamed, and untaught opinion.

As for the example of Christ, it is a vain thing to demand it, as who baptized
none, as I have told you formerly out of the Evangelist.

And for the Apostles, they baptized but a few, as whose business and work was
especially, and lay for planting Churches, and raising of foundations out of
grown persons converted by them out of Judaism and Gentilism, as is expressly
set down, 1 Cor. 1.13 and 17. And therefore if Christ sent them not to baptize,
but to preach the Gospel, (not to baptize, either especially in reference to
preaching and converting, or generally, all whom they preached unto or
converted:) it was not part of their commission to do so, nor any violation of
Christ's command, for them not to do so; for then S. Paul would, and should
rather have asked God pardon, than given him thanks, as here he does, for that
he baptized none of the Corinthians (whom notwithstanding in Christ Jesus he
begat through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15.) save some few here also named and
mentioned by him.

This I acquaint you with at first, to let you understand the reason of so
frequent mention of the Baptism of believing Converts, and of so much silence
in Scripture of Infant Baptism, and to show you further the irrationality of
your demand, who, as your friends and father Jesuits were wont to call upon
us, for Names, Names of Protestants before Luther's days, now clamor me for
Examples, Examples of baptized Infants in the Apostles time: Yea, to present to
you the invalidity of your reason, so frequently urged, the Apostles did not
practice constantly the baptizing Infants, and therefore it is not to be so
done. For (besides, that for you to reason negatively from the Scripture in a
matter of fact, as here from the not-practice of the Apostles, to the
unlawfulness of our practice, and fact, shows you are indeed averse, not
only to humane, but even Divine Arts and Sciences, there being no Divinity,
little humanity, in such arguments, fitter for children than men, for the
scales of a Higler, than the Schools of a Disputer.) I have showed you good
reason why the Apostles (yea the Apostles own reason, which (I suppose) you
will not deny to be good) did not baptize all, either grown persons whom they
converted, or their Infants by name, and sometimes did not baptize at all, when
they had converted people. And may not I now turn the same Argument upon and
against your self, and put the same yoke upon your neck? There is no practice
of any Apostle to be seen or read of in the whole Gospel, or Acts of the
Apostles, of their baptizing any Christians child, when he was grown up to
years, and therefore your practice in doing so is unlawful and unwarrantable,
you (I believe) would think this but mad arguing, but you know the man and his
communication. 1 Kings 9.11.

From the Acts of the Apostles there may be, but from the non-Acts of the
Apostles there may not be made or drawn a good reason to enforce or unforce a
practice. There is recorded no practice of any Apostle, admitting women to the
Lords Supper, or example of any woman receiving the Lords Supper (more then of
Infants receiving Baptism, and the Apostles admitting them thereto) will you
therefore hence conclude, the practice of Women's receiving the Lords supper is
to be omitted? yes will say there is, for does not Christ say; Drink ye all of
this; And I say, Christ also said, Teach baptize all Nations; (therefore
Infants) will as well follow here; As therefore women will follow, there you
will say again, was not the Lords supper, administered, to the whole Church of
Corinth, and therefore to the Women therein? and so (say I) was not Baptism
administered to the whole Church of Corinths, and to whole families there, and
therefore to the children therein? You will say again, that in Christ Jesus
there is neither Male nor Female, Gal. 3.28. And may not I say, that in Christ
Jesus there is neither Old, nor Young, Father or Child? Thence indeed you may
prove and deduct that Women are not to be kept back from the Lords supper, but
there is nothing expressly set down or mentioned of their receiving the Lords
supper, or the Apostles giving them it. And so may I prove hence (and have
proved many ways) that Christian-Infants are not to be kept back from the
Lords Baptism, Though there should be nothing mentioned explicitly of the
Apostles practice of baptising children, or childrens examples of receiving
baptism, in the Gospel.

For your fuller Understanding in this point, look back to what I have
discoursed formerly about our imtation of the examples of th Apostles and their
practices; To which I add, that their practice and example is and ought to be,
in all Moral and material acts of Religion, an affirmative and Positive Rule
to the Churches of God, as thus and herein, they baptized such, and such, and
therefore we may do the like. But it is no negative or exclusive rule. They
baptized not such and such. That therefore we may not baptize such, for the
reason is plain, that they possibly might not meet with all persons and
occasions, and their practice is not a full rule, though a good rule; but the
reason I gave before, is a playner one, for that they were altogther, in a
manner, or chiefly taken up with the preaching to the Nations converting people
and planting Churchs, that they could not, nor did attend so much upon
Baptising, and therefore their Practice and example in not baptising such or
such, is no rule for the Churches to walk by now.

But yet (Sir) notwithstanding all this, there are fair footsteeps and prints
of the Apostles feet to be seen, walking in this, though not so much beaten,
way of baptising believers and their infant, which the scriptures have traced
and tracked out for us to take after them. As in the Acts of the Apostles,
chap. 16 15. Lydia she and her household was baptized, and verse 33. The Jailer,
He and all his household was baptized; Acts 18. chapter verse 8. Crispus with
all his house, and many of the Corinthians with their households (for so it is
meant) were baptized. So in the Acts of Paul the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.4, 5.6.
Where is repeated again, the baptising of Crispus, and Gaius, and the household
of Stephanas.

And I know nothing to the contrary, or contrary to the Analogy and proportion
of faith, but rather it may be agreeable to the Harmony of the scripture, and
these scriptures, If I should say that those persons who are mentioned but
single, are meant to be baptized, them, and their households; as Gaius here by
Paul. So Cornelius by Peter, yea the Eunuch, baptized alone by Philip, might
procure his children, if he had any, to be baptized by some or other
Evangelical minister coming into those coasts, and so where the household of
Aristobulus, and the household of Narcissus are mentioned, as Romans 16.10. And
the household of Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy 4.19. Baptized households are there meant.

Now when it is said, such and such were baptized and all their households, such
a one, and All his, by the Apostles, is your imagination so strong, and wide,
as to shut out the children first out of doors of those households, that so next
you may exclude them, from the Apostles Baptism? You must do so, if there were
any within doors, or tell us, that the Apostles passed by them, in their
baptisings; or you must show us, that all the Women in those households, were
barren, not a Mother of a Child, or a young one amongst them all (For though
there should not have been in them, Infants or Sucklings, yet, if but a
youngling and a Child of some years, all would have been but as one, as to
their Understanding and confessing.) Or you must thus divide the households, (as
you are good at dividing houses and households, setting the Husband against the
Wife, and alienating the Children from Father and Mother, which is a very bad
practice,) and say, that not all the Household was baptized, whereas the Text
says expressly, He and all his household were baptized, but some major part, or
the most considerable part of the house, and when it is said, the house of
Israel was circumcised, its meant not of a part, either major or most
considerable, but of the whole house, as to the Parents and Children, and
Servants also or Proselytes under their education and instruction.

I do not wonder, you cannot abide our University, Arts, and Sciences, These
cannot abide you and such reasonings and interpretations; the Apostles baptized
such and all their households, that is, the greater part, the people of Growth:
for though sometimes such a word may be so taken, where all are not capable of
the thing done or spoken of, you must prove it to be so here meant in all the
places, where the Apostles baptized such and all their households, which you can
never do, the express Letter (which you are so for,) is expressly against you,
such and all their households, of which many times also children are not only
some of all, and a part of the whole, but (in your Terms, one of them at
least) the major part (I say not the most considerable) but I say a capable
part too, but if in all or any of these households, there was but one infant, or
any one young stripling, you are gone, as to the Apostles practice who baptized
the believer, and all his household: and incapacity here is none to hinder
either our interpretation or the Apostles ministration; for if there had been
any in the household incapable, The Apostle would not have baptized the whole
household, or the believer, and all his household: and I have abundantly showed
before from the Apostle, that Infants of Believers are capable of baptism,
Verse 32. Now if be said, that the Apostle preached and spoke the word to the
Jailer, All that were in the Gaolers house, so all might believe and be
baptized; it is true, the Apostle did so speak the word to all capable of it,
but yet at the 31. Verse, he speaks of the salvation of all the house upon the
terms of the Gaolers believing, for that the promise and Covenant being so
made at first, held still to believers, parents and their children and here
also servants, because it is said, he and all his, were baptized in the 33.
verse. So it appears to me, that the Jailer himself only believed, and had an
inward work of Faith wrought in the heart upon some special evidence he
received of Christ come in the flesh, whereupon he and his, (of whom, the other
Pagans of his family there is nothing said as to their faith, whether servants
of growth or children under age the whole household, were baptized immediately,
in relation to the Fathers and Masters, undertaking and engaging for themselves
and their households.

And indeed (to keep to my particular) if such in these, or our households, as
did, or do actually believe and profess, were and are to be baptized only,
why was the household, as of the Jailer before, who only there believed (as I
have showed) so: the household of Lydia, (of whom only, it is said that the
Lord opened her heart to believe in Christ) baptized?

Surely the Apostles would not bring in a different Administration, now in the
households of believing Christians, whether out of Jews or Pagans, from that
which ever was in use and practice amongst the households of believing Jews at
first, and therefore went here according the common custom formerly used in
time of circumcision, and where they baptized any believing Father of a Family,
there they did baptize, or others for them, the children of the same household,
or might have done. Otherwise, how could they, the Apostes when they preached
the Gospel to all Nations and so to their households, how could they bring the
blessing of Abraham into all Nations and their households (according to the
prophecy and promise thereof by God) if they did not apply the Covenant and the
Seal generally to them and theirs, in the same manner as it was to him and his,
so, that the children of believers might now be baptized, as formerly they were
circumcised?

And lastly I may add this, That when men in those days were converted from
Judaism or Pagainism, they did (probably) at their admittance into the Church
by baptism, make an open and solemn League and Covenant with God, before some
people present to profess the Faith of Christ, they and their households, which
Saint Paul may seem to put some of them in mind of, Ephesians 6.4. Fathers
bring up your Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: And therefore
when the Apostles did baptize households of believers, they did it in relation
on to the Parents, or others in their stead, undertaking and engaging for
themselves and the children therein.

And thus now at last, and at length too (as all other point) I have asserted
unto you this Point also, of Apostolical Practice and Examples, for the
baptizing of the children and Infants of believing Parents.

I have answered all your Quaeres, and (I hope) have informed and settled your
judgment better by my answers, than you could do it by our Quaeres (for I
cannot yet forget, how that at the end of them you say, these your Quaeres are
your judgment.) I proceed now to what you have more in your Letter of two
sheets, but do not mean to proceed, as I have begun, either to transcribe all
your words of the second sheet, all have done your words of the first, or to
bestow twenty and five sheets closely written, in answering of your second
sheet, but loosely written, as I have done upon your first sheet (for I have
dispatched hitherto but the one first sheet of your Letter) and there is good
reason for it.

For the first sheet, for the most part, put Quaeres to me, in your number
twenty one, and they contained in them some material and substantial things to
be answered, of a large extent, and great depth; and therefore I thought good
to give unto them a full and proportionable answer, what pains and time soever
it should cost me. But that which you propound in your second sheet to me, is
nothing but certain Considerations of your own, against baptism of Infants, and
about some Texts of Scripture, the very froth and barmings of your own head;
the which if I should let alone unreplied to, as once I was resolved, would of
themselves sink, disperse, and fall to nothing. But, lost you should swell and
be puffed up in any conceit of these your considerations, as the Bladder is
with its own wind, I will as briefly as I can, with my short breath, by reason
of my old age, blow away your froth, and let out your wind, that so the
hollowness and shallowness of them may appear to the Reader.

The Title you set over your first Consideration, is this, More particularly
about the Doctrine of Babtism (Baptism) consider these Arguments proved by
clear and plain Scripture. Sir, this is a false Title to your Tractate; for if
you would have done here more particularly, it should have been, and you should
have said, about the Doctrine of Infant Baptism: for if you bring not
Arguments, not only about Baptism, as you say, but against Infant baptism, and
these proved by clear and plain Scripture, I shall not consider them, neither
have you considered well of our difference. 1. You bid me Consider that the
Doctrine of Infants Babtism overthrows the nature of the Covenant of grace, and
the who (whole) Gospel of Christ; why so? because the Covenant of grace and
Gospel of Christ stands upon the account of faith actual in there one (heir
own) persons, as uppears in John 3.36. and John 5.24. But Infants Babtism stand
upon the account of the faith in there (their) Parents or Surtie, (Sureties,)
(although they have none for themselves) and so makes faith void and unnesesery
(unnecessary) to the perticipation (participation) of the Covenant, Romans 4.13.
Gal. 3.17, 8.

But what do I? did I not say I would not transcribe your words of your second
sheet? but I see I must do it, for there is so much false-written English in
them, that I must of necessity do it, lest if inscribed to my Answer, that may
be thought mine. But to the matter. Baptism of Infants of Believers, does not
overthrow, but establish the Covenant and Gospel of Grace, because it seals
and executes it. Neither does the Covenant of Grace, and the Gospel, stand
upon the account of actual Faith in all men's own persons, but only such as
being grown in years, are converted from Paganism, these must make profession
of faith, before they can come into the Covenant, and be sealed. But actual
faith is not a Condition required, as to the Covenant or Seal in Infants. Your
Text therefore of John 3.36. is not to the purpose, as which only sets
everlasting life upon (to use your phrase) the account of actual faith, which I
grant, and so does the next Text, John 5.24. as appears, for that he begins
with, and speaks of such as do hear the Word of God, and believe in Christ,
which is not appliable to Infants but grown men: And as to your Inference, The
baptism of Infants stands upon the account of their being in Covenant together
with their Parents, and not upon the account of the Faith in their Parents or
Sureties, but only so far, as the Faith of the Parents serves to show them a
seed of the faithful; and the Faith of the Sureties, undertakes for their
education in, and profession of Faith afterward: How strangely also do you
pervert that Text, Romans 4.13? For it is there said, the promise was made to
Abraham, that he should be the heir of the world, was not to Abraham and his
seed through the Law, but through the Righteousness of Faith; Which he had yet
being uncircumcised, to whom God upon this account of this faith, made the
Promise both to himself and his Seed; you would have the faith there spoken of
to be the faith of the Seed or Infant, as holding it necessary to the
participation of the Covenant, and so falsify both Covenant and Text, which
both, together with your last, Gal. 3.17. do quite overthrow your first
overthrowing Consideration (for Argumentation here is none.) More of this you
shall have hereafter.

Your second Consideration, because it has a Narration, yea a repetition of
what you set down in your first Page, about the nature of the state (so you
speak, whereas rather you should say, the state of the Nature) of Christ's true
visible Church under the Gospel, to the showing of which you here only
describe Christ's true invisible Church, and therefore cite the Texts you did
before, and add some more, that speak only of invisible Members, such as you
call Saints, made so by the immortal Seed, new Creatures by the benefit of
Regeneration. I shall therefore say nothing to that here, but refer you, and
especially the Reader, to what I have largely before discoursed, about the
state and nature (for I will correct my self too) of the Church both visible
and invisible; for though you may (perhaps) have no such care of me, I must and
will be careful, that I dead not the Reader, by any tedious and vain
repetitions and Tautologies.

Yet this I say in anser to it, That Infant Baptism in the Church, is so far
from overthrowing (as you argue) the nature and state of Christ's true visible
Church, that it is rather much confirmed and established, increased and
enlarged thereby, because thereby more are admitted in present, members
visible, and are engaged to be for the future, visible professors and
confessors of Christ; yea, and the invisible Church also is not overthrown, but
upheld and augmented by our Baptism of Infants, as whereby many Infants are not
only dedicated and consecrated unto Christ, but are also by Baptism, as a Seal
and Means (as I have showed) regenerated, and so fitted and prepared the better
for Heaven and happiness. And whereas you add, That Infants Baptism is grounded
upon the Relation they have to the Church, by generation only, or by the mere
pro ession of faith and repentance in the Parents and Sureties, I see you are
corrupted in your Principles, and grounds of Divinity.

Once more I tell you (I pray learn it now, for I will teach you it no more)
for the Readers sake, that Infants Baptism is grounded and foundationed upon
the Covenant of God made with the believing Parents, for himself and Infants,
and that which you call Generation, does but raise up the ground and
foundation-Covenant to bring it into some act of visibility in relation to the
Church, for the Seal thereof. And so also Infants have not their relation unto
the Church by generation (rather by this they have relation to the world) nor
by the mere faith and repentance of the Parents and Sureties, but by the
Covenant and the Seal thereof, in both which Infants are interessed together
with their Parents, have they their relation unto the Church. For which you may
see Acts 2.39, and 41. (because you give me no Text here, which I wonder at) of
which I have your consideration in particular to peruse anon.

Only I shall add a word or two about Sureties in the Baptism of Infants,
because I do not remember that hitherto, before now, you have made any mention
of them; and for that I see you are here in an error about them; and you would
put a slur upon us, and a kind of slander upon our Church, as if
Infant Baptism stood upon account of faith in the Parents and Sureties,
although (say you;) they have none for themselves. I will add somewhat,
although they have more than your self. I may say the one, as well as you say
the other.

Know then Sir, that the costom of having Sureties at the baptizing of Infants,
has been very ancient in the Church, when Truth was in its prime light, and
Primitive purity, though thereupon it is the less liked, because the more
unlike to the new upstart and out-staring novelisms of these later Ages, and
last declining times; and their office was, as to bear witness of the birth of
Infants of Christian Parents, and therefore were called Attesters or Witnesses
(as at this day) so to answer for the faith, and take upon them the education
of the baptized Infants, and for this they were called Sponsors or Susceptors.
Hereupon the Infant to be baptized, although he did not profess himself to be
Believer with his own mouth, nor could, yet being asked and interrogated (as
the manner was) Do thou believe? he answered in the mouth and tongue of his
Sponsors or Sureties, or the very Parents, or they (which is all one) answered
in stead and place of the Infant, I believe. And without such profession of
faith, Infants publicly were not baptized in the Church. Thus in and by the
judgment of charity, the Ancients held and judged the Infant to believe, and
that if it could speak with its mouth, it would answer, that it believed; and
because it could not, they appointed (as before) Sponsors and Sureties in the
name and place of the Infant, to answer, I believe.

And in this sense also (besides others I have given) were Infants of
Christians called of old, Believers, because they did in some manner profess
faith, in and by the mouth and words of their Sponsors, Sureties and Parents.
True, its uncertain and unknown to the Church, or man, whether the Infant does
believe or not; but unless the Church had so judged by the judgment of charity
(which, says the Apostle, believes all things, hops all things) the Infant
to believe, she would not have appointed Sureties and Sponsors in the name and
place of the Infant, so to asnwer; and unless the Infant it self had so
answered, in the words and mouth of its Sponsors and Sureties she, i.e. the
Church, would have forbid it to be baptized.

Thus I have told you of the ancient manner of the Primitive Baptisms with
Sureties and Sponsors; you must not now here call upon me for proof hereof out
of the plain and direct Scripture: for I acknowledge this ancient Custom, and
many a one in use amongst the first Christian Churches, is not expressly
prescribed in Scripture (for then it might be concluded absolutely necessary
for all ages and persons to follow) so neither is it forbidden explicitly in
Scripture, and therefore not utterly to be rejected, as unlawful to be used,
as which was for the good of the Infant (and hurs of none, as having neither
impiety nor iniquity in it) so also it was for the provision and better
education of the Infant, the edification of the Church, and the demonstration
and exercise of Charity to, and charitable judging of others. Insomuch, that as
those venerable Names and Lights of the Ancient Church, Tertullian and
Augu^tine, have related and delivered that Custom of baptizing with Sureties
and Sponsors: so other Reverend Names and Lights of these Modern reformed
Churches, as Luther, Zanchy, Beza, have allowed, approved, and commended the
aforesaid Custom, as fit to be retained still.

From all which it now appears, that you (Sir) are much out, when as you talk
and tattle of the Churches baptizing Infants upon account of faith in the
Sureties, although they have none of their own; for (you see) it was not upon
the account of the faith of the Sureties, which the Sureties had of their own,
that Infants ever were baptized, but upon the account of the faith of the
Infant, which the Infant had of its own, testified and professed in their name,
by the Sureties (appointed by the Church, which judged charitably of the
Infant, to believe) that the Infant was baptized.

But now, before I proceed to the next, I will call upon you to consider, That
your Doctrine of baptizing actual Believers only, and thereupon not baptizing
the Infants of Believers until they have actual faith, and can and do make
confession of it, does rather overthrow, as much as in you lies, the nature of
the Covenant of Grace, and the whole Gospel of Christ, at leastwise to the Seal
thereof, all the while from their birth, that such Infants are kept by you from
the same Seal of Baptism (for you cannot keep them from their Covenant, though
you do shamefully, ingratefully, ungraciously, yea and unnaturally keep them
from the Seal.) The thing is evident enough, if you do but remember, this is
the nature of the Covenant and Gospel of Christ, the Promise of God, to be the
God of the believing Parent and his Seed jointly, therefore also of his child
as soon as its born; yea before, when it is his Seed; and soon after its birth,
Gods will is declared to have this Covenant executed and confirmed by an
initial Seal of Circumcision upon Infants, in the Old, and of Baptism upon
Infants in the New Testament; now, who overthrows this Covenant, we, who put
our Infants under the Seal of the Covenant, soon after their birth, (it being
their birthright) or you, that withold it from your Infants, until they come
to be of years to make profession, let God himself be judge, and that his Word,
Genesis 17.14. He has broken my Covenant; who? the child, whose flesh of his
foreskin is not circumcised: so also he, whose flesh is not washed with the
water of Baptism; which latter, if not done, or ordered to be done by you, who
are Parents to the Child, the breach and overthrowing the Covenant lies upon
you, and not upon the child, to answer for. You have broken the Lords Covenant,
and the Lord may break in upon you, as he did upon Moses for neglect of
circumcising his Seed, Exodus 4.24. Consider of it, its the Lords mercy you are
not broken and consumed; let the riches of his goodness, and forbearance, and
long suffering, lead you to repentance; the Covenant Gospel, Christ being the
same under both Administrations, God will look (and justly may and must) that
his Covenanters or covenanted with, even Instants, shall be now partakers of
Baptism in a proportionable time (if there be no intercoming excusable
impediment) like as the same were of Circumcision.

And now also, before I set upon your next Consideration, consider with your
self, whether your Doctrine of baptizing Believers only, and thereupon your
not baptizing of Infants of Believers, until they come to have actual Faith,
and to a confession of it, does not rather overthrow the state and nature of
Christ's visible Church under the Gospel? I have largely proved before, and that
out of Texts you here cite to the contrary, Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2, etc. That
Christ's visible Church under the Gospel consists and is made up of visible
and outward members and professors, (some of which, though unknown unto us, are
members also of the invisible Church under the Gospel) and I have also clearly
showed you, that Baptism is a means of entrance and admission into the visible
Church; whereby Infants (who by virtue of Gods Covenant may also belong to the
invisible Church as members) are reckoned and enrolled, and even made members
of the visible Church. N^w then, whether of us do overthrow the State and
Nature of Christ's visible Church under the Gospel, we, who help to uphold and
increase it, by our ad nitting and initiating of our Infants to be visible
members thereof through our baptising of them in their Infancy, or you, who, by
your not baptising of them for the space of 15. or 16. years and more, and
sometimes as much more, do all that while withold visible members from the
Church, yea and do all that while leave them to a visible standing and being
under the kingdom of darkness, (though invisibly it may be otherwise) which is
most opposite to the Church of Christ, Let the next Reader judge, for you are
neither fit nor able to judge herein, as who are already prejudiced,
prejudicated, and prepossessed with a Spirit of delusion as to the Nature and
State of Christ's visible Church under the Gospel.

3 You bid me, Consider, That Infants babtism, it overthrows the end for which
true babtism was appointed, For the Chief one of Christ's true babtism of
believers, was to distinguish the true Church from the World: Col. 2.12.
Compared with Verse 20 Gal. 3.26. and 27 Act. 2.41. But Infant baptism
overthrows this distinction, because all are admitted in by it, and no
distinction made.

Sir, I not think of it until just now, or else I should have asked you, a
Quaere, Why you always write it Bahatism, when as you are so great an enemy to
Babe-baptism? I shall be bold, to answer it, thus, because you do so babble
about baptism. For is not this in present, (as there has been much of it
before) profane and vain babbling, which the Apostle bids you shun, to talk of
The end for which baptism is appointed, and then to call it, a Chief one; And
then to instance, in the distinguishing of the true Church from the world, as a
chief one, which is the inferior one; and lastly to cite holy Scriptures which
are too no such purpose, is not this profane and vain babbling? But I answer to
the matter.

1. It is an unsound and lame assertion or proposition, to say, that Infants
baptism is to be rejected for ever, (as you conclude your Considerations with,
and therefore mean so in every one) if it should overthrow one chief end, for
which true baptism was appointed, when as in the mean, it upholds five other
ends, as chief, if not chiefer, which I have reckoned up to you in my fifth
warrantable Reason for baptism, to which I refer you.

2. How will you prove Infants baptism to overthrow the end why true baptism
was appointed? because it overthrows the chief one, which was to distinguish
the true Church from this; but how if there be the ends, as well as the end why
true baptism was appointed? how, if amongst the ends, there be chiefer ones,
than that chief one you mention? how, if Infants Baptism do not overthrow those
five chiefer ones, though (supposed only) it should overthrow one chief one?
Here be now some Quaeres for you.

But now, how prove you also, The chief one end of true baptism to be, to
distinguish the true Church, from the world? you cite, Col. 2 12. and 20. There
is mention made of baptism and the world, and a spiritual end and effect of
baptism, that therein the Colossians were buried in Christ and risen with him,
(alluding to the ancient manner of baptising by immersion and emersion, to
signify them both,) and they were freed from the Rudiments and Ordinances of
the World, that is of the Legal economy of the Jews, and what is all this to
the purpose of baptisms being a chief end, to distinguish the true Church from
the Heathen World, which is also but an external end? And though the Text speak
of grown persons, and Heathens converted, yet it is true also of all elect and
regenerate Infant (of which there are many you cannot deny it) that they are
buried with Christ in baptism, and risen with him, etc. So that you get nothing
by this Text, against Infants Baptism, They rather gain by you hence for their
baptism; But there is nothing at all gained for the distinguishing the true
Church from the World by baptism, as the chief end thereof.

So that other Text, Galathians 3.26. Is nothing to your purpose, yea against
your purpose, for it speaks only of the inward and spiritual effects of
Baptism, and of baptism into Christ, that thereby the Galathians had put on
Christ, and were so incorporated, as they were one in Christ, so that there was
neither Jew, nor Gentile, bond, or free, and So far is this Text from showing
the distinction of the true Church from the World, to be the chief end of
baptism, that it rather and only shows, the spiritual Union of true Christians
with Christ, to be one end and a chief one, which also all Infants regenerate
and baptized into Christ do attain unto, as well as these grown Galathians and
converted Heathens.

I profess I never read in all my life time, Texts of Scripture, more
impertinently cited, and I had once thought to have let your Citations of the
word alone, and only have replied to your words; But that I honor the word,
and you do dishonor it, by citing it for that which is not in it, even as
Christ said, he honored the Father, but the Jews dishonored him, by saying, he
came not from the Father. Your last place, though it comes some what nearer
that the former, as to an external addition of the 3000. Souls unto the Church,
by baptism, yet it as far from mentioning any distinction of the true Church
from the world, and making it the chief end of baptism, as the other before.

3. Infant baptism does not overthrow but support that end, the distinguishing
of the true Church from the World: that is, from the World out of the Church,
which is the Pagan and Heathenish World, (you must mean this, or else you say
nothing, seeing there is a Christian World, or a World of Christians, even all
that profess the Gospel, and embrace Jesus Christ) for if you mean by Church,
the elect true believers; and by the World, the Reprobate and false Believers,
within the same, neither our Infant Baptism, nor your baptism of believers, (as
you call it) confessing Faith, when grown in years, can make such a
distinction; for as amongst our Infants, so amongst the grown Believers
baptized, there may be and are undoubtedly many Reprobates, and Hypocrites, and
Falsehearted Professors; such of both sorts come to Baptism, without any
distinguishing by us; and go from baptism without any distinction of such by it.

And therefore 4. Is a pitiful reason you add, and I pity you for it, that
Infant Baptism does not distinguish the true Church from the World, because all
are admitted in by it; True, all of the Church are admitted in by it, (What
need a distinction in the Seal, where there is a conjunction in the Covenant)
and this very admitting all of the Church professing Christ, or born of those
that profess Christ (upon both which terms, the Covenant runs) does
evidently prove, that we hold strictly, and uphold strongly, the distnction of
the Church from the World of Pagans and Heathens, whom we exclude-and keep off
from baptism, until they learn and believe the Gospel and make profession.

And now 5. Consider, that your Non-baptism of your Infants until they be grown
to great years able to profess faith, etc does overthrow the end of bapttism
and a chief one, the distinguishing of the true Church from the World, for that
none of them are admitted into the true visible Church, by it: for tell me,
what is the distinction and difference betwixo the World-Infants, I mean the
Infants of Pagans and Heathens, and the Church-Infants, the Infants of
Christians and Professors, but this only of baptism, admitting these into the
visible participacion of the Covenant, and Communion with the Church of God,
for want of which, the others are kept out as aliens and strangers, until they
by faith and confession come to claim the same Seal of admittance.

I say again consider this, and lay it closely and seriously to your heart,
that during the years you detain uyour Infants and Children from baptism, which
is their birth-privilege and their Covenant-Seal and their distinction-mark,
you leave them in a Heathenish and Gentile state, as Aliens and strangers from
the XCommom wealth of ChrisTians, and Covenants of Promise, Them, I say you
leave without Hope, as being without the Seal of the Promise, and your selves
in doubt, about them. The revealed things belong to you and your Children; The
Promise, and the Promise to be sealed, belongs to you and your Children, to
your Children, upon their birth, as their Privilege and due, Let them have it,
and leave the secret things to God, to whom they belong, their Salvation by
Election; for he that elected them to such an end, has elected them to the
means.

And thus you have been thrice overthrowing of Infant: Baptism, yet have you
not given is any fall: For though in words you seem to make is the great
overthrower, as if it overthrew the Covenant and Gospel, the visible Church,
the ends of true baptism, yet Infant Baptism, and all these stand ver, well
together, each upholding the other, and though you would indeed seem as the
great Goliath and overth over to little David, and so have given these three
retches and girds at Infan shaptism, its rather to your own overthrow, and of
vour own baptism, and yet (I perceive) you have another stroke to come, in the
21 of Ezekiel 27. God said of Jerusalem, purposeing to destroy it, I will
overturn, overturn, overturn, and it shall be no more; but in your design for
the ruin of Infant Baptism, you exceed the wrath and indignation and have gone
beyond that threefold Ingemination, saying, I will overthrow, overthrow,
overthrow, overthrow the doctrine of Infant Baptism. But as cursed Cowes have
short horns, so strong words have (most an end) weak hands, you have done but
little yet by your three highly and strongly conceited considerations, and I
(believe) the fourth will be like the sormer. Which, because there are so many,
In and outs and round abouts in it, I will reduce it to a short form.

The baptising of Believers or Deciples, is only expressly commanded in
Scripture, as in Matthew 28.19. Mark 16 15. John 4.12 Acts 2.38. and 41. Acts
8.37. and 38. But Infants baptism overthrows and prevents that babtism which
is only expressly commanded in Scripture? Therefore what? you infer nothing,
lest it should be a Syllogism, a Limm of the profane University human Learning,
but I know your meaning, only mend in your copy at home, (Deciples and
Babtism) as you write here, and make it, Disciples and Baptism, lest your
friends think you call the baptism of believers only, a babism: and derive
your Disciples from Deciples, decipients or deceivers.

You must pardon me, for not turning to your Texts, and some of them I have
already handled, and showed they were nothing to your purpose, and others, I
shall meet within in a fitter place, I know them without book, that none of
them all do expressly command the baptising believers only; Which they must do,
if you cite them for your purpose: For who ever denied the baptising of
believers, as I have formerly written? Again as these Texts, do command, some
of them, expressly the baptising of believers, as Acts 2.38. So some other does
but condition for, and propound Faith unto baptism of grown persons, as Acts
8.37. And another mentions faith and baptism as a joint requisite to Salvation,
as Mark 16.16. And another has nothing at all in it either of faith, or
baptism, or command as John 4 12. And for the last place (in your paper, the
first,) look back, where its largely handled, and you shall see (you might have
seen it in the Text it self) there is no express command for baptism of
believers, but of Disciples, and therefore you did well to add, to believers,
(or Deciples) and are not Children of believing Parents, Disciples too, if not
believers? you shall find (if upon your first reading you did not) Them also to
be commanded there, under the Notion of Disciples or a discipled Nation, (of
which they are a portion) to be baptized, and much more to that purpose.

And lastly your Texts that do speak of Baptism of Believers, mean it of
Believers, being grown persons and Heathens converted newly, not of Believers
born and living within the Precincts of the Church.

But how (I pray) does the Baptism of Infants within the Church, overthrow the
Baptism of believing Heathens and Pagans, grown persons? they stood up
together, both in Apostles General and National Commission, by which the
children of believing and baptized Heathens were to be also baptized; and in
Apostles domestical and special Dispensation, when they baptized whole
Households of believing Parents and their children. It is true, this Doctrine of
thus baptizing Infants, overthrows your practice of baptizing only Children
grown, though born of baptized Christian Parents, when they can give a reason
of their Faith. I say Infant Baptism overthrows this your Man Baptism in a
settled and planted Church; and you have not one Text to raise or lift it up, or
hold up your selves, But I remember you joined with Infant Baptism
overthrowing, its preventing also the Baptism expressly commanded in those
Scriptures alleged by you. What mean you, Sir, by such a conjuntion of
overthrowing and preventing? for if that overthrows this, then it does more
than prevent; and if that does but prevent this, it does not so much as
overthrow it. For my part, I think the one does not prevent the other, but both
were; joined together, both in the Precept, Baptize the discipled Nations, the
believing Parents and their children; as also in the practice, The Apostles
having converted Pagan Nations and Houses, I mean, the grown Parents, unto the
Faith, baptized them and their children at the same time, or left them
baptizeable, and to be baptized of others, if they were in haste of their
preaching the Word; like as Abraham the Believer, and Ismael his Son, were both
circumcised upon one and the same day. Sure if any one prevented the other, it
was the old Administration (as you call it in this place) the Baptism of
Believers, that prevented the other, the Baptism of Infants; and not the other
back way, as you affirm; for the Believers both of the Jewish and Heathenish
Nations, were first baptized, and then their Infants were afterward baptized,
as Abraham was first circumcised, and then the self-same day was Ismael
circumcised.

But let me hear and read your Reason. You say likewise, Insant-Baptism
prevents the old ministration of this expressly commanded baptizing of
Believers, because most of persons look upon themselves as baptized in their
infancy, and so never look after the command of Christ to be baptized when they
believe. What a Reason is here given of Infant Baptism preventing, another
Baptison expressly commanded? namely the baptized persons, imagination of
himself, or looking upon himself as baptized in his infancy, and so never look
after the command of Christ to be baptized when they believe. To let go the
irrationality of this Reason, I must say again, that there is no such old or
new ministration of an expressly commanded Baptism of Believers grown, after
they have been once baptized in their Infancy; Your cannot wring or wrest it
out of the mouth of any one of your cited Texts; so far are you from deducing,
and leading it fairly by the hand (as I may so say) out of them or any one of
them. This of yours, savours too rankly of the old Heresy, and new Schism of
Rabaptization, ever condemned in the Churches of God, both of old, and of late,
as I have formerly proved, from the Apostles casting up this account, and
bringing all Baptismes to this, as the total sum, that there is but one
Baptism, and therefore once baptized, are not to be baptized any more. And
therefore not only most of the persons, but all of the persons baptized, are
to look upon themselves as baptized sufficiently, and never to look after any
other Baptism, commanded them of Christ when they believe, for there is none
commanded.

Do you, Sir, express it as if it were a fault or a fancy, that most of persons
look upon themselves as baptized in their infamcy, and never look after to be
baptized when they believe? Stop your ears (Oye baptized men, women, and
children) at the voice of the chaarmers, for they charm neither wisely, nor
foundly, nor sweetly, as to you and your good and benifit; not wisely for you,
but subtlely for themselves and their party, who having forsaxen their first
love, and renounced their first Baptism, now compass about to make your their
proselytes, and so twofold more the children of Hell than themselves, if ye
after so many strong Reasons, and so fair a warning, will also renounce your
Baptism, wherein ye renounced the Devil and all his works, A chief one of the
DXevils works is, to draw people to renounce their Baptism, the mark and Seal
of their Covenane with God, and Gods with them, as he uses to do with Wirches
and Sorcerers, before he enters into Covtract with them, and give them a mark
and Seal of their Langue with him, and his with them.

Not soundly or truly for you, but hypocritically and falsely for themselves, do
they thus charm, as who only do pretend the Word and Commandment, but can
show you none, nor example for any Christian once baptized, who ever was
baptized again. The desire to have you baptized again, as the Impostors would
have had the baptized Galathians circumcised, That they may glory in your
flesh, Galat. 6.13.
(a most vain and shameful glory) and make you tread under foot the Son of
God, and to count the blood of the Covenant, wherewith ye were sanctified, an
unholy thing, and do despite unto the Spirit of grace; Heb. 10.19.
at least to grieve the holy Spirit of God, wherewith ye were sealed unto the
day of redemption, if ye belong to the Election of God. Such a grievous,
heinous, and unsound thing tit is to renounce your Christian Baptisms: Look
therefre diligently to your selves, as the Author to the Hebrews has it, lest
any man among you fall from the Grace of God, (even that Grace offered in the
Sea crament of Baptism ot you, and (it may be) received by you therein) lest
any root of bitterness springing up in you, trouble you, lest there be any
profane person amongst you, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his
birthright; Heb. 12.15, 16
thus Esau despised his birthright, Genesis 25 34. Is not Baptism your
birthright also? is not your renouncing of your Infant Baptism, a despising of
your Infant Birthright, and a breaking or pulling off, or a trostrating or
evacuaring the Seal either way, a despising it, and a profaning of the Covenant
of Grace? and will ye thus part with your Birthright, first Baptism and sell
it (as it were) to these supplanting Jacobs, and all for a mess of twice sod
pottage? such is second Baptism, or rebaptization, Will you leave your Manna
that came down first from Heaven, loathing it, to lust after, and hunt after
these Quails, and listen to their Quail piper, who say. What is this Manna?
nothing before over eyes but this Manna. Remember, that whilst the flesh of the
Quails eaten in cintempt of Manna; was yet between their teeth ere the Quails
were chewed, the wrath of God was kindled amongst the people, to the smiting of
them with a great plague (besides that the flesh afterward came out at their
nostrils, and was loathsome unto them:) and so fear ye, left while the water of
the new Dippers or second Baptism, received in contempt of your first Baptism,
is ye upon your heads, and ears, and faces, the wrath of God (which ever
attends upon the contemners and despisers of his Sacraments) fall heavily upon
you, and some or other curse of God pursue you; so also, that such water may be
loathsome and noysom to you afterward. Remember Esau again, For ye know how
that afterward, when he would have inherited the blessing, Heb. 12.16, 17
he was rejected, for he found no place of repentance, though he sought it with
tears. Are they not ritghtly called Jacob's, Supplanters? (one of the first
planters of them was called Jacob, and that rightly;) for they that take away
your Birthright, Baptism, will also take away your Blessing, the Blessing of
God in Covenant with you, as well as with your Parents. Yea, remember one of
the Separation, by name Hodsou, of the City of Glecester, and by an Epithet
called Hodson-peevish, who since he was new baptized, grew as light in the
head, as before he was light in heart; the which I find recorded by Master
Thomas Wynell in print, a Minister of Cranham, nigh unto that City. Yea,
remember the sad and desatrous ends of those first Ringleaders of re-baptising,
Muncer, Cnipperdoling, etc.

And now, thirdly, Can they charm sweetly and delightfully to any of you, who
have the root of bitterness in them (from which I dehorted you) and whose
mouths are full of cursing and bitterness; like as they have bitter envying and
sirife in their hearts against your Mother Church, and your Baptism especially
wherein ye were (if regenerate at all) born again of water and the Spirit. My
Brethren, these things ought not to be; does a Fountain send forth at the same
place or hole (of heart or mouth) sweet water and bitter? Hear now ye
Benjamites, (ye left handed Protestants) will the Son of Jesse Muncer (who I
mentioned but now) give every one of you, the Field Benefits, 1 Samuel 22: 2, 5
and Vine-eard Privileges of Christ and his Church, by their new dipping of
you, and make you Captains of thousands, and Captains of hundreds, against your
sins, that they shall not reign, or have dominion over your mortal bodies, or
immortal Souls; that all of you have conspired against your Mother Church,
and brethren Ministers? O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you, that you
should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently
set forth, crucified amongst you, even in your Baptism, Gal. 3.1.
(as the word and other Sacrament) wherein you were sprinkled with the blood of
Christ, unto the washing away of sin, being also crucified in the old man with
him, and buried with him by Baptism, that the body of sin might be destroyed,
that thenceforth ye should not serve sin? I mervaile that you are so soon
removed away from your Baptism, and your calling into the Grace of Christ, and
his Covenant of Grace, unto another Baptism; which is not another, but there be
some that trouble you, and would pervert the Baptism of Christ: Gal. 1.6, 7
But though they or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Baptism unto you,
then that which we have preached and reached unto you, let him be accursed; and
as I said before, so say I now again, if any man preach or reach any other
Baptism unto you, than that ye have received of us, let him be accursed: or let
him show where ever the Lord Blessed for ever, at any time blessed or
consecrated, instituted, or appointed a Baptism of Baptized ones, Parents or
Children, or any other Baptism, then once of Believing Parents and their
Children once.

They say, if a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another
man's, shall be return again to her? shall not that Land be greatly polluted?
But thou have played the Harlot with many Baptisms, and many Dippers, yet
return again to me says the Lord: I say return again to the Lord, Jer. 3.1.
and to the Lords Baptism, if thou have put it away from thee and renounced it,
if thou be gone from him, and with the strange woman, have forsaken the guide
of thy youth (yea Childhood) and forgotten the Covenant of thy God, Prove. 2.17.
and the Seal thereof, and art become another man's, and betaken thy self to
another Baptism, (for which the Land is also defiled as thy self) I say, return
again to the Lord, and his and thy first Baptism.

The Lord look upon thee, and remember thy first Baptism, and the words of the
Covenant of Christ, and go out from amongst them who, by their Quaeres and
intricate questioning of thee, caused thee to deny thy first Baptism, and
therein thy Lord and Master go out and weep bitterly for the same. Remember
therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works, Rev.
2.5.
and leave not thy first Love; hold fast that which thou have already, (even
thy first Baptism) till Christ come, I say, Repent, and be still as you were in
your Infancy, baptized every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ, and you
shall have the Remission of your sins, (even of this sin, of being Baptized
again, if so you have committed it.) For the promise is made to you and to your
Children; and with many other words I would have testified and exhorted you,
saying, save your self from this untoward Generation. But that I hasten; and
will tell you to the contrary, Look often back to your first Baptism in your
Infancy, and think not upon any other Baptism afterward) as to a Storehouse
of comfort in all time of your need: if you be tempted by the devil, and
assaulted about your sins, in your youth, or old age, think not now of ny new
or second Baptism, but recall thy first and old Baptism, oppose it against him,
say and know, that therein God has promised and sealed unto thee the pardon of
thy sins, and the purchase of everlasting life by Christ.

If thou be troubled with doubtings, and weakness of Faith, Fetch from thy
first Baptism, such a strengthening consideration and meditation (for the doing
of which, to introduce another Baptism, is but a Fetch) that God has given
thee there, an earnest and pledge of his loving kindness to thee, in the water
sprinkled upon thee, representing the blood of Christ applied to thee, and so
(as when Thomas saw the Holes in Christs-side; and the print of the nails, he
strengthened his Faith against doubtings) be not thou faithless, but faithful,
when thou reflectest upon thy Baptism, and remembrest the pouring out of the
blood of Christ for thee, and the earnest thereof, the pouring out of water
upon thee.

If thou lie under any kind of Cross or Calamity whatsoever, have recourse
to thy Baptism, in which God has promised to be thy God, of which promise he
will not fail thee, nor can thou be miserable, having this promise, yea if
God be with thee, who shall be against thee?

Thou do often look upon the wills and Testaments of thy Father and
Grandfather, when you are in a doubt of hour Estate, or in some trouble about
it, or in want, to be resolved in all matters thereabout: do the same here,
look often back to thy Baptism, wherein the will of thy heavenly Father (which
is this, I will be thy God) is delivered and sealed, and thou will be well
resolved, comforted and cleared, in all Estates and Conditions.

Only look back also to, and remember as often, the obligation of Homage, and
stipulation of obedience wherewith thou have bound thy self to God, (by thy
suerties, or prelenters of thee to Baptism;) now thou know and understandest
it, thou must stand to it, nd make it good, thy part of the Indentures, perform
the Order of Baptism on thy side, which is to turn to God, and believe in
Christ, and be continually renewing of thy Faith and repentance: and then there
shall be no need of any second Baptism, or washing in water, having the benefit
and efficacy of, and from the same Baptism at first.

For this also I will tell thee for thy farther comfort, that the benefit and
efficacy of Baptism extends it self to all actual sins (like as original)
and to the whole course of the life of man whensovever he shall believe and
repent, and is not to be restrained to the time of the Birth and Infancy, and
so after the administration of it, Baptism has the same force, it has before,
or in the time of its administering: for Baptism is of force, so long as the
Covenant is of force, and that is everlasting, Esaias 54.10. Hos. 2.19. The
Papists indeed will tell you, as I have mentioned already, that your Baptism
will serve you only for Remission of sins, done before it, meaning your
original sin, and so call your Baptism the first Table for Refuge as from it;
and for sins done after Baptism, you must have their Sacrament of Penance or
Repentance, which they call, a second Table for Refuge; (like as the
Anabaptists tell you, you must have their Sacrament of Confession, as I may
call their second Baptism, which they Minister upon Confession, of Faith,) But
I tell you both, are needless and superfluous, for your one, first, single
Baptism supplyeth all, (you need no New Sacraments for the matter) as whose
force and efficacy (though the rite and Ceremony were gone in an instant) does
extend it self, to your whole life time and to all sins, to be a seal unto you
of the Remission of all, original and actual, past and to come, so you will
still have recourse unto it, and make application of the grace thereof offered
and sealed to you on Gods part.

For I do not mean, nor must you think, that the bare and empty Review or
Remembrance of your Baptism, that such an outward Act was done will be unto
you, at all times, a Remission of your sins, but it must be an effectual
application of the blood of Christ, which is the virtue and power of it, that
will do it; and this may be and is done, in the confession of your sins, and
the profession so your faith; I may rather speak more properly, (than they do)
and say that your Baptism is not so only the first Table for Refuge after
Shipwreck, and Repentance the second; but that Baptism is the first and one
long drawing Table, that may and must be drawn out at length into the Two
Leaves of it, namely into and unto Repentance of sin, and confession of Faith:
at or upon which, rightly used and applied, you and all true believers, and
penitent sinners may sit down, and find plenty and provision of grace and
mercy, or which, not so much as a Table or Plank, but as the Ark and Ship it
self, will save you; as Saint Peter says.

So then, let the effects and fruits of your first Baptism be acted and
exercised by you, aad let the force and efficacy thereof be seen in the
reformation of your whole life: (for Baptism is a seal of a dying to sin, and a
rising unto Newness of Life, Romans 6.4. as well as a Seal of the Remission of
sin, Mark. 1.4.) and then you shall need no second Baptism; and if not, your
first will be frustrated, (and yet you can have no second;) and I may say unto
you Christians, ye stiffnecked, and unbaptized in heart and ears, as Stephen
does the Jews, ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised, in heart and ears, when as
you do not express the force and virtue of your first Baptism, (as they did not
of their first Circumcision) in the renovation and reformation of your hearts
and ears, i.e. life and actions. Therefore, when the Jews fell away from God,
at any time, and were called to Confession of sin or profession of Faith, the
Prophets did not propound unto them a new or second Circumcision (as if the
former were voyded or vacated) but only mind them of their first and only
Circumcision, and their Obligation, in their Infancy, bidding them to
Circumcise the foreskin of their hearts, and to practice the inward
Circumcision, in conversion to God, the spiritual and inward part of that
Sacrament. And so the Apostles used to call them that had sinned after Baptism,
as the Galathians by name, who had fallen from the Grace of the Gospel, to
confession of sin and repentance to believe in Christ, telling them of their
Baptism into Christ, and so bringing and reducing them to that foretaken by
them, and the order set down there, which is already mentioned, nor do we read
either in Prophet or Apostle of any other new order, required afterward, of
the Baptizing them again, but only a renewing of their Faith and Repentance,
the Order and Obligation of their first and once Baptism, by the Ministry of
the word, and that other Sacrament, the Supper of the Lord.

In a word, learn now to practice thy Baptism, the inward part of it, to which
appertains Repentance and Faith; and so look not only back to it, but into it,
an find out there thy engagement and restipulation, and perform that now, that
thou art come to knowledge thereof, and walk before God, in true obedience, and
in good resistance; and abrenuntiation of the Devil and all his works: For I
would not such a looking back to thy Baptism, as may put a vain confidence in
the cutward element received by thee, such a Respect or Contemplation of
Baptism, as to trust in the Elements, is a misapplication of it, through
corruption, and may well indeed, occasion sin, and encourage thee to a certain
libertinisin, and licentiousnest in life; there are some who being reproved for
their swearing, drunkenness, and whordom take Sanctuary at their Baptism, as if
it assured men wilfully trading in sin, of the remission of it without
Repentance, and Faith; but rest not thou in the outward Letter or Element of
the water; but study the Spirit, and walk in the Holiness of the same Repent of
every breach of Covenant, and this Repentance will be, as a second plank or
board, after such Shipwreck, to carry thee to the Haven of Happiness, like as
thy Baptism was a first step and stair of thy entrance into the visible Church,
and set thee, as it were, a Shipboard, or into the Ark sealing Christ with his
benefits unto thee, which shall not be pulled off and made Null, and therefore
need not to be iterated. and set to again, the first being still of force and
efficacy, to all true believers in Christ, and repenters of sin.

Thus I have showed you (Sir) how most men, yea all men who have been Baptized
in their Infancy, may, and ought to look upon themselves, as Baptized in their
Infancy (which you seem to condemn,) and that to very good purpose and benefit;
and whereas you add, as the other part of your condemning them, for their not
looking after the Command of Christ to be baptized when they believe, will you
have them look after that, is not to be seen or found; nay have you seen or
found out such a Commandment? I pray Si lend, or sell no some of your eye salve
to anoint our eyes, for by and from that eye salve in the 3. of Rev. 18.
(wherewith we have anointed our eyes, according to Christ's Council there given)
we cannot see from the one end of the New Testament to the other, any such
Commandment for persons baptized in their Infancy, to be baptized when they
believe.

And yet as if you had revealed and brought to light some rare matter of
Salvation, you have a very scrious and devout epilogue, that it and your
considerations, should be considered without a selfiish prejudicial Spirit, a
Spirit willing to he guided by the Spirit of the Lord according to his word of
truth, and the Scriptures truly red and interpreted by the Spirit of the Lord,
which are quoted to prove the Assertions, It will appear to every honest and
unbyassed Spirit that Infant Baptism is a great and dangerous error for ever
to be rejected of every Soul that expects Salvation by Christ Jesus: What a
Cackling is here made upon the laying of an addle egg, or rather what a
Crowing is here, upon the Treading out, of a few idle considerations? you have
the faculty of entitling upon the Spirit, and the Scriptures that which they
being the Spirit and Scriptures of Truth, own not, your considerations, and
interpretations, (though very seldom you give interpretations (them you leave
for me to make) quotatious, and considerations enough you bring, and those to
no purpose or proof, as I have particularly demonstrated, where you cite them,
I leave it to the Honest and unbyassed Spirits, to judge and determine, whether
the Texts you have cited, were pertinent to your Consideration, or according to
your meaning, or interpreting (if you have given any:) whether Infant Baptism
be a great and dangerous error, for evewr to be rejected, because now opposed
of you, which ever was, a good and Religions Truth, ever practiced amongst the
Saintt, because recommended of Christ and the Apostles; whether youts or mine
be a selfish and prejudicial Spirit (I confess, my Spirit is prejudicial to
yours, and your opinions, as your Spirit is prejudicate to mine, and thoughts.
Lastly whether your considerations, be not as inconsiderate in the writer, so
inconsiderable to the Reader.

However you think so well of them, that you go on, to more of them, (when its
time to have done with such selfish things) and in the next place, offer to me,
some of your considerations upon Act. 2.39.

The which if I thought, they were no more considerate, nor considerable, than
your former, I would consider a while upon it, whether or no I should take them
into consideration at all, or pass by them, as inconsiderable.

And such indeed they seem to be, and upon the General view, I find them so:
for in them all, there are nothing but answers and solutions made to objections
not set down; Refutations and denyals, of a sense before it be any where
mentioned; is not this Cart before the Horse, which a Carter (methinks should
not do:) and a consideration, without consideration, which a Consideratour (I am
sure,) should not do; we had before, your judgment settled out of Quaeres; this
is as bad, your answers to no objections, and your refuting, no Exposition of
ours.

Well, as all the way hitherto, I have ordered your matters for you, so (I see)
I must do so still, or else we shall make no work of it, at least, have no
orderly proceeding in it.

First therefore, let the sense of that Text be given, and the argument drawn
out of it for Infant Baptism (which I will do for you:) and then after, let the
refutation of that sense, and the Answers to that Argument be added or
subjoyned; the which you shall do for me.

Peter having preached here unto the Jess, and laid to their charge the death
and crucifying of Jesus Christ, and brought them to some apprehension of their
horrid sins, at the 38 Verse exhorts them to repent and be baptized into the
Name of the same Jesus Christ, and to accept him for their Messiah; the which
he does upon this reason and ground, mentioned in the 39 Verse. and drawn from
the benefit that should redound not to the mselves only, but to their
Children, by their believing in Christ. The which he proves from the Promise
made to them and their Children. In plainer and larger words, thus it is.

God has remembered his Covenant, in sending that blessed Seed, in whom he
promised to be the God of Abraham, and his Seed; know ye therefore, that (as
God made the Promise of Grace in Christ (to come and to be exhibited) unto
Abraham upon his believing, and took also his Children and Posterity into
Covenant with him, not only the natural Jews, but even amongst all Nations
whoever became followers of Abraham's Faith, should by virtue of the same
inherit Abraham's Promise, That he would be their God, and the God of their
Seed also, which should also be taken into the same Covenant) so now this
blessed Seed in whom the Promise was founded being now come and exhibited,
would make it good to you all, Jews and Gentiles, who would believe in him; and
(notwithstanding your cruel practices against him, and your crucifying of him)
if you will believe in this Lord of life, and your Messiah, you shall thereby
be in as good, or better condition, under this last Administration, for your
selves and your children, as in the former; therefore deprive rot your selves
by your impenitency and infidelity, of so great a benefit, as may come to your
selves and Posterity; for the Promise is made to you and your Children, etc.
what Promise, or the Promise of what? for so I will clear the Text of some
exceptions; the Promise of the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost? so say
some of you, that you may the better turn this off from Infants of Believers
baptized. It is true, they are promised also in the Verse before, and I
acknowledge, they were Appendants to the Primitive Baptismes of the adult, and
peculiar to the first times, for the more abundant confirmation of their Faith,
as Act: 10 and 11. who were converted to it from Paganism and Judaism. But (no
doubt) Peter here aimed, and even pointed at that grand and fundamental
Covenant of Grace made to Abraham, In thy seed shall all families of the Earth
be blessed. Such a Promise as this, of Grace, and the free remission of their
sins, by that blood of Christ (though shed by some of them) sealed in the
Sacrament of Baptism, comes seasonably to them, to pacify their troubled
consciences, and cheer up their drooping spirits; whereas the other Promise, of
receiving the Gifts of the Spirit, that is, the extraordinary ones of speaking
diverse Languages, etc. would nothing so properly and effectually have done it,
as that was the thing then in hand to be done. And besides, the Promise here
spoken of, being a Gospel Promise, was to extend to all also that were afar
off, as many as the Lord shall call; and so it did pass on in the general
Tenders, Privileges and Effects, to the Believers of the Gentiles and their
children, from that time, and so shall unto the end of the World. But you will
not say (I dare say) That according to this Promise, the believers of the
Gentiles and their Children have received, and shall receive, those Gifts of
speaking diverse and strange Languages, throughout all Ages and Generations.
Such a Promise was never made, and ought not to be challenged of God.

But (it may be) the Promise made to Abraham was but a personal and peculiar
one, to him and his seed, to be taken Into Covenant, and to become a visible
Church (I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed) i.e. Isaac, Jacob, and
their children. No, it extended, we see, to the Proselytes of other Nations
also, and to all followers of Abraham's faith, both Jews and Gentiles; and
therefore the same Promise was frequently renewed in Scripture, many hundred
years after those Patriarchs deceased, both to Jews and Gentiles, as Isa. 30.6.
Isa. 44.2, 3. and so shall continue unto the end of the World, Isa. 59.21. to
as many as the Lord our God shall call, until the very last calling in of the
Jews; it being, as I said, a Gospel-Promise.

Yea, say you, it is granted, when any of the Children of Believers come to be
called, and do believe, this Promise shall be made good to them. But thus
saying, you make the Promise to hold forth no more comfort or benefit to the
children of Believers, than the children of Pagans; and thus even Isaac and
Jacob should have no external privilege by this Promise, until they actually
believed; yea thus all the Jews (but such as were Elect, and truly faithful)
were cut off, as well as the Gentiles, from having any visible communion in
external privileges thereof. The Call here is either inward or outward; if
inward, can none partake of the outward privileges, as Baptism, but such as
have that? We know those are common to the Elect and Reprobate. If of an
outward Call, why the Infants of Believers enjoy this Call with their Parents,
and so partake of the Promise.

And what if Peter here required repentance of such as were in Covenant before
baptism, are therefore Infants not to be baptized? so Ahraham was in Covenant,
and an actual Believer, and justified in Uncircumcision, and received
Circumcift. on as a seal of righteousness of Faith; and Proselytes turned to
the Jews, were first to make profession of faith; were therefore none but such
to be circumcised?

But if being under the Covenant besufficient, to give a proper right to the
seals of it, and the privileges of it, (as I said) why-doth Peter keep such a
do with these Jess, being already in Covenant, to repent and believe before
they were baptized? and why were none of them being in Covenant, baptized, but
such as gladly received the Word and believed? It is no where so said, that
none but such were baptized amongst the three thousand souls. And as for the
Jews, who receiving the Word gladly, were baptized, you must know, they were
not now before it in Covenant, so as to acknowledge Jesus Christ the Son of
Mary, to be the Messiah and Savior of the World, as who denied that holy One,
and killed the Prince of life. True, they were born Jews, under the Covenant,
in the first Ministration of it, and were circumcised, and had the seal of
their faith in Christ to come. But this being now antiqunted and out of date by
the coming of Christ in the flesh, and these Jews having renounced Christ, and
deposed themselves and their children from the Title they had to Christ, as
Matthew 27.25. they so renounced the Covenant they had Title to by birth, and
were now in a condition little better than Pagans, Christians to be made; and
therefore they were not to have the new appointed seals of entrance, which was
Baptism, to assure them that Jesus was Lord and Christ, until they embraced him
by faith, confessing that he was come, and that Jesus was he, and repented of
their crucifying him.

And thus having cleared the interpretation of the Text, I will give you a
Consideration of mine upon it, before I come to your Considerations, without
any interpretation given of you.

My Consideration upon it is this, That here is a good warrant for me, and for
Infant Baptism, against you; and so as Solomon said of Adonijah, 1 Kings 2.33
That be had spoken a word against his own life: I may say, you have brought in
this Word and Text against your self, and the life of your Cause; said I a
warrant? yea a very Command.

The words, Be baptized every one of you, you will not deny (I suppose) to be a
word of command from Peter in Christ's stead, and so from Christ by Peter. But
the Command is, To baptiae Father and Child, I prove thus; Because the Promise
is to the Father and Child. The Promise is made to you and your Children, and
therefore the Command is, Be baptized every one of you, and your Children. For
if the Children of Believers have a right to be baptized by the word of
Promise, they must have a right to be baptized by the word of Command, and so
the other way also, these two being convertible Terms, the word of Promise, and
the word of Command, having mutual relation each to other. So its in the
general nature of Covenants, there must be a convertibility betwixt the two
parts that do contract, as the mutual Indentures show, and so also it must be
in the Sacramental Covenant betwixt God and man, and betwixt the word of
Promise, which is Gods part, and the word of Command, that contains the duty of
man, in the Sacramental Action. And so particularly it was in Circumcision, in
which Institution there was a mutual near relation and convertibility between
the word of Promise (I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed) and the word
of Command (Every manchild among you shall be circumcised) so that as many of
them that had a right to be circumcised by the word of Promise, had a right to
be circumcised by the word of Command; and so also the other way, turn it, and
its as true.

Sir, my hand is now in, and I will give you another Syllogism.

Whosoever are expressed in the Promise, Verse 39. are contained in the Precept
before, Verse 38. Be baptized every one of you.

But believing Parents and their Children are expressed in the Promise, Verse
39. The Promise is made to you and your Children.

Therefore believing Parents and their Children are contained in the Precept;
and so both are commanded to be baptized.

There is no difficulty but in the first Proposition; and in it there is none,
by reason of the mutual relation, and reciprocal convertibility that is betwixt
a Promise and a Precept in Covenantal, and Sacramental matters, as has been
showed.

And whereas it may be said, That a Promise may be without a seal, and this
here does not infer Baptism. It is true; but when men have once put their seal,
then there needs must be a correspondence and relation between that Seal and
the Covenant. So here, though it was not absolutely necessary, the word of
Promise, or Covenant of Grace, should be set forth by outward seals, appearing
to the senses; yet God having once anpointed them to signify the inward grace,
it is now necessary there should be such a mutual relation between the word of
Promise and the word of Command, and the Seal also. But I come now to your
Consideration, upon the Text of Acts 2. verse 39.

Consider, that such a being in the Covenant, as makes Faith void, is no true
being; But that being in the Covenant which is concluded from the Faith of the
Parents, is such a being, as makes Faith void, therefore no true being. That
this is so, I prove.

That Title whereby any person has once a being in the Covenant, by the same
he may remain in it for ever; now then if any one has such a Title as to be
within the Covenant, by being the seed of the faithful, he may remain in it
for ever, and so needs no faith of his own; and so by the same reason one may,
all may; and seeing all be the children of Abraham or Noah, which were
faithful, all are in the Covenant, and so Faith needless in the wordl.

2. Consider that such on Expositionas overthrows the Promise, that cannot be
a true Exposition of the Text, but such as expound a being in the Covenant from
faithful Parents overthrow the Promise. Therefore this Exposition is no true
Exposition, for the Promise is upon account of faith in our own persons, and
not in our Parents; as appears in Hab. 2.4. compared with John 3.36. And that
it does overthrow the Promise, I farther prove, because nothing answers the
Promise but faith; and if faith be needless, then the Promise is needless.

Sir, I can write no farther, being sorry I writ out so much of your needless
stuff; for to what purpose is all this? are these Considerations upon Acts
2.39? they might have been upon any other Text as well, which makes any mention
of Promise, Faith, Children. And what is it, but such an Exposition as
overthrows the Promise? Why did you not set it down the Exposition at first,
and then consider upon it? you alwaiet love to shuffle with shadows, and fight
with fancies, and strange Chymaera's.

Your purpose is, to except to the children of Believers being in Covenant,
with their Parents: (for so I must still be working upon your earth, which is
without form, and void, and darkness upon the face of it, like a Chaos) and you
say it is a false being, as concluded from the faith of Parents, and so makes
faith void.

First I must tell you, that the being of children in the Covenant of Grace
with their Parents, was concluded by God jointly and together (in that Promise,
I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed) both were in the Promises, and
concluded together, not one from another: both in the Promise, and confederate
together, not one from another. Your expressions are uncouth, unheard in the
Church; yet we may conclude thus, That if the Parent be in Covenant with God,
then also his seed and children are in Covenant, not so much from, as for the
faith of the Parents, God accepting of it, so as to Covenant with them and
their Seed.

But grant your Conclusion in your own terms, what then? Such a being in
Covenant as is concluded from the faith of the Parents, makes Faith void, say
you; and say I, what Faith, or whose Faith do you mean? Not the Faith of the
Parents, I suppose; for the Baptizing of the Child, or the being of it in
Covenant, from the Faith of the Parents (as you speak) does rather confirm,
establish, and bring it into effect, than make it void: nor can you mean the
Faith of the Children; for you holding them to have no Faith of their own, as
here you expressly say, how can you say it is here made void, any way, which was
or is no where extant at all? nor is Faith required of them as to any
manifestation of it, for their being in Covenant, or taking the Seal; though
these do require it of them afterward: But the Proof that you bring, it being
of, I know not what, nothing asserted before of you, or denied of me, deserves
to be answered in its kind, that is, by a Reproof; for thus you prove. That
Title whereby a person has once a being in the Covenant, by the same he may
remain in it for ever, (I must cast in a grain of Salt here, without which it
is too fresh, yea, unsavory: that is, (so long as he lives, and renounce not
before,) whether he be one of our Infants, or one of your grown Baptized ones;)
Now then if any one has such a Title, as to be within the Covenant, by being
the seed of the faithful, he may remain in it for ever, and so needs no Faith
of his own: Here Is a rope of Sand, for my grain of Salt. I grant he may with
the former limitation: and he that has such a Title, as to be within the
Covenant, by being converted from Paganism, may do so too, and as one, so all
may.

And he needs no Faith of his own, I hope you remember your self, no Actual
Faith expressed, as elsewhere you write it, as to this purpose to give him
Title unto the Covenant or Seal, which his being the seed of the faithful
does; yet he needs Faith, to give him Title to the benefits of the Covenant,
Justification and Salvation; and he must be also, a faithful seed himself. And
so by the same reason one may, all may, and seeing all be the Children of
Abraham and Noah which were faithful, all are in the Govenant, and so Faith
needles in the world. Sir, you rise apace, but to no preferment of a Proof:
before it was but, He needs no Faith of his own, and now, it should but have
been, they need no Faith of their own, because by the same reason, one may, all
may as you say: but instead of such, you fly high and far, and say, And so,
Faith needles in the World, because all the children of Abraham and Noah which
were faithful, are in Covenant. I never met with a man that made or called
Faith, a Cost needless in the world, that is and may rather be called, that one
needful thing in the world: for though actual Faith be not needful in all, to
entitle them unto their external part of the Covenant and the Seal, as in the
Baptism of Infants of believers (for whom it is sufficient, that they are born
in and under the Covenant of grace) yet it is needful for the partaking of the
inward part and benefits of the same, and their being in Covenant, is an
obligation unto them to believe afterward, etc. as a part of their
Astipulation.

Now then if I should reckon up, the Company of your, And so, and so, and so,
(which are the Formals of your proofs) I shall not need to go out into Lanes or
Streets, and fetch in, the Blind, and the Halt, and the Maimed, to fill up the
Room, so long as your Reasons, Proofs, and And soes are in presence, for they
supply us fully, as thus; The Children of John and Thomas who were Loyal, are
joined in the same Copy of Court-roll, and so Fealty is needless in the Manor:
or thus, your Plough lies in the Field, with its whipple-trees, and so rain is
needless in the County.

And a man may see, you understand very well the Covenant God made with Abraham
and his seed, to be a Gospel Covenant of Grace, for the Remission of Sins, and
Salvation of Souls in and through Christ promised, who join thereto together,
Noab and his Covenant, without any distinction, or difference made, whereas the
Covenant God made with Noah, was but a Covenant of Nature (as I call it for
distinction sake) for the Continuation of the world, and preservation of the
Creatures, and fruits of the Earth, to which he also annexed as his sign, his
Bow in the Clouds, That Rain bow: Are you of the mind of those, some of your
Cut and Size, who when they are put to it, and pent up by our Reasons for
Infant Baptism, from Infant-Circumcision, stick not to say, that God meant no
farther in his Covenant with Abraham, and his seed, than that he would give him
and them a visible standing in the promised Land of Canaan, and Circumcision
should be the seal of it? if Therefore, you joined Abraham and Noah together in
your proof and discourse, you thereby showed, that you are not of Abraham, your
Father, nor as Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness.

But you call of me to Consider, that such an Exposition as overthrows the
promise, that cannot be the True Exposition of the Text, it is granted, but
where, what is that Exposition? such as expound, a being in the Covenant from
faithful Parents, overthrows the promise: it seems you are got up again, and
come to overthrowing again: But how do you prove, that Exposition overthrows
the promise. First, By reason taken out of a Text out of Habakkuk, because the
promise is upon the Account of Faith in our own persons, and not in our
Parents: And secondly, because nothing answers the promise but Faith, and if
Faith be needless, then the promise is needless; and this I must take upon your
bare word without any Text. Most of this is answered already, if you will read
back. You bid me here compare Habakkuk with John; I pray compare your
Exposition, and the Promise together.

The Text says, the Promise is made to you, and your Children, and to all a
far off; (I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed) where you see, Children
are Covenanted jointly, and together with the Parents: you frame an Exposition,
and would put it upon us, Childrens being in the Covenant, is from faithful
Parents, as if severally, and a part faithful Parents were taken into Covenant,
and then from them their Children should, because born of them, and when born
of them, come into Covenant; for Abraham, believed whilst he was in
uncircumcision, but that Faith of his, gave no being in that special Covenant,
either to himself or children, whereof Circumcision was the Seal: but yet God
so well accepted of Abraham's Faith, that for its sake, he was pleased to enter
into Covenant with him, and with his children at one and the same time, and to
assume them together into Covenant with himself: So there the childrens being
in Covenant, is not from faithful Parents, simply and absolutely, as I have
showed, but from faithful Parents in Covenant: or rather (to speak properly and
fully) from the Covenant God made unto both, Parents and Children, so that not
so much their being in Covenant, as their being born in Covenant, is from their
Faithful Parents in Covenant.

But neither way does it overthrow this Promise; for the childrens being in
Covenant, by virtue of the promise made, supporteth and supposes the promise;
and their being in the Covenant, from faithful Parents, as you speak, does not
overthrow the promise, seeing even their being so is, from them, by reason of
the promise made to them for their Children also, which rather establishes and
confirms, than overthrows and evacuateth the promise. You had need add
another Exposition to your Exposition, and put better light to your New light,
and into your dark Lanthorn, or else none will see to walk by it but your self;
and so you have done. For it overthrows the promise, you say, because the
promise is upon account of Faith in our own Persons, and not in our Parents.
See how you forget your self, in forgetting the Children, of whose being in the
promise, you are discoursing; you let them alone, and put your self (and would
join me with you, but that I will not) in their place, saying, the Promise is
upon account of Faith in your own person, and not in your Parents. True, now
you are a grown man, the promise will be, and must be accounted to you, upon
the Faith in your person, as to the virtue, efficacy and effects of the
promise. Now you are become a man, you must put away Childish things, as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13.11. to which purpose only your Texts are, out of
Habakkuk and John, where Justification, and everlasting life, are set upon the
account of Faith in a man's own person, speaking of such only, as are grown to
be tall proper men like your self, able to account, and give a reason of them.

But why did you single out John 3.36. where the words of the Prophet Habakkuk,
are not repeated, and bauk those other Texts in the Margent, Romans 1.17. Gal.
3.11. and Heb. 10.38. in all which the very words of the Prophet, The just
shall live by his own Faith, are repeated and applied? is it to show in your
own person, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness more than
light? you turned only to John, for Name sake, out of self-love; (yet I tell
you, the Evangelist John, is against the the Anabaptist John, even herein, in
that very thing for which you cited him, as I have showed you) but if for Truth
sake, out of love to the Truth, you would have compared Habakkuk with Paul, in
any of the three Texts, the Margent directed you to, (yea, the whole Books and
Epistles to the Romans and Galathians) they would have given you a clear
Elucidation, if you would lay aside your own Spectacles, and look with theirs,
that your Justification, and everlasting life is there, in the Prophet, set
upon the account of Faith in your own person, applying to your self the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ: which contains rather the Execution of the
Promise.

But what is all this to the Promise it self here mentioned, and of old made to
the believing Parents, and their Children in their Infancy? Sure when you were
a Child, you spoke as a Child, you understood as a Child, you thought, or
reasoned as a Child, you reckoned and accounted as a Child: I pray now give me
some account, (because you make an instance in your self,) passing by the Faith
in your Parents, of the Faith was in your own person, when you was a Child, and
went to Baptism, by which you lived; or instance now again, in the Children of
faithful Parents amongst the Jews, what account of their Faith, did any of them
make in their own persons, when they were Circumcised in their Childhood; or
here in the 2. of Acts, which you have taken upon you to expound, what word, or
syllable, or the least intimation is there, of any account of faith to be made
of Children in their own persons? And yet the Promise and Covenant is both here
said to belong to the Children, and the Children before, and so likewise to
your self, Sir, all the while before you could, or did give an account of Faith
in your own person; you would be loath to be accounted all that while to be
without Christ, and an alien or stranger from the Covenants of Promise, having
no hope, and without God in the world; and if you should think or say so of
your self, yet I will not so account of you, and you would be very ungrateful
unto God, Covenanting, and Promising, and ungracious to your Parents bringing
you into the world, and to Baptism, in so thinking or saying: It is as clear as
the light at noon day, that Feter, to persuade those enemies, and Crucifiers of
Christ to Repent, Believe, and so to be Baptized, and to come under the New
administration of the Covenant of Christ exhibited in the Gospel, whom they had
renounced, uses this as a main argument, the Benefit also that should redound
to their Children, that they should also be accepted into Covenant, and be made
partakers of the external Privileges of the Church, as to be Baptized and
Counted Gods people, like as before they were Circumcised, and so reckoned;
which he proves, for the Promise is made to you and your Children, as to them
and their Children: to you indeed, upon account of your actual Faith in your
own persons, but unto them, upon account as I have given before, of their being
taken of God, into the same Covenant with you, their believing Parents.

But for all this, Though Children without account of Faith in their own
persons, by their Birth of believing Parents in Covenant and Promise, have
Right and Title to Baptism, by virtue of the Promise and Covenant made to them
both, (Thy God, and thy Seed,) yet Children, when they come to enjoy the
Benefits of the Covenant in their Justification and Salvation, they must have
these upon the account of Faith, in their own persons, or some grace of the
Spirit answerable applying Jesus Christ, and his Righteousness unto them.

Your other Reason is, Because nothing answers the Promise, but Faith, and if
Faith be needless, then the Promise is needless. You did well to add no Text
here, having abused enough already: but let us look upward, and see what its
you prove, And that it does overthrow the Promise, what is it? the Exposition
of the Text, Act 2.39. of Childrens being in Govenant from Faithful Parents,
that it overthrows the promise, I prove farther, because nothing answers
the promise but Faith; thus then it must be reasoned; if nothing answer the
promise but Faith, then Childrens being in Covenant from Faithful Parents,
overthrows this promise; I am sure, This is a needless consequence; because
the promise stands up still, and is of so ce, notwithwanding though there were
no Faith in some to uphold it; and much more, though no Faith in some to answer
it. I will give you a Text here, though you give me none, Romans 3.3, and 4. What
if some did not believe? shall their urbelief make the Faith of God (the Faith
made and given of God) i.e. this promise, without effect? God forbid: yea, let
God be true, and every man a liar; Let Gods promise stand, though some men's
faith fall: yea, though none in the world had believed, yet God would have
fulfilled his promise, in sending and exhibiting the Messiah, a Christ; and
therefore much less is the promise overthrown, because there may want Faith in
some, for some while, to answer it: If indeed there were no Faith at all extant
or to come any where to answer the Covenant, and promise, this might seem to
endanger the overthrowing of it, as to the taking effect and benefit in men;
and then your reason would be of some seeming consequence, or your consequence
carry some show of Reason. But it is not so here; for here is Faith in the
faithful Parents (as you acknowledge) embracing and holding up the promise;
and here are Children in Covenant, upholding also and enjoying the promise, by
birth of Faithful Parents, by grace, and indulgence of God, and (for any thing
you know) by Faith or other influence of the Spirit: Look again into the Text
of Act. 2.39. See if the promise there be not standing fast and firm to the
believing Parents and their Children, though there is no mention made of Faith
to answer the promises, but only called for of those grown men that were to be,
and were Converted.

But which way do you mean, Faith answers the Promise? For one thing may be
said to answer another, many ways, as the Antitype does the Type, the thing
signified the Sign, a thing regulated the Rule, the consideration a bargain,
performance a contract, or a Condition a Covenant. I suppose it is this later
way, that Faith answers the Promise; For as the old Covenant with Adam stood
all in Preceps, Do this and Live, and so works as the Condition were to answer
that Precept; so the new Covenant stood all in Promiser, I will be thy God, if
thou will trust to me, and Faith, as the Condition, is to answer the promise,
else no proportion or agreement betwixt them.

For nothing but Faith it is, that answers the promise, it being impossible to
have made the Sons of men partakers of the Covenant, that other way, by
obedience to the Law; if it could, it should have been done that way: Adam
(though made perfectly Righteous, and able) did not answer it; and if God had
tried Adam the second time, he would not have answered, in obedience to it; but
would have broken it again, and so should we; Therefore it must needs be by
Faith embracing the promises and so amswering them, that the Covenant of Grace
must be made sure unto us, which otherwise could never have been done.

But all this makes nothing against the exposition of the Text above of
Infants being in Covenant with their faithful Parents, and included (yea they
are expressed) in the promise; for God looked upon the Faith of Abraham, when
he entered into Covenant with him and his Children, and made the promise to be
the God of him and his seed; and hereupon himself was Circumcised and his seed:
And where God pleases, and when he pleases, as he does give sanctity, and the
Spirit, and other Graces to Infants, as to the Innocents, Jeremy, and John the
Bap. so the habit of Faith infused, (it being the Condition on man's part, yet
wrought in every Elect Infant by God,) whereby they answer the promise, as to
the good and benefit of the Covenant, if they dye before, or soon after the
Sealing thereof by Baptism, besides that Infants being born of Parents in
Covenant, and themselves also in Covenant with God, and others, as sureties and
sponsors, in the name of the Infants answering for their Faith, and promising
for their education in the Faith, and the Churches charitable opinion, or
judging them to have Faith, are sufficient to answer the promise, as for the
outward visible seal which is Baptism, to be conferred upon them.

But you make an answer to an objection, which will make also an answer to the
promise; If any will say, (say you) that the Parents may believe for their
Children, and so their Faith will answer the promise, I answer; 1. That the
Text does not say, the promise is made to you, in the behalf of your Children,
but to you, and to your Children; and therefore you must believe for your
selves, and they for themselves, or else neither you, nor they do answer the
promise. Somewhat of this before.

Sir, whilst you are about this promise, I wish you would observe the precept,
of using no vain repetitions, as here you do, so that I must either wholly
omit, or repeat vainly with you.

1. Though the Text says not so much in so many words, yet it means so much;
The Promise is made to you, in the behalf of your Children (also) that word
added, it is the same with, The Promise is made to you and your Children, both
together and jointly, the one being in promise as well and as soon as the
other; and thus the Text neither says, or denies your objection, nor your
answer. For the promise may be truly made, and is to believing Parents and
their Children, whether the Parents do believe for their Children also, or the
Children for themselves.

2. Whereas you say, Parents must believe for themselves, and children for
themselves, or neither answer the promise it is truly meant according to the
inward and spiritual part thereof, so as to partake of Remission of sin,
Justification and Salvation: But yet the Faith of Parents in Covenant may be,
and is so far beneficial to their born Children, that thereby they are declared
to be also in Covenant with themselves, and to have a Right and Title unto the
Seal of the Promise, and the external Ordinances, and outward Privileges of the
Church, and in respect of these may be said to answer the promise. For the
promise is, the whole Covenant and the dispensations of it in outward
Ordinances, as well as saving Graces; and its your constant error and mistake,
never to speak distinctly of this promise, but usually, and only strictly of
the saving Graces thereof, belonging to the Elect, whereas there is an
answering of this promise also, by visible profession, and external
Church Membership and privileges, which is done both by the Parents and
Children, whether the inward Graces thereof be known or not.

Concerning Infants Faith, and their inward Graces, whereby you will have them
also, and they may be answerable to the inward promise, I refer you to what I
have said before.

3. You Sir must own the Child above, and it must be laid at your doors. I mean
the objection there made, That Parents may believe for their Children, and so
answer the Promise. I do not believe you can find out a Father for it, nor did
I ever read the words, as I remember, it is true, as I have related before,
that Parents did answer for the Faith of their Children presented to Baptism,
when the Child was asked, do thou believe, the Parent, in the Name and place
of his Child, answered, I believe; but this is far off from your Parents
believing for their Children, for it was only Parents professing of their
Childrens Faith; or the Childrens professing their Faith by or in the mouth of
their Parents, as I have largely showed.

And as for those Divines, who, though contesting for Infant Baptism, because
they could not be persuaded of Infants-Faith, made their refuge to
Parents-Faith, yet they did it not in such words, as Parents believing for
their Children, nor to such purpose, that their Faith might answer the promise,
but to show, that the Parents Faith gave unto their Children a proof of being
born under the Christian Covenant, and a Plea for the Seal of Baptism,
notwithstanding the supposed privation of Faith in Children.

Though therefore Infants, as to their inward state before God, of
Justification and Salvation, are not relieved and helped forward either by
profession of Sponsors and Parents, or by the acts and habits of their Faith,
because as I said, the just shall live by his Faith, and as you say, the
Parents must believe for themselves; and as the Errors and Heresies of the
Parents do not hurt the Children, no more do their Faith and Truth help them,
as giving nothing from themselves unto their inward and eternal condition. Yet
are they beneficial to their Children otherwise. 1. Its from their Faith, that
the Children are brought out to Christ, and offered and dedicated to him in
Baptism, Psalm. 206.37.
whereas the Infidels offered their Sons and Daughters unto Devils. 2. And as
in their dedication, so by their supplication, the Faith of the Parent is
helpful, toward the obtaining of their Childrens regeneration, and many graces
of the Spirit, God being ready to hear, and do accordingly. 3. If original sin
did hurt Infants, which without any fault of theirs, they drew according to the
flesh from their Parents, why may not the Faith of the Parents profit the
Children so, as that sin be not imputed to them, for Christ's sake, to whom they
are offered and dedicated purposely and willingly, by their Parents, seeing
grace is more abundant than Condemnation, and the gift greater than the fault?
4. Romans 5. 1 Cor. 7.14. Romans 11.16.
It is from the Faith of the Parents in Covenant with God, that their Children
born of them, are not unclean but Holy, and if the Root be Holy, so are the
Branches.

So also for the obtaining of Temporal blessings, upon their Children, the
Faith of Parents is avaylable: How often is God said to bestow such, and such
good Temporal things, for Abraham's and for David's sake? Jesus seeing their
Faith, Matthew. 9.2.
who brought him lying on a bed, Healed the sick man of the Palsy. So Christ
said unto the Centurion, Go thy way, and as thou have believed, be it unto
thee, ^^t. 8.13.
and his servant was healed the same hour that he believed: will Christ do so
much for a sick servant, because of his Masters Faith, who brought him, to a
sick man, because of his friends Faith that brought him? and will he not do the
like, or more for Children, because of their Parents Faith, who bring them and
offer them to him in Baptism? Matthew. 15.28. John 4.50.
Yes he healed the daughter that was grievously vexed with a Devil, for the
Mothers great Faith, the woman of Canaan; and healed a Son that was at the
point of death, for the Fathers Faith, a ruler in Capernaum.

In a word; one man's Faith may profit another, as the Parents, the Children,
toward both Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal Salvation, by way of entreaty and
impetration, but not by way of conveyance and application: For this, the
Application of Christ and his Benefits, is not another man's work of Faith, but
it is every man's Faith to work it: and now, Sir, you that have thus slighted
the Faith of Parents, as to the good and benefit of their Children, Go you and
learn, what this means, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved,
and thy House, Act. 16.31.

And so you suppose it ware (were) so, that the promises ware (were) made unto
the faithful, in the behalf of their Children, and they concluded to be in the
Covenant thereby: Then either God does perform his promise, in saving all the
Children of faithful Parents according to his Covenant: or else he breaks his
Covenant made to those Parents, and does not perform it his promise; either of
which particulars, no man which is in his right wits will dare to affirm; and
therefore this Exposition, that Children have any right to the Covenant by
virtue of the Faith of their Parents, or to any privilege of the Covenant, by
virtue of the same, is a falce (false) Exposition of the Text; and a wresting
of it; Jesus says, ye do err not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God,
Matthew. 22.29. I am the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob; God is not
the God of the dead, but of the living, verse. 32.

I thought it it would come to this at last: that, after your Railing upon the
Church of God in England, for worse than naught, even no Church, and after your
baiting the Ministers of God there, and, by your good will, ill will, your
quaerying and tearing Gods portion of Maintenance from them, your Quarrelling
at their Ministrations of the Sacraments of God, this especially of
Infant Baptism, besides abundance more of Gods institutions and allowances,
that you have been Quaerulous at, you would at last ascend above the height of
the Clouds, and fall to Questioning of God himself, about the performing and
breaking his promise, about his saving all, or not saving all the Children of
faithful Parents.

Either of which particulars, if you had been in your right wits, you would not
have dared (yet what is it, you will not dare, in matter of Interpretation of
Scripture, or argumentation of reason?) to have drawn and enforced, so
inconsequently and inconsiderately, from that, though but supposed proposition.

For suppose it again, that the promise was made to the saithful in the behalf
of the Children, and they concluded to be in Covenant thereby, yet neither of
the particulars, you mention,) does follow, that all their Children must be
saved according to that Covenant, that so God may perform his promise; or if
not, God must be a breaker of his promise: and seeing you have not proved the
consiquence, I will prove the Inconsequence of it; by the reason I have touched
before, the Promise and Covenant made to the faithful, in the behalf of the
Children, and concluding these in the same, (I must here use your words)
contains not only the inward saving graces, and the spiritual benefits of the
same, such as are, Justification, Regeneration, perseverance, and glorification
freely promised in Christ: (if so taken only, then indeed all in Covenant must
be saved, or else God be a breaker of Covenant.)

But it contains in it also the outward administrations, in visible
Ordinances and Church Privileges, which are many, as to be Gods people, and the
Children of Gods invisible League, to have the Oracles of God, etc. and thus
taken, God is no breaker of promise, if all in Covenant with him, be not saved
by him; for God made no such Covenant with all faithful Parents, to save all
their Children, but to put them under the way and means of Salvation, by taking
them also to be the God of, and owning them for children in Covenant, and
appointing them a Seal thereof. This may be called the Covenant of
Administration, or rather that part of it which stands in administrations of
external Ordinances and Privileges; the which has belonging to it all visible
and external professors, as also a visible Seal, which all that are in this
Covenant, ought therefore to be partakers of; you (as it appears) allow none to
be under the Covenant of Grace, but only such as are inwardly believers
Justified, Sanctified, and partakers of the saving Graces of the Covenant; The
which error and mistake, as I told you before, I tell you again, has seduced
you into these inconsequent consequences, and mislead you into your
Anabaprismal Baptismes: for as many are called but few chosen, so many are to
be reputed to belong to the Covenant of grace, and to be Covenanters, though
they have not inwardly and effectually the saving graces of the Covenant.
Besides, I could prompt you, that the Covenant is but conditional, not absolute.

And now, for a conclusion, because you have made mention of such a thing, the
Salvation of Infants, born in the precincts of the Church, I will leave with
you a few Propositions to consider off.

1. That the Church of God determines nothing positively and peremptorily
about the Salvation of Infants dying either with, or without Baptism, for she
knows that secret things belong to God, and only revealed things belong to
her and her children.

2. She judges that Infants in the general, Baptized or unbaptized are saved,
that is some, but not all; for this she has a judgment of certainty an
charity both, both the charity and certainty of such a judgment.

3. That this and that particular Infant, baptized, or unbaptized is saved, she
has no judgment of certainty, but only of charity, and this may have, though
there should be none of those particulars saved

4. That inward saving grace, does not always attend the Covenant (largely and
comprehensively taken, of which before) nor the Seal, but only in such as
belong to the election of grace. Yet the Church may in charity think so; as to
particulars in Covenant and under Seal, (till the contrary appear) though she
have no certain knowledge of it.

5. Elect Infants Baptized, and dying in their Infancy, have no outward means
of Salvation but their Baptism, the Seal of the Covenant, but there is an
inward invisible grace, which the Holy Spirit, before, in, at, or by Baptism,
does truly, really, and actually impute or impart to them, applying Christ in
his Justifying, and Sanctifying virtue, unto the souls of such Infants. This
the Church holds not only as of Charity, but as of certainty.

6. Such Elect Infants Baptized, and so dying, are capable of, and do attain to
such saving inward graces, not by the usual and ordinary way of Believing upon
hearing and conceiving (for such actual Faith, is not of absolute nececessity
to all Gods Elect, but only to those to whom God affords the means of it.) it
is the application of Christ's Righteousness, that justifies them; which is
done to them, either by some habits of Faith infused of God into their hearts,
or by Gods Spirit in a secret and unknown way to us, supplying all defects in
them, and doing all things on their parts; and this he holds, most in
charity, with some though not, full of certainty, because it is secret.

7. Such Elect Infants Baptized, and living to the Use of Reason and
Understanding, the seeds of Grace and Faith infused before, or in Baptism, do
grow up, by the ordinanry means, unto an actual apprehension of Christ and his
Righteousness, yea areall possession and comfortable fruition of Christ and all
his benefits, which were in Baptism truly and effectually sealed before unto
them, whenever they should be capable to make use of them: and this she
affirms both out of certainty, and charity.

8. Because the Church (and all this while, I speak of the Church of old
England) has no certain knowledge of particulars, who are Elect Infants, and
who not; but only a charitable opinion of this and that, and so every
particular one, born in the bosom of the Church; and for that she not only
charitably holds, but certainly knows, that all Infants born of Christian
Parents, are also inexternal and professional Covenant of God, together with
their Christian Parents, Therefore she is careful, as she ought, that all such
in convenient time and with the soonest, may be Baptized, and receive the
Initial Seal of the Covenant, so as none, as much as may be, depart out of this
life, without Baptism, not as if she certainly thought Infants, having been
true partakers of Baptism, must needs without doubt be saved; but because she
will not be wanting in her charity, and duty to God and such Infants, which
being once baptized, and dying soon after, she thinks them saved in her
judgment of charity (in which she thinks the inward grace may accompany the
outward Ministration) but for any judgment of certainty and verity herein, she
disclaimeth, and refers the same to the God Omniscient.

Now to what end you add these last words, Jesus says, Ye do err, not knowing
the Scriptures, nor the power of God, Mat. 22.29. I am the God of Abraham, of
Isaac, and Jacob; God is not the God of the dead, but of the living, Verse 32.
unless it be to show a kind of fatality of error falling upon you, and
following you wheresoever you go, not knowing, but pretending ever the
Scriptures; which still you cite, as heretofore, and speak words against your
own life (the life of your Cause) and cut your own throat with your own knife,
or run your self through with your own Sword, even the Sword of the Spirit, the
Texts of Scripture, as you cite and apply them, as here: For by virtue of
Abraham's says, which God so well accepted of, did not God enter into, and
make a Covenant, both with Abraham, and his Seed, Isaac and Jacob, and all
other, both Jews and Gentiles, who should be followers of Abraham's faith? and
God being the God, not of the dead, but of the living, Abraham lives still in
the children of Abraham, who are of the same says with him; and so the
Covenant made with Abraham, lives still in all believing Parents, for
themselves and their children, In that saidest thou truly, John 4.18.

And for your last words hereabouts, Consider these things with a single eye,
aiming at Gods glory, and thy Neighbors good; and answer these Considerations
by plain and direct Scriptures, if you can; or eise leave off wresting the
Scriptures to your own ends (if not your destruction,) I have done it, you see,
considered your Considerations, (which I wish you had better considered of,
that so they might have been truly Considerations) and that not only with a
single eye, as you speak, but with a twofold eye; so I must, if aiming at both,
Gods glory, and my Neighbors good, even your good also, as well as Parents and
their children; whereas your Considerations did neither, but rahter obscured
Gods glory in his Covenant, and diminishing your Neighbors good, the good of
Infants especially, which God has enlarged to them. And God has enabled me
(for I can do nothing of myself) to answer your Considerations by plain and
direct Scriptures, and Reasons drawn from them; yea, and such Scriptures, as
you have wrung, wrested, and wronged, I have vindcaged by explaining them, and
directing of them to their right end and construction. And so I shall not need
to leave off that I never began. But (truly) it is time for you to give over
that which you have practiced all along your Letter to me, the wresting of
Scriptures, and that to your own ends (if not destruction;) yea, I must tell
you, (though you may wrest the Scriptures to your own destruction, unless you
see your error and repent) you do not wrest them to your own ends, I am sure,
for they do not come up, or attain, either to your own end, the destruction of
our Infant Baptism, or to your other end (for both these are your own ends) the
justification of your Adult Baptism of persons before baptized. I will not be
my own judge herein, but refer it to the indifferent Reader; if any shall
peruse this my Answer.

I proceed to that which follows of yours.

An Exposition according to the mind of the Holy Ghost in that Scripture, 1
Cor. 7.14. For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the believing wife, and
the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the believing husband; else were your
children unclean; but now they are holly (holy) (or clean) which is opposite to
uncleanness.

What a Mountebank are you, always thus to mount up your low bank, and to
elevate your mean drugs of Exposition, with such high and extreme Praises and
Titles, as if it were according to the mind of the Holy Ghost; is not this to
sound a loud trumpet before a poor alins given, as the hypocrites do, Matthew.
6.3? Is not this one kind of boasting of things without your measure, 2 Cor.
10.15. and this one thing, The mind of the Holy Ghost in this and that
Scripture, and peremptorily saying your Exposition to be according to the same?
this is that the Spirit indeed speaks expressly, that in the Latter days some
shall be lovers of themselves, proud, boasters, 2 Timothy 3 and 1 Timothy 4. and
boasters of the Spirit, having not the Spirit; these be they who separate
themselve, as Jude tells you now again, verse 19. O the depth of the riches
both of the knowledge and wisdom of God, for who has known the mind of the
Lord? Romans 11.34. Behold the man, who expounds according to the mind of the
Holy Ghost, in that Scripture at leastwise: No Sir, you do not, you are
confounded already, who presume to be of the Council of the most High, and of
the mind of the Holy Ghost; see how you falter and stagger at the first step
and setting out to your Exposition? (for the meek will he guide in judgment,
and the meek will he teach his way, Psalm. 25.9. God resists the proud, and
gives grace to the humble, James 4.6.) for you chop and change the words of
the Holy Ghost, whose own words do best express its own mind, turning ( holy,
as you should write it, but that you are so holly, or hollow) into clean, as if
you would teach the Spirit of God, the words it should use; and then (indeed)
you may the sooner know the mind of the Spirit, speaking in your own words.

Sir, are you like to expound this Text according to the mind of the Holy
Spirit, who refuse the words of the Spirit, by which it signified its mind?
and bring and add another word, which expresses your mind better; besides
that in the ciring the words of the Spirit, you twice add (Believing,
believing) as if you would teach the Spirit to express its mind, more fully
and plainly than of himself he does, putting words into his mouth, which he
left out; though I acknowledge, the words aee twice necessarily implied. But I
would you could once teach your self to write English, and speak sense your
self (so far are you from expounding according to the mind or words of the
Holy Ghost) Look agian upon what follows of yours. This Scripture is own
(one) of the main props that Mr. Wsinell builds his Infant Baptism upon,
gounding rom hence, That children are holy, because there (their) father, and
there (their) mother are lawfully married; for that is the Apostles meaning in
this Text; namely, the holiness of the child, or uncleanness of it, according
to the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the marage (marriage) of the Parents; and
so the the unbelieving husband or wife is sanctified by the believing husband
or wife, being lawfully marid, (married) as the holy Ghost says, Unto the pure
all things are pure, Titus 1.15. Romans 14.20. and so an inpure (impure) or
unbelieving wife or child is sanctified or pure to the pure or believing
husband; and so likewise the husband to the wife, being lawfully married
(married) or joined together, according to Gods Ordynance (Ordinance) or may of
marriage, Heb. 13.4. and so their children are holy or clean, otherwise they
ware (were) unholy or unthan, or bastards, and they themselves made
whoremongers and adulterers, whom God will judge.

First, I pray Sir, poine your two first lines, and make your flops; for the
whole two Verses seem to relate Mr. Wyness opinion, and grounding childrens
holiness upon their father and mothers being lawfully married; as if that were
the Apostles meaning. The which Mr. Wynell disclaimeth, as his grounding, or
the Apostles meaning. Seeing then it is your gounding and expounding, put it
into such words, or dress it in such clothes, that I may know it, and you own
it, for your Child, or child ish opinion, whether it prove a legitimate or
bastard; for so (I see) you intend to make of the Apostles holy children, only
legitimates; and of the unclean, only bastards. And I am farther glad to see
you are willing to look into any of our Writers and Books, that treat of
Infant Baptism, as here Mr. Wynell (whose Treatise, as I remember, I sent
either to you, or to a friend to show you) and the rather, because your
Provincial Anabaptists (like as the Provincial Jesuits, do forbid unto their
new Converts, and old Catholics, as they call them, the reading of our
Protestant Books) are cautious that our Oathodox Teactates come not into the
hands and view of their Catechumen Proselytes. It appears to me, you have not
so much as read Mr. Wynell about this Text (so far are you from reading over
his Book) or not read so much as he wrote about it, because you pass by his
Exposition of it, and his Reasons, and your Answers to them, and spend your
time in drawing out of your self and your own bowels, as a Spider, those
Cobweb-Consideration of your own, spread out to catch Flies, that will come
into them.

Well, suppose it one of Mr. Wynell's main props or pillars, he has more
besides; and I thought that such a Sampson as you are, would have laid hold on
both, or all the pillars of the house, and pulled them down: but instead of
pulling down his, you set up first a prop and pillar of your own by his; and do
interpret the Aposltes meaning, of children being holy, to be only from a
Matrimonial holiness, as born in lawful wedlock; and so to be nothing else in
a manner, but a legitimation of birth: And here you cite Romans 4 20. which
speaks of lawfulness and purity of meats to Believers; and Titns 1.15. which
speaks of faith purifying the heart, and all things after to the pure; and Heb.
13.4. which shows Marriage is honorable, and the bed undefiled, all to what
purpose? forsooth to prove, that the holiness spoken of children by the
Apostle, was meant of a legitimation of birth; and the sanctification there
mentioned, of a Matrimonial sanctification? were they not rather to this
purpose, to show that a good memory, and a good wit, have not met in your head;
who show your good memory, to cite many Texts of Scripture, but no good wit to
apply them, or to prove that out of them, for which you bring them?

Next you infer it from the scope of the words; For (say you) the words are
part of an Answer (Answer) to a Question put by the believing Corimhians,
Whether that they which were converted by the preaching of the Gospel, might
live with there (their) husbands or wives, which were not converted? Now the
Apostle answer thus, If the unbelieving husband or wife will dwell with the
believing husband or wife is sanctified to or by the unbelieving husband or
wife; else ware your children unclean, or unholy. But now (says he) by your
dwelling tegether, and owning your former marriage (which was lawful) they are
holy and clean. This in short is the genuen (genuine) meaning of the Holy Ghost
in this Scripture.

This, neither in short, nor at length, is the meaning of the Holy Ghost in
this Scripture; for according to this meaning, all the children of Heathens and
Pagan-Parents, lawfully married, as they may be, and many of them be, may be
said to be holy, and each of the Parents sanctified to the other, by their
dwelling together, and owning their Marriage, which was lawful: Which things
are nothing pertinent to the Corinthians Question, or the Apostles Answer, and
quite wide, and fardistant, if not wholly repugnant, to the scope of the words
and meaning of the Holy Ghost in this Scripture.

To let pass the nonsense of some part of your Relation, and the confusions
thereof, as to the Question and Answer, and your shortning, or rather
curtailing of them, I will set it down to the full, because upon this depends,
as upon a prop or pillar, the Frame and Fabric of all Reasons and Arguments.

These Corinthians, before they received the Gospel, and their conversion, were
of the civil Heathens and Pagans, amongst whom the men had their wives, and
wives their husbands, joined together in lawful Matrimony, according to the
Customs and Laws amongst them. Now when amongst these married couplet,
sometimes the husband was converted to Christ, and became a believer, the wife
abiding in her unbelief, and sometimes the wife was converted to Christ and
became a believer, the husband rentaining in his Idolatry, (the Spirit blowing
where it listed, and grace being free,) the believing party began to have some
scruple of Conscience, (occasioned, it may be, upon their knowledge of the Law
in Hug. 2.12, and 13. or remembering the fact of Ezra 9, and 10. Chapters, or
considering its faith, and the others infidelity, how ill they would comply
together,) and thereupon sent to the Apostle to have his resolution and answer,
whether they might retain, dwell and live with their unbelieving consorts: to
which the Apostle answers, that if the unbelieving party, be pleased and
willing to live and dwell with the believing parcy, the believing party should
not depart and leave the other; and gives them this reason, for that the
unbelieving party is sanctified by the believing party: the which he asserts,
by this reason, Else were your children unclean, but now they are holy.

Or else this may go for a second doubt and scruple, of the Corinthians,
resolved here by the Apostle, for so sure, when they scrupled whether their
married society, as husband and wife were lawful in this respect, because one
party was an Infidel and unclean, they doubted next concerning their children,
whether they should be holy with the believing Parent, which was within, or
unclean with the unbelieving who was without the Church, and its Privileges,
and therefore the Apostle, in his answer speaks to the Case of children also
so born, (as well as he had done to the other, concerning the Parents,) that
their children also were holy, and not unclean.

Now (it seems) the Corinthians rested well satisfied in their Consciences,
with this Apostolical resolution of this double doubtful Case; for he spoke as
unto wise men, able to judge what he said and meant, as himself testifies of
them, 1 Cor. 10.15. But we have sought out many inventions, and though they
might be plain Cases with us, being thus determined aforchand long ago by an
Apostle, we have folded them, and perplexed them with many intricacies, about
the senses and meaning of the Canons of that Apostle.

As, what is that sanctification, and how the unbelieving wise is sanctified by
the believing husband: and what is this holiness, and how the children of such
Parents are said to be holy and not unclean.

You have already and soon shot your bolts at both at once, and thus give the
Genuine sense and meaning, as you boast, of the Holy Ghost in this Scripture,
that the former resolution, Apostolical, is to be taken of Matrimonial
sanctification, as thus; the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the believing
Husband, so that they are lawfully Husband and Wife: And the latter resolution
Apostolical, is to be taken, of Natural holiness (as you call it in your third
Consideration) so as the children of such Parents were not unclean but holy;
that is, not bastards but Legitimates.

And now I must skip over to that third Consideration mentioned, to find out
either some Text of Scripture, or some sound of reason (there being none
betwixt this and that.) There indeed I find cited by you, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4.
Wherein thus you proceed; in the 3. verse the Apostle says, For this is the
will of God, even your sanctificaion (or holiness: What is this sanctification
or holiness? it is laid down in the latter part of the verse in those words,
that you should abstam from Fornication; so that from hence it appears, what
holiness the Apostle meant before, even a Natural holiness or clean e^,
(cleanness) that is, not born of Fornication; and the reason is in the 4.
verse, that every one of you should know how to posese (possess) his vesel
(vessel) in sanctification and honor: speaking of Natural holiness and
cleanness, of keeping their body, etc. and so their children come to be clean
and holy, else were they unclean and unholy.

First, What a Reasoner are you, your self may see by making the 4 verse a
reason of the 3. verse, which is only an explication of it as to the persons to
whom he prescribed the duty of abstaining from Fornication, and to the means
thereof, that every one should keep his vessel or body in sanctification, etc.
which is the same thing in substance with the former. Secondly, You mis-name the
thing, as well as mistake the reason: For it is not a natural holiness or
cleanness, that the Apostle speaks of or for, but a conjugal, or civil, or
moral one; nor is Fornication or uncleanness, here, any natural, but a moral,
civil, or conjugal thing, or otherwise an unconjugal, uncivil, and immoral, as
all other vices and sins are.

Thirdly, If this Text must prove the former Text, of the Corinthians to be
meant only of Matrimonial sanctification, (for I hope now you will leave off
your Natural holiness:) Why then this text (of the Thessalonians, I mean) and
the uncleanness and holiness there, must be restrained to Fornication and
chastity: but this cannot be, because other sans are named and mentioned in
that place besides it, as, that no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any
matter, at the 6. verse; and then the Apostle at the 7. verse, gives this as a
reason common to both and all particulars, because God has not called us to
uncleanness but to holiness, so that by holiness there is meant not only
chastity, but justice also and integrity; and by uncleanness, in justice also
and fraudulency. For the will of God is first generally set down, at the 3.
verse, and specified in two particulars, the one of chastity, along to the 6.
verse, in whcih verse is another particular, of justice, and at the 7 verse,
the reason of both is yielded; For God has not called us to uncleanness, but
holiness; which if understood only of Matrimonial uncleannes which is
Fornication, and holiness which is chastity, then the Argument must run thus;
let no man go beyond his brother in bargining, for God has not called us to
fornication but to chastity, and so you alone shall run with it for me, and
follow the consequence thereof, which I hold to be of no consquence.

And fourthly, Such another consequence is this; uncleanness and holiness, or
sanctification is put by St. Paul. to the Thessalonians, for fornication and
chastity, (suppose it so, though I grant it not so) and therefore the same is
meant by St. Paul to the Corinthian, when he says, the husband is sanctified
by, or in, or to the wife, else the children were unclean, but now they are
holy; as if the same words may not bear diverse senses, in scveral Text of
Scriptures, according to the diversity of the matter and scope; and how will
you show, that chastity among the Heathens and unbelievers, is ever called
sanctification in Scripture, the spirit only being the Spirit of
sanctification, and the bodies of Heathens and unbelievers, being not the
Temples of the Holy Spirit: and yet (you see) the Heathen or unbelieving
husband or wife, is said to be sanctified in or by the believing wife or
husband.

And Fifthly and lastly, The Apostle speaks to the Thessalonians, grown
persons, converted to Christ, and tells them for the present and time to come,
that it is the will of God, they should abstain from uncleanness and
fornication, from fraud and injustice, (for the one of which you cite Heb.
13.4. also, the only t^xt you ci^e, according the sense of it,) and what is all
this to the unbelievers being sanctified by the believers, or their childrens
being holy? Here was no such mixed conjugal societies of Christians and Gentiles
or Heathens, and children born of them, as appears in that the Apostles says,
Let every one of you possess his vessel in sanctification, and not in the lust
of Concupisence, even as the Gentiles, which know not God: I am sure the
Apostle neither speaks nor means a natural holiness or cleanness, that is, not
born of Fornication, as you strangly and inconsiderately blurt out; which words
I leave to you to put into some Genitive Case, for the birth of I know not
whom, the fathers or children of these Thessalonians; for you make no Genuine
sense here, either of fathers or childrens Natural holiness or cleanness.

There is a parcel of your third Consideration, clapped in by you, not belonging
to the matter in hand there, which, according to my custom of right ordering,
and methodising of your confused stuff, I reserve until anon, to come in its
due and proper place.

I proceed, now that I have answered your Allegation for a Natural (you would
say, if you were acquainted with the best spoken of your Sect, Matrimonial)
sanctification, Holiness and cleanness: to give you my Reasons to the contrary
of your Opinion.

1. When the Apostle says, the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife,
etc. and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: this cannot be
meant of Matrimonial sanctity and holiness, that their Marriage was good and
lawful, and chaste, for both parties knew that of themselves before, nor needed
they, nor did they here propound any such Quaere unto the Apostle, Whether they
were at first or still rightly man and wife, or were joined, in lawful way of
Wedlock whilst they were Heathens. And that case was also determined before by
the Apostle, as the 9, and 10. verses, let not the wife depart from the
husband, and let not the husband put away his wife: But the Quaere here was,
whether the believing party might depart and separate from the unbelieving
party, a Brother or a Sister, as its more explicated at the 12, and 13. verses;
so that it seems, this Quaere arose from something in difference of Religion,
that troubled the Conscience of the believing party after his or her
conversion, as whether it would not be defiled in remaining joined to Idolaters
and Infidels: Now suppose the Quaere had been sent to you for answer (for I
will see how good you are at answers, who are so much in Quaeres) what will you
answer to these Corinthians? why thus you do: Be content, Sirs, you have a
natural holiness and cleanness, or your Matrimony is lawful, notwithstanding
the difference in faith, you may live together for all that, you are no
Adulterers and Adulteresses, increase and multiply, your children are no
bastards but Legitimates.

But, Sir, do you think this would have answered their Quaere, satisfied their
scruple, or pacified their Conscience? would they not have replied to you, in
the words of Job to his Friends, We have heard many such things, miseralbe
Comforters are ye all. Job. 16.2? Tell us that we know not; answer us to that
we Quaere you; speak that we have not heard; we have heard many such things, we
know all this, that we are lawfully man and wife, and our children are no
Bastards but Legitimater; if this be all you can say, as good hold your peace,
for you speak no peace to Conscience: Miserable comforters of Conscience are ye
all, or as in the margent, troublesome comforters of conscience are ye all, and
by this your resolution, make our Consciences more troublesome and miserable
than before they were. Our doubts are, whether we that are converts and
believers, may put away or go from our husbands or wives, which are Infidels
and unconverted, and also his or her children, as not belonging to God for part
of his people, or seed, and being as a grief and vexation, if not pollutionto
us: what do you tell us of lawfulness of our Marriages, or Legitimacy of our
children? Can you show us, there is any sanctification, betwixt us and our
unbelieving consorts, whereby we may be induced to live and dewell together?
any holiness, of our offspring and children, that we may own them, as members
of the Church of God? do this and do something, else its nothing you say.

But I will take off these Corinthians from you, Sir, and from baiting of you;
(for which you may thank me) and will direct them to a more happy and peaceable
Comforter, ever their own Apostle St. Paul, who here fully answers their
doubts, and quiets their Consciences, telling them, that the unbelieving
husband is sanctisied by or in (the word in the Original bears all) the wife;
and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by or in the husband, meaning (though
not expressed) the believing husband and the believing wife. (I blamed you Sir,
before for expressing it in the text (where the word, believing, is not for
mentioning it as the fense and scope, which my self now do) for the question
is, what the believing wife or husband is to do with the unbelieving husband
and wife. Now this goes and speaks to the heart (as the Hebrews say) of
these Corinthians, and brings a calm upon their troubled spirits, now if the
unbelieving husband bepleased to dwell with his believing wife, she is well
coutented, for the unbelieving husband is sanctified by or in the wife: and if
the unbelieving wife be content to keep with her believing husband he is as
well pleased, for the unbelieving wife is sanctified in and by the husband; and
now also their children are not unclean, but holy. This of sanctification, is
such a privilege, as is not common to all married folks, but peculiar to
believing persons, so that these may reap such comfort and benefit hereby, that
their unbelieving consorts are sanctified to or by themselves; and they may
have not only a lawful enjoyment, but also a holy use of their unbelieving
yokefellows, for that God esteems the seed of such to be a holy seed, as truly
as if both were believers. Thus the Apostle, his resolution removes that
scruple of Conscience, telling them, the believing husband or wife, they were
not defiled by remaining joined with the unbelieving consort, but rather that
the unbelieving consort was sanctified in or by the believing husband and wife:
he which your sense, of natural or Matrimonial chastity, or sarctification, (if
you will have the word also) is nothing so satisfactory to, or answerable for.

For (again) if so it should be meant and understood, the Reason would have
been as good, The unbelieving wife or husband is sanctisied by or in the
unbelieving husband and wife; or the believing Consort is sanctified in and by
an unbelieving Consort; or the husband is sanctified by the wife, and the wife
by the husband, Let them be what they will, believers or unbelievers, according
to your sense, as betwixt whom there is your matrimonial Chastity, or lawful
Marriage. But then it would not have been so true every way (as now it is
according to my sense) for to the pure all things are pure, but unto them that
are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their mind and
conscience is defiled, Titus 1.15.

Nay more, whereas the believing Consort sanctifies the unbelieving Consort,
and not the other way, the unbelieving Consort sanctifies the believing one,
if matrimonial Chastity, or your natural Sanctity, were here understood, both
Consorts would here be sanctified; yea both the believing one, and also the
unbelieving one would be, and were hereby sanctified in themselves, not by, or
in, one the other, for Marriage is honorable amongst all, and the bed
undefiled, Heb. 13.4. And then you may alter the Text of Titus, and say, to the
impure, and unbelieving husband or wife also, all things are pure 3. they are
sanctified even in themselves, by their matrimonial Sanctity, and natural
Chastity, and even their mind and conscience is undefiled.

Besides, what an incongruity and inconsistency is there in such a reddition
and interpretation, the unbelieving: wife is sanctified by or in the believing
husband; that is, chastified or matrimonially holy? Said I not but even now,
That chastity amongst the Heathen, or spoken of them, as here you will have it,
of the unbelieving, is never called Sanctification, or Sanctity, in Scripture?
Turn down to your self the one Text, and then turn it over to me. I gave you
also reason for it, because their bodies are not the Temples of the Spirit of
God, which is the Spirit of Sanctification and Sanctity. But, I pray, show me
also, that one Consort or yoke fellow does chastifie or make chaste the other,
like as the Apostle shows you, that one does sanctify and make holy the
other; and if so be both Consorts be not chaste, how are they made chaste or
chastified, each by, or in other; or if but one be unchaste, how is he or she
chastified or made chaste, by or in the other chaste one, be it he or she?

Truly, Sir, this opinion of yours, and your sense here, deserves a little to
be chastised, till it be more sensible, yea and chastified too, as which does
adulterate and corrupt the purity of the Word, and the sanctification of this
Text. It may something recreate the Reader (if any come to read these sheet^,
besides your self, who do concreate i^) to intersert what a great Champion of
Infant Baptism has related of as great an opposer of it, about the
interpretation of this Text; which he holding, as you do, it to be meant of
matrimonial chastity, and holiness, brings forth as a parallel Text, the 34
Verse of this Chapter. I pray look the Verse, it is too longton me to write out
twice; and he thus renders and means it: The unmarried cares for the things
of God, that she may be holy in body and Spirit, i.e. That she may be chaste:
but she that is married, cares for the things of the world, that she may please
her husband. The Relator says of it only this, That in truth it is a pretty
odd sense, thus invented; and that which I only shall add, is, That if thus
invented, it is (hardly) in truth; and though pretty, it is not chaste, but
holy, that the Apostle aims at, That she being unmarried, and free from
worldly cares, cares the more for the things of God, that she may be godly and
holy; and whether the sense be even or odd, I pass not; it is odd indeed, that
the unmarried cares for the things of God, that she may be chaste. I will make
it even, and say with the Apostle, The unmarried cares for the things of God,
how she may be holy.

If you ask me now for my sense and interpretation of S. Paul here to the
Corinthians, saying, The unbelieving Consort is sanctified by or to the
believing Consort, I gave it you but a little before, to be this plainly, You
believing Consorts may have, and have, if you dwell together, not only a
lawful enjoyment, but a holy use of your unbelieving Consort. This I shall
elucidate, by comparing it with 1 Timothy 4.5. where the creature is said to be
sanctified by the word and prayer, unto the pure and Believer. You may as well
limit and restrain the Sanctification here, only to a lawful use of the
Creatures to Believers and unbelievers, as you do the other former
sanctification, only to the lawful marriage of the unbelievers and Believers:
But as I have showed you the one, so I shall now prove that the other holds
out more to your eyes, if you will open them and look on, because the Heathens
and unbelievers had a lawful use of the Creatures; but S. Paul here to
Timothy, speaks of such an use of the Creatures, as they had not, and is
appliable only to Believers, and therefore is a holy and sanctified use also
(not lawful only) as appears by that which follows, for it is sanctified by
the Word and Prayer, they have the Word to Warrant the use of them, and Prayer
to work down Gods blessing upon them; and then also (in the fourth verse)
Thanksgiving, to send up glory to God for them; all which the Heathen and
unbeliever were not capable of, or able to, and this Sanctification is not
their lawful use of the Creature, but a peculiar holy use of them, which the
Believers and Saints have.

And so this Exposition of Paul to Timothy, makes the other of Paul to the
Corinthians, clear and stronger; for some of your Sect hold, That the
Sanctification of the unbeliever here in the Corinthians, is such a
Sanctification as is parallel with that there in Timothy; and therefore I may
infer, that as the sanctification in Timothy, is peculiar only to Believers,
and more than a lawful use of the Creatures, which Heathens are also capable
of: so the Sanctification in the Corinthians, is a holy use of the unbelieving
Consort unto the Believer, and more than a lawful or Matrimonial Chastity,
which the unbelievers may and do enjoy amongst themselves.

This that I have set down, is the same in effect, with that which our latter
Divines call Instrumental Sanct fication; they mean, and so would have the
Apostle to mean, when he says that the unbelieving Consort is sanctified by or
to the believing Consort, that is sanctified instrumentally, to the precreating
of issue or children, which the believing Consort does sanctifi^^; and so both
together, the unbeliever sanctified by or in the Believer, do make a holy root,
to produce a holy branch. For its evident, that this sanctifying by the
believing party here mentioned, respects the issue, as the Apostles reason
shows; else were your children unclean, but now they are holy. And you and
your Sect acknowledge as much, by your grounding and building a legitimation of
issue thereupon. Briefly, the Infidel party is sanctified by and in the other,
both for a holy Conjugal Society, and for raising up of a holy Seed unto God:
so it is but relatively, for absolutely all are sanctified only in Christ
Jesus.

And so I should and would have come to the Corinthians second Scruple, or Case
of Conscience, about their children; but that I remember a parcel or Clause of
your third and last Consideration, reserved hither, because it was clapped in
there disorderly and impertinently; and it is this, as you deliver it.

Again, if it ware meant (were meant) otherwise, then might the unbelieving wife
be saved, and enjoy any Church-privilege by the faith of the husband, or the
husband by the faith of the wife, as well as the child by the faith of the
Parents, and that by the Apostles rule in this Verse.

If it were meant otherwise; you mean (I suppose) if the being sanctified of
the unbelieving Consort, by or to the Believing one, were not meant of your
natural holiness or cleanness, or others Matrimonial Chastity and Sanctity (for
I will give you in this, as an overplus) but of our, either the Believers holy
use of his unbelieving Consort, or his unbelieving Consorts being instrumentaly
sanctified to the procreation of children, together with the Believer. What
then? then might the unbelieving wife be saved, and enjoy any Church-privilege
by the faith of the husband, and the husband by the faith of the wife, as well
as the child by the faith of the Parents. For the General, its a non-sequence,
and then a nonsense. Once more I must tell you of your nonsense, of natural
holiness or cleanness; you did well to join them together, otherwise, were it
not for your cleanness, you were clean gone as to your holiness, and must go
off uncleanly from your natural holiness; for the Apostle never intended any of
your natural holiness or cleanness (nor the others Matrimonial) but either a
Moral, or Ceremonial, or rather Instrumental, or Sacred-usual (if I may so
speak.) And another nonsense of yours is, your putting of Salvation, and
enjoying of Church-privileges together, when as many are saved that enjoy none
of them, and some enjoy many of them, and yet are not saved; yea, and putting
Salvation before enjoying of Church-privileges, when as ordinarily
Church-privileges, and the enjoying them, go before saving and Salvation. These
things carry not sense in them, besides they are not according to the sense of
the Apostle and his Text, which speak only a word of sanctifying, and not of
saving a syllable.

And now again, from being sanctified, especially the unbelieving husband or
wife's being sanctified to their being saved, whilst unbelieving is one of
your greatest non-sequences you have made in your two sheets, though you
understand it of any of the sanctifyings mentioned, mine or yours.

Once more, and lastly, The unbelieving husband or wife, though sanctified by
and in the believing Consort any of the ways, yet may not be saved and enjoy
Church-privileges, as well as the born child of a believing Parent, because
this child has present capable Right, and real Title to a Church-privilege,
which is Baptism, and all other Privileges of the Covenant, as he shall grow up
to them, yea and to salvation it self: whereas the unbelieving husband or wife
has not just plea in present to any of these, until forsaking their unbelief,
they embrace Christ, and make preofession of their faith, and so come into
Covenant with the believing Consort, and its child or children. Therefore I
say, not so well as a Christian child, may an unbelieving husband or wife be
saved, or enjoy Church-privileges, by the faith of the believing Consort; and
you did not as well as you might to say so; especially seeing children born of
Christian Parents, are not unbelievers or Infidels, but Believers rather, as I
have formerly showed; as also how, and in what way and sense, such children may
be said to enjoy Church-Privileges, and to be saved by the faith of their
Parents; to which I refer the Reader, and your self.

You write something of the Apostles rule in this Verse, by which it would
follow, which you presume of; but whil^st you apply it ill here, it begins to
be your rule, and you being the Author of the misapplying, are also the Master
of misrule. I know no rule here, but the Proposition and Resolution of the
Apostle, that the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband, and the
unbelieving husband is sanct^fi^d by the wife. The Apostle says not, as you,
is saved, or enjoys Church-privileges, by or in the believing Consort,
whilst he is an unbeliever; and yet so it may fall out, that the unbelieving
Consort may be brought off from its infidelity by the believing Consort, and so
may enjoy all Church privileges, and in the end be saved; for so Verse 16. What
know thou, O wife, whether thou shall save thy husband? (he speaks to the
believing wife of her unbelieving husband,) Or how know thou, O man, whether
thou shall save thy wife? (so he speaks also to the believing husband, of his
unbelieving wife.) The which Text may be a satisfying reason for the
comfortable and hopeful continuance of marriage-society and cohabitation, as
which does fully remove those jealousies that might arise in their minds from
another Text, perhaps they knew of, Deuteronomy. 7.4. and 3. ver.

I shut up the Point with this, That howsoever the just and righteous man shall
live by his faith, yet as the Apostle says, the unbelieving husband is
sanctified by his wife, and the unbelieving wife by her husband (though it may
be, not to life or salvation) this sanctifying which the Apostle mentions of
the unbelieving party, is a result of the faith of the believing Consort; so
the unbeliever is twice said to be sanctified, but not the Believer; and the
Believer does sanctify the unbeliever, or else I can make no sense of the
Apostles Argument.

And so now by a kind of back skip, I shall return from your third
Consideration, where you ended about the unbelieving Consorts sanctification by
the believing one, unto your first Consideration; where you begin about their
childrens being unclean or holy. Do you not see what a great deal of trouble
your want of good order and method, your ignorance of our University Arts and
Learning, does create to me? Truly you might pity me as much for the one, as I
do you for the other.

For so the next Quaere or scruple of Conscience in the Corinthian Believers
unto the Apostle, was, what they should do about their children they had, or
should have begotten of their Infidel husbands or wives, whilst they lived and
remained in wedlock with these? and whether they should look upon them their
children, as any part of Gods people belonging to the Church, and so what he
thought of them? To which the Apostle answers, they were not unclean, but
holy. But the words are not barely propounded as his Resolution of the
Corinthians second Doubt or Quaere, but as an addition or proof unto their
first Quaere or doubt, as the form and manner of the speech shows, Else were
they unclean, but now they are holy. The like is, 1 Cor. 15.29 Else what shall
they do who are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not? So here, The
unbelieving husband is sanctified by his wife, etc. else were your children
unclean, but now they are holy. As who should say, This farther proves that
Sanctification, because your children are holy, which else would be unclean.
Thus the Apostle here, one of these Doubts or Quaeres necessarily flowing from
another, as one sore breaking out by another, by the resolution of the second,
as it were a Plaster laid upon it, both salveth that, and also spreads and
dilateth the same, to the more perfect cure of the first.

But I will give you the precedence of speech, as who love to hear you speak
first; and it is (indeed) my place to be but an Answerer, and so to take into
consideration what you put to me. Say on therefore, and speak out.

Consider farther first, if this holiness here spoken of, be a holiness of
sanctification; such as is the way to heaven and salvation, as some will
affirm? then I pray let me ask you this question, from whence this holiness
comes?

What some will affirm, I know not, do you? then you know the future opinions
of some as well (and indeed, as well) as the present mind of the Spirit in
this Text. But its not material to my answering of you, what some men will
affirm; let me hear what either they or you do affirm; or tell me the names of
those some, and then I shall tell whether they do affirm; but what they will
affirm, I leave it to you to foretell, and from henceforth to begin to be a
Prognosticator or foreteller of weather; which you may be better, than of the
wills of men.

Again, holiness of sanctification! Manhu, what is this? I do not think any
will affirm it, besides your self, either to speak such words, being both one,
not distinct things, holiness being the quality or habit, and sanctification
being but the act and operation of the same; so that rather both you and they
should have said, if you would speak right English, or sense, The
sanctification of holiness, than The holiness of sactification. But now
farther, neither is holiness of sanctification here spoken of, as to the
children in question, and under doubt; for, because you do not specisie whom
you speak of, and of whom you affirm or deny this your holiness of
sanctification, let me, I pray, ask you this question, Of whom, Parents or
their children? sure of the children, and their holiness (for of the
unbelieving Parents and their sanctification, you have done speaking; and your
asking me whence this holiness of sanctification comes? and your answering
your self, Either from the lawfulness of the marriage of their Parents, or from
the faith of the Parents, or from the Covenant; these do make clear what you
held in obscurity, that the holiness here spoken of to be a holiness of
sanctification, such as is the way to Heaven and Salvation, as some will
affirm, no matter who, is intended by you to be, or at least questioned, if not
refuted, as to the being of it in the children of Parents, whereof one is an
unbeliever.

And now I have another question to ask you, Why you join together in the
children only (sanctification of holiness) when as the Apostle divided them
betwixt the Parents and their children, giving sanctification to the Parents,
the unbelieving wife or husband, is sanctified by the believing Consort, and
leaving holiness to their children; Else were they unclean, but now they are
holy? And lastly, (for I cannot forget how when time and place was, you wearied
and tired me with your quaeres, I ask you another question, If your conjunction
(holiness of sanctification) be not a tautologie, or vain repetition? whether
your limitation following (such as is the way to Heaven and Salvation) be not a
Battologie, or needless restriction? For is there any holiness or
sanctification, which is not the way, or tending to Heaven and Salvation?

And now Sir, to your question you ask me, From whence this holiness (that is,
of children) comes? and as soon as you asked this question, and before I could
open my mouth to make you answer, from whence, away you are gone, to your
suppositions, If it come from the marriage of the Parents, or if from their
faith, or if from the Covenant: and who are you like to herein? I will not give
you neither time or scope to answer; but without all supposition, shall say,
you are like to Pilate, who asked Christ this question, What is Truth? and as
soon as he had said it, went out unto the Jews, as not having the patience to
stay for the Answer, John 8.38. Whether Pilate were able to answer that
question himself, What is Truth, I know not, it seems you are, and therefore
made such haste away from me, to take my breath (as it were) out of my mouth,
or rather to stop it, and to undertake the answer your self; for presently you
follow on.

If it comes from the lawfulness of the marriage of the Parents, then why was
not (were not) all the sons and daughters of Solomon, Rehoboam, Jeroboam,
Nadab, and others of the kings of Israel and Judah saved; seeing they were all
lawfully married according to there (their) Laws and Customs? and why are not
drunkard, (drunkards) swarers, (swearers) and other profane persons saved,
while (while) they so lived and so died; seeing they are in our experience of
times (times) the children of lawful married people, according to the laws of
the land? and why was Jeptah (Jephthah) saved, seeing he was a bastard?

How now, Sir? is all the ado for this? I looked for Grapes from your mouth,
and you bring forth wild grapes; I looked for judgment, and behold
oppression, or a scab; and for righteousness, and behold a cry, or a lie. In a
word, I looked for an answer, and behold more questions, and nothing but
questions, and those nothing to the purpose; for 1. whereas you said before,
Some will affirm, that sanctification of holiness in children, such as is the
way to heaven and salvation, is here spoken of, do you affirm if you can, of
some that say, or ever said, that it came from the lawfulness of the marriage
of the Parents. Here you are like Don Quixot, who imagined windmills in the air
before him, and ran a tilt at them: so you set up images and imaginations in
your way, to question them, thereby to keep your self in breath, and your pen
on paper. 2. Suppose some had affirmed it, that childrens sanctification of
holiness (for as long as I am about your work, I shall use your words, and when
I have done that, I shall leave there, for I like them not) comes from the
lawfulness of the marriage of their Parents, does or may then rationally or
religiously follow thereupon such a question, as, Why then were not all the
children of all married Parents in the Church? (for I pass by your great
reading in the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel and Judah, and their
Genealogies, so impertinent here;) and why not drunkards and swearers, which
are in your experience of times the children of lawful married people? (you
seem to be a man of great experience of times, and a diligent observer of
childrens births, and their Parents marriages, and are a fit man to be the
Register of your Parish, and to keep the Book;) why, (say you) were they not
all saved? and why was Jephthah saved, seeing he was a bastard, and not the
child of lawfully married Parents? what a consequence, or rather, as I said
before, a non-sequence of a question is here from a supposition? like unto
this, the qualification of coldness in the water, comes from the confluence of
showers into the pond, why then are not all the drops and handfuls fetched
thence, sweet and distilled? Sanctification of holiness in the children, comes
from the lawful marriage of their Parents, why then are not all their children
and issues saved? Sirs, can you forbear smiling? They say, when one
Almanack-maker looks upon another, they smile both, to think how they delude
simple people with their vain and false Prognostications; certes, when you
Sectaries see one another, you cannot but laugh out, to remember how you
deceive silly people with your irrational and inconsequent argumentations:
offer it now unto thy Governor, thy God, will he be pleased with thee, and thy
Question, Why not all saved? he will tell thee, that thy and their destruction
is from themselves; but thy and their help or salvation is in me, says God;
not in or from any other, Parent or not Parent, married or not married,
lawfully or not lawfully, you and they are saved by the free grace of God, and
not by the sanctification of holiness in the one or other.

Yea, do you not answer your self, why drunkards and swearers, who were
children of lawful married Parents, are not saved? Why they so lived, and so
died drunkards and swearers, how could they?

But what is all this to our business, which is not of salvation, but
sanctification? Here is another of your absurd and inconsequent questions;
sanctification of holiness in children, if it come from the lawful marriage of
the Parents, why then are not all sanctified, so you should have said, and
would, if you could have told how to keep to the Question: and then you might
have answered your self, or needed not have made such a question, seeing even
the wicked children born of lawful married Parents in the Church, are in a way,
which I shall anon show you, sanctified, and this their sanctification is a way
also, unto Heaven and Salvation, and all those whom you name, were in this way,
and I suppose you know, I shall not need to tell you, what fell out in the way,
that they were not all or any of them saved. It is one of your gross mistakes
and Reasonings, from every kind of sanctification of holiness, to conclude,
the salvation of souls, when as (to go no farther) the unbeliever is here said
to be sanctified in and by the believing, and their children are said to be
holy, from whence who can infer their salvation? these arguings, are rattles
for boys to play with, not Reasons for men to bring forth.

But what is the business, why Jephthah is here named? It is confessed, He was
saved, because the Scripture bears witness of it, in Heb. 11.32. and also
that he was a bastard, Judges 11.1. But seeing he was a bastard, you ask, why
he was saved? why? to teach you, that base birth is no obstacle to free Grace,
nor hinders the salvation of any believer: no more than lawful marriage of
Parents, so much talked of, or rather, as you should have spoken, the
legitimate birth of children, does further the salvation of an unbeliever.

But in the mean time, this Example named by you and produced, does accuse you
of inconsiderateness in your Consideration; for we are both considering (as you
will have it) of the sanctification of holiness in children, whose Parents are
one of them an Infidel or unbeliever, and you come in with your Jephthah
neither of whose Parents were unbelievers, (though sinful in that act,) and so
its impertinent, as not coming within the compass of the Corinthians doubt
and Quaere, or the Apostles answer and Argument; and so you are besides the
Matter, and out of the Cause and Case here questioned in, all your Questions,
being nothing to the purpose.

But now lastly, tell me one thing, did you not once, but a while ago hold, the
Apostles meaning here, of childrens being holy, to be noching else, but a
legitimation of their birth, from Parents in lawful Wedlock, or Matrimonial
holiness or chastity, (which you also, or yours make to be the very
sanctification of the unbeliever to or by the believer?) How then can you, and
with what constancy can you now here argue against the sanctification of
holiness in children, as coming from the lawfulness of the marriage of the
Parents, who before make legitimation of their birth, and nothing else to be
their Birthholiness? and lawful marriage to be the unbelieving Parent his
sanctification? Thus usual it is with God to confound the opposers of his
truth, so as to contradict their own Tenets: for as they heard only, that he
which persecuted the Church in times past, now preaches the faith which once
he destroyed, Paul by name, Gal. 1.15. So we may see now, that he which
revileth the Church in times present, now destroys the errors, his own
errors, which once he preached and wrote; but I will not name him: and as they
glorified God in Paul, so we may glorify God in this, and say, Great is Truth
and will prevall; vile is error, and will fall.

2. If it come from the faith of the Parrents, (Parents) or at least from the
faith of one of them, thenn (then) I pray tell me why Cayne (Cain) Esau,
Absolon and others were not saved, seeing their Parents ware (were) all
faithful and belevers (believers) and why was Rahab the Harlot saved, seeing
her parents ware Heathens or unbelevers; neither ware the Parents of all those
who were converted at the first preaching of the Gospel, belevers.

Here it the same song again of the sanctification of holiness in children,
only to another tune; the former was to the tune of the lawful marriage of
their Parents, and this is to the tune of faith of the Parents, or at least one
of them. I have found or put the first song, out of tune, and I believe I shall
do so to the second song, especially in reference to the consort or consequence
thereof.

Sanctification of holiness in children, comes not from the says of Parents,
neither of them, by way of conveyance causality or application, as I have said
before: that is, the faith of the Parent apprehending Christ and his
righteousness, and holiness, does not cause, convey or apply the same unto his
or their child, thereby to justify and sanctify it: so it must, if you will
argue from it, the faith of the Parents or one of them, to the salvation of
their child, and therefore all that follows, even your consquences, are thus
blasted and blown away.

But yet there is a sanctification of holiness in children, that comes from the
faith of the Parent, or either of them, by way of declaration, relation or
impetration; that is, the faith of the parents, Covenanted with God and
baptized into Christ, does relatively, and declaratively sanctify their child,
even unto the same holy seal of the Covenant with themselves; and may impetrate
holiness, and salvation for him, though not impart or derive the same to it,
unless it be in a foederal way, which is a way also to salvation, like as if
the root be holy, so are the branches. But all this may be, but without any
necessary or infallible consequence of salvation hereupon, though it is in the
way, and a way thereto, as I said.

I must here tell you again of the same fault, as I did before, that our
Discourse and Dispute, is about childrens sanctification of holiness, and you
still run out, to childrens salvation of happiness, whereas this does not
always or necessarily, either Logically, or Theologically follow upon that.
There needs no more or farther Consideration of this Paragraph, but only of
this, that instead of proceeding in Dispute like an Academick and Scholar, you
conclude here like an Epidemick and vulgar, Taking away the subject of the
question, the holiness of children from the faith of the Parents: for you give
instances of Rahab a Heathen, whose Parents were Infidels; she was saved from
the Grace of God, what is that, to her being sanctified from the faith of
Parents: the like is to be thought and said of those first converts.

Besides, you are out of the text, you undertook to expound according to the
mind of the Holy Ghost: for here the Corinthians second Quaere, and the
Apostles second answer (which you are upon) is about the living children of
believers, at least one of them, and their childrens holiness, you instance in
Rahab, a grown person, as were also these first converts (whose Parents were
unbelievers, it is likely, both of them as to Rahab,) and you tell me of their
happiness and salvation being now dead: Well Sir, if you were a young man, or
youth, I would persuade you to go to one of the Universities for all this. But
I go to another, even the last now of your Considerations, and glad I am, that
I am come to the last end of your Considerations, that so having gone through
them, I may return again to my Considerations of my latter and last end, Deuteronomy.
32.29. and make ready to answer my last Enemy and Adversary, which is Death, 1
Cor. 15.

3. If it be a foederal holiness that the Apostle here speaks of, as Mr.
Weinell afirmeth (affirms) and others likewise, I would desire to know,
whether ever any of the seed of Abraham or David did enjoy any priveledg
(privilege) of the Church upon any such account, without or before they had a
command for it? ware (were) they Circumcised, or did they eat the paskall,
(paschal) before they had a command for it? And I pray, show me if you can,
any command in the Gospel for the Parrents (Parents) to admit any of there
(their) children to any Ordinance of the Gospel without faith in there own
persons, or any command in the Gospel for any Minister of the Gospel to admit
persons to any priveledg of the Church without faith in there own persons, or
at least so far as the Ministers of the Gospel can judge.

Sir, I thank you for your four last lines; which being nothing but what you
have Quaered before, and I have answered before, (as you self, or any Reader
may see, if you will review or remember) I may save so much labor and pass by
them with silence, or only bid them, farewell: I see you begin to be weary as
well as my self, or to want new matter, which makes you now here retrace and
retract the old, to requaere and require, what formerly you have done: I look
upon them, as a piece of Recapitulation, as its usual, at the period of a
Discourse, and I shall need to look no farther after them, having made a long
look before, upon the matter of them.

As for the three first lines, you are come now indeed to the Point: your
former, its or suppositions, were but circumferences, or round-abouts.

It is now the second time you have named Mr. Weynell, but not a Sentence or
Argument of his do you mention, much l^sse Argue against, from first to last of
this your Consideration upon 1 Cor. 7. The shortest and sweetest, the finest
and prettiest way of answering and confuting, you have gotten that ever I met
withal, in any man: I would you could or would teach it me, I am not too old
yet to learn any good thing of you; your words in the beginning would have put
upon him a false opinion even your own, about the Matrimonial holiness of the
unbeliever, as if that were this sanctification of the believing consort, which
I put off again, from him to you: now you ascribe unto him and others, and that
rightly, a foederal holiness to be held of them, as meant by the Apostle; and
if you can and will show me (who hold with him the same foederal holiness) that
it is not meant, but only a legitimal holiness, I will be your lawful Attorney
to follow this matter in your name, and moreover your confederate friends.

But if I can and shall show you, (who with the others of your Sect, hold only
a Legitimal holiness) that it is not here meant, but only a foederal holiness,
then you shall be my confederate friend, and moreover my lawful Atturny to
prosecute this business in my name: it is agreed; begin you first, so you have
already, but not to prove any thing, either for your holiness of legitimation,
or against our holiness of federality, and thus you say.

If it be a federal holiness, you desire to know whether any of the seed of
Abraham or David did enjoy any privilege of the Church upon any such account,
without or before they had a command for it, ware they Circumcised or did they
eat the paschal Lamb before they had a command for it?

What! still more rattling without reasoning, and prattling without pressing? I
would you were as desirous to know, as here you pretend, you would then soon
know, that your desire to know, is not a refuting of what others know, nor is
your putting forth a Quaere, a putting down of our Answer, of the foederal
holiness of children. But what do you desire to know, whether any of the seed
of Abraham or David did enjoy any privilege of the Church, upon any such
account, (of the Covenant you must mean) without, or before they had a command
for it? yes, Sir, all the seed of Abraham did enjoy this holiness, they were a
holy seed, and people unto God, because of the Covenant of God made with them,
and so were a peculiar people and privileged Church, before and without a
command; as for your instance, which you bring for proof, were they
Circumcised, or did they eat the paschal Lamb, be fore they had a Command for
it? it is as pitiful a proof, as the instance is impertinent; for our
discourse is about holiness from or under the Covenant, and your return upon
it, is about Circumcission and the paschal Lamb, the Seals of the Covenant,
from and under command; so according, to the proverb, whilst we ask the
question of Onione, you make answer of Garlic, other impertinent instances:
And the proof is as pitiful, for though we should grant it, that none were
Cir. cumcised or did eat the Paschal without or before a Commandment, yet were
they holy, by virtue of Gods Covenant, without and before that Commandment,
yea before and without their being Circumcised, all the seven days before they
came under the Seal, they enjoyed that Church-privilege of holiness, and were
holy from the very Womb and birth; (and some also sanctified in the Womb, yea,
why not all there, saederally holy, being the seed of faithful Parents!) and so
the seed of David, (because you mention it) the child that died the seventh day
(and so a day before Circumeifion) enjoyed the same Church-privilege of
holiness, (from the Covenant) otherwise David could not nor would have said, I
shall go to it, declaring his hopeful assurance of its happiness and being with
God, from its birth-Covenant holiness, knowing that no unclean, or unholy thing
can enter into Heaven, 2 Samuel 12.23.

I deny not, but children of the Jews were holy also by Circumcision, the Seal
of the Covenant, which was commanded them; but they were holy too, before that,
by the Covenant of Grace, which was promised them, and to argue from their
signal or Sacramental holiness, to the denial of their foederal or Covenantal
holiness, when as children have both holinesse^, is to strain or wind up one
bow-string, to the snapping asunder of the other bow-string, when a man has
two strings to his bow.

But (it seems) you would have a command also for childrens holiness by
Covenant: do you make so little account of Gods holy Covenant, as it children
upon that account of their entrance, and being in Covenant with God, could not
or should not be accounted holy? is Gods Commandment only able to joy them of
a Church-privilege, and to make them enjoy it, and not Gods Covenant, and
Promise? when as the Commandment of God, for the holy Seal to be annexed, is
but a branch of the Promise or Covenant of God, and the Covenant goes before
the command, and is as a first step or forerunner precedent of holiness (as I
may so say) unto children; The first holy Church-privilege, is the Promise and
Covenant it self, and the next, is the Seals of the Covenant; Holiness is more
intrinsical to the Covenant, and more extrinsical to the Seal, as manifesting a
discrimination, and difference of holy people from profane and heathenish; so
that children of believers, may be both ways holy, in their order and times,
but primarily and principally holy by Covenant. I will be thy God and the God
of thy seed, are the words and tenor of the Covenant and Promise, and they are
eof force, and efficacy to pronounce, and make holy, both father and children,
that are taken thereinto: yea more (because I am willing to give you full
satisfaction in all your queres and quirkes) there is a Commandment also for
childrens holiness, in those words (though they belong to a part of the
Covenant interwoven with them) Thou shall be my people, thou shall be a holy
Nation, a holy seed: whereupon the Apostle Romans 9.4. being to prove the holy
privileges of the Church, and Nation of the Israelites, says, that to them
pertains the Adoption, the Covenants or Testament, the giving of the Law, the
service of God, and the Promises, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ
came: all which and especially the Covenant and Promises, were sanctifying
Ordinances to the Parents and their seed.

But I hasten to an end, and will give over spending my precious time about
your nifles and trifles; only I cannot but observe you, speaking of children
and their holiness, how you join together, their being Circumcised, and their
eating the paschal Lamb, and both by a Commandment. Take heed what you say,
children of the Jews did they eat of the paschal Lamb, by Commandment of God?
I shall be ready to give you a fir caution, lest you give occasion to a foul
notion. First, therefore be sure of your Commandment, to have it in a
readiness to show; show it now, and then it willb e in more readiness: I have
read over the whole institution of the Passover, and cannot find a syllable
of such a command, for, nor a footstep of such an example of, children eating
of the paschal Lamb: It may be you may find some tuch thing au-ongst the
Rabbis, and Doctors of the Synagogues, (but you, I suppofe, regard them as
little, as you do our Students, and the learned of our Universities:) but is
there any such to be seen in the chair of Moses, or to be read in the
Pentateuch of his books? all that I can meet with is this, that (when their
children should ask their Parents the meaning of the Pesseover) the Parents
were to instruct or Catechiz: them therein, and so prepare them for a
Passover, against the time should come, that they under, stood the service
thereof; in the mean, the memorial of the Angels passing over them in Egypt,
and their passing over the Red Sea into the Wilderness, was so held up, even
amongst their children, Exodus 13.14.

What Is now become of your old Quaere now, what express command have you for
such and such, (I retort it upon your self,) for childrens eating the paschal
Lamb? Every Male-child shall be Circumcised, a command is express for the
Circumsing of children: Deus. 16.16. and sure if chidlren had been to eat of
the paschal Lamb, there would have been as express a command for this; and
whereas Exodus 34 23. Thrice in the year, shall all your men children appear
before the Lord God, the place which he shall choose, whereof one time was, the
feast of the Passover; its granted, as a Commandment, that such children, who
could hold the father by the hand, and walk with him up to the Temple, went
along with him; but wherefore? namely to be instructed, Catechized and blessed
of the Priest, but not to eat of the paschal Lamb, unless: they were of that
grows in years, and in understanding of the mystery: if otherwise, they had
other food than the paschal Lamb, for them of lesser age and knowledge, as also
for the unclean (as some might happen to be) and uncircyncumcised, both at
home, (when they did eat the Passover,) and also at the Temple; as for the
unleavened bread, I suppose the children did eat of that, because for seven
days together all leavened bread was to be put quite and utterly out of the
house, and burnt, insomuch as they must not look upon any, yea, it was under
Gods curse, if any did eat any leavened bread, during those seven days (which
at other times, ordinarily they did:) but for the paschal Lamb, which was to be
eaten up all in that one night, and what remained of it, to be burnt with fire
in the morning. I take it, the children of the Jews did eat nothing of it at
all, who were there, fore had to bed, and laid to sleep, whilst the Parents
were celebrating their evening, and night-service of the Passover. At other
Sacrifices and Offerings, which were not Sacramental, its expressed, it shall
be for Aaron and his sons, for the Priest and his children, as being a part of
their maintenance.

Now this I the rather enlarge upon, to persuade you from your opinion that you
have taken up, I know not where, (yes, I believe I know where you have taken it
up, even where it lay, in-Tombed) that so you may be no occasion of reviving
and raising up and old bruied error, that has lain quiet in its grave these
thousand years and upwards; and that is, The administraing the Lords Supper
unto Infants and children of Chriftians, as necessary and decent.

This opinion was of force in the Roman Church in the days of Pope Innocent
the first (I will not name some others of ancient and reverend remembrance in
that Age, who held the same thing and practice; and did thereby show, that men
standing too much upon their own conceited interpretations of Scriptures, may
fall from the truth, and err from the faith in some particulars; as you, Sir,
have generally done throughtout your whole Letter;) for then He, and the rest
of the Roman Church under him, believed that Infants baptized could not be
saved, except they should participate of the Eucharist; taking their ground
from that Scripture, John 6 53. Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you,
except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life
in you; and therefore they held it the Lords Supper, wherein the flash of the
Son of man is eaten, and his blood drunk, necessary to the life and salvation
of Infants. But this was not the right interpretation of that Text, as which is
not meant of that Eucharistical or Sacramental feasting upon Christ's Body and
Blood, but of a Spiritual Faith, and believing in Christ's Death and Passion.
And hereupon this opinion of Pope innocent the first, and the Roman Church
under him, is since retracted and rejected by Pope Pius the fourth, and the
Roman Church under him, in that Council of Trent (whose Decrees are all held
and canonised, to b^^^lieved upon necessity of salvation) as who have
determined against administration and participation of the Eucharist. as
neither necessary nor decent for Infants.

[How say you to this, you Great Patrons and Imitators of the Church of Rome,
who say she cannot err, at leastwise has not erred? Did the Church of Rome
not err in the days of Pope Innocent? then is she now in an error; does she
not now err herein? then did she formerly err, and conseq tently may err
hereafter.]

But now, if those above named had light upon your Tenet or error (as I think
it) and could have made it hold up, which you only raise and startle (having
the Gift, as any gisted Brother that ever I read, to prove nothing, and affirm
any thing) That the Infants of the Jews did eat of the Paschal Lamb and Supper,
they would have had a far fairer pretext, and faster ground, for the Infants of
Christians to participate of the Eucharistical Cup and Bread of the Lords
Supper; for then they would have pleaded hard for a Commandment of Christian
Infants to partake of the Eucharistical Supper, even in or out of that
Commandment you mention, but show not, of the Jewish Infants to partake of the
Paschal Supper; and pressed it the rather, for that the Eucharistical Supper
succeeds in place under the Gospel, unto the Paschal Supper under the Law; and
rather more, for that the Grace of Christ now exhibited, is of larger extent,
and greater latitude, than when he was to come and be revealed. And I tell you,
these reasons would have troubled much these Tridentine Fathers to have
answered and refelled, more than that Text of John above cited.

But I believe, that you never had any such notion or dream in your head,
either sleeping or waking; nay upon a re-view of your words, I see I may answer
to your Question, and say as you mean, and you never the nearer to what you
aimed at; for you say thus, Did they eat the Paschal Lamb before they had a
Commandent? I answer, They did not eat the Paschal Lamb before they had a
Commandment; you mean so, do you not? and so do I, and what then? therefore
the Jewish children had a Commandment to eat the Paschal Lamb. But this
follows not well, nor will, before you follow this better.

But some others, whose opinion I rather think you follow, than they yours,
they drive it on to another design, as thus, Because the Infants of the Jews
did eat the Passover, as well as they were circumcised, Therefore the Infants
of Christians should eat and drink the Lords Supper as well as be baptized.
This structure is soon pulled down, standing upon a false foundation, even as
the house fell, built upon the slippery sand; and therefore I shall but touch
it, and it sinks or slides. Because the Infants of the Jews did not eat the
Passover, but were only circumcised, Therefore the Infants of Christians are
not to eat and drink the Lords Supper, but only be baptized.

So taking off the Argument against Infant Baptism, from its false and ruinous
foundation, of the Jewish children eating the Paschal Lamb, you were best set
it upon its own proper Basis and build Baptism upon the Lords Supper thus, or
rather pul^ it down by the Lords Supper, thus: If Infants of Christians may be
partakers of Baptism, then also they may be partakers of the Lords Supper; for
why of one Seal of the Covenant, more than another? and if Infants may not be
partakers of the Lords Supper, why then not of Baptism, no more of one Seal
than the other; besides they are capable of the spiritual part of the one
Sacrament, as well as the other. So I have made the Argument as strong for you
as I can; if you can fort fie it yet more, do it quickly, for I am in haste to
answer, as desirous to make an end of these wearisom skirmishes, as to my self,
and tedious discourses, as to the Reader.

What! will you become of Antipaedobaptists, now Propaedocoenists, and grant
Infants sometimes, and sometimes deny them in Argument the Lords Supper, that
you may deprive the of the Lords Baptism? You shall never do it by such
ambidextrous inconsequences, to which the Answer and Reason is very obviou^.

1. Your own Reason and Answer will do it, that from the one Seal ordered and
appointed for Infants, to another Seal not enjoined or instituted for Infants,
the Consequence is vain and invalid; the former I have largely proved, and
disproved the latter clearly; let but the Argument rest till can can disquiet
or disturb it, and I desire no more.

2. From Baptism, which is the Seal Initial, and of Admission due to Infants,
to infer the Lords Supper, which is the Seal Progressional, and of nourishment,
to be also due in present, and partaked of in infancy (like as the other) is as
inconsequent an absurdity, as to infer time to come from present, or perfection
from beginning, or a man from a child, and to join them in one moment, state
and age. Can a man enter into his mothers womb, and be born a babe again? or as
soon as he is born a babe, can he run over the ages, and become a man
presently? When I a child, says the Apostle, I spoke as a child, and
understood as a child, I thought as a child, but when I became a man, I put
away childish things. I mean, Infants may be initiated by the Seal of Baptism
into the Church, and are fitted to have the Graces and Benefies of the Covenant
sealed unto them, but that they are presently perfitted to have the nourishment
and growth of the same Graces sealed and confirmed unto them, by the Lords
Supper, passes mine, and your, as much as their capacity.

It is true, that both Baptism and the Lords Supper do seal the same, and the
whole Covenant and the Graces of the same, but both in their place, order, and
time, so as the prime and main use of Baptism is to be the Seal of Initiation
and Reception into Covenant, and the Lords Supper is the Seal of Augmentation
and Confirmation of the same, as to the main and prime use of it: so as that
Baptism seals the Infants entrance and admission thereinto, which the Lords
Supper does not properly and principally, but only by way of supposition and
testification of a spiritual life and entrance, (such does the spiritual food
of the Lords Supper imply and require aforehand:) So also, as that the Lords
Supper seals the growth and nourishment of the same Graces of the Covenant,
which Baptism does not properly and primarily, but only by way of infusion of
a seed, or laying a foundation of such growth and nourishment (such does the
spiritual life of Baptism tend and proceed to afterward.)

Lastly, Though Infanrs may and ought to be partakers of Baptism, yet may they
not, nor ought to be partakers of the Lords Supper in their infancy, because
the Lords Supper belongs only to such, as can spiritually examine themselves,
and discern the Lords Body, as the Apostle expressly and directly says, 1 Cor.
11.27, 28, 29. whereas Baptism belongs unto Infants of Christians by right of
their being in the holy Covenant of God, and birth of baptized Parents; for
more is required to the Lords Supper, than unto Baptism, of Church Members by
nature and birth: whereas of Aliens and Strangers, more is required of them
unto Baptism, than of Church Members unto the Lords Supper; a public
profession of faith is necessary for the admitting of a Heathen into the
visible Catholic Church by Baptism, and his entering into the Gospel Covenant
for himself and his Seed, and he may presently after be partaker of the Lords
Supper, upon the examination of his faith, for the confirmation of the same.

But Infants, being in Church Covenant by birth, have a just Title and Right to
all the external Privileges in the Church (as being freeborn to them all) in
due time and order, as to Baptism in their infancy, because born members of the
Church, so to the Lords Supper, when by reason of full age and use they have
their senses exercised to discern both good and evil; and this their
Covenant-right remains until it be forfeited by a renunciation of Baptism on
their part, or by excommunication from the other, the Lords Supper, by the
Churches power, when they are either wilful violaters of the Conditions of the
Covenant, or hate to be reformed by wholesome Censures.

If any farther reply (He must be a better replyer than you) That the Infant
baptized can no more discern the Lords Body and Blood in Baptism, than in the
Supper, nor the sign it self in the act of Administration of either Sacrament,
and therefore Baptism is as vainly given it as the Lords Supper. I re-joyn,
That our Infants can and do as well discern the Sacramental Sign, and the thing
signified in Baptism, as well as the Jewish Infants did discern the same in
Circumcision. So that if our Baptism be in vain to ours, their Circumcision was
also in vain to their Children; and the Replyer does but open his mouth against
Heaven, and charge God himself with vanity and folly, for appointing
Circumcision of Infants (and also Baptism of Infants) whereas the Axiom is, God
and Nature does nothing in vain, or foolishly. As therefore the Jewish Infants
were to have the initial Seal of Circumcision, the old Ministration imprinted
upon them in their infancy, to seal up the Covenant unto them, under which they
were born, though they had no such discerning, as is now required of the
Replier to be in the present act of our new Ministration: so our Christian
Infants are to have the initial Seal of Baptism, the new Ministration,
sprinkled upon them In their infancy, to seal up the same Covenant unto them,
under which they are born, though they have no more discerning, than was
mentioned to be in the Jewish Infants then at the past act of their old
Ministration.

And yet neither of these Ordinances vain or ineffectual to either of the
Infant parties. For the efficacy of Baptism (as Circumcision) depends not upon
the act of the Creature discerning and working, (this is but a rank Romance, or
a Roman prank of the Replier,) but upon the free Grace and mercy of God
conveighing and operating; yea Baptism is not only a transient act, as to
sprinkling of water and outward washing, but a permanent and continued act of
the same grace and mercy, as to the inward washing, and application of Chirsts
merits unto all Gods children.

But Jewish infants discerned somewhat, as who had a bodily seeling of the
cutting of their the foreskin of their flesh; and so have our Christian
infants, a bodily feeling of the water laid upon their forehead or faces; but
what is either to the purpose of the spiritual discerning of either action, or
sign as Sacramental to them? they discern somewhat, and this somewhat is
nothing, nothing to the purpose, being but a natural feeling of the coldness of
the water, or sharpness of the knife.

But there is mroe reason, there should be demanded, discerning of the sign
when Baptism is ministered, than there was when Circumcision was given, for this
left a mark or print of it self behind it, so that the Circumcised person,
bare in his body the mark of the Lord Jesus, (to use the Apostles phrase,) and
he did daily discern that visible sign to assure him, that he was sealed into
Covenant with God; but the water leaves no impression upon Baptized infants,
but is either presently wiped off with a Handkercheif by the Midwife, or other
woman (though I think they should not do so, and the Ministers ought to rebuke
them for it,) or shortly after it is dried up of it self, so that the body is
as if it were not washed or wetted at all, and and no mark to be seen outwardly
to put the party in mind of his being sealed into God his peculiar Servant.

But what, and if there be a mark and character, of Baptism, like as of
Circumcision then there is no more reason of discerning in the one party, than
the other.

I do not mean, that mark which Papists hold, is formed in the soul of every
Baptized infant, and inscribed thereby the external action of Baptism, Simply
and barely in it self considered, which they call an Indelible character: For
such is not to be found in Scriptures nor Orthodox writers; such a character,
as may be imprinted and consist without grace, in a soul damned; and besides
its absurd, if not impious to ascribe to an external action of a creature, that
which is the proper act of God, an internal characterising, or indelible
marking in the soul; and they may as well say, the bare and naked external
preaching of the Gospel or remission of sins, does imprint eternal salvation
upon the soul without perceiving any force, or using any faith.

But I mean that mark and character, which the Ancient Orthodox held to be
imprinted in Baptism, which was either that gracious act, or gift never to he
reiterated, and therefore called an indelible character: for a man rightly
baptized, becoming a Turk or Jew, and afterward returning to the faith and
Church of Christ, is in no case to be rebaptized, the virtue of his former
Baptism is not spunged out, but still remainech a vailable: (of which matter I
have spoke largely before) or else the very grace and gife of the holy spirit,
of which the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 1.22. Who has also sealed us, and given
the earnest of the spirit in our hearts, and Ephesians. 1.13. In whom, after ye
believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise; which also may very
truly be called, an indelible seal and character, wheresoever it is inscribed
and imprinted, as it is in the hearts, and souls of many Baptized infants, even
all belonging to the eternal election, and inheritance mentioned, and spoken of
in the Texts above alleged.

Or thirdly, the character of Baptism is that passive power, whereby the party
Baptized is made fit and capable, in due time and order to receive the other
Sacrament, the Lords Supper; whereof without Baptism he were incapable, as
without Circumcision the Jew was of the Passover.

So then there is in both the initial seal, marks or characters; and as much
mark, left upon the face and forehead of the infant Baptized, as there was upon
your head and face, when you were dopt, or dipped over both, in the Pond or River
you wot off; and though the outward mark were more permanent in Circumcision,
being done and engraven upon, and into the flesh by incision, yet there was an
outward mark in Baptism (though more transient.) done, and laid upon the face,
and flesh by aspersion or infusion, as anciently by immersion,

But neither was the one character or mark more discernable to the one, the
Circumcised infant, then the other to the Baptized infant: neither if it was,
was it more available to the participation of the Passover, then the other to
the partaking of the Lords Supper; or more acceptable to God, who though he set
sometimes an outward mark upon them that mourned, Ezekiel. 9. and so and outward
mark upon the houses of the Egyptians, for good ends and purposes, and so
appointed the external elements and actions both of Circumcision, and Baptism
to be holy, and profitable signs and seals, yet are not the outward marks in
the flesh, or the sensitive discernings of the sings, the excellencies of
Circumsion, or the eminencies of Baptism; nor is God taken only, or chiefly
delighted with beholding such external services and administrations; who
required these at your hands, these only or chiefly? when therefore the Jewish
infants came to years of discretion and discerning; God looked for and called
for, not the Circumcision of the flesh, but for the Circumcision of the heart;
this was the mark he looked for, and upon in his sheep, the Israelites: and and
so likewise, when Christian infants shall attain to the age of discerning and
understanding, God will look for and upon, not so much the water in or upon the
face, which was the mark of flesh, as the blood of Christ in the heart, which
is the mark of the Spirit.

And this is that I conclude with; As one of your Baptized, and rebaptized
adult proselytes, may have the sign of water, and discern the sign in the very
act with the eye of his flesh, and yet be a gross heritique, and a vile
hypocrite, yea a very reprobate; So an infant may be, and but once Baptized,
and that in its infancy, and want your discerning of the sign, and yet when he
comes to years of discretion, prove a holy, pious, honest, orthodox and worthy
Christian.

But now that, according to our agreement, you and others have spoken first,
all you had, and have to say for your legitimal holiness to be here meant,
against the federal holiness of children of Christians Baptized: (which all, is
but very little, very nothing,) it is my turn now to say something for our
federal holiness to be (...) a meant, and against your legitimal holiness;
which (...) also little, yet something, only a small addition to whom have
already enlarged upon, in my answer to you hereabouts, to be as a conclusion to
the premises, and a performance of my promises.

I say then, that the Apostle speaking of the children of Parents, of whom one
is a believer the other an infidel, and saying that they are not unclean but
holy, does not mean, holiness by legitimation, as thus, your children are not
bastards, but lawfully begotten and born, as you, and other of the separation
do expound it, insisting in the steps of the Jesuits, and in the way of Rome,
from which and whom, notwithstanding you pretend a separation as much, yea have
taken a solemn Covenant for the extirpating of Popery. It is true such a
holiness is here spoken of, and meant as is opposite to uncleanness, but to
what uncleanness? the uncleanness of Idolatry, and Paganism, (for so these are
called in Scripture phrase, uncleanness and even spiritual Adultery and
Fornication, and all Idolaters and Heathens are called harlots, and said to go
a Whoring after other gods) but you and your genuine Expositors, oppose that
holiness, to another uncleanness, only which is bodily adultery, fornication
and uncleanness, and so give us, as the genuine sense of those words, else were
your children unclean, that is bastards, but now they are holy, lawfully born,
and no bastards; a genuine sense indeed as you call, and according to the lust
of the flesh, more than the mind of the Spirit, as you boasted in the
beginning of your exposition of this verse.

If this had been all the matter, the Corinthian couples, know this particular
better than the Apostle himself, who knew more than they all, of this matter of
holiness; they needed not to have sent to him for his opinion and resolution,
to know whether their children were bastards or no, who knew themselves, being
of the civil Heathens, to be lawfully married according to the Laws and Customs
of their Nations, and so their issue to be legitimate; they were so fully
assured of that and this, that they could have made evidence, and given
satisfaction to the Apostle, rather, then needed to have the one, or take the
other from him.

And whereas its held of you, and all of us, that the Apostle here answers a
scruple or case of Conscience, which the believing party, joined with an
unbelieving yoke fellow propounded unto him, (as before about their conjugal
society, so) about their natal or natural issue, whether it was to be counted
to the people of God, after the believing party, or as alien from God, after
the unbelieving party; he answers it clearly and pertinently, their children
were not unclean, but holy, by which if he had meant, they are not bastards,
but legitimates; the incomparably learned and Logical Disputer, St. Paul had
not answered to the business, and question propounded (for they made no
question of the legitimacy of their issue, but of the holiness of their state)
and the exquisitely prudent, and Theological discerner, had very meanly
resolved their doubt, and but very cloudily elucidated their scruple, and
afforded no peace as all to their Consciences in this, but rather involved them
in farther troubles. For the whole City of Corinth, and all the Heathen
Regions, and conjugal couples emongst them, would have been disturbed, and
disquieted in their Consciences, at this case of Conscience so resolved by the
Apostle, and would have been filled with confusion, ready to have laid hands on
Paul, where they could meet him, and to say of him, This is he that has turned
the world up-side-down, and is come hither also to be a setter forth of strange
resolves and doctrines; yea to take and apprehnd him, and bring him unto
Areopagus, the greatest Court of the Heathens, for calling them all Whores and
Adulterers, and their children bastards and illegitimates, by this his
resolution, if it were according to your interpretation.

Look to it, Sir, for you are in danger to be called in question for this days
uproare, and this trouble of Conscience amongst the poor Heathen, there being
no cause whereby you can give an account of this con-course and rugged
interpretation. For, (observe it I pray) if the Apostle saying, the unbelieving
wife is sanctified by the husband, and the unbelieving husband be sanctified by
the wise, else were their children unclean, did mean, else were they bastards,
according to your interpretation; does not he, or rather do not you make him,
call all those children bastards, whose both Parents were or are unbelievers?
it is palpable, you do; for if the unbelieving party were not sanctified by the
believing, then were they unclean, that is, bastards you say; and in so saying,
you say thus much, That all children of those Parents, whereof the one is not
sanctified by the other, are unclean, that is, bastards; for the former
proposition being conditional and hypothetical, were not true, if this
proposition, which is pofitive, and categorical were not true: or more plainly,
I will resolve the truth of the Apostles sequel, (the unbelieving husband is
sanctified by the wife, etc. else were your children unclean:) into this
proposition, from which it flows, namely, All the children of an unbeliever
are unclean, unless the unbelieving husband be sanctified by a believing wife,
or the unbelieving wife be sanctified by a believing husband, for generation
and coition, as I have said: Now give you the sense, and bring in your
interpretation of it. All the children of an unbeliever are bastards, unless
the unbelieving husband be sanctified by a believing wife, or an unbelieving
wife be sanctified by a believing husband, for generation and coition: and then
tell me whether you do not make the Apostle say, or rather say your self, that
all the children of the Heathen and unbelieving Parents, of which the one is
not sanctified by the other believing are bastards, notwithstanding born of
both Parents in lawful wedlock according to the Laws and Customs of Nations.

If the Apostle Paul had preached this doctrine, that you by your Exposition
would seem to make him, he would have been in many more perils and hazards,
whilst he passed through the Pagan and Heathen Nations, than he was, and would
not have converted so many of them as he did; and I would wish you to be very
wary, when you go over to the Savages in New England, and the Pagans in our
West Indes, that you broach not this either doctrine or interpretation, amongst
them, lest the Parents there and husbands, and especially the mothers and wifes
fly in your face, and all to scratch you and scald you, for calling and making
their children bastards; and left the children (...) come forth out of the
Cities, and mock you, and throw stones at you, or words as hard; Go up thou
baldhead, (he interpretation is bald indeed, and has not one hair of a
rational Writer, whatsoever the head is or has under the cap, I know not) and
the she Bears come out of the Wood, and tear the false Prophet and interpreter,
instead of the true children and no bastards.

What a man are you, Sir, that thus fill the world with bastards, by such your
interpretation, I mean the world of Pagans and Heathens, where man and wife
being neither of them believers, and so neither sanctified by the other, their
children must be unclean bastards; according to your doctrine and Exposition,
thus instead of satisfying and pacifying the doubtful and scrupulous
consciences of some converted yoke fellows, the other remaining unconverted you
will trouble, and disquiet a world of consciences, or the conscience of the
greater part of the world, which being unconverted, and lying in infidelity,
must sadly look upon their issue as bastardly and illegitimate, because
unclean. Yea this will make such mutinies, and insurrections in those Kingdoms,
that there will be no Conscience of peace made (as no peace of conscience,)
successions in them, and all inheritances may be hereby questioned and
overthrown, by this your Divinity, although it be not good Humanity: Yea, and
those worthy Primitive Christians converted by the Apostles, who were born in
Paganism, of both Infidel Parents, must lie under your censure and sense of
bastardy, until you release them; and the very father of the faithful, Abraham
himself, cannot escape you, but by your exposition must be a bastard too, as
whose Parents were Idolaters both, and servers of other gods, than the true
one, Jos. 24.2.

I pray you, Sir, you that pretend so much to the language of the Spirit (as if
it were your Mother Tongue, the cloven Tongue of the Spirit,) as also to
exposition according to the mind of the Spirit, as you said of your self, even
now, (as if you were the Spirits Secretary or Clerk of its Closet) show me such
a language of the Spirit, such a mind of the Spirit, in any one Text
throughout the whole Bible (for this in hand, fails of it,) where a child, or
children of two unbelieving or Infidel Parents, lawfully married together, are
called, or but intimated bastards; and will you have the face and impudency,
without any exemplary Text or parallel Scripture, or miraculous gift of
Prophecy (it would be miraculous indeed, if you were so gifted, but indeed
miraculous gifts are ceased, and they were for confirmation of Truths, not for
confusion of them, as are your prophesyings) to affirm such children bastards,
as you cannot avoid it, whilst you interpret, the children (in St. Paul)
whereof but one of the Parents in lawful wedlock is an Infidel or unbeliever,
are therefore caleld holy, because they are legitimates, or lawfully born, and
not bastards; and when you have done it, or before you do it, to call it the
genuine sense, and meaning of the Text, and to father it, (as it were) upon the
Spirit, to be an exposition according to the mind thereof: And so now having
gone thus far, against your interpretation of bastardly uncleanness, and
legitimal holiness; I shall now come back to mine, (which is also the
Exposition generally of all Orthodox Baptist Protestants, and I may add more
truly, an Exposition according to the mind of the Spirit, and the very genuine
sense of the Text.

For I suppose you will not deny, but the mind of the Spirit was in Paul; Now
Paul was of this mind, you must confess it, That children of, though but one
Christian Parent, were holy, in the Scripture phrase, in the Spirits language,
in the Churchs relation: and if they be judged and reputed such esteemed, and
spoken of as such by Paul, I shall not hereafter much mind or regard, what
they are in your or others minds and meanings, expositions and
interpretations. For if the Apostle reputeth them so, then God reputeth them
so: in some things the Apostle said, I, but not the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.10. in
other, not I, but the Lord, 12 ver. but in this, I, and the Lord, for not I,
(says he) i.e.) I, only, but the Lord also, verse 14. the believing wife is
sanctified by the husband, etc. else were your children unclean, but now they
are holy: I said before, that such holiness is here meant and spoken of, as is
opposite to uncleanness, as appears in the very words, placed and set in
opposition, one to the other, (else they were unclean, but now they are holy:)
but to what uncelanness? not to the uncleanness of bastardy, as you will have
it, to make up a holiness only of legitimation, both which I have refelled:
but the uncleanness of infidelity, or a state out of Covenant, as our Divines
will have it, to make up the holiness of these children, a holiness of
federation, or federal holiness.

For so this state out of Covenant, as Infidelity and Paganism and Idolatry, is
very often styled and called uncleanness, as I touched before, and such Infidel
and Idolatrous Parents or people, are even named Adulterers and Fornicators,
and said to go a Whoring after strange gods or Idols, and so its the condition,
and denomination of their children to be called unclean, all after a Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical sense.

But you cannot show me, where by unclean are meant bastards, though bastards
may be called unclean; for where the unclean persons are reckoned up, bastards
are not mentioned: But if this must go for an Exposition of the Text, and that
according to the mind of the Spirit, as thus, unclean, (i.e.) Bastards, then
the terms or words must go or run true, both ways, backward and forward, that
bastards are unclean, and the unclean are bastards. And whereas bastards
amongst the Jews might not, by their Laws bear any Office in Magistracy
ordinarily: (for Jephthah was extraordinarily chosen, by God and the people for
this valor) nor sit in the Sanctuary, nor execute any Priestly Office, as over
the Congregation of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 13.7. (like as by the Civil Laws, they
could not enjoy Inheritances,) yet they were Circumcised, and might eat the
Passover, and had free access to the Temple, and Tabernacle, to perform
worship and hear the Law, and were federally holy, as any legitimates.

But for the particular of infants holiness, I say, 1. in general, Any person,
or family (for so it was at first, in Abraham) or Nation (as afterward it was
with the Jews, and is now with the Gentiles) that are in Covenant with God, and
enjoy the Ordinances of his grace and mercy, do also, by virtue of Gods
Promise, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, convey to their issue and
posterity, a state and privilege, (and so rather, it is the joint Covenant made
by God with both together, the Parent, and his issue and posterity,) to be
reputed of a holy, and clean society and Congregation before God, from the
other Pagan and heathenish world, and so the child or children born of such
Parents in Covenant, to be truly holy, like as the Parent, because of the
Covenant.

Not that insants have any real personal qualitative holiness in them, (which
is and must be in all true believers, whither Parents or children, to make them
acceptable to God, as to justification and Salvation) whom I confess, though
born within the Church, and of believing Parents, to be born in sin, naturally,
and be unclean, children of wrath by nature, as well as others, the children of
Pagans, without the Church. But I say, they have a federal and parental, (so it
may be called by a savory mouth) and relative or imputative holiness, put upon
them by the Covenant of God, and brought forth or executed on them, by, or at
their birth of believing Parents, which is sufficient and enough to make them
pass in the eyes of God, and in the face of the visible Church, for clean and
holy; or if not, their professions of the faith of Christ (for you will not
deny them to be professors of Christ, and members of the Church in part and in
kind, at leastwise) by the mouth of their Sureties presenting them, and
speaking for them, this will bear them out, to be holy likewise.

And what if, I should tell you in your ear, that Christian infants in Covenant
with God, are holy too, by an inward holiness also, (are not all inward
sanctifying graces, effects of Gods Covenant, and who knows when God, as
where, he effects them?) you, perhaps, would stop that ear, cry out. Then
grace, which only makes holy, comes successively and is derived by nature,
and Parents shall be the authors, and conveighers of grace and holiness to
their children. No such matter, Sir, For the children are primitively holy with
the Parents by the Covenant, as copartners and confederates with them therein;
(I will be thy God and the God of thy seed) not derivatively holy from the
Parents, as solely or first partners and prefederates without these: Christian
Parents and children are both, joint confederates, I say, and do both draw and
derive together their holiness, as other privileges, from the Covenant and
Tenor of grace therein, and not successively from one another, children from
Parents derivatively, as you fondly fancy to your self, and erroniously
imagine. The which truth may also serve much, to clear off those cloudy
difficulties, so much pressed by the Anabaptistical party, from the Jesuitical
side, about infants being Baptized, sanctified saved by the faith of their
Parents, as they use to blate and b^^e abroad.

You, like enough before you will believe any holiness in them, would have them
show some such thing, either in words before they can speak, and whilst they
are infants, that is, nonfants; or indeed, before they have any idoneity of
instruments and ability to act. (Have patience a while, and you may hear them
speak the words, and see them do some acts of holiness.) What! are you so
sensual, all for sense, and so altogether lead by sense, that nothing, but a
sensative or sensible manifestation of holiness in children will be believed by
you? I had thought, you had walked by faith, and not by sight; you believe a
holiness, in other things, in Faith, in the Word, in the Sacraments, in the
Church of God, and in all things, which the holy Scriptures, the oracles of
holiness, have pronounced holy, though you have not a visible and sensible
demonstration of holiness in them (you walk by faith there and not by fight)
and why cannot you believe a holiness, in children of Christian Parents in
Covernant with God, though they show forth no sensible effects of such
holiness, seeing also the same holy Scripture, does call them holy, and not
unclean, and so supplying their defect of speech and action, gives you what
you ask, even a sensible manifestation of their holiness, and speaks them holy
unto your ears, not declares them holy to your eyes, (so you may now walk by
sight, and hear say, not by faith and hope, limping and halting therein, for
except you shall see in their hands, and tongues, the prints of holiness in
works, and words, and (perhaps) thrust your fingers into their fides, to feel
the holiness of their hearts too, in affections and thoughts, you will not
believe.

What and if our Savior Christ should now, as once, take one of our little
children in Covenant with him, and set it before you, and say, whosoever
humbles himself as a little child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of
Heaven, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven? would it not be strange for you,
to tell him, you see no such (yet you hear of such) humility, lowliness,
meakness, mildness, innocence, in children: and is it not a like, to tell him,
you see no such holiness here, when you hear of it, from the mouth of Christ,
his and this Apostle Paul here saying, They are holy; But that I have said it
before and already, I would say, that even children show themselves more
bumble, lowly, meek, mild, and innocent, and so more holy, than a great many of
your grown Professors, and grand Pretenders unto holiness and all those graces;
let their holiness and other graces rest but a while, as seed hidden up in
their hearts, or wrapped up in Gods Covenant with them, and see, if afterward
they do not show it, and their holiness break not forth as the light at noon
day, that was within the cloud, or as the seed in harvest, that was within the
clod; and in the mean time, show me thy faith by thy works, and thy holiness,
by thy words; and learn to speak better of childrens holiness, and to do better
with children for their holiness, even so well, as to let them be Baptized.

But besides this in hand, there are two eminent Texts, that hold out infants
of Christians, their holiness by Covenant: the one is, Romans 11.16. If the first
fruit be holy, the lump also is holy, and if the root be holy, so are the
branches. I know the stream of our Divine Advocates for Infant Baptism run
altogether, and out of this Text, upon a derivative holiness from the Parents
or Ancestors, to their children, which notwithstanding they call and make a
federal holiness; I am not willing, in my old and infirm days, to strive or
swim against a stream, only I will be bold to venture, and wade so far, as to
hint again, and mention unto those akilful steersmen, now especially that the
waters of strife about Infant Baptism are risen high, what great difficulties,
and intricate Objections are laid upon the Point, as pleaded and held to be
derived from the faith or holiness of Parents and Ancestors, the which, for my
part, I have not found so easy to extricate and shake off; though I have said
something for it, and enough against my Antipoedo baptist hare. I do therefore
refer this to better Confideration, whether our Plea for Infant Baptism would
not be stronger, cleerer, and more consonant to the Truth, (not that I any way
do implead the other, as weak, dark, or dissonant) if it be made directly and
primitively from the Covenant it self, and the says (of which before much is
said) and the holiness of children themselves thereby.

I see indeed, our worthy Divines do interpret, and call the derivative
holiness, from Parents to their children, a federal holiness too; and so we all
agree together in our general meanings: but would it not be more properly, and
rightly called, a federal holiness, if it were said to be derived from the
Covenant of God, as to Parents, so to children, to both jointly, equally and
indifferently made? And methinks the Text above cited speaks clear for it,
somewhat clearer in the Original than in the Translation, as to the former
part, but if the first fruit (be) holy, And, or so, the lump is; if the root
(be) holy, And, or so, the branches are. And thus we shall not need to fly to
Parental holiness, as sometimes we are driven (or faith, of which before,) for
the upholding of holiness in children, seeing we may have federal holiness for
them; the which I know not, but that it may be called a personal holiness,
(sure it is not an abstract Metaphysical, Metaphorical, or an aerial imaginary
notion) I say a personal holiness, being in or upon the persons of children, as
the Covenant is, and as other relative privileges, and the imputative
righteousness of Christ are. If I err in any thing here, I will not be either
Here^ique or Scismatique, for I am ready to retract, if convinced, no^ willing
to divide from the differing: Either way, it will be still a federal holiness,
and good either way against you, Sir. And therefore also, some of those our
Divines do Expound the holy Root, and first fruit, in St. Paul, to be the
Covenant, (and in a good sense and sounding to that I have said, it may be so)
upon which Abraham and his seed, and so along, all believing Parents and their,
children, do grow together as holy lumps and branches; and it is by virtue of
such Covenant, that Abraham and every believing Parent, is called and meant,
the holy root and first fruits, and their children or posterity, the holy
branches or lump.

For the holy Covenant stayed not, and determined in Abraham, and his seed,
Isaac and Jacob, (as some say) because the Covenant runs in their names only,
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, as if that were
meant, when God Covenanted, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed; God
often renewed this his Covenant with that people, even after those Patriarchs
were deceased, and the Covenant entered into with Abraham, was an everlasting
Covenant, and comprehended under it all Nations, as the Jews, even the
Gentiles, as many as the Lord our God should call to the says of Abraham, had
a share therein, and in the eternal privileges thereof, both Parents and
children, and were both holy thereby before the Lord, as in others and the
Churches account. For not only the Jewish children the natural branches of
their father Abraham, (if he be the holy root, as he is, but by virtue and in
respect of the Covenant) are holy and partakers of holiness, and the other
privileges thereof; but even so Gentilish children, the natural branches of
their converted Parents or Parent, being also a holy root, as its said, the
root of Jesse, Esa. 11. still by virtue and in respect of the Covenant, are
holy, and partakers of holiness and other privileges thereof: But, (to derive
the Pedigree, as I may so call it, of holiness of children to its first
original and root,) I think, I may safely say, that all Parents and their
children, both Gentilish and Jewish, even up to Abraham and his seed Isaac,
were holy branches, and partakers of holiness, and other privileges, from the
Covenant it self, as the first original and root of their holiness.

Another Text there is, that does eminently hold out the holiness of Christian
infants by Covenant, which is Gal. 2.25. We who are Jews by nature, and not
sinners of the Gentiles: (of which because I have had a former occasion to say
something, I shall need to add but a little,) there Jews by nature or birth,
are put in opposition to sinners of the Gentiles, just as he^e the holy
children, are to the unclean; And these two Texts seem to be parallel. As
therefore Jews by nature or born Jews, in contradistinction to sinners of the
Gentiles, were holy federally, by being born in and under Covenant, and of
Parents in and under Covenant; so Christians by natures or born Christians, in
contradiction to born Heathens, are holy federally, by being born in Covenant,
and of Parents in Covenant; our children must be one of the two, holy or
unclean, Christians by nature, or birth, or sinners of the Gentiles; but
unclean they are not, or sinners of the Gentiles or Pagans, therefore t^^y are
born Christians and holy, with the holiness external of the Covenant, and also
the holiness particular of the Parents, and the chosen Nation in Covenant.

Besides that, they are dedicated and consecrated to God, and designed to
holiness, as Candidates thereof (as some of the Fathers were wont to call the
infants of Christians,) and therefore are holy, as the Temple is holy, the
Sabbath is holy, the Priests were holy.

Again, Moses and the Prophets every where call the Jews, a holy Nation, and
holy people, in respect, and by virtue of the Covenant; and shall not the
children of that Nation and people, being also in Covenant, be holy federally
too? yea, in therefore called, a holy seed, Ezra 9.3. in Ezekiel. 36.38. a holy
flock is the flock of Jerusalem, and shall not the little Lambs, a great part
of the flock, be holy too? The visible Catholic Church is holy, and so are
particular visible Churches, and all the members of the same are federally
holy, and therefore also little children are so, who are members of the same,
even as the little finger is a member of the body, and partaker of the bodily
external cleanness.

Lastly, is not the external Covenant it self holy? why then, sure, all who are
taken and assumed into it, are Covenantly holy, and they are, Parents and their
children.

And so now lastly, I will shut up this Point, (as I have done often before,
even all along before,) with this Syllogism, to bring you still into more love,
and liking of our University Arts and Sciences, one whereof is, Logical
syllogising; and it shall be this.

All persons in the Church, holy, and so reputed by the Apostle to be, by their
being in, and under the holy Covenant of God, or by being children of a
believing Parent or Parents in Covenant, may and ought to have the holy Initial
Seal of that Covenant, which in the Gospel is, Baptism.

But all infants in the Church of believing Parents, are such persons, holy,
and so reputed by the Apostle, to be by their being in and under the holy
Covenant, or by being children of a believing Parent or Parents in Covenant.

Therefore all infants in the Church, may and ought to have the holy initial
Seal of the Covenant, which in the Gospel is, Baptism.

You will now, Sir, of your self (I shall not need to urge or advise you,)
being experienced and practiced often before therein, now the eighth time, with
much facility, deny the conclusion.

For the first Proposition you cannot deny, it being grounded out of that Text,
Act. 10.47. where Peter says, Can any man forbid water, that those should not
be Baptized, who have received the holy Spirit? and, as is largely explained
and proved before; as also upon this Reason deducible hence, that where
holiness is, the Spirit is, and where the Spirit is, Christ is, and where
Christ is, the Covenant is, and where the Covenant is, the Seal initial,
namely, Baptism, may and ought to be.

For the second Proposition, you cannot deny it, being the express affertion
of Paul here; But now they are holy, namely, their children.

And whereas I have put in my whole Discourse, all these my eight or nine
Arguments into the form of a Syllogism, I have done is the better to inform
you, (to which you pretend to be willing, in the close of your Letter.) I hope
you will taste it now at last the better though savouring much of our
University Arts, and Humane learning, as consonant and agreeing, subservient
and conducing, to the Divine wisdom, and of good use for the understanding,
and Expounding of the Scriptures written in the learned Tongues and Languages,
and often referring to Moral and Phylosophical matters; of which I have spoken
largely before, and should not have mentioned again, but that you have another
fling at the same, in the close of your Letter, saying, that it appears, that
the most learned by Humane learning, want the learning of the Spirit to
interperate (interpret) Scripture.

It is true, that some of the learned by Humane learning, may and do want the
learning of the Spirit to interpret Scripture; but do not more of the ignorant,
by their Humane ignorance much more want the same? yet none of the learned, and
much less of the most learned, do by humane learning (as you must mean, though
you point not your words, with any Comae's or Colons, for want of Humane
learning) by Humane learning, I say, want the learning of the Spirit, seeing
the Spirit of God has both taught it at first, as the Author of it, and made
much use of it, practicing some of it in the Scripture, and as Hagar and Sarah,
may dwell together in the same house; humane learning, as you call it, and the
learning of the Spirit, may keep together in the same head-house, so long as
Hagar is an obedient handmaid to her Mistress Sarah, and Humane learning humbly
submits, and is servant, or subservient unto the learning of the Spirit, and
the Mysteries of it. But of this matter there is enough written before; and how
it should now at the last appear to you, that the most learned by Humane
learning, do want the learning of the Spirit, to interpret Scripture, (if you
mean it of those who interpret the Scriptures for Infant Baptism, against you)
it is marvelous to me; for I will instance but in this one, and last
interpretation of 1 Cor. 7.14. But now they are holy: We interpret it, holy
federally, as who are born in Covenant with God, and of a believing Parent or
Parents in Covenant with God, and so are not unclean, as the Gentiles out of
Covenant; but you interpret it, holy legitimally, as who are lawfully born of
Parents in wedlock according to the Law, and so are not unclean, as bastards
born out of wedlock: now do you remember your words, four times repeated in one
of your pages, I will repeat them once more for you, but to you, Judge you, but
judge you righteous judgment, for God will: judge you, I say, whether of the
interpretations savours most of Humane learning, or the learning of the Spirit,
yours or ours? does it not clearly appear to your eyes, that your
interpretation is a mere Humane, natural, carnal, political interpretation, and
such as you can bring no word or example for, from the learning of the Spirit,
the Scriptures, where holy are called or meant, legitimates; and unclean,
bastards; and therefore it is a mere Humane learning, and not agreeable to the
learning of the Spirit, nay repugnant to it, for by the learning of the Spirit,
all bastards are not unclean, nor all legitimates, holy.

But our interpretation is a very Divine, gracious, spiritual, Ecclesiastical
interpretation, and such as I have brought both word and example for, from the
Scriptures, the learning of the Scriptures, where all in Covenant with God, or
born of Christians, or one Christian Parent, are styled holy, and all childeren
born out of Covenant, or of Parents both Heathens, are called unclean; and
therefore ours is the very learning of the Spirit, (to take your words now out
of your mouth, and put them into ours, as justly I may) according to the mind
of the Spirit, as who declared unto us, in the Scriptures, and we from it, to
you, that all Covenanters, born of Covenanters with God, are holy, and all out
of Covenant, and born of such as are out of Covenant, are unclean.

And so now by this (as indeed by all, or most of the Scriptures, that you have
made use of throughout your whole Letter, which rather you have made an abuse
of) it will appear, yea does, that your self is one of them, the most learned
by Humane learning, (certainly, Sir, for all your talk against it, you have
been at the University, and gotten up some Humane learning, and are a great
Practitioner therein, as appears by this, and your other interpretations) yea,
I take you to be a man, if not a Master of Arts and Humane learning, more than
of the learning of the Spirit (though pretending to this more) a better
Humanist than Divine, or rather an Alchymist, who can extract out of the
Spirits holy, in Scripture, the spirit and flesh to a child lawfully born, and
out of spirits unclean, the quintessence of a bastard.

Do you call this, the learning of the Spirit, to Interperate Scriptures with
all? (for so you write, and show your self to be good at expounding, as you are
at spelling, your Orthography and Orthodoxy being both alike,) do you interpret
the Scripture by your learning of the Spirit? no sure, you Interperate
(interpret) Scripture rather, by the ignorance and illiterature of your flesh;
Interperate, (what is that?) is it not Intemperate, or interprate? sure it is
not, to interpret Scripture: No marvel indeed if you would have me, To confider
of these things you have written, with an unbiassed spirit, and a self-denying
humble spirit such as those spirits are that are guided by the spirit of the
Lord: For surely, then your spirit has not been guided by the Spirit of the
Lord, as which is, or has been in your Letter, a biased spirit, and an all
other, besides your self, denying, proud spirit; and therefore without any just
ground, you arrogate those words of the Apostle, to your own practice, saying
as he, 2 Cor. 2.17. We are not as many, which corrupt, or deal deceitfully with
the Word, but as of sene^rity (sincerity) but as of God, in the sight of God
speak we in Christ: What you speak, when you are teaching, and expounding, or
praying, I know not; this I know, by the experience you have given of your self
to me, that in your writing and citing Scriptures in your Letter, you are the
most corrupter, and the most deceiptful dealer, and wrester also of Scripture,
that ever I read; I do not know many, scarce any, that go beyond you, except
your Masters and Tutours, you know whom I mean; and your sincerity is as false
spoken, as written of you; if as of sincerity, as of God, in the sight of God,
you shall speak in Christ, it will be acceptable, as to God, so to man and my
self, if renouncing the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness,
not handling the Word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth,
you commend your self to every man's conscience in the sight of God, as you add
of your self, 2 Cor. 4.2. Comparing spiritual things with spiritual; but so
you did not, when you compared the holy and legitimates together, and the
unclean with bastards (to go no farther backward,) And Scripture with
Scripture, for Scripture is the best Interpreter of Scripture, (neither did you
so, when you could find no Scripture to compare with 1 Cor. 7.14. that either
did interpret or intimate, bastards to be unclean, and much less fignified by
this word there, or legitimates to be holy, and much less meant by this word
there.

For that in the close of your Letter, which concerns my self in particular,
as That you should gladly see better fruits from me, If I knew what fruits you
mean, I should soon tell you whether or no, I should ever glad you so much as
to see them; but if they relate to which immediately goes before them, the
wresting of Scriptures by Humane learning, I must tell you, that the root that
I am graffed into, and which bears me, shall ever (I hope) bring forth better
fruits, though I question your gladness in seeing them, as being opposite to
your fruits; who throughout your whole Letter have been gathering, yea, pulling
and enforcing, thorns of grapes, and thistles of figs, diverse errorneous
Tenets from Texts that will not, nor can, bear them, the which I am sorry to
see from you.

And for your entreating me to lay aside all selfe-ends and by-respects, you
must pardon me herein, for I took up the defense of my self, and my Ministry
and Infant Baptism, as well as of others, making both my end, next unto Gods
glory, and the truth (without any other by respects) which I must not upon your
request lay aside: but for that which follows; I have seriously considered
the things and words of God spoken by the Spirit of God in the Scriptures,
which were all written for our learning and imitation, yea moreover have
informed you in particular, how far forth all which were written for our
learning, were written for our imitation, some of them, and some of them not,
which you indistinctly and confusedly jumble together; yea, and according to
your farther entreaty, I have turned to and looked into all those Scriptures
you have but quoted and named and not written out for want of time as you say,
and have writ out all the words of most of them, (as who never want time to
search out the Truth of the Scriptures, if I want not health:)

Your self best know, whether it was for want of time, or for want of truth,
you did not transcribe the words, as making, most an end, nothing to the
purpose or Point, for which you set down and multiplied Chapters and Verses by
their figures only, and whether this was, Not walking in craftiness, nor
handling the Word of God deceiptfully, but by a manifestation of the Truth, a
commending your self to every man's Conscience, whether this was of sincerity,
as of God, as in the sight of God spoken or written, judge you, but judge
righteous judgment, for God will, who tries the heart, etc.

For that in the close still of your Letter, which concerns your self, it is
your desire, that wherein you have erred I would inform you by plain Scripture,
It is done to your hand, but, I fear it is not gone to your heart, whose heart
was and is, (I surmise) resolved before hand, as your hand laid upon your heart
to that purpose, of not acknowledging any error, or submitting to information;
for what hope or likelihood is there hereof, when as presently you add, You
are confident hear (here) is nothing aserted (asserted) nor queared but will
now appear a truth proved by Scriptures, and likewise will appear at the
great day? Wherefore then do you entreat me, to weigh things seriously, and if
you have erred in any thing, to inform you, when as you are confident here is
nothing asserted or quaered, but will now appear a truth? just as the man in
the Gospel professed to follow our Savior Christ, and went away presently
about other matters of no such consequence; you likewise say, you will be
informed by me, wherein you have erred, and in the next words you are confident
of nothing asserted or quaered by you here, but the very Truth. I am persuaded
the work will be much alike, the informing you, to the laying down of any error
of yours, and the washing of a Leopard, to the putting off any of its spots;
But I should gladly see better fruits from you, than such a non resolution and
brasse-forehead, (which for the most part is in most of the Revolters from our
Church and the Truth) as not to be conformed and converted, when informed,
confuted, notwithstanding, Though I have labored in vain, and spent my
strength for naught, and in vain, yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and
my work with my God, Isa, 49.4.

But, Sir, are you confident that there is nothing ^sserted or quaered, but
will appear a Truth? what that which is asserted by you may appear, let pass,
bu^ sure, that which is quaered by you here, will not now appear a Truth;
neither now, nor never will it be a Truth, no not at the great day, that which
is quaered only; your Quaeres were your judgment, as you affirmed before, now
you affirm, they are a Truth, proved by Scriptures, and yet but propounded in
Quaeres; and what will they be at the last? your Quaeres will appea (you say) a
Truth also, at the last and great day; you will be deceived, then, as now; for
your Quaeres, are not Resolutions, Decrees, Axioms, but Quaeres; it does not
yet appear what is Truth in them, to your self or any others, put them out of
Question, into Propositions, come out of your Quaeres, into your Resolves, and
then I will tell you, whether now in the later little days they do, or in that
last great day, they will appear a Truth or Truths.

In particular, (to pass by your Questions and Quaeres,) your Sacrilegious
Usurpation to Preach, Baptize, and distribute the Sacramental Bread and Wine,
your injurious Detension of Christian Infants from Baptism, the Seal of the
Covenant God made with them also; your ridiculous dopping and plunging of grown
persons, over head and ears back ward in a Pond, who were before Baptized in
their infancy in the face of the Congregation; your Scrismatical separation
from your Parochial and National fellow members, professing truth and holiness;
your Scurrilous railing upon the true visible Church of England, and the
Ministers thereof, as Baalitish, Devilish, and Antichristian, professing and
worshipping Christ Jesus, and God in spirit and truth, with a world more, of
fraudulent misinterpreting, and misapplyings of sacred writ, virulent
Caluminations of holy Truth, violent oppositions of lawful order, uncharitable
imaginations, and contempts of higher Powers, and all persons who are not of
your S ct and Set: can I think, or any man else, whose brains and heads have
not been intoxicated by a superfluous re-baptization, that these will appear a
Truth, or truths at that great and last day, which in all the former days, the
Word of God has judged, and condemned for errors and untruths? it has been
the fashion of some Heretics and Scismatiques, when they have been confuted,
and confounded with the evidence and light of Truth, which has been flashed in
their faces here from the Word and Scriptures, to make their appeals to the
great, and last day for trial, and to Jesus for the Judge of truth or untruth:
but we have it already, as a ruled Case from himself, in the 12. of John 48.
ver. The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him (and you, and all,)
at the last day: and the Apostle Paul speaks of the same day, When God shall
judge the secrets of men, according to his Gospel, Romans 2.16.

Flap not me off therefore with this put off, of your Tenets (if you have done
with Quaeres, as its high time) that they will appear Truths at that great and
last day: for if you cannot now in this your little present day, make them to
appear Truths, according to Christ's word. and Paul's Gospel, (better than you or
others have done as yet, and yet I think you, and they have done your best)
they will never appear Truths in the great and last day, but the Word and
Gospel will then, as now they do, appear against them, for errors and untruths,
and by that Word and Gospel, Christ and his Apostles, and all the Saints shall
judge, and condemn them for such; so that you and they, who held up your heads
in these waters of strife, and contention here on Earth, with the pust and
blown bladders of your self-conceipted fancies, will be fain to hang them down
in shame, and confusion of face, Revel 3.^^.
Calling upon the Hills to fall upon you, and to the Mountains to cover you,
from the face of him that siteth upon the Throne, and from that shine and
luster of Truth, that then will appear at that great and last day.

I will therefore give you the good counsel of the Apostle; Let every man (for
the counsel is good for all of us) take heed how he builds upon the
Foundation, Jesus Christ; every man's work shall be made manifest; for the day
shall declare it. (Especially the great and last day, you speak off) Because it
shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort
it is, whether Gold, Silver, precious Stones, or whether Wood, Hay, Stubble; if
any man's work abide which he has built thereupon, he shall receive a reward;
if any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss, 1 Cor. 3.10, and 12.

And whereas in your next close, you bid me lie down before it and stoop to it,
it is spoken like an imperious School Master, or imperial Master of the Field,
(which as yet, you are neither;) as for all the Truths of Christ, set forth in
his Word and Gospel, I do here stoop to them, and ly down before them,
prostrating, and casting down all my imaginations, and every thing (of my
Reason) that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity every thought (or affection of mine) to the obedience of Christ, and
his Truth and pleasure, laying my hand upon my mouth, and putting my mouth in
the dust, and laying dust upon my head, I do here bow down my head, incline my
heart, throw down all within me and without me, and wholly, and totally yield
my self unto Truths of the Word of God, as to the Victorious and Conquering,
the powerful and Triumphant Rod and Scepter of Christ: Speak Lord for thy
servant hears: 1 Samuel 3.10. 1 Kings 18.39. Numb. 23.18. Deuteronomy. 32.4.
The Lord, he is the God, The Lord, he is the God; God is not as man that he
should lie; a God of Truth and without iniquity, just and right is he; yea God
is truth it self: and Christ is the Way and the Truth: and the Spirit is truth,
1 John 5 6. And thy Law is truth, and all thy Commandments are truth, John
14.6. Psalm 119.142, and 151. Thy Word is true from the beginning: Psalm.
119.160. and so to the end thy Word endures, Heaven and Earth shall pass
away, but one jot and tittle of the Word shall not pass away till all be
fulfilled, Matthew. 5.18. But, Sir, to lie down before, or stoop to your Quaeres,
and Considerations and Interpretations, so void and empty of the Divine Truth
of God and his Word, so full and even swollen with the Humane sanfie of man and
his will, though you masterly expect it, I shall Scholarly defeat you: I am now
too strong and well trussed, and truth'd, to untrusse or untruth to such a
dip-dop pedant (or rather Anti-pedant) as you are, such a one as you are, I
could have disciplined that way and discipled any other way, fifty years ago:
and I have too much of Mordecai the Benjamite in me, and of his zeal to the
Church of God, than to bow or stoop to such a Haman, a man, the Agagite, the
separate that speaks so ill and vilely of the people of God, and seeks to
destroy it and them utterly.

Nay rather let your Dagon fall upon his face to the earth before the Ark of
the Lord, and your Quaerulous errors lie down before the Truth, and stoop to
it, now that that I have brought it unto your house, and set it before your
face and eyes: and if you would but rise up betimes in the morning, and admit
in of the light of Christ, that true morning Star, you might see your Dagon
fallen down before the Ark, and the truth standing up over your errors: I doubt
not, but there will be those (for, Sir, if you will be reled by your friend,
never meddle more with any controversy of Divinity, I had almost said Text of
Scripture) that will take up Dagon again, and set him in his place again; but I
may foretell them, it will be labor lost; for when they rise up the next
morning, they will behold D^gon fallen again upon his face to the ground,
before the Ark of the Lord, and in worse case than before, with his head and
both the palms of his hands cut off upon the threshold, and only the stump of
Dagon to be left him.

But why should I lie down before and stoop to your Quaeres, Considerations,
and Interpretations, and the Truth of them that will appear at that great day,
and now appears proved by Scriptures? For that now I am informed (informed)
and so cannot plead ignorance before the Lord at his appearing, when he will
reward every own according to his work. I am now informed you write, and must
mean, by your self and your Letter: and I am glad to find you here in form,
though now you are out of matter; for when you had matter to Quaere and
Propound, then (I am sure) you had no form to proceed or order it in: I was
then fain to inform you, that is, to put your matters in form, which are so
deformed and disordered, that so I might inform you in the matters which were
material and of moment: for if otherwise you mean of the matter, I pray let me
know, wherein I am now informed by you; (not by your Quaeres) these rather put
doubts than bring any matters of Informations from you or themselves: (nor by
your Considerations;) for they were so inconsiderable in themselves, and so
inconsiderately delivered by you, that I never considered them farther than to
refutation of them, they never got within me, and took any place in me, to form
or inform, or conform or transform into or unto any thing in them: (nor by your
interpretations of any Texts of Scripture;) for you never had the spirit, you
have so talked of, to give a right interpretation of the Text, but still as you
broached it for my information, it seems the Text of the Spirit informed me
to the contrary, that it was not the meaning of the Text, nor mind of the
Spirit.

I acknowledge, I am not too old to learn, nor so much a Scholar, but I may be
informed; but I think I am too old a Bird, to be caught with such your chaff,
and too long a Scholar and a Minister, to be taught by such your stuff; What is
the chaff to the wheat, says the Lord by Jeremiah? Jer. 23.28. If, Sir, you
spread out any more shrapnets, and send out any more Letten of Information to
me, let them be more literate, and better baited with wheat, else I shall not
come down to them, as who care not for pecking amongst such light and chaffy
Quaeres and Considerations, though I like well of sound, solid, and wheaty
Reasons and Argumentations. Again, what are the resuse fish, to Soles and
Salmons? now that you have toiled all this night, (for I see you fished in the
dark night) and have caught nothing of worth; if you launch out into the deep
again (of controversies) and let down your Net again (of another Letter) for a
draught (of Objections or Answers) I pray be careful to enclose a multitude of
good fish, Salmous and Soles (of solid Objections and Reasons, salving Answers
and Distinctions) or else I shall not be beckoned to, to come in, as who cannot
(though I love Fish well, such as are sound and whole as a fish should be, as I
have mentioned) feed upon poor John, and fresh Herrings, Minna-Quaeres, and
Sprat-Considerations, and such other refuse fish; you will never fatten me, or
inform, or immatter me, with such; but I shall still be lank, lean, and
ignorant, and may plead ignorance before the Lord, at his appearing (for any
thing of knowledge I have found in you,) and when he will reward every one
according to his work, you are not like to be rewarded, for your informing me,
or for your interpreting Scripture, or for your denying Baptism to Infants, or
for your dipping again the baptized, or for your reviling the Church of Christ,
and his Ministers, or for presuming to preach in Pulpits, without Ordination
and Authority; for there shall be no reward to the evil man, Prove. 24.20.
Therefore take heed of having an evil eye, or evil tongue, against little
Infants and their baptising, or against the great God, and his Church and
Ministers, and bringing and evil report or interpretation upon the good Word of
God, and the Scriptures, lest God reward you according to your work, and your
evil work be rewarded with an evil wages of punishment; for David's prayer is
still with God, Psalm. 94.2. Lift up thy self, thou judge of the earth, render a
reward to the proud.

But now again, Sir, why do you follow, And if you can answer these Quaeres and
Considerations by plain Scripture, I pray do, or else hold your peace, and
leave your unwarrantable practices? Did you not tell me but even now, that I
was informed now by your Quaeres and Considerations, so that I could not plead
ignorance? and what, will you have me answer them, when as I am fully informed
by them, and have gotten full knowledge by them? shall I answer against my
information, and dispute against my knowledge of your truths? you even here
contradict your self, and your own spirit and speech; as it often falls out to
them that have such speeches, and such a spirit of contradiction of others.

But if I can answer them, and that by Scripture (it is possible, it seems, or
otherwise why do you pray me to do it) then sure you have not rightly informed,
but rather misinformed me, and mis-interpreted the Scriptures; and therefore I
may more justly set upon the answoring them, to inform you better in the
knowledge of the truth, and to infirm in you the grounds of your errors; which
I have done by plain Scriptures, and by Arguments also proved by direct and
plain Scriptures, rightly interpreted. And now that it is done, I will command
my self to hold my peace, and enjoin my self silence. You (boldly enough)
prayed me to do it, or else hold my peace; and I (kindly enough) have done it,
and do hold my peace, Isa. 62.1. It was for Zions sake, that I held not my
peave, and for Hierusalems sake, that I did not rest, until the reighteousness
thereof went forth as brightness, or rather some little glympse brighter by my
enlightening, some small step farther, by my upholding, or rather by Gods
enlightening of it, and Gods upholding of it; For not I, 1 Cor. 15.10.
but the grace of God it is, by which I am what I am, and have done what I have
done; to the God of which Grace I do here give up the Glory, in the words of
that heavenly Host, praising God, and saying, Glory be to God in the highest,
and on earth peace, good will toward men, Luke 2.14. And now return unto thy
rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee, etc. Psalm.
116.17.

But I must not thus make an end; you, Sir, will not let me return to my rest,
or give me a Writ of ease, until I have considered some certain Texts of
Scriptures, which you have written out to the full of the words, and left with
me, for the conclufion of your Letter. There is not reason the Reader should be
deprived of them, they are so excellent for the purpose, and so pertinent to
the cause; they come like after-drops, when a storm of rain is over.

The first is, Job 6.24, 25. Teach me, and I will hold my tongue, cause me to
understand wherein I have erred: how, orceable (forcible) are right words? but
what does your arguinges (arguing) (or Arguments) reprove? do ye imagie
(imagine) to reprove words (Why do you leave out that which follows? with
your leave, I will add it, as belonging to the former) and the speeches of one
that is desperate, which are as wind. This is kindly spoken of you to me, as
of Job to Eliphaz his friend, if as truly meant; and I think I may say in
justification of the truth more than my self (for wisdom is justified of her
children) that the thing is really done, you are taught the truth here, and
caused to understand wherein you have erred, and may hold, if willing to learn;
therefore hold your peace, as a friend answered, and therein satisfied, without
reply, as another friend only questioned, and thereby convinced, was
speechless, without answer, Luke 22.12. But I suspect you have not told me all
your heart, and do but mock, as Delilah told Sampson. I fear I shall never
teach you, who have learned as much as you desire to know; I may (perhaps)
cause some other, an indifferent Reader or so, to understand wherein you have
erred; but your self, the principal party, I shall not, I foresee, according to
that Text, Prove. 27.22. the words whereof, for want of time, I have not written
out. Nor will you hold your peace, for all your saying so, you must or may, as
to any material or substantial replication, you can make against the truth
herein asserted and proved; but you neither will, nor can hold your peace, as
to frivilous multiplication of words, impertinent citations, and
misinterpretations and mis-applications of Texts, slanderous calumniations of
Ministers, and the Answerer especially, no more than the dog in the dark night,
can or will leave barking and bawling at the bright Moon.

But how feeble and impotent are crooked and impertinent words, appears by Job,
saying, How forcible are right words? the other words, What does your arguings
or arguments reprove, as unfitting and unseasonable for you to use unto me,
before you had heard or read any word or syllable of any arguing or argument
from me; You might rather have left them out for me to have said them to you,
as now I shall, after that I have read over and heard your arguings and
arguments, or rather Quaeres, Gonsiderations, Interpretations, without any
arguings or arguments in them; What do they reprove? Indeed they reprove
something, every thing, those things that deserve no reproof, but they prove
nothing, no not those things that most needed proof, and which you undertook to
prove (which indeed moved and occasioned me to be thus large in setting down
the things in controversy betwixt us, by proving, and disproving, and
reproving sometimes, lest all the time should be as lost and misspent betwixt
us, and no body, nor our selves the better by this discourse.)

The last words are right words for us both, and very forcible to inform me,
and reform my imagination, which has been, to reprove words and speeches of
one that is desperate; (you were very loath to write out these words, and good
cause why) which are as wind; so are both the words and speeches of one that is
desperate, and so are the reprooss of such words and speeches of one that is
desperate; you, out of hope of learning, I, out of hope of teaching; according
to that Text, Jer. 17.9. and Jerem. 13.23. The words whereof I have not written
out for want of time.

The other Texts that you have heaped up together, and at large transcribed,
are nothing but very Quakerisms in the end of your Letter, to which Anabaptisms
will come in the end; you have here begun, though you are not the first. For as
it is the fashion of Quakers, to get up into their memories and mouths, all the
Texts of old and new Testament, where any false and vicious Prophets are spoken
of, and against, or any covetous and superstitious Pharisee is taxed and
reproved, and to flap them in the face of every Minister they meet withal,
though never so impertinently and inconsiderately; insomuch that one of them
very lately being at Church, after the Minister had ended his Sermon, as who
preaches constantly every Sunday twice; Yea, said he, this is just as the
Prophet says, Isa. 56.10. They are all dumb dogs, that cannot bark, sleeping,
lying down, etc. And just even so do you, Sir, first you tell me of Jerem. 5.4.
and have now time enough to write out the words at length, and not in figures,
Surely these are poor, they are foolish, for they know not the way of the Lord,
nor the judgment of there (their) God. The which is spoken of the ignorant and
perverse people amongst the Jews, the Prophet complains of, like as we
Ministers may of many such amongst us, your self not excepted; and I commend
you for your fit and pertinent, and even Quaker-like application of it, to us
the Ministers of England, whom you know to know the way of the Lord, etc. and
therefore apply it against your own science and conscience, to Ministers, which
is spoken only to the People by the Prophet.

The next is, Micah 3.5, 11, 12. Neither here is there to you any want of time,
to write out all the words: Thus says the Lord, concerning the prophets that
make my people to err, that byte (bite) with their teeth, and cry, Peace; and
he that puts not into there (their) mouth, they even prepare war against
them. The Heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priest thereof teach for byre
(hire) and the Prophets thereof devine (divine) for money, yet will they lean
upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? none evil can come unto us.
Therefore shall Zyon (Zion) for your sakes be plowed as a field, etc.

What if there were in the State of Israel both Civil and Ecclesiastical, such
corruptions as are mentioned in those Texts, at that time, what reason or
Religion, prudence or conscience, is there in this, to make use, and your
application of them to our State, both of Magistracy or Ministry, until you had
cleared the Doctrine and proof of the same sins to reign amongst both? What
Prophet do you know makes the People to err, bite with the teeth, and cry
peace, to teach for hire, and if their mouths be not filled, to prepare for
war? do you not remember who it was that said, And how like unto him you are
herein, does Job serve God for naught? and who said, Ye are of your father the
devil? he is the accuser of the Brethren, and a false accuser; we Ministers
teach not for hire, and yet we laborers are worthy of our hire; and if it be
detained, and taken out of our mouths, the Law is open, they may implead one
another, (as I have largely showed before) we may fly into the arms of the
Law, which is no Law of Arms, or War. But farther, the word of Micah was that
which he said concerning Samaria and Jerusalem, and (for any thing appears)
the word in the Text might be concerning Samaria, and not Jerusalem, and then
it concerns you more than us, you more and your Prophets, for Samaria was the
head City of the separate Jeroboam and his company, the ten Tribes who divided
from the House of David, and departed away from Jerusalem and the Temple, and
set up their Calves in some private stalls and houses; and so ever after
continued separates, so that the Samaritans had no dealing with the Jews
ordinarily, when Christ came and lived with them, but kept aloof and apart from
the public Services of the Temple, 1 Kings 12. and John 4.

The third is, Isa. 3.12, and 15. O my people, they which lead the (thee) cause
the (thee) to err, and desroy (destroy) the way of thy paths. What mean you to
beat my people to pieces (pieces) and grind the face of the poor, says the
Lord? Neither here wanted you any time to write out all the words. Besides,
here is excellent good order in your proceedings, from Esaias to Micah, from Micah
to Esaias, by a new retrograde method, or rather your old crab-order, backward
and forward, forward and backward. But these words are wholly and solely
directed by the Prophet, to the secular Powers and Civil Rulers of the People
of Israel; the which if you by-your bold and prophetical spirit, shall, as you
do here, (or else you are quite out of your Texts) revile the Temporal Rulers
of our Nation, with beating Gods people to pieces, and grinding the face of the
poor, I must refer you over to their Temporal Authority and Justice, to
chastise your insolency and rebellion, according to those Texts, Exodus 22.28.
Romans 13.4 the which for want of time, I have not writ out in all the words.

The next is, Jer. 5.30. and 31. A wonderful and horrible (thing) is committed
in the land, the prophets proplesie falsely (talsly) and the priest (priests)
bare (bear) rule by there (their) means, and my people love to have it so; and
what will ye do in the end thereof? Falsely written, and falsely applied is all
this Text. In what, and which of our Prophets, (for so and such you make us,
and must grant us, or all your Applications of the Prophets to us, out of
prophets, is vain, impertinent, and inconsistent) I say, which of our Prophets,
and wherein do they prophecy falsely? we neither foretell or reveal hidden
particular things to come; some of your Prophets do, as Christ's coming to reign
temporally and gloriously upon earth for a thousand years, together with the
very year of the beginning of his Reign; and have herein prophesied falsely, for
the year is passed of late wherein some of them said it should begin.

Or if you mean by prophesying, expounding and interpreting of Scripture, I
will go no farther than your self, for a false prophet, at the next door,
(because I am weary with traveling thus far,) than whom, if there be a more
false Expounder and Interpreter of Scripture, as I have abundantly declared
throughout this whole Tractate, I will forfeit all my Commentaries upon the
Bible, into his hands, if he will read them, and take them so into his head,
thereby, by such help, to make himself a true Expounder and Interpreter of the
Scriptures afterward. As for our Priests bearing rule, by their means; your
own eyes, looking about you, may serve to give your tongue (I will not say, the
lie) an answer to the contrary. And for our People love to have it so; I
thought you had been better acquainted with the People than so, or to say so of
them, for the People love to have it otherwise than so, that Priests should
bear rule by any means. And if you love the People no better than so, to say
they love to have it so, they may (likely) begin not to love you so as they
have done, to make you a Father or Son of the People, and Vox Populi, (I think
you understand that word) a Preacher of the Peoples making, and a voice of a
Crier in the Wilderness, against John the Baptist, though your namesake, and
their Childrens Baptism. And for the last Clause, And what will ye do in the
end? Here Is a Quaere indeed; I who have answered so many of your Quaeres
before, will not stand out for this one at last; but will tell you what I will
do in the end (let others tell you what they will do in the end.)

I will now in the end, pray to God, (and I do so) that he would give unto you
a better understanding of his Word into your head, and a greater love of his
Ministers into your heart. For (to end with that you began the Text with) a
wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land, and by you, for one and
a chief one, some prophets (but they are only so called by some) expound the
Word of God falsely, and revile the Ministers of God falsely, and the Priests and
Jesuits bear rule by their means, and some people love to have it so; and what
will you do in the end? I hope you will have done in the end, and hold your
peace at last, as you promised even now by your Sarety Job, in your first Text;
which you have cause to do, lest Job mind you of it, and say, as he does, Job
18.2. How long will it be ere you make an end of words? (words indeed, and
little else besides.) I hope you will do so anon, for I perceive the next Text
is your last you end with.

Matthew. 23.4. Foor (for) they bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be bourne
(born) and lay them on men's shoulders, but they themselves will not move them
with one of there (their) fingers; in vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men, Matthew. 15.19. And if ye love me, keep my
commandments, John 14.15. For so I have put your three last Texts together
into one, as being all much as one, that so I might bring your words the sooner
to an end. Neither here wanted you time to write out all the words, even of
three Texts together: yet I see you are as far off from an end, as when you
began; for you here fall back again upon your old matter you began withal, to
quaere me about Commandments of God, and men's Traditions and Prescriptions;
say once more out of your former Text, What will ye do in the end? I must
answer you from these Texts, That I must now do in the end, the same I did in
the beginning, discourse again of the Commands of God, and Prescriptions of
men. But I am resolved otherwise, having gotten up the stone to the top of the
hill, not to let it roll back, or tumble down again, this would make my labor
endless, and my pains infernal, and Hellike, which are supernal now, and
Heaven-like; nor will I suffer you to begin the Suit again, but will force you
to join issue, and to come to trial, and so to an end. In vain, Sir, you will
tell me, that we worship God in vain, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments
of men; when as you do not here (as not heretofore) teach me, and tell me what
Commandment of man we make, or teach, for a part of Divine Doctrine or
Worship. We teach and embrace the Political and Ecclesiastical Commands of the
Supreme Rulers over us, as prescriptive Orders, and directive Rules, about the
external carriage, and outward celebration of the public Divine Service and
Worship, to make it the more comely and in order (and have not you the same
Collinical and domestical Orders and Rules about your private Congregations and
Administrations, and so teach for Doctrincs the Commands of men, and worship
God in vain, by your Text?) What a vanity is this in you, to write thus in
vain; and in fine, to show nothing of ours in vain, but only words in vain of
your own? So likewise, why do ye not name some one of those heavy burdens,
grievous to be born, that we either lay upon the peoples shoulders, or if lasd
by others, we our selves are not ready to move them with one of our fingers. As
for the old legal burdens and yokes, of keeping the Law in all its Morals and
Ceremonials, as to justification and salvation thereby, we were, and are so far
from laying them on men's shoulders, no not with one of our fingers, that with
both our hands, and not ours only, but with the hands of the Apostlet, Acts 15.
we do pull them off, knowing that neither our Fathers, nor we, (for our
shoulders yet are underlaid by them, as well as others) were able to bear them,
and to lay no greater burden upon men, than things necessary as to salvation,
than the yoke and burden of Christ, of which the one is casie, and the other
light, as Christ himself said of it, who also makes it so unto all that
undergo the same, Matthew. 11.29, 30. This is no other than the Gospel, the
Doctrine and Commands of Christ, the which, as his yoke, draws in all; and as
his burden, bears out all Evangelical Graces and Duties, which we Ministers
in the Name of Christ impose upon our People, or rather call upon them, to take
this yoke and burden of Christ upon them, and to learn of him, and to practice
as he did (things learnable, practicable, and imitable.) And these burdens and
yokes we also, as yoke-fellows, and burden-fellows with our people, we are even
with both our hands, and all our hearts, ready to move, stir, and lift at, and
lift up, as upon our own, so their shoulders, bearing our parts, and helping
them to bear their parts, in repenting, believing, praying, etc. so bearing one
another burdens, as the Apostle advises, Gal 62. yea with heart and mouth,
praying for them, and preaching to them, we strengthen the weak hands, and
confirm the feeble knees, as the Prophet bids us, Isa. 35.6. by saying to them
that are of a fearful heart, Be strong fear not, if any faint under their
burden, or hold it not fast, or stand not sure under it, or grow weary of
well-doing, Coloss. 6.9. and as the Apostle again exhorts, 1 Thessal. 5.14.
we are always ready to comfort the feeble-minded, and to support the weak, and
to be patient toward all men, (as active toward some) for we that are strong
(or stronger than some others of our people; I may say) ought (and some of us,
I say do, or desire to do as we ought) to bear the infirmities of the weak, and
not to please our selves, Romans 15.1. nay we cannot please our selves, if we be
such as we ought to be, better, I think, I am sure, we cannot please God
better, than by bearing the infirmities of the weak, and helping them to bear
their burdens.

What would you, Sir, have more of us? do you so much your selves? are not you
rather of those bad Scribes and Pharisees, and in their coat and seat, whom you
quote and cite against us?

For a Scribe, I think you are none, or a very bad one, who not only cannot
write true English of your own, without a Copy, but even when you have a Copy
before you, and write out of the Bible, cannot write the true English out of
that Copy, witness my Corrections of your Transscipts of these last Texts.

Nor are you a true Scribe; for whereas at the beginning of your Letter, and so
all along, when you had time enough before, then you did not write out the many
Texts you quote and cite, about matters in question and proof, but only name
the Chapter, and Verse, now, at the end of your Letter, when you have less
time, and are in more haste to make an end (excusing the former, for want of
time,) you write out to the full length, all the words of ten or eleven verses,
without any mention made of, or excuse for want of time: They were not the
Pharisees only, but the Scribes also, that were the Hypocrites, in our
Saviors time: so the words run together, Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites,

And was there not an Hypocrisy in your Scribism, or the Scribe here showed
himself an Hypocrite? I have said it, and showed it, it was not want of time or
leisure; what then? even want of truth and sincerity, (which you so much assume
to your self, or rather presume of in your self too much.)

For, Sir, of fifty Texts of Scripture at least alleged by you in the former
part of your Letter, of which all had one verse, many two, and some three
verses, and some more; To write out the words of few or none of them, (whereby
the Reader, and especially Popular sort might see how they accorded to the
matter in hand, for which they were cited) when time enough was before you, and
at your own will and pleasure to take, and then toward the end of your Letter
to entreat me to look them, and seriously to weigh them, excusing the matter,
that for want of time you had not written out all the words of all the
Scriptures, you might have added, scarce of any at all; when in the end and
last clauses your Letter, when time must needs therefore be more wanting to
you, by reason your Letter coming, was noised abroad, and long expected, to
take so much time as to stand, and stay the writing out all the words to the
full (a thing different from your fashion, when you had more time) of six or
seven Texts, without the least intimation of want of time, let the next honest
Clerk or Scribe judge, whether there were not some Legerdemain and Handicrast,
if not heart deceit in such handwriting, and a piece of hypocritical
Scribism, (as also Anabaptism) or of scribbling and Anabaptizing hypocrisy in
it.

And there was another piece of the same stuff in it besides: for the former
part of your Letter being of matters, and points of Divinity in Question
betwixt us, it was your policy and hypocrisy, to set down to your Tene's and
Assertions, Texts of Scripture, named and figured by Chapter and Verse, so to
put a fair gloss and Iustre of Truth, for the amusing of the vulgar people, and
deluding them with such shows and paints of proof, you knowing they neither
have skill nor will, nor leisure, nor pleasure to turn to the words themselves
and weigh them, of which you might have saved them the labor and me also; (but
that you meant not, but rather to put me to the pains, wherein you lost your
labor and purposes, for that it is a pleasure to me to search the Scriptures)
if you had written out the words into your sheets, and folded up them with your
Arguments or Expositions together into the same.

But then there was another fear or Quakery in it, (for Hypocrites are ever a
fraid of discovery, and Quake for fear of it, as the Devils believe, but
tremble for the same fear of being discovered in their false faith.) For you
feared and might well enough, that if you had written out the words of your
Texts, and set them down together, or by your Opinions and Expositions; people
must needs see and read both together, and so comparing the one with the
other, the words of the Texts cited, with the words of your Tenees asserted,
they might espy and discern (as an ordinary understanding may do) the
impertinency of the one to the other, yea the contrariety of the matters in
them.

And truly this was, and it a notable piece of Popery and Jesuitism, to keep
the people as much as may be, from the words of the Scripture; for the words of
the Scripture are pure, enlightening the eyes, but peoples darkness best for
their devotion, they know and say: Therefore indeed was I the willinger to look
into every Text cited by you, that so I might present unto the Reader
whomsoever, the Texts of Scriptures in words at length, and not in figures, (as
I said before, if I remember well) and so giving him a plain outsight of the
words, He may come to a clearer infight of the sense, and better discern what
it proves or proves not: A good way to disfigure an only Text scribe, and to
reverse and decapitate, a verse and Chapter Hypocrite.

But there is more of the same cloth, your Linsie Woolsie hypocrisy here, at
the end of your Letter; for usually he that plays the Hypocrite in the
beginning, works the Hypocrite in the end, and turns to be of a merry, a very
one; when you were engaged to prove and fortify your Tenets, as hitherto, you
only set down Chapter and verse, but not the words, why so? you could not
stand about writing them down for want of time, no no, that was not the cause,
for being but newly begun, it was free to you to have taken as much time as you
would: was it not rather for want of truch, and out of abundance of subtlety
and policy, lest the Reader finding Gods words, and your words in the same
place together, might the easier at one view see the distance, and diffonancy
of the one from the other, and so perceive the weakness of proof in your
allegation?

But now that you are resolved in the end, (for a friendly farewell) to reprove,
yea to revile, and reproach the true Church of England, and the true Ministers
thereof, and now in the foot of your Letter, without any foot, or ground,
unless the foot of Pride, (like as you did the same in the front of your
Letter, without any front or brow, but that of Brass) to trample under your
unclean, and stinking feet, the sweet, and precious Sons of Sion, (like as you
dossed them before with your brazen, and impudent forehead) it seems now at the
latter end of your Letter, you can find time enough (though it be high time
you should have done two hours, and two sheets ago) to write out fully the
words of six or seven Texts, spoken of some false, and erroneous Prophets, yea,
and of some corrupt Judges, and Magistrates, yea, and some ignorant, and
sottish people, some thousands of years fithence, and to apply them to the
learned, pious, and laborious Ministers of England, very foolishly,
impertinently, inconfiderately, yea very wickedly, maliciously, devillishly.

Oh here you are very exact, and diligent to write out all, and the very words,
that your proselites reading here, may learn the Scripture phrases and words,
and get them by heart, and have them ready in their mouths, as Shimei had the
stones in his hand, to cast them at David, a man after Gods own heart, and to
asperse, slander, and bequaker the Ministers of God, who are such according to
Gods will, as they pass by them, or meet with them; Remember (Lord) the
reproach of thy servants, how we do bear in our besoms the reproaches of the
mighty people: Wherewith thine enemies have reproached, O Lord, wherewith they
have reproached the footsteps of thine Anointed, Psalm. 89.56.

Why did you not write out a thousand Texts more, word for word, even all in
the Bible, that mention any sin or vice, of any Nation, any erroneous or
profane person, of any place there recorded, and make application of them all
to the Church of England, and the Ministers there of? This would have made the
heap of your stones the bigger, and so would have heaped up more wrath for you,
against the day of wrath, for your speaking evil of Dignities, and reviling
Orders; and especially for your teaching vulgar people, errors, confusions, as
to renounce their first Baptism, and reproach their Preaching, and Baptizing
Ministers, and that in Scripture Language, and Phrases which they learn of you,
and such as you, who writ: out the Texts, and the words too, when you wrest
Scripture to the vilifying of Ministers, and you want no time, nor malice for
the doing of it, to put such words into your peoples eyes, and ears, and mouth:
but when you are to wrest Scriptures, for the justifying of your errors, then
you cite the Text only, but write not the words, for want of time, and truth
too, and so feed their senses only with figures, and numbers only, sending
them away to search out the words, for their satisfying their understandings,
as the Egyptians did the Isaelites to find out straw, for their burning the
Brick.

But I remember your last Text you cited, wherewith you think, you have hit us
home, was that off the Scribes and Pharisees, laying heavy burdens upon men's,
or the peoples shoulders, and not moving them, with one of their fingers. I
have put by the blow, as of all the other your Texts alleged against us, so of
this, and the Scribism of the same, and have made them to recoil-back and fly
in your own face, because you overcharged, and had no kill to charge aright:
you hold as great, if not a greater correspondency with the Pharisees, than the
Scribes; Few of you are Scribes, more are Pharisees: for you are like unto them
in your name, the word Pharisee signifying Separate, (as formerly I said,) so
in your corrupting, and false interpreting of Scripture (this I have showed
throughout this Discourse) so in your high conceit, of your own righteousness
and holiness, (this you manifest in your scornful, and supercilious loo^s and
speeches,) so in your compassing the Land to make you Proselites, and ambitious
seeking the people, and their applause (this all men see, and you will not
deny) I add lastly, (which makes the wonder, that people run after you) in
your laying heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne upon the shoulders of men
and women.

This latter, is the thing, I will show out off, Act. 15. where ver. 5. There
arose up certain of the Sect of the Pharisees which believed, or professed
Jesus to be the Messia, saying it was needful to Circumcise the newly converted
Brethren, etc. the matter is decided in the 10. ver. 28. ver. Now therefore,
why tempt you God? who put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples, which neither
our Fathers, nor we were able to bear: And it seemed good to the Holy Ghost,
and us, to lay upon you, no greater burden, than these necessary thing, etc.
Out of which I gather, and deduct this one General Proposition (leaving out the
particular of Circumcision.)

Things laid upon Christians or Disciples, more than necessary, are a burden
and yoke, and seems not good to the Holy Ghost, but is a tempting of God.
Join we issue now in brief. Here the Pharisees of the old separation said, it
was needful to Circumcise the new converted Chirstians or Disciples; and you of
the newer separation say, it is needful to re-Baptize grown, and professing
Christians or Disciples, upon a particular confession of their Faith; are not
you now agreeable to the Pharisees, in laying on a burden, and a yoke, upon the
necks, and shoulders off the Disciples and Christians?

But, how do I show this latter, to be a burden or yoke? why, from the
Proposition here, because the re-Baptizing of Christians or Disciples, who were
Baptized formerly in their Infancy, is more than needful or necessary; andthat
it is so, my whole last part of this Discourse, which now I am finishing, has
amply Demonstrated; yea, your own Rule given to me at first, does jointly
attest the same, the which is this, of all things necessary to Salvation, the
Scripture has either a Command or an Example, or both. Now show me for that
your practice, any Command of God, Express, or Implicit, or by Consequence,
for such your re-Baptizing; Or any Example of any grown person or Christians,
formerly Baptized so Rebaptized; if you cannot, hold you your peace (they are
your own words,) I will speak you a Pharisee, laying upon men's necks, and
shoulders, a yoke, and a burden; and moreover by doing so, a tempter of God,
and doer of that, which seemed not good unto the Holy Ghost, and the Apostles.

Again, for you to require of Infants born in Covenant with God, and of Parents
in Covenant with God, an external confession, or profession of Faith, before
you will put them under the initial Seal of that Covenant, and in the mean
while to with hold this from them, until they shall do that, is a putting a
yoke, and burden upon their necks and shoulders, to hinder them in their
Christian progress; it is to tempt the Lord, and to put him upon other means
for Infants Salvation than Baptism, and its a doing of that, which seems not
good to the Spirit, and the Apostles assembled, and determining the case in a
holy Synod, for, that it is a requiring more of Infants, than is necessary to
needful for their Baptism.

Yet once more: The leading of grown Christians, Baptized before, into some
deep Pond, and therein re-Baptizing them, plunging, and holding them some while
there under water over-head and ears, body and clothes too, is a yoke upon the
neck, and a burden put, and laid upon the head and shoulders, heavy and
grievous to be borne, especially of the aged, infirm, and sickly, and a doing
of more than is necessary unto the administration of Baptisin, unseemly, and
superfluous if not ridiculous, and so more than seems good un to the Holy
Ghost, and the Apostles met in Counsel yea it is an tempting of God, (and some,
as I have heard, have sickned and died soon after thereupon,) of which I shall
discourse at large, in my Narration, and censure of a late dipping which
follows.

Now see, Sir, by this, whether we Ministers of the Church of England, or you
Separates from the same, be like to the Pharisees.

And so I have retorted, all your Texts, and returned them to you again, to
apply them to your selves, or to apply your selves to them.

I shall therefore only give you the like friendly farewell at the end of my
Letter, as you gave me in yours, namely, a few Texts of Scripture to consider
of, and seriously to weigh, some for your self, and others, that take upon you
to be Preachers of the Separation, to consider of, and that not slightly as you
use: Numb. 16.11. and 12. 2 Chronicles. 26.18. Jer. 23.21, 31, 32. 2 Corinh. 11.13,
14, 15. 2 Timothy 3.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Tit. 1.10, and 11. Heb. 5.4, and 5, 2 Pet.
2.18, 19. 2 Pet. 3.16

Some for your followers, and others that hear you, and (if any of my people be
amongst them) for them also to consider of, and that not lightly 2 Chronicles.
36.15, 16. Jerem. 2.13. Matthew. 24, 23, 24, 25, 26. Mark 12. 38, 39, 40. Luke
21.1. with Mat. 16.6, and 12. Romans 16.17, 18, Gal. 4.16, 17, 18. Gal. 5.7, 8,
9, 10. 2 Timothy 4.3, and 4. Heb. 10.23. and 24, Heb. 13.9. 2 Pet. 2.12. Jude 17,
18, 19. 20. And this one, for all, and every one of you, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4. 5.

You see, Sir, I do not as you did, for whereas in the matter of Proof, I have
written out the words of every Text to the full, here in point of Reproof, I
only name the Texts, and no more; so the Reader cannot know the particular
here of them, until he take the Bible, and look farther, so ready I am, not to
blazen abroad, but rather to go backward and cover your nakedness, as Cham.

But, What have I done? I thought indeed I had done, and replied to all your
Letter: But I perceive, that it is undone, as who have omitted one of your
Texts, which is in your last line of all, John 14.15. and in these words of
Christ Jesut, If you love me, keep my Commandments. What a bad-sighted man am
I, that I should take no sooner notice of these last words, of your last Text,
in your last line? words, like Apples of Gold, with pictures of Silver, as
spoken in season; a Text, like a bundle of Mirth, worthy to be laid betwixt the
breasts. A line, Sir, I speak seriously, worth all your Letter besides, and had
it not been for this last line, it had been so far from being any Love-Letter,
or Message of Jonathans to David, that rather it would have been, as David's
Letter against Vriah, or a Johnathan's Maranatha Letter, writing bitter things,
as Marah, and breathing out not only excommunication, but even damnation,
whose mouth I have stopped notwithstanding, If you love me, keep my
Commandments, John 14.15. says Christ to his Disciples; This is a text to
purpose, which few or none of the former were, brcathing love at last, the best
thing to end a Letter with, and to make some recompense for all your hateful,
horrid, hellish, and malicious, calumniations, of your Mother, and Brethren, in
the beginning thereof; Above all things, and so in the beginning, and after
things (and so in the end) Put on love, which is the Bond of perfectness; The
Law makes nothing perfect, but love does: for the end, and so the perfection,
and fulfilling of the Commandment, is Love, out of a pure heart, and a good
Conscience, and Faith unfeigned; at leastwise Christ Jesus, whom we love, (as
who loved us first) is the end of the Law for righteousness, to every one that
believes; if Christ Jesus be the end of the Law, and the Commandment, and
love the end of the Law, and Commandment, Then the love which is of Christ,
sure, or Christ who is love, (for God is love) must needs be the end of the
Law, and Commandment; and therefore is ye love me keep my Commandments, says
Christ, John 14.15. (a Text worthy to be thrice mentioned, and repeated.)

This is the one only Text, that you, and I shall not differ in I hope, and
which you have rightly applied, and both my self, and all of us, do take to
belong unto us, to love the Lord Jesus Christ, and to keep his Commandments:
yea I add, if any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, Let him be Anathema
Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. And in testimony of our love, we walk in obedience of
his Commandments; but I will say to you, asit is, Jam. 2.8, 9 If ye fulfill
the royal Law, according to the Scripture, That shall love thy neighbor as
thy self, ye do well; but if ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are
convincedof sin, as transgressors. For he that said, If y love me, keep my
commandments, said also, Thou shall love thy neighbor, or Brother; and keep
that Commandment also of his, amongst others; and this Commandment have we
from him, that he who loves God, loves his brother also, 1 John 4.21. If a
man say, as it proceeds verse. 20. If a man say, I love God, and Jesus Christ,
and hates his brother, he is a liar, (whosoever the man be) for he that loves
not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?
And again, Love works no ill to his neighbor, therefore love is the
fulfilling of the law also, Romans 13.10. I confess, I could now much refresh my
self in this sweet and rosy Discourse of this point of our love of Christ, and
our Brethren, after my wearisome traveling through other sharp and thorny
Disputes; but I resolve this Page now in hand shall be the last, and determine
both.

Only I shall mind you, that amongst these your Neighbors and Brethren, we
the Ministers of Jesus Christ are to be accounted and taken in, by your leave,
Sir; for by his leave, Sir, we are so accepted of, to be his Neighbors and
Brethren; his Neighbors, as whom the Lord has brought nigh unto himself, to
do the service of the Tabernacle, (and Temple) Number 16.9. and also his
Brethren, For both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of
one; for which cause he is not ashamed tocall them brethren, Hebrews 2.11.
whether sanctified by Grace from him, or by Office under him; and if he called
and owned the Hearers and Doers of his Word, his Brethren, sure he owneth for
such also, the Preachers and Doers of the same. Yea, see how Christ Jesus not
only owneth them for such, but oneth them also as himself (if I may so speak)
saying, He that hears you, hears me; he that receives you, receives me;
and he that despises you, despises me, Matthew 10.4. Luke 10.17. And truly I
must tell you, that when our People were let alone, and left to themselves, and
our Ministers, and before they were befooled and bewitched by you separation
from us, as the Galathians were by creepers in amongst them, they did, as the
same Galathians Paul, receive their learned, pious, and industrious Ministers,
as Angels of God, even as Christ Jesus; Galath. 4.14. And will do so again, (I
believe, or hope) by that time they have had a little more trial and experience
of your courses, and seen the difference betwixt the new light, or flashings of
your blazing Comets, and the old light and luster of their own fixed Stars.

But I give over proving against you, or reproving, seeing you have given over
accusing of us, and reviling, and are fallen upon love in your last line; love,
I say, and that of Christ Jesus, the most lovely Object for a fair conclusion,
from those foul Principles of malice in your former lines; malice I say, and
that against the Church of England and her Ministers; the least deserving
hatred from you, because serving you by love, showed, if not saving you by
faith, Preached to you.

My advice, I know, will seem strange and irrational to you in the form of my
words and expression; Forsake your Principles, and leave them, hold fast your
conclusion, and keep it; but it is good and religious, in the matter of sense,
and my intention, which is this, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and
clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice, Ephesians. 4.31.
this was your Original sin, and bad Principles: And again, Be kindly
affectioned one to another in brotherly love, love as Brethren, be pitiful,
courteous, of one mind, having compassion, putting on the bowels of mercies,
Romans 12.19. and 1 Peter 3.8. Goloss. 3.12. And thus your latter end has been
better than your beginning, and your conclusion, your last line, lovely and
amiable, though the first leaf was hateful and detestable.

I embrace you in your last line, so also in your Subscription, speak it again,
and write or subscribe again your self (that in the hand of two witnesses, or
the double witness of your hand, this word may stand and be more confirmed,) To
be the Lord Jesus's devoted Servant, as also mine (and the rest, the meanest of
Christ's Servants and Ministers) Servants for Jesus sake; which I take only
according to the Apostles limitation, Galath. 5.13. in or by love, for which
also I thank you, being ready also to serve you, in and by love, for Jesus
sake, but with another of the same Apostles limitations, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. by an
in love of the truth, the which because some have not received, God has sent
them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie, as it follows in the
Apostle, ver. 10, 11. But we are bound to give God thanks for you, Brethren,
and N^ighbours, and Parishioners, (and your selves are boundmuch more to do the
same to God) for that he has called you unto the belief of the truth by our
Gospel, (and something also, by this my Answer to you) 2 Thessalonians 2. verse
14. Therefore Brethren, and Neighbors, stand fast, and hold the Traditions
which ye have been taught, whether by word, or our Epistle, verse 15. Now our
Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which has loved us, and
has given us everlasting consolation and good hope through grace, comfort and
^stablish you in every good word and work, verses 16, and 17 And now also
Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to
build you up, Acts 20.32. Consider what I say, (and have said) and the Lord
give you understanding in all things, 2 Timothy 2.7. Let every soul, that is
understanding, be subject to the higher powers of the word, and captivate every
thought to the obedience of the truth; Let every Saul who is ignorant admit of
the light of the Word and Truth, to shine round about him, that the scales, by
the Ministry of Ananias, may fall away from their eyes, that in seeing they may
see, and understand the truth of all the matters and mysteries of Salvation,
Acts 9.15. But if any man be ignorant (and will be ignorant) let him be
ignorant, and still be ignorant, 1 Cor. 14.38. Or, Let them hear and say,
(read and see) It is truth, Isa. 43. verse 9.

And so Sir, because I will be answerable to you in all things, I do now
subscribe my self, as in relation to my Master and Lord Jesus Christ, His, the
least of his Servants and Ministers, not worthy to be called a Servant and
Minister of Christ; so in reference unto you my Antagonist and Opponent, Your,
the greatest of your friends, worthy to be called a friend of yours, (for, am I
therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? Gal. 4.16.) When you
have tried all your Brethren and Friends, Truth will be your best Friend; and
your best Brother will be

Jeffry Watts.
From Muchleigh's Parsonage, July the 1. 1656. Now I proceed from a Scribe and
his Letter answered, and a Pharisce or Separate churched, to a hypocrite or
Dipper sprinkled: but first of all to be questioned and catechized; and so to
the Narration of a dipping, to be censured, according to my Promise in the
Title and Frontispiece of this Treatise. Only first,



Courteous Reader;
I Must desire of thee, that, in the reading over (if so thou art intended)
this Narration of a Dippping, with a Censure thereupon, which follows now,
Thou would not mind a Passage, or Paragraph of the Former Epistle to thee,
which goes before the Answer and Instruction of a Scribe, and his Letter; as
wherein I apologized for my omitting to cite and call into the several Points I
handled, the venerable Testimonies of the ancient Doctors and Fathers of the
Church in their own learned Languages: This I excused unto thee, partly because
I was confined and tied up by the Scribe and his queres, only to Scripture
Commands and Examples, for my Answer; and partly for that I intended my Answer
should go no farther, then in a reciprocal and interchangeable Letter returned
unto him, who first occasioned and provoked it. Though afterward by reason of
the larger extent of my Answer then I expected, The Desk refusing a
transcription of it, to which I had offered it, I was even compelled to make my
refuge unto the Press, for an Impression of the same; otherwise all the labor
must be lost on both sides, the Queres and Letter unanswered, the Scribe
uninstructed, the Pharisee uncharged, and Truth unvindicated, as to, and by my
self.

This beingdone, the Answer finished, dismissed, and sent away for the
aforesaid prupose, There fell out, and was practiced in my Parish, and (it may
be for the more affront to me) at a house of mine there, This Dipping of two
new Sisters in a Pond of the Yard: The which being in public, upon the
Lord's Day, and betwixt the Morning and Evening Worships, drew away much people
thither, and was discoursed of by many mouths, and so famed about in these
parts, that I resolved (and could do no less) to get a full Narration of the
business, and to pass my censure upon the same. And so having first preach it
down in my Pulpit to my own Parish, as a New business of ill consequence, I
next have written it down in my Study, to thee the Reader, and have sent up
also, this my censure, after the former, my Answer, to be Impressed or
Imprinted together, into the same Tractate, as handling both of them, matters
very agreeable and consonant.

So then here intending the Press, and having now no confinements or
restraints upon me, I have taken my full Liberty to produce and bring in much
of the Learned Antiquity, and to write out, and transcribe their weighty Words
and Speeches, in their own Languages, as many of them as I had by me, for the
fuller Confirmation and firmer Attestation of this my censure upon that
Dipping; that it was, and is, as I have said, a New business, and a very
Novelty.

Yea this I have done, as for the convincing the Anabaptists their Dipping, and
Immerging Baptism (so called) to be of Novelty; so for the Confirming the
Orthodox, their Sprinkling, and Aspersing Baptism (as it is) to be of
Antiquity, by the evidences of the ancient Fathers and Doctors, brought forth
and showed on both sides: and farther I have ascended up to the Highest
Antiquity of all, even to the Ancient of days, and the Primogenit of every
Creature, and have (probably at least) showed, that Christ Jesus himself
manifested in the flesh was but Aspersed or Superfused with water, and not
Dipped and Immerged under the water (certainly not in their way and manner) at
his Baptism, by S. John the Prime baptist, nor other Christians, after him, by
S. Peter and the other Primitive Baptizers. And as to ra^fi these things, so
(learned Reader) I have done thus much, to gratify thee, and to refresh thee
with the rare deticaies of these Ancients, after that I have well nigh wearted
thee, if not cloyed thee with the course Ordinary of my Moderness.

Only, I wonder at the Iron-brow, and Brazenface of novel Impudency, and New
light, that whereas it is every Seventh day at least, in its Chimney-house
Conventicles, prating against the Old, Laudable, and Ancient Practices of this
our, and other reformed Churches, it dares pretend to Antiquity, (so
contradicting it self) and glory of it in this point, of their Immerging and
Dipping, (calling it the Good old way) who scorn it, and scoff at the same, and
all Old Light, in their other Tenets and Opinions.

I say no more to thee then what Job says, 32.7. Days should speak, and
multidude of years should teach wisdom. And so 12.12. With the Ancient is
wisdom, and in length of days understanding. And lastly, what Solomon says,
Remove not the Ancient Landmark which thy Fathers have set, Prove. 22.28. So
farewell, and Fear ill.

The Narration of their Dipping in a Pond of Much-leighes.
AFter Supplication within a House near the Pond, for Gods Presence and
Blessing, the two Women, or Sisters, gave an account of their Faith, and
others, a testimony of their Life; and after suplicating again, the two Women,
or Sisters, did privately strip themselves in a Chamber, and put on other
clothes, that so they might have their own dry to put on again. And so they
came to the Pond, wherein the Brother, who is set apart by Fasting and Prayer
of the Church, to administer the Ordinances stood in the water; the Women, or
Sisters, going into the water also, so above the knees, (but the one before the
other about a minute) He took them one after another, fast by the clothes
about the shoulders, and spoke the words acccording to the Institution,
severally to each of them, at the instant time, immediately before the Dipping,
and so dipped them severally all over head and ears, body and clothes, (having
first tied their clothes together with a string, about and above their knees)
He dipped either of them but once, and then raised them up again, and so they
went again to the House and shifted themselves in a Chamber by themselves, with
the help of some women; and they supplicated again, That God would encourage
their Souls, and increase their Faith, and the rest of the day was spent in
prayer, preaching, and participating the Lords Supper.

The Narrator hereof (to whom, being an Actor and Abbettor in the business, I
wrote for a true and full information, because I would not take it upon report,
from Spectators and Lookers on only) added these words to me.

I am sorry to hear you call it a New business, for it is older then your
Sprinkling of Infants, though indeed that has been so long practiced
generally, that this Old Good Way seems now a new Thing: And no wonder, for we
read that the Song the Saints sing for their deliverance out of
Antichristianism, is termed to be, as it were, a new song, Rev. 14.3. And no
wonder though the old Practices of the Saints be, as it were, a new Thing to
the World, and unto their Leaders.

I am glad to hear you acknowledge that Baptizing is Dipping, then Sprinkling
is not Baptizing; we confess that every Dipping is not Baptizing, for I may Dip
my Dog, but not Baptize or Dip him in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost.

Reader, Thou have heard the Narration and the Addition, now read on, and hear
the Censure, and its Reasons; but having to deal with Crabbed Fellows,
especially here in this Point, ( for they go backward here (which they do not
elsewhere) to antiquity, and the Good Old Way) I must, and therefore will begin
at the last and lower Words, and so go backward also (though upwards) that so I
may follow them and overtake them, which else I cannot do.

THE DIPPER SPRINKLED.
All Baptizing is not Dipping.
SIR,
YOu have no cause the be glad at my acknowledging that Baptizing is Dipping,
(unless with Democritus you can laugh at any thing you hear) for then I must
have said, All Baptizing is Dipping, which I did not, as who know that but some
Baptizing is Dipping and some Baptizing is a sprinkling: Baptism being both in
the true nature of the thing, and native signification of the word, but an
ablution and washing with water, which may be done either way, by dipping the
party in the water, or by sprinkling water upon the party.

And you have as little cause to be sorry at my calling your Dipping a new
Business, (unless with Heraclitus you can weep at every thing you hear) I
called it so indeed, and shall here now make the Calling true, as in word, so
in deed; so far is it from being older then our sprinkling of Infants, that
your self helps it forward, saying, that this has been so long practiced
generally, that your good old way (of Dipping) seems now a new thing: It seems
so to you, it is so to me.

You make me in the mean time no whit sorry but glad, to see you moved somewhat
upon the charge of a new thing or business: Are not all your things now new?
and your whole Business, is it not new, a new nothing?

This will do well indeed (if real) and will be a credit to you (if creditable)
to come out of your new Lights into our old Light; to forsake the Novelties of
your Scribe, and embrace the Antiquity of the Scripture: so you would be
thought to do, by alleging of that Scripture, Rev. 14.3. Though very
impertinently and improperly; For the song the Saints sing there for their
deliverance out of Antichristianism, (be it so) is not termed there to be as it
were a new song, by the werld and their leaders, by way of reproach or
scandalizing imputation: but by the Church and its Saints, the victory of the
Lamb and its followers; and the song which they sung for it, is termed a new
song, by way of Renown, or magnifying Reputation; as elsewhere the Scripture
speaks and means by the same phrase of a new song, Psalm 33.3. and Psalm
44.4. You apply it (as if the Lamb and his company, or their victory and
deliverance, were wronged and mistermed by some, as it were a new song) to me
for vilifying or miscalling your Dipping, a new Business Thus, instead of a
Leader of the world, (as you write and would make me) against your emaning and
will, you make me a follower of the Lamb; who though I bear a part in the
singing of that glorious new song, yet still may and shall sing my old song and
saying of your inglorious new Thing and Business, namely your late Dipping
amongst us.

See how soon you have profitted much in the school of one Tyrannus, Acts.
19.9. (so but the other day, you said and thought you were under the spirit of
Bondage) and what is the virtue and efficacy of this your new Dipping, how
quickly it has made you a right and perfect Scribe, and taught you the art and
skill and practice too of your master, which is to pervert Scripture, wresting
it to your own ill intents and purposes, and worsting it against its own good
meaning and sense.

For all this that you have cited here, The accusation of a new thing may
justly and manifestly still lie against you, for your dipping, whilst there
goes along with them and their conquering, the Revelation of a new song, or
that new song of the Revelation. But I must remember, that I have entitled
this, to be a word and work of Catechizing the Dipper, as I have Instructed the
Scribe: And instead of many Quaeres which I received, I shall give but these
four Questions.

1. Was not the person dipping a new thing? 2. Persons dipped, a new thing. 3.
Place where, a new thing. 4. And the very Dipping it self for the 1. Action 2.
Manner
a new thing? If either of them be such, then let this be my first
Catechistical Quaere to you, of the person Dipping, and tell me, or show me,
Quaere 1. What warrant you have from any precept, or example in facred
Scripture, or succeeding Primitive Antiquity, for one Lay-Breother (no Minister
called or ordained) to be the Dipper or Bapitzer of another, or any?

Paul indeed Baptized Crispus, and Gaius, and the household of Stephanas, 1 Cor.
1.14, 16.

The same Paul baptized the jailer, and all his, and a certain woman named
Lydia, Acts 16.14, 33.

Peter baptized Cornelius and his household, Acts 10.48. So Ananias baptized
Saul, Acts 9.18.

Philip baptized the people of Samaria, and Simon the sercerer, Acts 8.12, 13.
And the three thousand souls which were added unto the Church, were baptized by
the twelve Apostles, with the assistance of the seventy two Disciples, Acts
2.38, 41. And so the Commission was given by Christ to the Apostles, as of
Preaching, so of Baptizing, Mat. 28.19, 20.

And so it was from the beginning: The first Baptist was John, who baptized all
them of Judea and Jerusalem, and Christ himself, and his Disciples.

Now John I know, and Philip I know, and Ananias I know, and Paul I know, and
Peter I know, and the twelve Apostles I know, and the seventy two Disciples I
know, and the seven Deacons I know, that they were servants of the most High,
sent and appointed of God, to show unto us the way of salvation, and to
minister the holy Ordinances, Acts 16.17. Acts 10.15. But who are ye? Ye that
go for Dippers?

And whereas it is said, that Peter commanded them tob e baptized, it seems,
that together with Peter, some other Brethren also present there, either
assisted in bringing water, or (it may be) in pouring on water, or aspersing
therewith, the household of Cernelius: but at the command and call of Peter, and
God chiefly, who had baptized them before with the holy Spirit. Besides, they,
the Brethren, were some such of the Disciples, who had before an ordinary
calling to such like work; if not, here they had extraordinary to this in
present.

Thus John 1.25. the Pharisees (I wonder how the Scribes hypocrites kept off,
for if, as usually they had been here joined, then you and yours had been here
fetched in) in their scrupling at John, resolved the point, saying unto him, Why
baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, nor that Prophet.
And at the 33. verse John shows his Authority, namely his Mission; He that
sent me to baptize with water: The Baptist was of Gods sending; nay, when John's
disciples came and told him, saying, Rabbi, He that was with thee beyond
Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold, the same baptizeth, and all men
come to him. John answered and said, A man can receive nothing, except it be
given him from heaven, John 3.26, 27. So giving us a rule in general first: No
man can (lawfully) baptize, except he be authorized from above, that is, sent
of God. So at 34. ver. he applies and expounds, in the particular of
himself, as before, so here of Christ, He whom God has sent speaks the words
of God. And thus the Author to the hebrews, Chap 5. ver. 4. gives both the
same Rule in general; No man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is
called of God, as was Aaron: Also makes the application in particular to
Christ, ver. 5. So also Christ glirified not himself, to be made an high
priest, but he that said, Thou art my son; he said also, Thou art a priest,
etc. To circumcise was a ward of the Legal, and to baptize, of the Evangelical
Keys; and they belonged only to the Priests and Apostles, and their
successors in both admiministrations.

So then, still I ask the Question, Who are ye, who take upon you (I hope not)
to call over them which have evil spirits, the name of the Lord, (saying, We
adjure you by Jesus, yet) to call over them whom ye think to have the holy
Spirit, The name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, saying, We baptize
you in the name of these.

. 1. Your answer is, They are Brethren set apart by fasting and prayer of the
Church, to administer holy Ordinances. But if this would do it, that they are
Brethren, and that they are set apart; why do ye not all, at times, become
Dippers? for ye are all spearate Brethren, there is but one letter less (and as
little literature) in a brother separate then, or as in a brother sot apart.

And if truly set apart to administer holy Ordinances, why do they not give
over, as in ordinary, their secular Trades and Laicall Callings, and wholly or
chiefly tend upon such Administrations unto which they are set apart: for so is
both the precept and example of the word you so much pretend to. Separate me
Barnabas and Sakl for the work whereunto I have called them, Acts 13.2. Give
thy self wholly unto them, i.e. Reading, Doctrine, Exhortation, and the Gifts
given thee, 1 Timothy 4.15. It is not meet we should leave the Word of God and
serve Tables, Acts 6.2. and much less Stalls.

. 2. If set apart, by, or of whom I pray? by, and of the Church you say: and
what Church do you mean? sure your own small private company of Believers; or
be you a great public multitude of them. And now are you not again out of the
good old way? yes sure; for Christ never gave unto such a Church, no not to the
whole community of people Believers, as Believers, any such power and
authority, to set apart a Brother or Brothers, to admi-ister the Ordinances of
Christ, as Preaching, Baptizing; but only to such as himself chose out of the
Church and believers, to be Guides and Pastors of the same. So of old, Ephesians.
4.11. He gave some Apostles, and seem Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, and it follows, for the Church its perfecting and
edifying, etc. (not to the Church to ordain and set apart) the Authority is
Christ's to give, not the Believers. And Christ (of old too) gave the Keys and
the power of them (one part whereof is this setting apart of persons to the
administering of holy Ordinances) to Peter and the Apostles, as bearing the
persons of the Pastors and Guides of the Church, Mat. 16.19. and not as
representing the Church of Believers, (for then these also must have power to
bind and loose in earth and heaven by Censures, John 20.23. as well as the
Apostles and Pastors, and so women and children may come in for it, as
Believers.)

I could never see yet, that the Ministry of the separation, had any
separation to the Ministry, just and right according to the good old way;
only a kind of popular Democratical designation they have, but no
authoritative or official Ordination, which is Aristocratical. But why do you
not speak out to the full? Was he your brother set apart of the Church? i.e.
your selves the Brethren to administer the Ordinances of Christ and was he not
also authorized to give Orders? (or do you mean these also orders by them
Ordinances) how else will you be given to preaching, or be a gifted Preacher
ere long, if not already? Nay, when your Church and the Brethren did set him
apart to the Ministry, did not your Church and Brethren give him Orders and
Ordination to the purpose, that so he might give back again to your Church, and
any of the Brethren, Orders and Ordination; and so make yours a very orderly
Church indeed, in running round in a ring until you be turn-sick and
giddy-headed. But enought of this, having spoken largely of it in the
Instruction of the Scribe.

. 3. Set apart of the Church, but how I ask? You say by fasting and prayer, and
this was all it seems. And why not also, by Laying on of Hands, according to
the good old way, laid open and plain in the Text before cited, Acts 13.3. and
tracked or traced by St. Paul, 1 Timothy 4.14, and 2 Timothy 1.6.

Thus of old they, the holy Spirit, and the Apostles did set apart Brethren to
the administering of the Ordinances, and this of old, namely the Laying on of
Hands also, was a note of conferring ministerial power and authority, as a
means also of procuring spiritual gifts and abilities. Now the things which god
has joined together (in the constitution and sending out of a Minister in holy
Ordinances) let no man put asunder, or set apart Fasting, Prayer, and Laying on
of hands: none do or will, but such as have a spirit of Division and
Separation, an humor of Novelty and Innovation, and therefore I do not wonder
at it in you. Besides, you had no hands to impose in such a business, they are
too short to reach up, and to lay upon the head of a Brother, as to Commission
or Ordain him, or set him apart, as from God, for the sacred administration of
Baptism: you mouths shut up by fasting, and your hearts enlarged by prayer, may
do well, as to commend and present him to God, for his blessing and
confirmation of his graces, when such are rightly and duly set apart.

. 4. You have done now with your set apart Brother, but there is another matter
yet to be done according to the old way; for they also in the 13. Acts 4. sent
away Paul and Barnabas. And so Romans 10.15. How shall or can they preach, or
baptize, except they be sent. True St. Paul says, Christ sent me not to
baptize, 1 Cor. 1.17. (chiefly and primarily) but to preach; yet he baptized as
well as preached and intimates that Christ sent him to do both, as being
conjunct parts of the Ministry, Mat. 28.19, 20. though distinct offices in
themselves, and the one preeminent to the other, at leastwise in St. Paul.

But now you were not in a capacity as to this sending out of a Brother to
administer this or other public holy Ordinances; as he would not take this
honor to himself, to be an Ambassador of Christ, so you and your Brethren
could not give it unto him, and send him forth, for that you must be sent your
selves, before you can send others to go forth into the nations, Teaching and
Baptizing. So Christ himself, John 20.21. As my Father sent me, so send I you.
In a word, was, or is your Brothers separation to administer Baptism, and other
Ordinances, ordinary or extraordinary? If extraordinary, then your Church did
nothing here, for that is neither of man nor by man; you did not then set
apart: If ordinary, then your Church had nothing here to do, as which it self
was never set apart, or sent out from Christ and his Authority to such purpose.
This being not done as yet to you, or him, you may think what you will of your
Creature, and admire your Feature; your Brother set apart Dipper, is still in
the estate and condition as your selves, and as before; he was for any thing
you have done, a Brother, but no Minister; a Separate, no Set apart; a Dipper,
but no Baptizer; a Lay Teacher, but no lawful Preacher.

And I will tell you what Austin says of such, and I will tell it you in
Latin, because you understand it, Si Laicus Baptismum dederit, null a cogente
necessitate, alieni muncris est usurpatio, lib. 2. contra Parmen. cap. 13. This
I desire you to English to your Brother. And because perhaps you were enjoined
before your dipping to renounce your Latin also as a profane thing, or else
since your dipping, you may have drowned much of your Latin, or drained it
from you, I will give you another saying of Tertullian in English, in his book
of Baptism: To give Baptism, is in truth the Bishops right, after him it
belongs to Priests and Deacons; but not to them without Authority from him
received; for so the honor of the Church, which being kept, preserves peace:
were it not in this respect, the Laity might do the same all sorts might give,
even as all sorts receive: But because emultation is the mother of Schisms, Let
it content thee (which art of the order of Lay men) to do it in necessity, when
the state of time, or place, or person thereunto compels; for them is their
boldness privileged that help, when the circumstance of other men's dangers
craveth it.

Both these learned and pious Fathers yield, even to a Lay man, such a one as
your Brother or your self, to baptize, in a case or state of necessity; and one
of them enlarges it, To time, place, or persons: I shall but guess at the
particular meanings of them, if I miss, let who can and will rectify me, I
will thank him, for you (I know) cannot if you would

1. The case of necessity in state of Time, is when the Christian party
unbaptized is in present danger of death, and no lawful Minister at hand, or to
be suddenly procured.

2. The case of necessity in state of Place, is when Pagans are converted, and
a Church there to be planted, and no ordained Minister amongst the Converters.

3. The case of necessity in state of Person, I scarce understand, unless it be
this, When as he or she earnestly desires and imploreth for the same, whether
by its speech, or its need, and there is no Minister to give it Baptism; here
the Lord will have mercy and not sacrifice, and men are not to stand upon this
ordination, but the persons salvation.

Let but your Brother, or your self, stay and expect such cases of necessity,
before you, or he, dip any more, or baptize again, and then though you be not,
nor he, set a part for the administering that Ordinance, but are mere Lay men,
you shall hear nothing from me against the same. I assure you. But if in a well
ordered, and already planted and constituted Church, and that when there are no
such cases or states of necessity, but that lawfully ordained Ministers may
easily be procured, you and your Brethren will go on still to dip and baptize,
and that publicly, being no better ordered or set a part, then you have
related, I shall say though again, Ye take too much upon you ye sons of Gad
(for I shall not hold you of the Tribe of Levi, Number. 16.7.) or Issachar rather,
couching down between two burdens, Genes. 49.14. your Laical and Ministerial
Callings. And it shall come to pass as Zacharias says, Zach. 13.4, 5. that
such Prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision, which he has
prophesied: (and every one of his Division that he has made, and set a
partition; yea, of his Dipping also that he has ministered, and Baptisin) and
he shall say (and confess at last) I am no Prophet, I am an Husbandman: for man
taught me to keep cattle from my youth. God never ordained me to dip Christians
from my birth.

Distinctly, Take this a Presbyter or Priest, in respect of his Ministerial
Character, and Order, I mean only a sacerdotal gift, power, and commission) is
primarily and principlally the public and ordinary minister of Baptism: A
Deacon may baptize also, and that publicly, so it be at the appointment of the
Bishop or Priest, but a Priest by his own right may baptize ex officio, as we
say, by virtue of his sacerdotal office, even in the presence of a Bishop.

But a Layman, may not baptize publickely but only privately; neither
privately in the presence of a Priest or Deacon, but only in their absence;
neither always in their absence, but only in case of necessity. Then it has
been permitted (according to the good old way, and new way also of true
Churches) some such times to Laymen to baptize, so he intend to do that, which
the Catholic Church does, in that kind of administration.

The second Catechistical Quaere, is concerning the Persons Dipped.
Quaere, 2. What warrant, of precept, or example have you, from the Sacred
Word, or Prim tive Antiquity, for your Dipping and Anabap^iz^ng Christians
washed before; or members of the visible Church, baptized once in their Infancy
by lawful Ministers; so as the two Women and Sisters were, whom your Brother
Dipped?

Ask now of the days that are past, which were before, since the day that God
created man and woman upon Earth, and commanded circumcision in the eldest
Chruch of the Jews, and appointed Baptism in the younger Church of the
Gentiles: ask from the beginning to the end of both, whether there has been
any such thing as this, that a person circumcised or baptized in their infancy,
were ever recircumcised or rebaptized, at growth, or yeras after, when they
could render a Reason, or make confession of their Faith, etc. Instance in one
if you can, and be instant upon it as you will, and is not then your dipping
the formerly dipped, a new business?

As for that example of Joshua, upon Gods command (Circumcise again the
children of Israel the second time) Jos. 5.2. This does not intimate any
Repetition or Reiteration of that Sacrament, in, or to the same particular
Israelitish person circumcised, as if he should be now circumcised again; but
only relates the Restoration and Renovation of that Sacrament unto the people
of Israel in general, amongst whom Circumcision was a long while intermitted
and discontinued, by reason of their frequeut, yea, continual journals and
removings up and down, as the 4, 5, 6 Verses do evidence the same.

As for that Acts 19.5. of St. Paul's practice, and the example of the Ephesian
Disciples in the Acts, it is abundantly answered in my Instruction of your
Scribe, to which I refer you, and I add this for a plainer and shorter
Resolution for you, 1. That it makes nothing for your Re-dipping, and
Re-baptizing.

1. Because St. John's Baptism being there spoken of, and you or your Sect
being Popish in your opinion of Re-baptizing, and so holding from hence that
the Baptism of John and Christ, are two different Baptisms, and that in the
substance, and not only in the Degree of their signification and efficacy,
Here was no iterat on of one and the same, but the ministration of a diverse
Baptism, and so is not to your or my purpose.

2 For that there is no Baptism of water spoken of, much less there laid to be
reiterated; (that the Ephesian Disciples had long before received from some of
John's Disciples) but only the Baptism of Fire, i.e. of the Spirit and the
miraculous gifts of the same, is there mentioned, which they confess they had
not so much as heard of, namely, that they unsually as then, accompanied the
other Baptism of water. And so that the former was that they were baptized
with, and was poured upon them there, in the Name of Jesus, namely, the gifts
of the holy Spirit which were miraculous.

If you shall produce (as somewhat you must say for your selves) the example of
Saul, Cornelius and the Eunuch, baptized in their elder years upon their
conversion to, and cofession of Christ: and the commands of God to Ananias,
Peter and Philip, etc. to baptize them thereupon: All this, and as much more
which you might have alleged of the same sort brings no advantage to your
practice, no age, to your new business of Rebaptising the second time: for,
that the mentioned above, were their first and only baptizings, they being
some of them Pagans born, others, aliens from the Covenant of Christ, adverse
and opposite to ignorant, at leastwise, of the Christian Faith, were then frist
of all baptized, upon their embracing of it, and never after baptized again.
No, not the Black Ethiopian amongst them, was ever dipped the second time, And
what is all this, to your Redipping of two Women baptized before in their
infancy, as being born Christians and within the Covenant of Grace and Christ?
Yea more, if the Pope of Rome should come over into England and turn
Protestant, or become one of your Sect, a separate; nor we would, nor should
you (of right) baptize him again, having been baptized before rightly, as to
the Element and Words of Institution.

Therefore the Ancient Orthodox Church, never Rebaptized Heretics themselves,
upon their return and reversion to the Faith, (who were before baptized; nor
the children of Professors, though baptized by Heretics, or heretical
Ministers, if rightly according to the Ordinance) but rather condemned it, and
pronounced it a Heresy to hold it, or to practice so, a Rebaptization.

For the Sacrament of the Eucharist, there is a Quotiescunque, and it should be
received as often of the same Person as may be conveniently, for that our growth
and augmentation in grace, ought to be daily and continually, whereof the
Eucharist is the Sacrament: But I never read of above a semel, of the Sacrament
of Baptism, that it should be received above once, of the same person, because
our Spiritual Birth and incision into Christ is but once, whereof Baptism is
the Sacrament. The thing is acted but once, and therefore is signified but once.

I acknowledge indeed that it is no where expressly written, that baptism should
not be irerated and received the second time, so its no where said, there are
three Persons of the Deity, though the word (of persons) is no in sacred Writ,
yet the will of God about the things signified by the Word, is revealed and
expressed in the same. So, the Will of God, that baptism should not be
iterated, and once baptized should not be rebaptized, or baptized the second
time, appears partly out of what I have alleged.

1. That Circumision was never iterated, none ever circumcised twice, and
Baptism succeeds Circumcision.

2. That there is mention made of an Iteration or often Receiving, the Lords
Supper, but not a syllable of Intimation there or elsewhere, of the like of
Baptism.

3. That in the very Place and Scripture, where Christ instituted Baptism
(which yet had been the very proper place for it) there is no order at all, for
re-baptizing, or iterating baptism.

4. That among all the many examples of persons baptized, There is not one
recorded to have been rebaptized, no not Simon the Sorcerer, nor Demas the
Revolter, not one of the Cormthians; nor of the Galathians relapsed, but only
were called upon to Return to the Grace of the Covenant (sealed in their first
Baptism) by Repentance and Faith.

I suppose the grand reason of your re-dipping and re-baptizing in elder age is
this, for that you hold your first dipping and baptizing to be vain, Invalide,
and frustrate, which was transacted in your infancy (for so one of your Sect
told me the other day, that when he was a Child he was Christened, but he was
then also but cozened.) As I warned him, so I wish you, to take heed unto your
ways that you offend not in your tongue or thought, so, as in either of them
to reproach the Living God, or blaspheme his holy and effectual Baptism, by
thinking and calling this a Cozenage, and him a Mocker.

Did God cozen the whole Church and People of Israel when he appointed and
commanded their children even but of eitht days old to be circumcised? how then
does he cozen the Church and people of the Gentiles in our Infants baptized,
seeing baptism is the Circumcision made without hands, Col. 2.11. Nay, seeing
both Circumcision and Baptism are the signs, and seals of that one and the same
Everlasting Covenant of Grace; they neither are, nor can be any cozenage or
frustrate things, to the right Partakers of them (until they be frustrated by
themselves, the Partakers, as by Esau was his birthright, and also his
circumcision, and them God is rather mocked and cozened, then a Mocker and
Cozener;) but they are valide and of force to the spiritual good ends and
purposes of either; and therefore being rightly once imprinted, are of vigor
and virtue, of frait and efficacy during life, and so long as the Covenant
lasts, which is everlasting; (as I said) and so need not to be repeated and
reiterated, but are often to be revolved, and revived in our minds, memories
and meditation and the Tenor of the Covenant daily to be studied and practiced,
and the Conditions thereof on our part to be observed and performed accordingly.

Rather your self, Sir, and your two Sisters were cozeded and cheated (and
never so much in all your lives as) when you renounced that your first
Christian Infant baptism, and received this your second novel youthful Dippism.

Nor can that be any good reason of your re-dipping or rebaptizing, your defect
of Faith in the time of your Infancy, or sithence days of age, your Eccess of
sins, such as have vacated the gracious Covenant and vitiated a good
Conscience. For you must consider, that the Covenant is sealed in Baptism, or
Baptism is added to the Covenant on Gods part as well as man's: God promising
there Grace and Eternal life, and man stipulating for Faith and new Obedience;
Though therefore you might or did fly from the performance of your Promise, by
Hypocrisy or Apostasy, and upon such default on your part lost your right and
claim of eternal life; God notwithstanding stood and stands still firm to his
Promise on his part, as who never breaks Covenant with any, nor ever loses
his right to any party baptized by any default made on his side.

These things if they be true, as they are most true, God being not as man that
be should change and alter, to what purpose was it, that you should or did
ent^r anew, into a Covenant with God, and reiterate the seal thereof, Baptism,
and so be rebaptized and re-dipped, which was but will worship of yours,
fruitless; and a tradit on of men, needless; no where commanded you of God, no
where exemplified to you by the men of God, the Saints.

This rather you should have done as that one and only necessary thing, you
should have repented of your evil ways and works, and so have returned unto
God, in Covenant already and still with you, sealed in your Infant Baptism;
(though forfeited on your part, yet not released on Gods part) This you should
have earnestly pleaded with God, confessing your sins, and by Faith firmly
embracing it, through Christ your Advocate and Mediator; Thus you would have
set your former Baptism on work, and your self too in performing the conditions
thereof, and so you should have recovered and received all the fruits and
benefits of the Covenant of Grace, sealed to you by Baptism in your Infancy.

This every where in Scripture do the Prophets call upon Covenant-breakers on
their part, and his revolting and relapsed people, to repent and to return to
their first Covenant with God, sealed in their Circumcision, not to any
re-circumcision as you may see Jeremy 3.1, 12. Hos. 2.7. and 6.1.

And so the Apostle calls to the Corinthians, and the Galathians who were far
gone from God, yea fain from Grace, not to put off their old baptism and to put
on a new; but to put off the old man, and to put on the new, to Repent of sin
and to return to the Grace of the Covenant, and to perform the condition of
their baptism, and to grow up in the fruits of the Spirit, minding them of
their first baptism, that as many of them as were baptized into Christ have put
on Christ, Galat. 3.27. 1 Cor. 6.11. such were some of you, but ye are washed,
but ye are sanctified, etc. see also Romans 6.3, etc.

The Husband who has kept the marriage contract inviloable and undefiled in
his part, and is willing to receive into bed and board a fornicating wife,
requires, no new marriage or the solemnities thereof again, but her humiliation
only and submission, with promise of better carriage after. God, who keeps
Covenant for ever, fast and indissoluble on his part, is also ever ready to
admit into his Grace and Favor, all who have gone a whoring from him, only
upon their repentance and sorrow, with resolves of reformation for time to
come, and expects no new solemn Re-baptizings and Re-dippings into the
Covenant: but I have spoken somewhat of this, in the Scribe instructed.

I shall add to this point, but, a few words of the good old Fathers of the
Church; and shall show by them that this your second baptism, or rebaptizing,
was and is none of their good old way.

Some of them built their judgments against Rebaptization, upon those Texts,
Romans 6.9. Heb. 9.28. wherein its said, Christ died once for all, but once
offered for sin: Hence Basil de Spirit usancto, Cap. 15. (...). I English it
for your sake, We know there is but one saving Baptism, for that there is but
one Death for the world, and one Resurrection from the dead, of which Baptism
is the Figure, Damasc. lib. 4. Orthod. sid. Cap. 10. has almost the same
words, as to the one Death.

Augustine also de vera and falsa poen. Cap. 3. (if that be his Book) has the
same also, Semel Christus crucifixus est, and una morte sua nos omnes redemit,
quod videns Ecclesia, intellexit, non iterandum esse Baptisma. (Let the English
before serve for this also.) Yea, Damascen calls the Reiteration of Baptisin
rightly collated, (...) as if rebaptization, were a kind of Recrucifixion of
Christ, others of them concluded against rebaptization from John 13.10. He that
is washed needs not, save to wash his feet; but is clean every whit. Thus
Augustine, lib. 11. de Baptismo contra Donat. cap. 14. Quid sit perniciosius,
non baptizari an rebaptizari, judicare difficile est; Invenio de utraque Domini
sententiam; nam and Petro dixit, qui lotus est non habet necessitatem iterum
lavandi; and Nicodemo, nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua and Spiritu, non
intrabit in regnum coelorum: It is hard to judge whether of the two is more
pernicious, not to be baptized at all, or to be again baptized. I find the
Lords sayings of both, for he said to Peter, He that is washed needs not,
save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit. And to Nicodemus, unless a man
be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven,
John 3.5. It seems St. Austin could not well tell, or would not, which of the
two are the worst, an Abaptist or an Anabaptist.

Ambrose also, lib. de iis qui initiantur mist. cap. 6. and Fulgentius de Fide
ad Petrum, cap. 36. agree to the same interpretation of, and argumentation out
of that place of John against Rebaptization; especially Fulgentius, whose words
are, Ideo Baptisma, et si ab Haeretieis fuerit administratum, modo in nomine
Patris, Filii, and Spiritus sancti fuerit factum, venerabiliter agnoscendum,
and ab hoc, nullatenus iterandum esse, juxta dictum Christi semel lot us non
indiget, nisi ut pedes lavet. I shall english this the rather to you, because
it confirms a passage of mine before, which (perhaps) seemed strange, if not
false to you: Therefore Baptism, although it were administered of Heretics, as
long as it was done in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, is
venerably to be acknowledged, and even for this, not to be repeated or
reiterated, according to the saying of Christ, once washed, has no need, save
to wash his feet. Others of them concluded against Rebaptizing from Ephesians. 4.5.
One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism. Thus Leo Papa, cited by Gratian decret, de
censec. did. 4. Canon non licet. And so Thom. Aquinas in 4. Sent. Distinct. 3.
I shall only cite what the learned Hugo says, Hac authoritate universi
utuntur, All the Ancients make use of this Text and Authority, against second
or double Baptism: quod enim unum est, geminari non potest: that which is but
one, cannot be doubled and iterated, whether a man be baptized of a Catholic,
or of a Heretic, as he also adds; but no more of this, because there is
somewhat of this unity of Baptism, in my Instruction or a Scribe.

I know there be some of our Divines do not allow of these ancient Deductions
and Argumentations from those Texts cited by them; which I believe they would
have made good and firm, if they had been questioned in their times; and now
others might do the same in their behalf. But this in present is only my
business, to show their Judgments (not to maintain all their Arguments, by
which they grounded them) I say, to show what their judgments about this your
Redipping and Rebaptizing, namely, that they are quite against it, and would
not own it, as any of their good old ways; its evident, this was their strong
and unanimons judgment, and therefore the (and very probably) confirmed it
from the Scripture Dictates, mentioned and produced above.

The third Catechistic. I Quoere, aebout the manner of this Dipping.
Quaere 3. What warrant or command, or example, have you from the sacred
Scriptures, or the succeeding Primitive Antiquity, for your dipping of persons
in their clothes and vestments at your baptizing them; so your two Sisters
stripping themselves in a chamber, and putting on other, and others clothes,
that so they might have their own dry against they came to the House again from
the Pond; went into the Pond in their clothes, and there were dipped in their
body, and clothes, (as you relate to me, and as you, or others instructed them)
All this speaks novelty, and nothing else but a new business, unheard in
Scripture, unseen in Antiquity, and the Ancient Churches.

For do your think that thd Eunuch, or Lydia, were thus, and in this manner
baptized of Philip and Paul in the waters clothed, and with their garments upon
them; and that to this purpose they went aside in private to shift themfelves
of the suits they had on, and to put on others that they might have dry clothes
ready, against they came out of the water with their wet ones: say not so, no,
not in your thought, for the Scripture says no such matter, no, nor suggesteth
any such thing to thought. This being then silent here, succeeding Antiquity
must be heard what they say, and you cannot refuse to do so, seeing in your
dipping you plead it for the good old way, and reject my appeaching it for a
new business.

Now there, and then, when Baptism was performed by immersion or dipping, (yet
I make some difference 'twixt the words as I shall show) they stripped their
bodies of all their clothes, and went into the water stark naked, and were
baptized naked, even as Adam and Eve created naked were in Paradise; as naked
as ever they themselves were born into the world; as Christ was crucified on
the cross, and as the bodies shall go to heaven or hell: (for by these
patterns, the Ancients expressed the manner of it, and if you see any vail, or
such like, about, or over the bodies of any of these at the time of baptizing,
it is the Painters fancy, it was not theirs, the Ancients fashion.)

I know you look for a proof of this old way, this naked truth, which I shall
give you to the proof and reproof of your new business, of clothed or cloaked
novelty.

Cyril of Hier. Catech. Mystag. 11. says, (...), etc. (...), etc. When ye went
into the water, you put off your garments, as a token of the old man put off,
etc. and so being naked, you were like Christ; who being naked, spoiled the
powers and principalities: and it was a wonderful thing ye were naked, and were
not ashamed as Adam. And so other Ancients of the Greek Church do testify the
same, whom I forbear to cite; only I add Chrysostom Homil. 6. upon Col. 2.
because he adds the mystical of this putting off the garment at baptism, to
be the putting off the old man: (...). And Elias Cretensis upon the 4. Oration
of Nazianzen, because he makes an addition of certain officers and helpers
appointed to undress them, and take off the garments of those that were to be
immerged or baptized, and to dress them, and to put them on again afterward.
Ad sacerdotem quidem is adducitur, qui spirituali regeneratione donandus est,
ipse autem, and pedes ejus adhibita ministrorum eorum qui ad hoc constituti
sunt opera, calceis nudat, and corpus universum detegit. And for the ancient
Latin Church, Ambrose testifies the Custom, and urges from it against the
covetous persons, saying, Thy mother brought thee forth naked, when thou came
into the world; the Church (thy mother too) received thee naked when thou
came to the Laver, and would. thou go clothed and rich to Heaven? I will
transcribe the very words of Ambrose in his own eloquent language, Ideo nudi in
saeculo nascimur, nudi etiam accedimus ad lavachrum, ut nudi qucque and
expediti ad coeli januam properemus: quam autem incongruum and absurdum est, ut
quem nudum matter genuit, nudum suscipit Ecclesia, dives intrare velit in
coelum, etc. And because I may have occasion anon, and again, to make use of
it, I will also set down Anselmus his witness and words upon the third Chapter
of Matthew, where twice he says it; amongst the reasons he gives of Christ
being baptized, this was one, and another this, That none should disdain to be
baptized of his inferior, (as he was of John) That none should be ashamed to
be naked or denudated in the sight of men, (as he was before John, and the rest
of the company there baptized.) Plures causae quare Christus ad baptismum
accessit, primo ut exemplo nos invitaret, nequis forte in conspectu hominum
denud^^i erubescerit, etc. It seems by this testimony of Anselm, that Christ
himself, as all those baptized of John, were baptized naked.

If you think all this to make nothing against your new business, because they
speak of men's dipping, and yours was of women's dipping, I shall therefore
(because I see you mind not that of St. Paul, that in Christ Jesus now there
is neither male nor female, no discrimination of sexes, as to the Gospel
ordinances) show you the same old way, in use for women also; so Chrysostom in
his Epistle to Pope Innocent relates, that women also were baptized and
immerged naked: for there he relates unto that Pope, how, when Theophilus a
Bishop of Alexandria had raised a tumult for the ejecting of himself out of the
Church, this, amongst other things, fell out, That the women who were there in
the Church, and had stripped themselves naked, as prepared for Baptism, upon the
noise, and for fear of this sudden and cruel commotion, ran away naked out of
the Church; and through fear, had no time and leisure to provide for the
shamefastness and modesty of that sex, by putting on their clothes again. I
add somewhat to the words, but nothing to the sense of Chrysostom. And he also
relates, that there were women appointed of purpose by the Church (not to
shift off the better clothes in a chamber, and put on worser to be dipped in, as
your course is) to accompany them to the water, and there to take off their
clothes, and so also for the more decency, and that nothing of immodesty might
appear or be occasioned, the women were baptized naked by themselves apart from
men, (as the men apart by themselves naked.) To which also Epiphanius
attesteth, Haeres. 79. and Augustine 22. Book of the city of God, 8. Chap. for
Augustine there speaks de part foeminarum ad Baptisterium, a certain part and
place about the Fonts, or where the women stood apart from the men ready to be
baptized: like as Epiphanius does of (...), etc. an order of Deaconesses
appointed for the safeguarding of the women's modesty and shamefastness, to
undress them at Baptism. And Cyril also in the place aforesaid. The which
Custom held on until Beruards time, who was made a Monk in the year 1110. in
whose days that old way was put by, because of some scandal and offenses were
given or taken, through haughtiness and wickedness on the one or other side,
which the innocence and honesty of the former Ages kept off and prevented.

By this time, Sir, I hope you see, that your dipping of women in their
clothes, is a new business in the Church, and has no print or footsteps to be
seen in the old way, or amongst the ancient Writers and Fathers of the former
Churches. Yea, this your clothes-dipping also, is so new a thing, that not much
above fourteen or fifteen years ago, your predecessors, and primer
Anabiptists, the Virgins of Sion, and the precious Sons of the same, the
Proselytes of those days, did in the Evening resort and run together, and went
naked into the Rivers, their Jordan, and were there dipped and plunged in their
naked bodies (without clothes on them) by their John-Dippers, or Dipper- John's.

I cannot deny, but that Infants also, as well as grown persons, were,
according to the old way, undressed, or taken out of their clothes, and were
baptized and dipped naked, and presently clothed again, and so carried to the
Bishop to be confirmed, as Gregory the Great acknowledges in his Sacramentary,
in which is set down the order of baptizing Infants: To which I shall add the
Testimony of another, one Alcuine or Albine, by name, who lived in the Year
780. and so 220. years after the aforesaid Gregory; and the rather I do,
because he was an English man, born in Yorkshire, (and, it may be, thereupon
called the other name Albine, of Albion) he was the scholar of our venerable Bede, and the schoolmaster also (as friend and familiar) to Charles the Great;
by whose advice, Charles the Great founded the University of Paris, and
appointed four principal Heads and Presidents thereof, Rabanus, Alcuinus,
Claudius, Johannes Scotus, all the Scholars of our Beda: (so much is France
beholding to England for their Learning and learned men) but to the purpose,
the words of Alcuine are Postquam vestiti fuerint Infantes (he is speaking of
Infants after they had been baptized naked) deportantur ante Pontificem ad
confirmand^m; who sat in a seat fixed somewhere in the Church, or in Sacrario,
the Chancel or V^stry, for the same purpose; whereby I conceive, it was at the
solemn times of Baptism, twice in the year, Easter and Whitsontide, an evideut
Testimony, both for Infant Baptism, and also for Infants baptized naked. And it
is true also that the old and late Liturgy of our Church of England mentions
the Ministers taking the child to be baptized, into his arms, and naming it,
shall (as the Rubric has it) dip it in the water, so it be discreetly and
warily done, but whether in the clothes, or out of the clothes, it is not
expressed. In present I think, and so shall, until I be better informed, that
our Church meant a dipping of the Infant out of the clothes, and therein owned
the Antiquity of the practice; but yet showed her authority in things of such
nature, for that she adds, if the child be weak, it shall suffice to pour
water upon it, so indulging the health and welfare thereof: (and what child is
not weak, in these our Northern cold Clymates?) though not contradicting
Antiquity which did so dip children naked in those Eastern warmer Countries,
where they might more safely do it; I am sure she meant not your new way of
dipping in the clothes over head and ears, and the whole body. What if she
meant the dipping of the naked face only, or the naked forehead, and head also
in the water, by such as hold still to the dipping there mentioned? so doing,
as it crosses not the Antiquity for the reason I gave but now, so it favors
not your novelty for the reasons I have given against the same all this while.

By this time you may see and hear how your dipping and baptizing bodies in
their clothes, in a new business, and none of the old way. I remember Justin
Martyr in dial. ad Tryph. gives the Pharisees, that peculiar term and epithet,
of (...), because of their washing so many things, as cups, pots, vessels and
tables, us are mentioned Mark 7.4. But these are civil or superstitious
washings, or ceremonial. Your Scribes surpass these Pharisees, in dipping of
clothes and all, in their baptizing and washings, which are Eclesiastical,
religious, and even moral with them, and therefore may more justly be called
(...), dippers or washers, and in this sense, John's the Baptists. I do look
when you shall fall from this novelty in this Sacrament of Baptism, to such
another novelty in the other Sacrament, and when you break bread, give it into
your proselytes hands with their gloves on. I omit to open unto the Reader, the
packet of these other frivolous if not scurrilous Rites and Ceremonies which
were used at this your dipping, some whereof you relate, and others, (for
modesty I suppose) you silence, but are talked of by the spectators, as
ridiculous and infamous. I question them not at all, for they were all such,
questionless, only this I question, How men of such sincerity only, should be
thus full of ceremony also, and wonder also how you, who hate in others,
innocent and significant ceremonies in ministerial celebrations, and abominate
them, as the abomination of desolation, throwing them away as the rags, and
patches of Popery, and rending them off, as the fringes and laces of the whore,
should now be so far in love of them as to clothe and adorn your Dippal
administrations in such offensive and senseless Rites, and Ritual dresses, so
that your brother may be better called a master of Ceremonies then a Minister
of Ordinances.

This one thing I shall question here, why your brother was so quick of his
words, and so slow at his work? for so it seems by the narration (which is your
relation) that he spoke the words according to the institution; I baptize thee
in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, before he dipped them
in the water, though but immediately before, The which I take to be another
novelty, if not more, some vanity be not in it.

For our English Liturgy, consonant to the ancient Liturgies of the Churches,
does otherwise and better practice and direct: where (as the Rubric has it)
the Minister naming the child, shall dip it in the water, saying, I baptize
thee, etc. And I conceive there is good reason for it, that the dipping into,
or sprinkling with water, and the pronouncing the words of administration I
baptize, etc. should be done in one and the same instant of time, as two
conjunct Acts, (and not one before the other) because the sign and the thing
signified are two correlate parts, and go together, not one before the other.
If either may go immediately and instantly before the other, It is the dipping,
before the words, as our Liturgy has it, (Dip it in the water, saying) and not
the words before the dipping as your Tympany does it, (he spoke the words,
before he dipped) nay, there is not verity or truth in it to say the words, I
baptize, etc. before the party be in the water, or the water upon the party.

But your Dippers tongue, dipped and tipped (it may be) aforehand for the better
keeping out of the cold of water, did run so fast, in the pronouncing the words
of institutution (too fast indeed, as which did run before it was sent, and
spoke before the Lord opened the mouth of the man, Numb. 22.28.) that his
hands, having taken such fast hold of the sisters by their clothes about the
shoulders and loath to let it go, or put them out of his sight, till needs
must, he forgot the work and action of dipping them, and putting them under the
water at the same time, or before the speaking of the words of Institution: And
so I may say, as the Comaedian does, in a like dipping and tripping, Neque
lingua neque manus suum faciebant officium, I may put in neque pedes (as the
Comaedian does) for his feet ran too fast to the Pond, as well as his tongue ran
too fast in the Pond.

The Fourth Catechistical Quaere, is about the place where the Dipping was done.
Q. 4. What warrant have you of precept, or example of sacred Scripture, or
succeeding primitive Antiquity, for your dipping of your Sisters and other your
Proselytes, in Ponds at your Baptizing. This to be done, I understand from all
present there. It was your modesty and humility not to make any Relation or
mention of it, for that it was your own Pond of your yard, and so not to glory
of it, that the Dipper should make choice of your Pond, your common and
ordinary pond, where your Ducks and Geese do wash themselves daily, to honor,
it with a solemn dipping of two special Sisters therein at their Baptism.

I speak not this, as if I took exception to common and ordinary water, used in
Baptism; yea, I acknowledge that God therefore also made choice of the vulgar
and common Elementary water to set forth, as the purifying and cleansing of
souls from sin, by the blood of Christ (which water that washes does well
represent) so the general offer and benefit of the grace of Christ thereby to
all, rich and poor, even the meanest and vulgars (which the commonness and
copiousness of water, every where to be had, does also intimate.) And therefore
that question about the necessity of water unto baptism, so that in decay and
defect thereof, there can be no Baptism in wine, or milk, or other liquor,
needed not either to have been first raised, or after so hotly pursued by
Hunnius and his party, for that water is so common a liquor as every where to
be had, and at all times, as there will be no need (nor has been that ever I
read) of running out for wine, or other liquor to minister the same in Baptism.
Yea, and so long as water may be had, wine or other liquor is not to be used
out of a luxury of pride, or pride of luxury, lest they be called Vinarii, or
(...) of us, winy and windy men too, like as some, who used water instead of
wine in the Lords Supper, when this might also be had under a pretense of
abstinence, but not abstinence of pretense, were called by the Church (...), or
Aquarii, watery and washy Heretics, as Augustine witnesses, Haeres. 64.

But yet this I add, that if there be such an invincible want and unavoidable
scarcity and privation of water for Baptism, and wine for the Lords Supper, so
as to water can be procured, but only wine may be had, where baptism cannot
with edification, and ought not in duty, to be delayed; so also no wine can be
gotten, but only water, where the Lords Supper cannot with edification, and
ought not in duty to be delayed, there the one may be supplied by the other in
each Sacrament; the water by wine in baptism, and the wine by water in the
Lords Supper. And if there be no affectation of novelty in either, no contempt
of either of the elements, no neglect of inquisition or acquisition of the
proper element to either, I suppose, there can be no charge of Heresy, or
breach of institution, in such administrations, where the peculiar and proper
common elements (as I may so call them) of wine and water, proper to the Lords
Supper, and commonly in use, proper to Baptism, and commonly in use, cannot be
had and procured, where such administrations ought to be done and performed.

If any shall here ask what need all this, seeing water is every where to be
had for baptism, and also wine for the Lords Supper, I answer, either, is not
so every where to be had, and therefore it is not a needless discourse; for
there is no use of wine in America, where there where brethren that wrote to
Calvin hereabouts, as Beza in his 25 epistle relates; and there are besides a
sort who were, and are, and so called, Abstemious, who cannot endure the very
smell or least taste of wine, but they will swoon away, as we speak, and fall
down for dead; what shall these be done to? They must either not receive the
Lords Supper at all, which they cannot well answer, if they ask not for it, nor
we, if we deny it them; or else we must give it, and they receive it but in one
kind, (for neither can they away with it, if diluted and mixed with water) and
then we shall do as the Papists would have us, and Bellarmine propounds, as
the wise way of the Roman Church, to heal up this inconvenience, namely, the
withholding of the Cup from such people, ( lib. 4. de Sacr. cap. 24.) And how
and if the Priest also should be so Abstemious? its readily replied, none of
these are ever taken with such a disease.

What remains then, but that they must and may take this Sacrament in water, or
other drink, usual and familiar unto them; like as Philip Malancthon tells the
Ruthins, that they may do well to take the same in their (...), or ordinary
Mede, for the scarcity of wine amongst them, lib. de usu integri sacramenti.

And if there had been no water in that Desert where the Eunuch was converted,
and earnestly desired Baptism, (as in many deserts there is none) and he had
said, See here is wine in my chariot (in stead of) See here is water, what does
hinder me to be baptized, I doubt not but Philip would have baptized him
therein, and the absence of water would not have hindered it, but the
providence of God disposed it otherwise, and better too, there.

Lastly, I should not have touched upon this discourse, but that I find
Hunnius, and Bellarmine, and another Jesuit, Jacobus Gualterius, coursly
handling Calvin, Beza, Melancthon hereabouts, whom I ought to defend in the way
of truth, as being three great Lights of the Protestant Religion. To let the
first of these alone, Hunnius; the third I named Gualterius, calls this a
Diabolical mutation of the Eucharisticall matter, lib. 1. Tabulae Chronol. The
second, Bellarmine, roundly asks, Quis dedit Philippo authoritatem mutandi
sacramentorum materiam? somewhat like my Scribe and Pharisee; By what authority
do thou these things, and who gave thee this authority? (he speaks of
Philip Melancthon) I answer, Christ gave it unto him, and the other two, (in
the cases mentioned) and that upon good reason. For a good reason hereof may be
given, that this being the mind and meaning of our Savior Christ, by setting
forth the signs of those things by which our bodies are washed and cherished
(as the water and wine) thereby to present our spiritual ablution and
augmentation by his blood, we do no way swerve or go from that his mind and
meaning, if without any wantonness of innovating in the want of the one, we
substitute another, as wine for water in baptism, or water for wine in the
Lords Supper, or any other common and ordinary liquor that may have, though not
an equal, yet alike analogy, of washing and nourishing spiritually.

By which may be put back what the aforesaid Hunnius objecteth, (as that we
have no word of institution, none for substitution, and whatsoever is not of
faith is sin) all which are blunted, by our keeping still to the mind and
meaning, purpose and intention of Christ, as to the end and use of the elements
in general, though the particular elements themselves cannot be procured. And
whereas he puts a man so baptized under some perplexity of conscience and under
the temptation of Satan (for I will instance but in that) (see you are not
baptized with water, but with some other liquor which was neither sanctified by
any Word of God, to this use of washing away sin, neither has it any such
promise in Scripture adjoined thereto) he may be taken out of the same
tentation, by this answer of a good conscience; That water was sought out for,
and none could be gotten, and he was in danger and extremity of life, and in
distress and want of Christ, and his blood to wash his sins away. There being
some wine in a vessel in the house, a Minister affecting no innovation, but his
good and salvation, and the sacramental application of Christ's washing blood
for his further confirmation and consignation which he so earnestly desired,
took wine (when he could have no water) and poured of it upon him, using the
words I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
and so he may hope, ye doubt not, but God has accepted of him as rightly
baptized and interressed in Christ. If it be said, what analogy in the Lords
Supper is there of water to wine, seeing this is made up of many bunches of
grapes; or in baptism, of wine to water, seeing this has a virtue to wash and
cleanse: I reply, such particular analogies (though they may be profitably
thought of where the proper Elements to each Sacrament may be possibly gotten,
which are not negligently to be omitted, yet are they not so precisely to be
urged, and strictly pressed the one against the other, in the times of the
scarcity of each (Though if so, I can say, That the water also is made up of
many drops of Rain, and the wine has also a washing and cleansing virtue) It
is sufficient that there is here a general analogy for the testifying of our
mutual Communion and spiritual ablution, as here is, in that we use the same
kind of symbols, as drink (and meat also) and washing, which are common and
usual amongst us, in defect of the proper and special, and specially in that we
hold one and the same faith in, conjunction with, and sanctification by one
Christ and Savior. If indeed, though in a case of exigency and scarcity of
water, any should substitute or use such a matter as has no power at all in it
self to wash or cleanse off the filth of the body, and so not to signify the
blood of Christ which cleanses from the guilt of sin, it were to be
disallowed, as that Baptismus Arenarius spoken of by Nicephorus, lib. 3. cap.
ult. how that a young man of the Hebrews being desperately sick and calling for
baptism, in want of water was superfused with sand, and miraculously recovered
immediately; whom notwithstanding the Bishop of Ascalonia being consulted with
thereabouts, sent away unto Jordan to be truly baptized; the former baptism,
being indeed as the house in the Gospel, built upon the sand and could not
stand. I know no History of a sandy Supper of the Lord, as I may so speak, to
parallel with that sandy baptism, as it was called, unless it be that
sucacoena, that dry Communion and Supper the Popish Priests do give to their
people; for they also as to the one material part of this sacrament, give them
not that which does and should represent the blood of Christ, and satisfy
their thirst, as who give them no wine, nothing at all instead of it; and is it
not all one, to give them nothing, and to give them that which does not, nor
can signify the blood, and satisfy the thirst; I am sure nothing does neither

But why do I thus enlarge I return to you and your Pond water. And here again
I must tell you, it was a new business, for the ancient manner of the Church in
the purest times was to baptize, as out of the Church, so in Wels and Rivers,
Floods and Fountains, so Walafridus Strabo says in the 26 Chapter of
Ecclesiastical things; For thus Christ and all the other multitudes of people
were baptized of John in the river Jordan, as is expressly said by the
Evangelists, two of them, Matthew. 3.13. and 6. Mark 1.5, 9. and where it is
said, John baptized in water, (...) Beza notes that Jordan is meant in that
Story, wheresoever its mentioned in the singular number, as there Matthew. 3.11.
And whereas John 3.32. John was also baptizing in Aenon, near to Salim, because
there was much water there, either Jordan overflowed hither also, and these
were other rivers about Aroer, and and by the river Arnon mentioned in the
Books of Moses often, and meant here by the many waters, like as Acts 8.36. they
came to a certain water, and the Eunuch said, See here is water, thereby is
meant the river Eleutheras, lying without the borders of Egypt, where Philip
overtook or found the Eunuch, and baptized him, says our learned Beza, Yea,
and that Text, Acts 16.13, and 15. that Lydia and her household were baptized by
a Rivers side, of the Apostle St. Paul.

Now tell me who of old, as old the Gospel and as the Acts of the Apostles was
ever baptized, or (as you speak) dipped in a Pond? True in the 5 of John there
is mention made of a Pond or Pool ( Stagnum, a standing or pent up water)
whereinto whosoever, after the moving or troubling the water by an Angel
descending, stepped in first, was made whole of whatsoever disease he had; but
this being a special Pond of water, extraordinarily assisted of God, and
miraculously, for medicinal cures of bodily diseases, makes nothing for Ponds
generally and ordinarily appointed, and mysteriously used for baptismal washing
of spiritual sins of the soul: Where is now your zeal for Scripture examples,
and patterns, that you so much pretend to make show of? How are you still taken
tardy in those defaults (as you make them in us) of humane inventions? is this
your conformity to the Word, is it not rather your difformity from it, and its
presidents? and so indeed this people have committed two evils, you have
forsaken the clear Fontains and Rivers, and Well-springs, and have sought out
muddy Ponds, Pools, and Well-springs, and have sought out muddy Ponds, Pools,
and standing waters to dip your proselytes in, and so leaving the Scripture
examples, embrace your own inventions: we our selves do not therefore baptize,
no not in Rivers or Fountains, nor do we press the same

For such examples are not (we know) left upon the record of Scriptures for our
imitation; but for our learning, Romans 15.14. Yea, we find the custom of
baptizing in Rivers and Springs, used by John the Baptist, and practiced also
by Philip, to have bin altered and left by other the Disciples and Apostles.
Peter therefore baptized, or if not Peter himself, those that accompanied Peter
thither, or some Disciples he met there, (because its said, Peter commanded
them of Cornelius house to be baptized, and no man is said properly to command
himself) Baptized them within the doors, and did not remove thence, they and
all the company to the next Rivers or Fountains. Yea, and Paul (though he had
but lately, Acts 16.13, and 15. baptized Lydia and her household at a Rivers
side, a place where prayer was wont to be made, as also preaching, and whither
women resorted, and whither came Lydia with her household, who, the Lord opening
her heart, attending to what Paul said, was converted, and so, being at this
time by the Rivers side, was baptized there occasionally) in the same Chapter
33, 34. Verses baptized the Jailer and all his, in the prisonhouse,
occasionally also, because he was there, and in that place converted to the
faith: the words themselves do evince the same. The Jailer took Paul and Silas,
the same hour (it was midnight) and washed their stripes, and was baptized, he,
and all his straightway, and therefore the Disciplse lead them not out to the
next Rivers and Fountains, it was no time and season to do it at midnight, and
his being baptized straightway, the same hour, shows that there was no stay
made until next morning, to have it done in any such place; and the like is to
be thought of all those other persons and their households whom St. Paul is said
to have baptized, namely, in their houses, and not in Rivers and Fountains.
Likewise (which I should have mentioned first) Ananias baptized Saul in the
house where he found him, sitting in sorrow for his persecution, and in
amazement about his vision in the way, though now blind: so the series of the
Text shows it, Ananias went his way, entered into the house where Saul was,
put his hands upon him, and immediately the scales fell from his eyes, and he
received his sight forthwith, arose and was baptized, namely, in the place and
house where he was, Acts 9.19. Afterward in process of time, the Church of
God, left off going to Rivers as for baptism, and ordained large vessels for
the same purpose, called Baptisteria with the Latins, and (...) with the
Greeks, and with us, as with them also, Ambrose and others, Fonts, or Founts;
though at first these were placed without the Church or Temple, but with a
house also over the same, and that for the honor of the Christian Religion,
and the more decent celebration of that mystery thereof, so Cyril in his first
Catech. and Paulinus in his 12 Epistle to Severas, and Nazianzen in his 40.
Oration. And there was at first but one of these in a City placed nigh unto the
Basilica or greatest Church, wherein all, rich and poor were baptized; like as
it is still observed and to be seen in Florence, Parma, Bononia, and other
Cities of Italy. And one thing more of Antiquity I will acquaint you, and some
others with, that both Constantine the Great, Emperor, and Professor too, in
the year 300 after Christ, or thereabouts, made one himself, a costly Font for
baptizing, and willed others to do the like, whose outside was of Marble, or
Porphyry, and the inside of pure silver, which I repeat to tax the niggardise
or prophanenesses of these latter ages, wherein men who yet are great
professors, put off the same Sacrament of baptism, with an earthen Basin, or a
pewter one atthe best, in most places.

And so a little after for good causes, they remmoved their Fonts or
Baptisteries, into the very Churches, and placed them (as they were with us)
next the porch or entrance of the same as Gregor. Turonensis witnesses, lib.
2. hist. cap. 21. so called, because he was Bishop of Turon in France in the
year 573. who testifies this amongst the Histories of France, which he wrote,
and so also does the Decretal distinct. 4. cap. 106. For good causes says
Turonensis, best known to themselves, which because he could not, or would not
relate, being in a history (and that removal of the Fonts was of mystery) this
may be one, that the word, and the first seal of entrance, which is baptism, as
well as the second seal, of continuance, and perseverance, which is the
Euchar^st, might be both administered within the Church, for more order,
decency, and convenience sake.

Now all this I have added to show how your Pond-baptism, is a new business,
not only as to Apostolic customs, but to the Primitive fashions, and all
successive practices; yea, as to your own original Authors and Scismarchs, of
whom I told you before, who ran not to Ponds but to Rivers to be dipped.

Not that I make any difference of waters, as to the material of baptism, or
the effectual thereof, whether it be Pond-water, or Rivere-water, or Well-water,
as who hold with Tert. in his book of Baptism, ca. 1.12. Nulla est distinctio,
mari quis aut stagno, flumine aut font, lacu aut alueo diluatur, and I give
you this reason, because in the water of all those places, there is, and rests
the Analogy, which each of them being true, natural, and elementary water, has
with the blood and Spirit of Christ, purging and cleansing from sin. And
because Christ by his Example (as Chrysostom homil. 25. in John.) by his
Mandate, Word, and Authority, has sanctified all water as well as Jordan. But
it is that which I have said of your Pond-dipping only to these purposes.

First to convince you of a new business, who talk so much of your good old
way, of which, that is none, but the River-dipping, and other, was that.

Secondly to take you tardy in following Scripture and primitive Examples,
which you pretend so much to, as who do forsake the River-dipping, and go to
the Pond.

Thirdly, to tell you that as there is no discrimination in waters to choose
of, for baptismal-uses and benefits, so there was (hark you, Sir, in your ear)
little or no discretion in you and yours to make choice, of a commond Pond or
Weyr to dip your two new converted holy Sisters in, wherein Horses, Cowes,
Swine, Geese, Ducks, do daily duck and pick themselves, wallow and drench
themselves, and do somewhat elss besides: Though they (as you thought it seems,
and showed indeed) deserved no better a pond of water to be dipped in; wherein
you were like to those in James, who had their faith in respect of persons, who
sa^d but to the poor in vile raiment, stand thou there, or sit here under my
footstool, dip thou here in my horse-pond: yet you being about a work of the
Lords appointing, as you pretended, namely, a dipping, and naming it baptism
(this indeed is the work of the Lord) it merited one of your best, clearest,
and purest water-ponds, to do the Lords work in, otherwise you make the baptism
of the Lord despicable, by your choosing a foul, muddy, horse-cow-hog-pond for
dipping, as they in Malachy, who made the Table of the Lord contemptible, by
their offering to him the blind, and the lame, and the sick for sacrifice,
Mal. 1.7, 8. If you think of no better then pond-water, and such water-ponds,
instead of River-water or Fountain, for their dipping in at the first
Sacrament, your poor proselytes may be afraid, that you will set forth the
brown-loaf to them instead of white-bread for their feeding, at the next
Sacrament: for this people who knows not the Law, are cursed, in comparison
of themselves (say the blessed Scribes and Pharisees.

The fifth Chatechistical Quaere, is about the Action it self, of the Dipping.
Quaere 5. What warrant have you of precept, or example from sacred Scripture,
or the succeeding primitive Antiquity, for your dipping or immerging the
bodies, over head and ears of these Sisters and others, whom you presume to
baptize as your proselytes.

If I would be a critic upon words I could tell you, that your word of Dipping
falls short and comes not home to the word of Immerging: for all dipping is
not immerging, though all immerging be dipping. That all dipping is not
immerging, See Mat. 26.23. He that dippeth ((...)) his hand with me in the
dish, shall betray me I think you will not say, that he immerged his hand, and
thrust it, or put it into, and under the sauce there, over back and palm, up to
the wrist: besides, Dipping may be of a part of the body, whereas usually
immerging is spoken of the whole body: That dipping may be of a part, you see
by the former Text of the hand, yea, of a part of the hand, so you may see Luke
16.24. That he may dip ((...)) the tip of his finger in water and cool my
tongue.

It is true, there is something of baptism in them both, in Dipping and
immerging, because (...) signifies both; yet both together (if so be you can
make them agree together) are at odds with baptism, and go not even with it in
the language of the Scripture or latitude of the Word, for some things are said
there to be baptized, which were neither dipped nor immerged, as the children
of Israel were baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea, 1 Cor. 10.2.
but neither dipped or immerged in them, of which more anon, and some things are
said to be dipped and immerged, which are not baptized: This you confess in
your Letter, and give me a very homely instance, that you may dip your dog, but
not baptize him.

Yea, some Schoolmen, as Hallensis and Gabriel deny it to be the Sacrament or
Baptism, if it be said, Ego te mergo, I dip or immerge; and they give this
reason, because those words are not Synonimal with the word I Baptize thee;
baptism not signifying every dipping or immersion, but only that sacred one:
but in reverence of Antiquity, and in respect had to the Ancient Fathers of the
Church, who in the point of baptism so speak of them, as one and the same, I
yield tinction or dipping, and immersion to be one and the same likewise in
this matter: for so Tertul. lib. de Coro. militis translateth and reads these
words, Ite, docete omnes nationes Tingentes eas; and so likewise do others of
the Latin Fathers, which shows that with them Tingo, as also Immergo, does
both signify the same with (...).

But yet I shall not yield it to the exclusion of our sprinkling, and aspersion
or perfusion, but that this also is included in the word (...), if not also
(...), for which (letting Lexicons and Grammarians rest) I will produce
Nicephorus, Narrat. Lib. Cap. 3. where speaking of Novatus, how that after, or
upon great sickness, converted, he desired to be baptized; Aquam petiit, qua in
lecto ipso, ita uti decumbebat, perfusus, baptizat^s scilicet est; siquidem
Tinctionem hujusmodi Baptismum vocari licet; where you see that the three
words, Tinction, Perfusion and Baptism are all one, and both perfusion and
tinction are called Baptism. This Nicephorus lived in the year 1330. above 300.
years sithence.

But I have undertaken to be rather a censurer of your work, then a Critic of
words. And yet before I pass from this, I must not so much Criticize as
Catechize you about the word of baptizing, which some of your Learned in the
Greek tongue (though most of you are professing and professed against both
learning and languages) do urge for your dipping and immerging Baptism, for so
they derive (...) from (...), which signifies to dip and immerge, and hence
conclude, that the dipping and immerging Baptism is the true and only Baptism,
as derived from dipping.

1. But first, How if (...) does also (as it does also) signify to Wash, then
does it not fetch in with it, our sprinkling and aspeising Baptism, or rather
the pouring on, or laying on of water with the hand, and gently rubbing the
face or forehead therewith?

Yea, and the word signifies also to Dye, (as well as to dip or wash) and
intimates that changing of the Hiew or Color (as I may so call it) which is
in Baptism, and which is alluded to, in Isay 1.16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put
away the evil of your doing, and then at the 18. v. Though your sins be as
scarlet, and red as Crimson, they shall be as wool, and white as snow: For
whereas in our natural estate, we are deep Dyed, in sins and transgressions, as
scarlet and crimson, and as the Ethiopian, have contracted a black skin upon
our souls, which we cannot change, and are as full of black spots as the
Leopard, which we cannot put off by any of the powers of nature, Jer. 13.23.
when we are baptized into Christ, we do put on Christ, that pure and immaculate
Lamb, who spreads over us the white Fleece of his innocence and
righteousness; and therewith, as with a white garment, covers all our black
deformities, and so (which is strange) being dipped in his blood, we are dyed
white i.e. innocent as in the sight and acceptance of God; which was signified
of old, by putting presently a white garment upon the party baptized, of which
Ambrose speaks, Lib. de iis qui initiantur mist. Cap, 7. Accepisti post haec
vestimenta candida, ut esset indicium, quod exueris involucrum peccatorum, and
indueris innocentiae c. sta velamina, de quibus dixit propheta, Asperges me,
Domine, Hysope, and mundabor, lavabis me, and super nivem de^lbalor. And so the
same Gregory Turonensis (whom I cited before) Lib. 5. Hist. Cap, 11. Renatusque
Deo per Baptismi Sacramentum cum Albatis reliquis and ipse procedit; and a
little after, Albicabat tota civitas de Grege candido. I add also the testimony
of our Countryman Rabanus Maurus, one of Beda, his Scholars, who, Lib. 1. de
Instit. cler. Cap. 29. P^st Baptismum traditur Christiano vestis Candida,
designans innocentiam and puritatem Christianam, quam p^st ablutas veteres
maculas studio sanctae conversationis immaculatam servare debet ad presentandum
ante Tribunal Christi. I think I may as well heap to my self Testimonies, and
have herein an itching hand, writing for the good of others (you being
indocible herein) as there be some that heap to themselves Teachers, having
itching ears, hearing too little good of themselves. Lactantius de Resur.
Dominicae die; speaking to Christ, Rex sacer, ecce tui, radiat pars magna
Trophaei
Cum puras Animas Sacra lavachra beant
Candidus egreditur nitidis exercitus undis
Atque vetus vitium purgat in amne novo.


1. This testimony I the rather add, because of its antiquity; for Lactantius
lived in the 310 year from the Nativity of Christ, and speaks of the clear
and white waters of the Rivers used in Baptism, to confirm what I said before
hereof; like as another does of Fountain or Fonts, Paulinus by name.

Inde parens sacro ducit de Font sacerdos
Infantes niveos, corpore, cord, habitu.
So Paulus Diaconus, who wrote in the year 790. Lib. 6. Hist. Longobard. Cap.
15. makes mention (for which cause I also make mention of him and his
testimony) of one Codratus, King of the Anglosaxons, who was baptized at Rome,
of Sergius the first, Pope there, in the year 690. and by him named Peter, and
that he died, being in his white Garments; and that was within the seven days
or weeks after he was baptized: For of old they were baptized at Easter (a
solemn time appointed for the Catechumens to be baptized in, after their
instructions and preparations certain days before) and so arrayed in the same
white garments, for seven or eight days, they appeared all upon the Sunday
following Easter Day, which thereupon was called with them Dominica in Albis,
as both Rabanus in his 2 Lib. de Instit. Cle^. Cap. 30. and Augustine in Sermon.
ad competentes, a very white Sunday, though in our English called Low-Sunday,
It might be a second Palm Sunday, being both Ensigns, as of Innocence, so
victory. The which Feast of Easter lasted with them, until Pentecost, therefore
called with us Whit-sunday or White-Sunday also, because they then also
appeared together in their white clothes; after which, namely, the Lords day
after, their white garments were taken off, for which purpose it was called
Pascha clausum, or the Feast of Easter finished or shut up, as Alcuinus in
Epistolaad Carolum Magnum and in Hebdomada Pentecostes.

In imitation of this, the Papists do even yet continue to put a white
handkerchief, or other white linen vestment upon, or about the head of the
baptized and anointed Infant, by which they signify both the glory of the
Resurrection, as also the splendor and whiteness, or brightness of the soul,
the black and foul spots of sins being washed off; and lastly, that the
baptized must so long as he lives, keep and preserve its purity and innocence;
and so in a manner, and upon the matter, I have given you in English, the
substance of all the Latin before, lest thou should traduce me also for a
Papist, for writing thus to you in an unknown tongue.

But I leave now this digression, occasioned from the third signification of
the word (...), which is (as I have said) to Dye, even to dye white as wool and
snow, the crimson and scarlet sins of such as being born therein, come to be
baptized. And so I conclude my first answer to your, or rather others,
objection, the which answer is briefly this, That your dipping or immerging
cannot be the true and only baptism, because (as they say) (...) is derived
from (...), which signifies to dip or immerge: for that I say (...) signifies
also to Wash, and also to Dye, and where there are three significations as
three branches of a Primogenial or Radical word, it follows not, but is a
great non-sequitur or inconsequence, that the word derived, as Baptism here,
should be confined to, and concluded in the one, namely dipping; when as it may
be, and must be, enlarged and extended to the other also, washing and dying.

Secondly, in words, when from them arguments are drawn, you must consider to
what use and purpose the words are brought, and not so much, or only from what
root and original they are fetched: for howsoever most an end, I acknowledge the
Primitive and Radical word is of a greater latitude, and larger extent, then
that which is branched and derived from it; yet it is often otherwise, or
sometimes at least, as in some trees, whose branches do exceed the root in
extension; and as in man, who is Arbor inversa, whose arms and legs do spread
wider and farther then the head and hair.

Our Divines do instance in two Derivative words, Catechizing and Prophesying
whereof the first, namely Catechizing, according to the use of the Scripture,
spreads now as far as to the teaching of men of riper years by any way of
writing, or preaching, or conference, as is to be seen, Luke 1.4. Acts 18.25.
Acts 21.24. 1 Cor. 14.19. yet is derived from a word (...), or (...) a sound,
or such a sound as an Echo yeildeth, and properly and originally is but such
an instruction as is of children or Novices in the Elements and Rudiments of
Religion, by a lively voice of Question and Answer, sounding and resounding
like the Echo.

So the second, namely, Prophesying, according to the use of the Scriptures,
spreads now farther then the root or word whence it is derived; for whereas
this (...) or (...), signifies properly and radically, but to foretell things
to come, and reveal matters to be hereafter fulfilled; that now is extended to
the declaring of things also past, done, and already fulfilled, as in those
well known places of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 11.4. and 1 Cor. 14.13, 31.

So thirdly (to come to our business in hand) Baptizing, though it may be, and
is derived from the radical word before mentioned, which signifies dipping
and immerging into, and under water; yet, it is of a larger signification then
so, and is extended in general to many kinds of washings and laverings,
rinsings and cleansings, even where there is no dipping or immerging at all;
and this also according to the use and language of the Scriptures.

I shall give you some particular instances and inductions, as I have in part
already, and so shall a little exercise your patience, and mine own too,
according to the rule given me, being apt to teach you, patient, in meekness
instructing you, if peradventure God will give repentance to the acknowledging
of the truth, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.

1. The children of Israel are said to be all baptized unto Moses in the cloud,
and in the sea, 1 Cor. 10.2. (the Red sea being an antitype of the Waters of
Baptism, and the cloudy pillar an antitype of the Spirit) yet were they not
dipped in the cloud; dashed they might be, and wetted with the cloud, and some
showers or drops falling from it, as they passed under it, going before them
and behind them at times, as Exodus 14.22. but dipped or immerged in, or into
it, you will not say, I suppose, nor can you say (I think) that the Israelites
were dipped in or under the waters of the Red Sea, as which were a wall unto
them, both on the right hand and on the left, so that they walked dry foot, and
dry shod through the same; sprinkled they might be, and washed a little with
some droppings, and aspersions from the walls, but dipped and immerged they
were not in them, and yet baptized.

I the rather and at first instance in this, because the Apostle does himself
call this a figure or example of our Baptism, at the 6. and 10. verses; for as
in that passage of the Israelites through the Red Sea, they were preserved, and
their enemies the Egyptians drowned; so by our undergoing and partaking of
Baptism, the water whereof represents the blood of Christ to us; our fouls
are saved, and our enemies, sin and our natural corruption, are enfeebled and
overthrown; so, as remitted unto us thereby, it cannot have dominion, or bring
damnation.

2. Our Savior asks the two ambitious Suitors, Can ye be baptized with the
baptism that I am baptized with? and foretells them, With the Baptism that I
am baptized with, shall ye be baptized, Mark 10.38, 39. What did he mean, that
either himself or those two Apostles should be dipped all over in blood and
immerged therein? no, rather, but that they should be sprinkled with the drops
thereof, and besmeared with the same; so himself, Though blood trickled down
his head, by the pricking of the Thorns, and blood ran down his back, by the
cuttings of the scourge, and blood issued out with water out of his side, by
the piercings of the spear, and blood fell out of his hands and feet, by the
wounding of the spikes and nails; sprinkled he might be, and aspersed in body,
and so was with blood, but dipped and immerged he was not, and yet baptized with
the baptism thereof: and as for the two Brothers, James, was killed of Herod
with the sword, Act. 12.2. and so he was baptized in blood, but not dipped in it;
and John was banished by Domitian into the Isle of Patmos, in the 90 year of
the Nativity of Christ (which was, as every persecution is, a kind of such
baptism as is here meant by our Savior) where he endured Exile nine or ten
years, and there wrote the Revelation to the Churches, but being after released
by Trajanus, he returned to Ephesus, and there wrote his Gospel, and there dyed
in the 100. year after the Nativity, he only amongst all the Aposties (being
the Survivor of them all) sicca morte and sine sanguine as some say, though
Augustine; Libro Soliloq. Cap. 29. Tom. 9. has these words, Veneni poculum
Johanues intrepidus potavit. He was forced to drink a cup of poison, but he
says not that he died thereof; so if he were not baptized with the baptism
that Christ was, he drank of the cup which Christ did, and foretold he should
die also, in the same Text.

3. John the Baptist told the people that He who came after him, meaning
Christ, should baptize them with the Holy Ghost and with fire, Mat. 3.11. and
Christ himself foretold the Apostles, they should be baptized with the Holy
Ghost not many days hence, Acts 1.5. and so they were on the day of Pentecost
following, when there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and
sat upon each of them, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost, Acts 2.3,
4. thus were they baptized with fire and the holy Ghost; but not dipped or
immerged in that fire, but rather aspersed or superfused, according to the
phrase of Scripture, I will pour out my spirit, Joel 2.28. and the spirit was
shed abundantly, Titus 3.6.

I could tell you of more baptizings (for so the word is in the original) of
Cups, Tables, and Beds, as they are mentioned in the Evangelist, Mark 7.4. The
which howsoever they may fit you well, as being Pharisaical and Hypocritical;
and me also, as wherein there was no dipping or immerging, but only washing
and rubbing, I pass by for brevity sake, as also that which the Fathers call
(...) called since the Baptism of Repentance, in which they were not merged or
drowned in tears; that is but a metaphorical phrase to show an abundance of
their weeping, but only sprinkled and perfused with tears, by which they did
seek and desire the remission of their sins, and also found and obtained the
same.

4. I will add but one more, 1 Cor. 15.29. Else what shall they do which are
baptized for the dead? whether it be taken passively, according to the
translation, for those who were baptized with water, for dead, i.e. given over
for dead, or ready to die, or whether Actively and Passively, for those who did
baptize, and also were baptized, over the dead, (i) upon the graves of the
dead, (...) being often, as here put for (...) as learned Beza observes upon
Mat. 17.27. and Mark 10.48. or whether it be meant, who are washed for dead,
their dead bodies are washed, according to the custom of the Patriarchs, as yet
then retained in the Church, and mentioned to be done unto Dorcas, Acts 9.37.
who being dead they washed and laid in an upper chamber; which way soever that
Baptizing with water be meant, it cannot imply any dipping or immerging, as
being unto dying persons, or unto persons baptized over graves, or unto dead
bodies.

And thus I have showed you, that there may be baptizings, where there are no
dippings and immergings, and that this derivative (...), is of a larger
signification then its original (...), as to the general, and therefore that it
can be no Argument to prove your dipping to be the baptizing, because baptism
is a derivative word from the root (...), signifying to dip. And so I come now
to the very particular work in hand, and shall take it not only in the
Grammatical and Theological sense, but in the very Sacramental and Mystical
meaning, the properly baptizing with water, In the Name of the Father, and the
Son, and the holy Ghost, so as John the Baptist, Peter, and Paul, and Philip,
and the Deacons, and the 72 Disciples gave and ministered its; so as Jerusalem
and all Judea round about Jordan, Christ and the Apostles, the 3000. the 5000.
the Eunuch, Lydia, the Jailer, and the several households gave it, and received,
and partaked of it.

It is confessed on both sides, that the former baptized, and the later were
baptized, both according to the good old way, and in the right and true manner.
The which, whether it was by Dipping and Immerging the body into, and under the
water, or only sprinkling and asperling, or laying on, and pouring the water
upon some part, that is the question: for whereas the two mothers strove about
the living child, whose of the two the child should be; here the two children,
dipping and sprinkling, which I may call the twins of Rebecca, or the Churches
two manners of baptizing strive whose of the two the mother, Baptism, shall be.

The Church of England has been now of a long time, time out of mind, mind of
any man living, in firm possession of baptism, and practice of it, by
sprinkling, or (...) on of water upon the face and forehead, and gently
washing and rubbing the same therewith, and pronouncing the word of
Institution, In the name, etc. it is your part to bring the Writ of Ejection, a
word, or the Examples of the word sufficient to dispossess and eject us out of
our baptism, and to invest your self into the same, by showing your better
title and plea of dipping and immerging the whole body in or under the water.

All that you can, and therefore do produce for your dipping and immerging,
that ever I could read of, are (besides that derivation of the word, baptism,
from an original word, that so signifies) the three examples of John the
Baptist, Philip, and Paul baptizing, our Savior Christ, the Ethiopian Eunuch,
and Lydia.

But for that argument, drawn from the derivation of the word Baptism, you have
heard enough already, and I pray let me hear no more of it, as not being of
force, or to the purpose, unless you can show, that so it is always used in the
Gospel, and that wheresoever baptism was ministered, there was dipping and
immerging into, and under the water, otherwise, words are of value, as money
is, according to the esteem of men, and the use of the time Nummus a (...) and
as the Poet has it -- -- Si volet usus.. (i.e.) consuetudo loquendi,
Quem penes arbitrium est and jus and norma loquendi.


Both of which derivation, and use or value of the word, are for the aspersion
and perfusion of water upon a part, to be understood by baptism, as well (if not
better) in sacred Writ, then for immmersion or dipping of the whole body; yea,
the word in its proper and genuine signification (as well as in its derivation,
as I have showed) imports but an ablution and washing with water, which is
ordinarily practiced and performed in our good and old way of baptizing, and
which does not necessarily infer or enforce your new business of dipping and
immerging in, and under the water, the whole body clothes and all. But for
your examples of Scripture, (for precept there is none in the Word, Go and
Baptize, for the dipping.)

I will set down what the Texts have, and in order as the Evangelists report of
John's baptizing Christ, Matthew. 3.16. and straightway coming up out of the
water, He (i.e.) John, saw the Heavens opened, and the Spirit like a Dove
descending upon him, Luke 3.21, says only, that he being baptized and
praying, the Heavens were opened; so of Philips baptizing the Eunuch, Acts
8.38. They went down both into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he
baptized him.

So of Paul's baptizing Lydia, Acts 16.13, and 15. On the Sabbath he went out of
the City, by a Rivers side where prayer was wont to be made, there Lydia
hearing Paul preaching, and attending, was baptized.

All this that I hear, is Text, but where is that that is for your Tenet of
dipping and immerging? why do you not press it, and argue from hence, any of,
or all of the three Texts? nay where is any intimation that any of these
persons were dipped and immerged in any of these Rivers?

If you say, there, where it is said, that Christ descended into the water, I
must tell you, that is no where expressly set down, but only by consequence,
because it is said, He went up straightway out of the water (I pray hereafter,
you and your brethren, love good consequences better, and stand not always
upon verbal expressions of the Scriptures for every thing.) It is indeed said
of the Eunuch expressly, That he went down into the water at his baptizing; but
of Lydia neither of both is said, but only that she was amongst the rest, and
that she was baptized by the Rivers side.

But what of Christ's descending down into the waters? If I shall argue for you,
and conclude hence it is only this, that therefore it was not now Harvest
time, when John Baptized Christ and others, for Jordan overfloweth all his
banks in the time of Harvest, Jos. 3.15. then they could not have either gone
down into, or have come up out of Jordan: But you shall argue for your self,
and conclude hence, if you will or can (for I neither will nor can.) Therefore
Christ's body was all over dipped and immerged in Jordan, under water, over head
and ears as you say, that follows not thence; Therefore also in his clothes
tied about him as you do, nor that.

More probably, if he was so dipped, it was in his naked body, and out of
clothes, as before I alleged the opinion and saying of Anselme; but most
likely, John did but either dip the head of Christ, bending it downward and
forward into the water (not backward as you do the whole body) or else with one
or both his hands did pour water upon his head (as he stood in Jordan) which
ran down and wetted his body; and so for any thing I can see to the contrary,
John did baptize in the like manner and way, all those other that came unto
him. And thus also Philip baptized the Eunuch in the River or Water; and thus
Paul baptized Lydia by the Rivers side. And so this comes up near to our
manner and way, and so it will prove at last, the good old way at first. But
did not John baptize in Aenon, near to Salim, because there was much water John
3.23. water enough as you think, to dip and immerge all the bodies over head
and ears; this is but your vain collection: look about the Text, and you may
see the drift and purpose of that, How that there went out to him Jerusalem and
all Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan, and were baptized of him.
Much water was requisite for such multitudes, though but to lay and pour some
upon every one, or to sprinkle and asperse them all therewith.

Again, if he dipped and immerged them over head and ears, in their whole
bodies, clothed as you do, or uncloathed, it must have been a tedious,
toilsome, and over-burthensome work for one John Baptist, to have taken them
fast by the clothes or shoulders, and to have laid them down backward in the
waters, and to have lifted them up again out of the waters, being now more
heavy in their drenched garments, and to have set them upon their feet again,
surely John the Baptist would soon have been spent that way, or had needed many
other Baptists under him, half a score of such dippers as your Brother is, to
have assisted him daily and continually, to have dispatched such multitudes as
daily and continually resorted to him. Amongst which great multitudes, that
came continually unto him from all quarters of Jerusalem, and Judea, and other
Regions about, I cannot but think that many sickly, and weakly, and diseased
persons hearing of the great fame of such a Prophet as John the Baptist was,
who not only preached the doctrine of Repentance, and of the Messiah come, or
shortly to come, but baptized into Remission of sin through the same, came
flocking to him, or were led or brought by others, as desirous to partake of so
great a blessing and mercy before they departed the world, like as Mat. 4.24,
25. And now can you think or imagine that Joh^ when he baptized such, would dip
or immerge them under water, over head and ears, thereby to endanger their
lives, and in the curing their souls of sin, to destroy their bodies of life;
when as with more safety to them, and to as much efficacy he might only
asperse or sprinkle them with water, or lay it on with his hand upon some part
of their body, or head rather. If farther you add, that it is said in the
original, that John baptized, (...), in water, which he could not do unless he
stood and dipped them in water; Say thou this thing of thy self, or did
others tell it thee of him? I am sure you could not say it of your self, who
know nothing of the original but your sin; (if that); and therefore for those
others that told you so of him, tell them from me, that it is right enough
translated and rendered to their hand if they can take it, with water, that
Greek particle (...) very often signifies, and is put for (...) or (...), with
or by, and that in the Gospel, as Mat. 26.52. they that take the sword shall
perish (...) by or with the sword, and so Luke 22.49. Lord shall we smite,
(...) by or with the sword, etc.

But to draw up, if John the Baptist was in the River of Jordan with the people
that came to him, how was it possible for him to stand there in the cold water,
all the day, and every day dipping and immerging their whole bodies in and
under the water? and if he was out of the water upon the brink or bank of
Jordan, how was it possible for him, to dip and immerge with his hands, the
whole bodies of those and so many as came to be baptized? For whereas it may be
replied, that John came straightway up also out of the water; and therefore he
stood in the water and baptized there, Mark 1.10. if the words of straightway
coming up out of the waters, refer not to Christ, but to John, then its spoken
of John, that he did so after the baptizing of Christ only. At the baptizing
of others as they came and went away, John stirred not from them, but
discoursing many things of Repentance, and Faith in the Messiah to come, both
whilst he was baptizing them, and afterward; and so before they departed out
from him, he inculcated to them of the Faith and of the Fruits of Baptism, as
Mat. 3.8, 9, 10 there is the sum of his instructions to the people set down,
which because (as he knew) Christ had no need of, therefore as soon as he had
baptized him, he straightway came forth with Christ out of the water, and the
rather to see the Heavens opening, and the Spirit descending upon him like a
dove; and so further to instruct the people thereupon.

Again, if the people baptized, were dipped and immerged with their clothes on
their bodies, it was the more heavy, too heavy a work to be done by one; if
with their clothes off, the multitudes coming consisting of men and women, and
some (doubtless) weak and sickly, it was too dangerous a work to be done and
too immodest a spectacle to be caused, or endured, by that holy and reverend
Prophet of God. Hereupon my opinion is clear to my self (but with a Salvo to
the naked immersions of the whole body by the Ancients, cited only by me, to
disprove the clothed dippings of Anabaptists to be the old way) yet not so
stiff, but that it is ready to bend and yield to the spirit of the Prophets
upon better evidence given, that Christ and the people baptized of Joh. came
indeed to the River Jordan, and into it some little way, it may be, or abode in
the brink thereof, the people confessing their sins, and so John the Baptist
from his hands taking up water, poured it upon their heads, or sprinkled and
aspersed it upon their heads or faces.

The which manner of baptizing by aspersing or infusing of water, does yet
plainer appear unto me out of the 2 Acts 41. Then they that gladly received his
word were baptized, and the same day there were added unto them about three
thousand souls. What do you think of these three thousand baptized in one day?
were they dipped and immerged so many bodies, in one day, by Peter and the
Apostles? how could they, if they had bin together in, or at a River? but where
they were, gathered together in the City and in one place thereof, there was
neither River nor Fontain, nor Wels, nor Ponds, to be dipped and immerged in,
in their whole bodies, neither is there any fyllable of their removing or going
out of the City to Rivers or Ponds, and how then could they be so many baptized
there, but as I said, by aspersing water upon them, or pouring water upon their
heads: the very place, and the persons, the multitude of those who were to be
baptized, and the paucity of those who did baptize, do plainly evidence, that
the 3000 were not dipped, but aspersed only, at that great and first baptizing
after Christ's Ascension.

No, nor Lydia, and her household though by a River side abroad, when she was
converted and baptized, was dipped and immerged in her clothes, or out of her
cloath^; and so much less those other households, of grown persons and
professors, baptized in private by the Apostles, as of Cornelius, Stephanas,
etc. these, or any of these cannot be said or thought to be dipped and merged
under water, in their whole bodies, clothed or naked, without great
inconveniences, difficulties, improbabilities, if not impossiblities, all which
are, and may be avoided by the other way of baptizing.

And thus, Sir, you may see and feel too, unless you will run into darkness in
the day time, and grope in the noonday, as in the night, that there is no
footing or bottom in any River or Pond in Scripture for your dipping and
immerging baptism. How dare you then cry this up as the only good old way of
baptizing, and determine that, and decree it so to be, even the very practice
of John the Baptist, and the very Acts of the Apostles, and the mind of the
Spirit, when as it never seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to them, to lay
upon us no greater burden then the necessary things. of which, your immersion
and dipping is none, I am sure, a burden indeed, but not necessary thing, sure
if there had bin, or were any such necessity, or but convenience thereof, to
the perfecting and completing baptism, as that without it, baptism should not
be true and right as of old, the wind that blows where it lists, and the
spirit that breaths where it pleases, would in some place or other of the
Gospel have blown and breathed out unto us something of it; nay rather, hereof
is a very great silence of your dipping and immerging, though much speech and
practice of baptizing. Christ says as elsewhere to the wind, peace and be
still, and the spirit rather holds in its breath, no words here are made, no
circumstances are given, no consequences are to be drawn out for this dipping
and diving, putting off or on of clothes, laying or lying down in the waters
of ponds as is used by you at your baptizing. But I shall now tell you, that
the wind blows fair, and the spirit breaths strongly and sweetly, and that
of old too, for our sprinkling and aspersing Baptism; and I perceive this sound
from heaven will come suddenly upon you, (before you looked for it) as of a
mighty rushing wind, and I wish it may fill all the house where you and your
Brethren are sitting, and that you would take them, the Texts I mean, into your
considerations, (unless they be all spent and sent away to me in your Brothers
Letter, wherein he gave me so many considerations.)

1. Now of these Texts, 1. Some are Typical, as all those in the Pentateuch,
especially, which speaks of the sprinkling of the blood of the sacrifices, as
Levit. 16.14. The Priest shall take the blood of the Bullock, and shall
sprinkle it before the Mercy-Seat. 2. Some are Prophetical, and allude unto
Baptism, as that of Ezekiel. 36.25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and
ye shall be clean from all your filthiness; by the which, I mean the thing
signified, in and by the Baptismal-water, even the cleansing blood of Christ,
the which David aimed at, when he said also, Wash me from mine iniquity, and
cleanse me from my sin, and I shall be whiter then snow, Psalm. 51.2, 7. 3. Some
other Texts are Mystical and represent it, as Heb. 10.22. and 12.24. ye are
come to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling,
that speaks better things then that of Abel; and again, Let us draw nigh with
a true heart in full assurance, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. Here is mention of
sprinkling, and washing, with a reflection upon the pure water, or baptism; the
which another Text shows, 1 Pet. 3.21. where he names Baptism, where having
spoken of the eight souls saved by water in the Ark, He says, The like Figure
whereunto, even Baptism does now also save us, by the resurrection of Christ;
so then, like as the Ark saved Noah and his family by water, so does Baptism
save us by water, by being washed and sprinkled therewith, as they were in the
Ark; for so the Apostle specifieth, and has no words of dipping or immerging,
as not conducing to the salvation of them, or of the Ark it self, which may be
a fifth Text or instance, where that is said to be baptized, which was not dipped
or immerged. Again 4ly. 1 Pet. 1.2. the Apostle there mentions the
sanctification of the spirit unto obedience, and the sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ, as the inward grace, and thing signified, of the outward sign and
water in Baptism. Now wherefore in all these, or the most of these places, does
the Spirit of God set forth the manner of application of Christ's blood, and the
spiritual grace by the sprinkling it upon us, but to intimate the way and manner
of ministration of the Baptismal-water, the sign and seal thereof to be by the
springling and aspersing it upon us.
Had you Sir, but such a Quaternion of Soldiers, as it is called, Acts 12.4.
four such militant Texts to stand up and fight for your dipping and immerging,
yea, or but an Union, one such Text, I mean, in all the Bible, that did but
carry the colors, or bear up an Ensign, a sign, or but the name of dipping (as
they do of sprinkling) how would you glory and triumph as the Philistines did
when they had gotten Samson into their hands; how would you call your friends
and neighbors, your Brethren and Sisters together, especially the two last
dipped, saying, Come rejoice with me, for I have found the piece that was lost,
a Text for our dipping that was at a loss. But it is so still, and you are at a
loss for it, and may be at alas also for it! you may go light up a candle, and
sweep or sweat too, and seek diligently, and yet not find a piece of
Scripture, one Text for your dipping and immerging into, and under the water,
like as I have found out fair texts and pieces of Scripture for our sprinkling
and perfusion of water in the time and act of baptizing.

For as for that Text and piece of Scripture, Romans 6.3, 4. and Col. 2.12.
(which are both one) that we are buried with Christ in Baptism, wherein also we
are risen with him; I know some, do descant and discourse hereout, of Immersion
into, Immoration under, and Emersion out of the water of baptism, but the Plain
Song in this (as in other) Scripture is this only, that through baptism, being
truly ingrafted into Christ, and made one with him, we are made partakers of
the merit and efficacy of his death, and burial, and resurrection (for these
are included in that) to kill and mortify, bury and abolish sin and natural
corruption in us.

Though I add also this, that such representation and operation of the death,
burial, and Resurrection of Christ, and of us sinners after his example, is not
then at baptism required of us, as which is accidental to baptism, or
secondarily essential; neither is it primarily nor properly, the inward grace
signified by baptism; but the ablution and washing of the soul, and cleansing
it from the guilt and filth of sin in that Laver of Regeneration, is
principally intended, and primarily essential to baptism; like as the putting
away the filthiness of the flesh, by cutting off the foreskin, was to
circumcision.

And lastly, if it were so, the burial and Resurrection of Christ, the main
thing in baptism, yet shall we not need to infer hence, or to introduce hither
the Rite of immerging and emerging, which is your total dipping, as which is
resembled as well and better in our manner of aspersion and effusion of water
upon the party, though but upon a part, for when water is poured upon, or is
laid upon the head of the adult standing on his feet, or kneeling on his knees,
as likewise upon the face of the child, lying in the Arms of the Minister, or
the Parent or other presenting it, are they not the while, as it were, buried
in, or do they not lie under the water, as the buried does under the earth? and
so the party may be said to arise as it were, when it comes or goes from the
water, as the body does from the earth, or the Ministers dipping his hand into
the water, and plucking it out when he lays it on, may it not have the same
signification with immerging and emerging, and so of the Burial and
Resurrection of Christ? And I think I may say, our Church, in giving liberty of
dipping or immerging and emerging of Infants (if not weak) did it not so much
from authority of this or any other Scripture, as in conformity to some of the
Ancient Christians and Fathers of the Church, in this custom, as in other
lawful Rites they practiced, to which and whom I now come.

Only I shall give but a tender and gentle touch of one thing that flows
more naturally, or rather more mystically from the afore-alledged Texts. That
if the baptized, his being buried with Christ in baptism, be represented and
signified by the lying and abiding of the water upon the face or forehead, as a
part of the body, and so the body in that part thereof, its lying and abiding
under the water, even sprinkled and poured upon it: Then sure it is not
advisedly and conveniently done by Gentlewomen and tender Mid-wives, to wipe
off the water from the part, and absterge it with a handkerchief as soon as it
is laid on by a Minister, or by turning the head of the Infant (whom I speak
for, that cannot speak for it self) presently downward, to cause the water to
fall off it, upon the ground. In all the History of Baptism, from the beginning
of it in Jordan and Rivers to the present being of it in Fonts or Vessels; I do
not read of such a word spoken, or such a work done, as absterging or wiping
off water in Baptism; no not then, when there seemed more occasion for it, as
when the adult, and likewise Infants were immerged all over their naked bodies
in the water at Baptism: nor then, when presently after it, they went or were
carried to be anointed (as they were) either all over their bodies, as in the
Greek Churches (so Cyril. Catech. Mystag. 11. and Chrysest. Homil. 6. in Col.
witness) or in their foreheads and breasts, and between the shoulders; (so
Epiphanius, Haeres. 79. Rabanus de Instit. Cler. l. 1. c. 23. affirm.)
Therefore learned Vossius, does justly censure the Translator of the
Apostolical Constitutions of Clemens (as they are called) for rendering those
words, (...) Lib. 3. Cap. 15. Thus, deinde Diaconissa eas abstergit, for the
word is, and signifies anointeth, not abstergeth; and the work was, the
Deaconess anointed them, not absterged them after baptism. The truth is, they
neither absterged or wiped off water after their Baptism, or oil after their
unction, and so such a custom has no ground either in Equity or Antiquity.

True it is also, that this our Westernly Northen Climate is colder much then
those Easternly Southern, and our waters therefore are colder, and our Infants
tenderer, and our Mothers more indulgent, and our Midwives are more
adventerous; but our Ministers are descreet, not to pour on much water, and
that they do, to hold it some while in their hand to the warming of it, and
gently to rub and wash the face of the Infant with such warm hand and warmed
water: and God is ever merciful, at his Ordinances and Sacraments especially,
so that I never heard of any child that ever sickned, much less died, upon a
cold taken at Baptism: In a word (and a word also is enough to a wise woman)
The wiping of the Baptismal-water from the child's face, as soon as it is laid
or poured on, is (so far as lies in her) the taking off and avoiding (I will
not say a frustrating and evacuating) of the sign and seal as soon as it is
laid on, as to that signification, and sigillation, of the parties being buried
with Christ in baptism, as which only the abiding and remaining of the water
upon the body or bodily part (and its lying and centinuing under the water)
does resemble and represent. But I return to you Sir, and shall now proceed to
farther discussing of your dipping and our sprinkling, by Antiquity to show
which is the good old way.

I or it may be when you wrote me word, that your dipping was older then our
sprinkling or pouring on of water, and that it was the good old way, you had
some squint-eye upon Antiquity of the second hand, (for the Scripture is the
Antiquity of the first hand, the very good old way it self) for that your right
or direct eye, could see little or nothing in the Scripture, for your dipping
and immerging.

And I am glad to meet you here again, in this your good old way, hoping that
by your looking upward to Antiquity, and the ancient Customs of the Churches
of God, you may ere long, lay down your Novelties, and the yesterday fashions
of your new Brotherhood. And to say the truth, whither else can you now go,
being beaten out of your holds you thought you had, and those firm ones (as you
had thought) in Scripture for your dipping and immerging, and finding (at
leastwise now) no ground or footing in any Pond there, no not River for your
Dippers and Immergers to stand in and baptize; whither I say can you go; but
(need of it, more then zeal to it, driving you) to the next Antiquity, which
succeeding, and some of them seeing the Canon of Scripture consummated and
consigned by St. John the Revelationist, as Evangelist, and so living and
dwelling next to those starry times of the Apostles, and those Sunshining days
of Christ Jesus, can best discover, relate, and traject their light, they being
the next neighbors to the same, borrowed and participated from them. But to
the point.

I acknowledge that some of the Ancients, (yea many of them) did use to dip and
immerge at, and in their baptizings, and because it lies upon your hand to
prove it, let the learned of your side take it in hand to transcribe and
produce such ancient Authors and their Testimonies: I had as live they should
spend the time, and lose their labor when they have done, as my self; for so
they will, neither will it be of any advantage to you and your dipping and
immerging, being far different as to the Ancients, their dipping and immerging,
as I have before touched in part, and now shall fully handle. For

1. I have showed how the Ancients dipped and immerged in Rivers and Fountains,
and Wells, and Fonts, or Baptisteries (made so wide and big of purpose) but
you, especially of the later brood of the Separation, run out into Ponds to do
the same.

2. They, the Ancients dipped, the whole bodies of those who were baptized,
naked and out of the clothes, such was the Candid Innocence and honesty of the
old times, and for other reasons I have given: but you do dip your converts and
proselytes, covered and in their clothes, for no reasons given by you, that I
hear of, unless it be fear, lest Satan tempt you to incontinency, as these last
ages are very naught indeed and wicked. And yet I know, some of the Ancients
dipped and immerged but a part of the body in the water, this is not yet
touched upon, and it will make somewhat for what I have said before, of
sprinkling and pouring the water upon the head of the baptized. Augustine in
his 4. Homil says (and so he is cited of Gratian. decret. de consec. distinc.
4. cap. 66. Postquam vos credere promisistis, tertio capita vestra in sacro
font demersimus, and this in the words following, he calls Ordo baptismatis,
it was the very order and manner of baptism, after their confession, to dip and
immerge their heads in the sacred Font. And before him Hierom. Dial. adversus
Luciferianos has these words: Multa quae per traditionem in Ecclesia
observantur, authoritatem sibi scriptae legis usurpaverunt, velut in lavachro
ter caput mergitare, To dip and immerge the head thrice in the laver of
baptism, he makes it a tradition of the Church, and as Authentic as if it
were a Law written. And before Hierom, a little, a matter of two years,
Chrysostom upon these words of John 3. Unless a man be born of Water and the
Spirit, says he, (...). To those who dip and immerge their head in the water,
as in a sepulcher, the old man is buried and overwhelmed, etc. Yea, and before
him Eunomius and his followers, (as ever the Heretics like Apes, will be
following some Ancient Customs of the Church) who started up in the year 360
(...), when they baptize, they wet them down to the breast, and no lower, (the
word is not (...) dip and immerge strictly, but (...), i.e. dew or wet them,
(it may be our English dew, may be derived thence) (and so here by the way, may
be a proof of the Antiquity of our aspersing or sprinkling, or bedewing the
baptized) for which cause, when they the Eunomians baptized (...), which is
labrum quasi lavabrum, in a large and ample vessel, such as they used in bathes
or bucks, the party to be baptized standing on the outside or brim thereof,
(...), they bowed down his head unto his breast into the water, all this is
reported by Theodoret. lib. 4. haeret. fabularum. Lastly, before these, it is
recorded of B. Laurentius that he baptized one Lucillus, and the manner this,
as the words in the Acts are, and cum expoliasset eum, fudit super caput ejus,
when he had stripped him of his clothes he poured (the water) on his head, these
lived about Cyprians time, in the year 260 recorded by Surius, tom. 4. in the
Hist. of the Martyrdom of the B. Laurentius.

But you, as you differed from some of the Ancients, in dipping, and immerging
clothed bodies, whereas they did them so naked; so do you differ from some
other of them in dipping their whole bodies, down even to their feet, whereas
these did but their heads down to their breasts.

3. The Ancients, dipped those thrice, whom they baptized; you had but even now
the Testimony of Hierom and Augustine, a part of whose words I reserved for
hither; Qui ordo baptismatis duplici mysterii significatione celebratur; The
order of baptizing, with thrice dipping and immerging, is famous in the
Churches for these two mysterious significations, 1. Of three Persons of the
Deity. 2. Of the three days death and resurrection, (some others add a 3. of
the three sorts of sin cleansed by baptism, offenc^s in thought, word and deed
(To which may fitly come in next Te^tullian advers. Praxeam cap. 26. Nam nec
semel sed Ter, ad singula nomina, in personas singulas mergimur: as also
Athanasius in dict. and interp scr. qu. 91. (...), etc. To dip the child
thrice in the Baptistery or Font, is to signify, as above Augustine says. I
might add to these Chrysostom homil. De fide in Deum Patrem, Filium, and
Spiritum sanctum. Ambros. lib. de Sac. 2. cap. 7. Gregor. Mag. in Epistela ad
Leandrum.

And it appears that as this custom was very general, so very Ancient, for
that Arrius also, who lived in 314. some ten years before Athanasius, (but yet
a great while after Tertullian, who lived in 190. and therefore best shows to
be ancient) He, I say, Arrius, had got up also this manner of baptizing, by
thrice immerging, who did it for an ill purpose and proof of three natures in
the Trinity, and not three persons and one God, as the Catholics then spoke,
and therefore according to Christ's form, baptized in the Name, and not in the
names, (for there is but one Name, and so but one Divinity) which when the
Fathers of the Church perceived, they saw good reason to change that custom
and order of thrice dipping, and instead thereof, to use but once dipping; and
thereupon Gregory the Great and the 4 Tolletan Council are very earnest about
it, the leaving of that Trine immersion, and taking up the simple or once
immersion, for the avoiding of the scandaling the weak, and encouraging the
heretics, and lest they should seem to countenance their error, when they
complied in their customs.

But you herein also differ from the Ancients, and your practice is to dip but
once, for so you tell me in your Letter, and that with an emphatical
reduplication. If he had dipped them more then once, I would have expressed so in
my first Letter, but he did dip them but once; and so in your saying twice,
once, and again that he dipped them but once, you gainsay the greater and higher
Antiquity, and your self too; for once dipping though it was also, a good old
way, yet it was not, The good old way, as you say, that is, it is not the best
and the oldest way amongst the orthodox Ancients.

Not but that I acknowledge, once dipping to be as efficacious to the ends and
fruits of baptism, and as mysterious to the signifying of the one Deity, of the
three holy Persons, and the one Death of Christ Jesus, besides that in the
unity of the same faith, a diverse or different custom of the Churches cannot
be hurtful, neither is it prejudicial to the baptized party, whether it be once
or thrice dipped and immerged: but so much I have said, to show the vanity of
your boast, of the good old way of your dipping, insomuch as you have thrice
digressed from Antiquity therein, as is hitherto proved.

Yea, you are gone from the present way of your Mother, and not only
Brother-church of Rome, which has lately sided with you, and gone cheek by
joyl with you; sided, said I, nay, rather headed you and the other Sects
amongst us, for so, she has given over her old way of the Trine-immersion, and
is upon the new path, of Trine-aspersion: and you have left her also in both,
both in the number of Trine or thrice, as also in the matter of aspersion or
sprinkling in this your once dipping and immerging; and thus you forsaking your
friends, and walking alone by your selves, (yet going to and fro in the earth,
and walking up and down in it, yea, compassing sea and land to get proselytes)
your friends may perhaps at last forsake you, and leave you to your selves, and
your bad new way, to walk alone and wilder your selves. But I come to a fourth
and last difference.

4. The Ancients dipped and immerged, and though they made it mysterious and
significant, yet they, the learnedest of them, thought it not absolutely
necessary, but adiaphorous, and therefore held it but as an Ecclesiastical
custom and tradition, as Hierom. dial. adver. Lucif. (whom I cited but even
now) expressly calls it such, morem and traditionem Ecclesiae; and so Basil.
lib. de Spiritu sancto, cap. 27. by way of Question, demands this of the thrice
dipping, how came it to us, and that other of renouncing the devil and his
angels, from what Scripture have we it? and then answers it by an affirmative
in a negative interrogation, have we it not rather from an (...), from a
private and secret instruction or tradition; for the word is, (...) (as to the
liberty of it, and no necessity hereof, being a consequence hereupon, I shall
say more afterward.

As for those that owned and held this dipping, and especially the thrice
dipping, to be either a Divine precept, or an Apostolical tradition unwritten
and nonscript, they were either minoris, vel nulliusfidei, as the Canons of the
Apostles (as they are called) Can. 50. and Basilius is cited by the Papists in
the Book before alleged by me, for making the thrice dipping an Apostolical
and necessary tradition: but it is answered by Whitakers desc. cont. 1 quest. 6.
and so also by Rivet in his Criticus cap. 20. (who both acknowledge they had it
from Erasmus in Epist. aa Johannem, Episc. Culmensem) that that Book de Spiritu
sancto, is not any true and genuine work of the great Basil, but a spurious and
supposititious one, especially in the later half thereof, by some one that
would be great in Basil, and therefore though I cited a testimony a little
before out of the 27 Cap. of that Book de Spiritu sancto, bearing the name of
the great Basil, like as Vessius and others do, yet I will not stand upon it
(as I need not having another Authentic one standing by him, which is that of
Hierom) for that I hear of it by those learned above mentioned, and read also
my self in that 27 Chapter, for though the words that I have cited thereout may
bear a good sense by themselves, yet finding the drift of that 27 Chapter,
being to equal, or to adjoin Traditions (of which a great many are there named,
and this amongst the rest) unto the written word of the holy Spirit, as
Apostolical and necessary, I do suspect those words before (of private, and
secret or hidden doctrine, as I rendered them) to bend and incline that way.

Others, less credible, Ancient Authors there are, who make this Trine
immersion, and Apostolical tradition, yea precept, as Pelagius Papa, Anno 510.
who is cited by Gratian de consec. did. 4. can. 10. makes it a precept in
those words (because of the three Persons named in the Precept) Go baptize all
Nations in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: and
Theodoretus, l. 4. haeret. Fabular. Which book is thought to be none of his, by
reason of some fabulous things in it: and so this way generally the opinion of
the later Roman Church, whilst they held to the Trine-immersion, that it was a
necessary Apostolical tradition: and the like (I believe) they are as ready to
say, now, they have left that, of their Trine aspersion to which they have be
taken themselves now at last.

And you also, and yours, are of the same opinion, for your once dipping and
immerging; that it is of Divine prescription and Apostolical tradition, who
adhere so peremptorily to it, disallowing and condemning all of us and other
Churches, who practice aspersion and sprinkling, for heretical and
antichristian and our baptism, for unlawful and invalid.

And therefore I shall now also give you a little of Antiquity to (...), for
our sprinkling and aspersing of water with the hand, upon the party baptized,
or our pouring or laying on of water upon some part, head or face of the same,
whereby it shall be made to appear to be also, a good and old way of baptizing.

But shall I need to add any more of this? I have given you already the
Testimonies of some of the Ancients for the same, in the third difference I
made 'twixt your and the Ancients dipping and immerging: and the Example of
Laurentius so baptizing Lucillus, by pouring water upon his head; and so also
he baptized one of the Soldiers, who brought Vrceum cum aqua, and took his
time, and offered it to St. Laurence, that so he might be that Soldier
baptized of him; which could be no otherwise, then by taking water out of the
Pitcher, or Pail, or Kettle, with his hands, and pouring it upon him, even his
head: and this was much about Cyprians time, in year 250. And therefore sure it
was the practice in Cyprians time; yea, and it was his very judgment given
hereupon, to one by name Magnus, Epist. 76. who propounded the Question to him,
whether the weak and sick, who could not be dipped, but were only perfusi,
sprinkled or aspersed with water, were truly Christians, and obtained grace? He
answered, Let it not move any, quod aspergi vel perfundi videantur aegri, that
the sick are aspersed or poured upon with water at their Baptism, for that also
they partake of the Lords grace, seeing the holy Scripture by the Prophet
Ezekiel says, I will sprinkle upon you pure water, and you shall be cleansed
from all your filthiness; of which Text I have made use before to the same
purpose.

So likewise I have showed the Antiquity thereof from Eunomius, and the
Eunomians, who living about the year, 360. did wet the head down to the breast,
in their baptizing; and I have pressed it out of the Greek word which Theodoret
uses, who relates it, that they did it by pouring or sprinkling of water upon
their head (those Heretics imitating therein as their manner is, in those
things there is no difference) the Custom of the Orthodox.

And yet before these, Athanasius who lived about 325. Orat. 3. Contra Arianos,
has another more express testimony, where having showed, that the Arians could
not give a true and perfect baptism, because they erred in the foundation and
essence of it, as who (though they pronounced the words, I baptize thee in the
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) believed not in the sacred Trinity, as
who deny the Son, he has these words, (...), so that those who are sprinkled
and aspersed of them (that is baptized) are rather polluted and defiled with
ungodliness, (then washed) for so I think the word ought rather to be rendered,
as having reference to baptism, according to the sense and purpose of
Athanasius in this place, then as Petras Nannius does (Redeemed:) for though
the Greek word (...), signify also to be redeemed, yet he showed him self a
true Translator indeed of the word in General, but not so good an Interpreter
of the sense, nor word here in this particular, which also signifies, and here
must, to be washed, for the reason above I have given: and so Vossius says
elegantly as pertinently, polluere ait non abluere, rather polluted then
washed, as I rendered it, but that which comes hence to my purpose, that
Athanasius calls and makes (...), the sprinkling and aspersion of water in
the right form, to be baptism, and that it is good and true baptism which is
given in that way and manner.

But I can bring forth a testimony far beyond these, for the Antiquity of
aspersing or perfusion in baptism, and that is of Tertullian, living about the
year 190 lib. de poenit. cap. 6. I deny not (says he) but that the Divine
benefit, Ablutio delictorum, the washing of sin, should be ready and safe to
all that come to the water, and then he adds, but they must labor also to
come thither, for otherwise (says he) Quis tibi tam infidae paenitentiae viro,
asperginem unam cujustibet aquae commodabit; if thou be a man untrue to thy
repentance thou make, who will let thee have one sprinkling of water; (in
opposition or allusion to the Trine immersion, as I suppose) and meaning that
if he would not come to the waters being in health, to be dipped thrice, he
deserved not to be come unto in sickness, to be once aspersed and sprinkled: so
speaking plain enough, for sprinkling and aspersing the sick and weak
especially, the which also Cornelius a Bishop of Rome in Cyprians time makes
mention of, in an Epistle to Fab. Antioch. which is in Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 43.
where he likewise relates of Novatus the Heretic, that when he was freed from
the evil spirit, and fell into a grievous disease, upon his bed desired
baptism, and so was in his bed baptized, i. e. perfusus aqua, by water poured
and sprinkled upon him; This was so customary amongst the Ancient, to sprinkle
and asperse the sick in bed (if there they came to their first conversion) that
it was called Baptismus Clinicorum, the baptism of the bedrid, though they did
not so highly esteem of such as were so baptized in bed and upon sickness, yea,
they debarred such from being of the Clergy, because they thought they become
Christians rather of necessity then good will.

And because I have mentioned such a thing, as the Baptism of the Clinicks, or
such as were converted and baptized in their sickness and death beds, I will
put you a Quaere upon a supposition which often falls out, knowing you will
presently run to your master of quaeres for answer and resolution.

Suppose one of your children, or his, or any your other brethren, who by
virtue, or vice rather of your opinion, has been kept and detained from it is
baptism during it is infancy and minority, should be at 13 or 14 years of age,
visited of God with sickness, and so scholed, and enlightened by him therein and
thereby (for schola crucis est schola lucis) that he should come to a good
measure of knowledge of himself and God, of his sins, traduced at his birth,
and committed in his life, of Gods mercies promised in his word, and covenanted
in Christ; and so lying in bed, under great distempers, even foregoing death;
should upon and after confession of his sins, and profession of his faith in
Christ earnestly desire and require baptism, as the Seal of Gods Covenanted
Mercy, and as a confirmation of his faith therein and a strengthening of him
against the fears of death before and at his departure out of this world. What
would you now do here?

Dare you deny still and withhold baptism from him in this condition, when as
it may be and ought to be ministered unto him? then will you be, and are you
guilty before God of a plain and palpable contempt, of the ordinance of
baptism, which is and will be damnable to whomsoever, Genesis 17.24. Exodus 4.24,
25. And if you think it now needful for him to have baptism, for that he is now
capable of it, according to your own tenet, and the thing is now feizable, and
possible to be had, I ask how and which way shall baptism be given and
conferred unto him?

Will you remove him out of his bed in his clothes, or in his bed and its
clothes to your Pond? or cause to be brought to the bedside some big Vessel
or Tub of water (which later, is more then I need grant unto you, in the point
betwixt us,) and so, either the one or the other way. (...) immerge his whole
body in the clothes or out of the clothes (which is still more then I need
yield?) Then in all probability may and will you be guilty both before God and
man of the death and destruction of the party, the which is and will be as
damnable to whomsoever.

Now advise and see what answer I shall return to him that sent me; You cannot
but see and say as David once) you are in a great straight, 2 Samuel 24.13, 14.
For according to your opinion and practice, you must either let your child
depart the world without baptism, when it might have it; if you would, which
will be prejudicial to your soul and your salvation, or you must give it your
dipping baptism, which will be prejudicial to its body and its preservation, as
causing it to depart the world sooner then otherwise it would.

The only way to come out of your straights, is straightway to fall now into
the hands of the Lord God (with David,) and (laying down your imaginations, and
every high thing of yours that exalts it self against the knowledge of God,)
2 Cor. 10.5. to call for and suffer some lawful Minister of God, to come, and
after such confession and profession heard by him, or testified by others, to
Asperse or sprinkle (In the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost,) a little water upon the face and forehead of your child in the bed,
gently washing therewith, by the moving of his hands, with prayer and
supplication before and after; Thus doing, both dangers may be prevented; and
this was that, I with the Ancients even now called Baptismus Clinicorum. How
long halt ye betwixt two opinions and thoughts, if the sprinkling or aspersion
be baptism, follow it, but if dipping and immersion, then follow it. And the
people (with their Dipper) answered me not a word.

I will but add one Testimony more, and that is, of Walafridus Strabo, de rebus
Ecl. cap 26. Notandum non solum mergendo, sed etiam de super fundendo multos
baptizato fuisse, and adhuc p^sse baptizari, It is a thing to be noted, as it
is notable, that many have bin formerly, and may still be baptized, not only
bydipping and immerging, but also by sprinkling and pouring water upon them,
and so he also makes mention of the baptizing of St. Laurence out of a Pitcher
or Pot of water, which was by aspersion or perfusion, and (...) was often (as
he says) when as the bigness of the bodies of grown persons converted, would
not suffer them to be immerged and dipped in the Vessel, their Baptisteries and
Fonts being too little for them.

And so I have done my Task which was to be a Task-master unto some of the
Egyptians, who have bin and would be still Taskmasters over the Israel and
churches of God, and give out their commands for the dipping and immerging of
our children in Ponds or Rivers, when, (and then only) they shall be of years
of discretion and confession, as to their faith: and I have drawn up this my
censure of it as an Ark, (you will presently say I know, of Bulrushes; and
therefore I say so in present myself aforehand to prevent you) The which, how
weak and mean a thing soever you may think it, through Gods providence, may be
a means, to preserve a Moses and more children of Israel from your immergings
and plun gings of them, (for the time, little else then drownings,) especially
the Ark being daubed with slime and pitch, cemented and closed together, with
Scriptures, Reasons, and Antiquity moreover.

More plainly, I have passed my censure upon your late dipping and immerging in
my Parish, for a new business, as I called it once, and ever shall; and if I
could stand so long about it, and the Reader would stay the while, as to gather
them up together or take a review of the evidences I have brought in against
it, for a new business, I do think there would be a full Jury, and a grand Jury
of them, the which propounded and given up to any indifferent Judge besides
your self, he would not only pass a censure of novelty upon it, as I hove
done, but might cry once and again Novitas novitatum omnia novitas; Yea, and
he would give out a Sentence of vanity also upon the same, and say, vanitas
vanitatum, omnia vanitas. The Person dipping and baptizing, an ordinary man, no
ordained Minister: the Persons dipped and baptized, Christians born, and
baptized before; The manner, the dipping and baptizing them in their clothes;
(the circumstances or ceremonies, I omitted, because they were not only new
and vain, but foolish and immodest) and the action of dipping the whole body
over head and ears in the clothes, and lastly the place, a common Horse-pond
and weyr; Novelty of novelties, all is novelty; yea, Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity; I will say no more of it; (though more might be said of it) then that
it was a new, and a vain business, yea, a taking of the Name of God, Father, Son
and holy Ghost in vain.

I will now only add a Corollary or two, touching the whole business betwixt
us, and so I shall give a Vale or Farewell to it, and to your Letter and my
answer, or censure rather: for so I must call it to the end, who so styled it
in the beginning.

Coroll. 1..
1 Immersion and dipping in baptism (especially thrice) as also Aspersion and
sprinkling), or rather perfusion and pouring on of water, though but once, were
both the good old way; in the manner as they were done and administered by the
primitive Doctors and ancient Fathers of the Church.

And to do the cause and the truth, right, their immersion was the older way, I
say not the better way, and is some years older then their aspersion, as many
years, as Tertullian lived before Cyprian which by computation is not above two
or three and fifty years difference or distance betwixt their times.

Yea, but I will recall that Verdict, and do reverse that saying, as whereby I
do immersion, and dipping too much right, and aspersion, and sprinkling too
much wrong, as to their Births, Right and Originals: for I do remember a
testimony before cited by me out of Tertullian lib, de poenit. cap. 6. in these
words (which may be repeated here again without any Tautollogy, being to
several and different purposes and proofs) Neque ego renuo divinum beneficium
(i. e.) abolitionem peccatorum, inituris aquam, omnimodo salvum esse; sed ut eo
pervenire contingat, elaborandum est: Quis enim tibi tam infidae poenitentiae
viro, asperginem unam cujuslibet aquae commodabit? where you read and see in
plain and evident words, that aspersion of the adult and grown persons was in
Tertullians days also, and I might also now pass the Verdict, the other way,
and say, that immersion and dipping is the younger way, some years younger then
aspersion and sprinkling, as many years as Cyprian is younger then Tertullian,
about fifty two or three.

The truth then is, They were both of them, as twins (as Esau and Jacob in the
womb of Rebecca, Genesis 25.24.) as two manners of baptizing in the Church of God,
born much about the same time, and, (as also Esau and Jacob did) they lived and
walked together a while, and sometimes lived apart, and assunder; and the one
was used in one place, and the other practiced in another place, according to
the diversities of the Churches, and difference of the ages, and variety of
customs, in, and amongst them, and so it continued for an eight or nine hundred
years. But what and if (as it may be) immersion, like Esau, being indeed the
more hairy, rougher, and harder manner, and way of baptizing, might get out
first and come forth into the Churches practice, it was but a very little while
before, for aspersion like Jacob being indeed, the plainer and smoother, and
easier way and manner of baptizing, soon followed after and at the heels; Yea,
as Jacobs hand took hold on Esaus heel, and after supplanted him of the
blessing of his Birthright, so aspersion (if behind) overtook immersion, and
wholly supplanted it of its primogeniture, and so got away the blessing from it,
to be the only approved and practiced way of bantizing in the Centuries
succeeding.

For by reason of some scandals in process of time given or taken at their
maked immersions, clothed aspersions (as I may so speak) or perfusions of
water, got in, and took place of it, and so the elder served the younger: I mean
the elder gave place, and both the Trine immersion, and the immersion it self
was laid aside; and the younger now, as being the more worthy guest bidden, is
set down in that uppermost place, I mean aspersion and pouring on of water, is
now altogether in request and practice; especially amongst all the Western
Churches (of which ours is a part and branch) in which the Gospel most
flouriseth, and the Ordinances of Christ, the Word and Sacraments, are most
reverently and religiously, and orderly observed and administered.

And so thus (as I said) in our purest and perfectest Western Churches, for
these five or six hundred years last past (I think, I am rather within, then
without my Compass) there have been none dipped or immerged, no not in the old,
once good way of the former times, publicly, authoritatively, nay, scarce
presumptuously; until those Affricane (I will not say Monsters, yet were they
cruel but) new men: for (Africa semper aliquid apportat novi) who were your
Progenitors and Predecessors, the first dippers and immergers in the West (the
very place whence they and you arose, is another argument to prove their and
your business of dipping, a novelty and new thing, as coming from Africa
originally) I say until those Africane new men, those Egyptian frogs, that love
to be padling and dipping in Rivers and Ponds, began to spread themselves and
skip up and down, and to bring forth Rivers and Ponds (as the Rivers and Ponds
brought forth them) or rather to bring their Perverts to Ponds and Rivers to be
baptized. The which bold and presumptuous attempt, against the constant and
uniform custom of the Western Church, began in the year 1524, and so is not
above an hundred and two and thirty years sithence; which is time enough, and
little enough to make it Novelty in comparison of Antiquity.

Nay, your Brothers dipping and immerging is not so old as theirs, for your
Ancient Fathers Nicholas Stork or Stock, and Thomas Muncer, did not dip in your
manner; nor is it as old as your elder Brothers, who about 13 or 14 year ago,
ran about the Country; for they did not dip in your manner, in their clothes,
but naked, nor in Ponds, but Rivers; nor do I think it is elder then your
selves were, in the day that you and they practiced it, and begot it in the
Parish of Much Leighs, upon the bodies of the two Sisters you dipped and immerged
in June last past, and so is but a brat or brood of yours and theirs, not a
twelve month old yet by a good deal.

Coroll. 2..
2. When they were both in use, immersion and aspersion, the Ancient Fathers
and their children had not any opinion of the necessity of either, as if the
one or the other, were the only lawful way of baptizing established by Christ
or his Apostles, but they ancounted of them as things and customs indiffrent in
themselves and Adiaphorous; and therefore to be left unto the liberty of the
Church to use, or not, upon just cause and occasion, as may appear by some of
their speeches and practices, which I shall here set down, (though the proof
both of this in part, and chiefly of the former Corrolary in the whole, has
been touched upon, and even handled before.

Gregor, lib. 1. Epist. Ep. 41. ad Leandrum Episcopum Hispalensem;
Reprehensible esse nullatenus potest, Infantem in baptismate vel ter, vel semel
immergere. It is no way to be found fault worthy, to dip and immerge the Infant
in baptism, either thrice, or once; Yea, he gives the reasons of both, and
shows cause, why he thinks fitting to have thrice dipping changed into
once, by reason certain Heretics made an evil construction of the first
custom of thrice dipping, for that they divided the Deity into three Gods upon
their thrice dipping, i. e. in the Name of the Father, 2. in the Name of the
Son, 3. in the Name of the holy Ghost; for which cause, Haeretici dogmatis
usum, as also vitandi scisma, is scandalum, which the Churches of Spain were
distracted with, some stiffly holding with the Trine immersion, and some
standing as stoutly for the once, or siple immersion, the fourth Council
Toletan, or of Toledo, Can. 5. grounding themselves upon the aforecited words
of Gregory, decreed for simple immersion, and against the Trine immersion, for
the two reasons answerable to the two abuses.

1. Ne videantur qui apud nos tertio immergunt, haeretciorum probare
assertionem dum sequuntur and morem: Lest those that dip thrice, should seem to
approve the opinion, whilst they imitate the fashion of the Heretics.

2. Ne dum parts diversae in baptizandis aliquo cont^ario modo agunt, alii
alios non baptizatos esse contendunt: least whilst parties divided in baptizing
several ways, some thrice dipping, and others but once, they should say the
one of the other, they are not rightly baptized, and so esteem each other
scismaticks.

And that this liberty was kept and observed about this matter, as also about
immersion and aspersion in Augustines time, is to be seen in his 74 Chapter de
Eccles. dogm. Baptizandus (says he) post confessionem vel aspergitur aqua, vel
intingitur, The party to be baptized, after confession, is either aspersed and
sprinkled with, or dipped and immerged in the water, and so long before him
Cyprian, lib. 4. Epist. Epistola 7. ad Magnum, (whose words I have set down
before) shows his indifferency for either, and rather his defenceof aspersion
in baptism, yet so as that he leaves it in the Churches liberty and freedom.

What need I go farther then the Church of Rome, whose Ancient practice was to
dip thrice in baptism, so their Gregory says in the Epistle above cited: Nos
autem tertio mergimus, and that for reasons given before; but now it is their
manner in baptizing, thrice to sprinkle or asperse, for what reason they did
before; (for none other they have given us) so by their later practice
reversing their former, though their opinion be still the same, that the Trine
immersion, is a nonscript Tradition of the Apostles, having alike force of
Piety with the Scriptures and necessary to be observed, which if it were so,
why did they alter from it? their own practice in changing of it, and using
their liberty, does refute their opinion of its necessity, or being an
Apostolical Tradition.

Seeing then there is no express precept for the one or the other, nor
Apostolical Tradition for the one more than the other, (He is not Basil the
great, and the true, but Basil the little and the false or forged who speaks
and writes of such a thing) seeing also the true Ancient Fathers and Pastors of
the Churches, some used the one in their Dioceses, and some the other manner of
baptizing in their Divisions, and both sorts with an opinion of indifferences
of the thing in it self, and with liberty of practice left each unto other (as
the affairs and the occasions of the Church required) of changing and altering.
Who can justly challenge, or rebuke our Church of England, and the guides
thereof, for holding and retaining either the one or the other, or both, (as
she does in some way and case) but betaking her chiefly, and most usually to
aspersion and pouring on-water, and that but once, so leaving both the Ancient
Fathers of old, some of them, and the younger Fathers of Rome, all of them in
the number of the Trin or thrice, for that the Trinity is sufficiently enough,
set out in the very form of our baptizing, In the name of the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost? why should any impose upon us, or require of us either the
Trine immersion at all, or immersion at all constantly and continually,
considering we are not of the Eastern Churches, where the Clymate being hot,
parties to be baptized might the better undergo the waters, and be dipped; but we
are of the Church Western, and our Church of the more Northerly side, were the
air, waters, clymate, being cold, the tenderer bodies of our infants cannot be
immerged or dipped, without evident danger to their healths and lives. Have we
not power to lay down and old custom as well as Gregory, and Augustine, and
Cyprian, or I only, and Barnabas, the Ministers of the Church of England, have
we not power to forbear dipping and immerging, especially where it may be
sodangerous and prejudicial? What though some ancient Churches had such a
custom of old, we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God, now a
days, 1 Cor. 11.16. and when they had it, it was but for a time, Temporary; it
was but for an use upon an occasion, Arbitrary; it was not under a necessity
for, but with a liberty to other Churches.

It is a part of the former Gregory his words (in the same Epistle) worthy
notice taking, In eadem fide nihil officit sanctae Ecclesiae consuetudo
diversa, where there is the same faith and an unity in it, a different custom
in things indifferent, nothing burteth or prejudiceth the Church of God, as
which has power, and authority to enact and to abrogate such things, to be
observed or omitted to all her Church children and members.

And therefore, Sir, I have not, nor do censure and condemn you absolutely for
the one and simple immersion, nor for immersion simply and only, but for your
immersion your simple one, an immersion that has almost nothing of Antiquity,
being such as is every way distant and different from the ancient immersion in
all things, but in this, that your dipping was but once and simple; and also,
for that it was a rash and presumptuous undertaking of a few private Plebeians,
and vulgar people, without any Law, or License, or order of Church or State; so
far is it from any precept, or prescript, or President of the Word and
Scripture.

I will be briefer in the next Corrollary, for it is time to have done about
this matter.

Coroll. 3..
3 The nature of baptism is but this, the cleansing and washing away the guilt
and filth of sin, by the application of waters, according to the appointment of
Christ, signifying and exhibiting the blood of Christ, that purges and
purifieth that way; and all the outward Sacramental actions thereof are but
only to represent and set out more lively the inward grace of baptism, which
is still but the ablution of sin. This indeed, ablution and washing of sin, is
necessary, as being of the nature (as I said) and Essence of Baptism; for this
is called therefore the very washing of regeneration, by which we are saved,
through the mercy of God, Tit. 3.5. and so the washing of water by the Word,
with which Christ does sanctify and cleanse his Church, Ephesians. 5.26. and so
St. Paul tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.11, Such were some of you (soul
sinners) but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, etc. in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

But the manner and way of washing and ablution of sin, either that way by
dipping and immerging the whole body into, and under the water, or by
aspersion, or perfusion, or rather superfusion of water upon some part of the
body, this is not necessary, but as I said Indifferent, and Adiaphorous, and
Arbitrary, and so not of the essence and form, but of the accidence and
formality rather, or solemnity of Baptism: so then if the ablution of sin,
washing off the guilt and filth thereof, may be as well (if not better)
represented by aspersion and sprinkling, and pouring on of water upon some part
of the body, and gently rubbing on the same, by the moving of the hand
thereupon, as by the dipping, immerging, and plunging of the whole body, into,
and under the waters, and holding it some while thereunder (as it must be.) I
add also, if it, the aforesaid aspersion, or perfusion, be as effectual to the
good spiritual ends and purposes of baptism, as the aforesaid immersion, I see
no reason to the contrary, but that both the ancient and modern, or present
aspersion and perfusion, or superfusion of water, is as warrantable, and
allowable in baptism (if not still more) as the somewhat ancienter immersion,
dipping and diving in and under water: for, as for any such modern or present
immersion, dipping or diving under water, as yours is, I acknowledge it not; we
have no such custom, nor the Churches of God, as I said but now.

It is true, the body must be washed and wetted with water in baptism, either
one way or another, and that is enough for the truth and nature of baptism; now
this may be, and is done, when we baptize with sprinkling and pouring water
upon it, or part of it, and gently rubbing the flesh therewith, as well as by
dipping and immerging: And therefore we do not speak falsely, when but
sprinkling and pouring on water we say we do baptize, and do not dip (that is
your false speech, for though we dip not into the water, we lay on water and
wash, and therefore do baptize.

Oh but were it not far better, more agreeable to Antiquity, and the benefit
from baptism more ample and large, if the whole body were dipped and immerged,
then only some part thereof, the face, forehead, or head aspersed and washed?

This is answered already; that our way of superfusion, or aspersion with
water, is as significant, as effectual as the other, and as ancient within a
sew years, (if any) as the other way, yea, was in force and life, amongst the
Ancients, when the other was dead and gone; and besides we are freed from it,
where we will plead our freedom, because we live out of the Hot Countries,
where it was bred and born, and was to be kept and maintained: in these
Northern parts of the world, where the Churches of God, cannot practice or use
it (I speak of dipping and immerging) with safety to our Infants healths and
lives. But to the other part of the objection or doubt, I answer, and that from
Antiquity.

First, I gave you but even now four several Testimonies out of four Ancient
Fathers and Writers of the Church, how in their times they poured water upon
the heads of those who were baptized; so I gave you good probabilities, and
more then so, of John the Baptists manner of baptizing of Christ, and Christ's
Apostles (most of them if not all) and the great multitudes that resorted to
his baptism, by pouring water upon their heads: were not all those as amply and
sufficiently baptized, as those who had their whole bodies dipped and immerged
under water? and were they not as fully partakers of all the benefits and
effects of Baptism?

In the Ark were the eight souls (the Epilogue of the World, and the Epitome of
the Church) saved by water; The like figure whereunto even baptism, does now
also save us, 1 Pet. 3.20, 21. Now then, as the Ark being washed with water but
in a part of it, whether that which was immerged under the water, or that which
was aspersed with the rain that fell, saved the Church then: so baptism does
the Church now, though but a part of the body, as the head, or face; or
forehead be either immerged and dipped, or aspersed and sprinkled with the
water in baptism.

And good reason for it, because by and from the Divine Institution, the
Baptismal-water, is blessed, sanctified, and empowered of God and his grace, to
be the ablution and washing of the whole man, body and soul, though it be
applied in the out ward Element, but to a part only of the body, and so
received but of a part; it being so in this mystical, as it is in some physical
sovereign Doses and Receipts, which being taken only at the mouth, and into
the stomach, diffuseth its healing vigor and virtue unto the whole body;
though not here in baptism by any natural and self-operation in this, but a
gracious, and the spirits dispensation: so then though the water, which in
baptism is poured only upon the forehead or face, does reach to, or flow down
to all the whole body, in the external liqucur, to wash and wet it: yet in the
internal virtue and efficacy, which the same has from the Institution and
Benediction of God, it extends to a total ablution of the party baptized, so
that it goes over all, body and soul too, even to an internal ablution of the
soul chiefly, as being principal in sin, and all this still by the force and
virtue of the Divine Ordination of the water hereunto. See it also from the
Analogy that Baptism has with Circumcision; I know you are never willing to
hear of that Circumcision, but you shall hear of that, whether willing or not.
In Circumcision, there was but one part of the flesh, the foreskin was touched
and cut off with the Knife, yet it was, and is so called, the putting away the
filth of the flesh, the whole body and soul, for that the virtue and efficacy
of that which was done but to a part, redounded also, by Gods appointment, to
the whole, even to the Circumcision in heart, and ears, and lips, as the
Scripture every where speaks. Now in Christ Jesus also we are circumcised
with the Circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of
the flesh, Coll. 2 11. that is, we are baptized, with the baptism of Christ, to
the washing away the sins of the body and soul; and therefore though but some
one part, and the fittest part the head, or forehead, or face be only
externally sprinkled and washed with the water thereof; yet the baptism is
valid and effectual to the ablution internally of the soul also, and all the
body also, virtually some way according to his ordination.

Lastly I think not the meaner of our Baptism, by reason of our but handful of
water, and our but sprinkling or pouring on of it upon the face and forehead;
or the better of yours, by reason of your Pond-full of water, and your
immerging and dipping of the whole body therein: No Ordinance of God is to be
esteemed more or less effectual, for either the more or the less of the
Instrument or Element; for God usually, and more usually saves with a few then
many, 1 Samuel 14 6. with little, then with great; that so all power might be
known to be of him, so all glory might be to him, Romans 11.36. as who is the God
of the Valleys as well as of the Mountains, 1 Kings 20.28.

This is true, especially in mystical and spiritual Ordinances and proceedings,
which have his Inslitution and Benediction upon them; as I have showed in
Circumcision, and may do the like in the Lords Supper, where a small portion of
bread, and a little pittance of wine, a morsel of the one and a spoonful of the
other, are as s^gni^cant, and as effectual to a spiritual and internal
refection of the Communicant, as if a whole loaf of the one, and a full Cup of
the other should be given and taken.

So also in baptism a few drops of water, or a little handful of it sprinkled
and poured on the face or forehead of an Infant or other, is as representing
of, and as working to a spiritual and internal ablution of the baptized, as if
a whole pailfull of water should be poured on, or the whole body of the Infant
dipped and immerged into a River full of water, after the custom of the
Eastern Churches.

I will only add to this point a Testimony or two of Antiquity: Chrysostom
writing in his 6 Homil. upon the 2 Chapter of the Coloss. and those words in
the 11 Verse, In whom ye are circumcised with the Circumcision made without
hands, in putting off the sins of the body, etc. buried also with him in
Baptism. He has these words: (...). I shall not stand to English all, the
effect of all is this, that both in Circumcision and Baptism, though the hand
in the one does but cut off a part of the flesh, as the foreskin, with a small
knife; and in the other, pour on a little water but upon some part of the body,
as the forehead, the whole body of sin may be, and in the Elect is cut off
(put off in the Apostles phrase) and washed away in both Sacraments, by a
spiritual operation of Christ,

So also for the other Sacraent the Lords Supper, it being one of the Popish
evasions for their not giving the wine unto the people, by reason of the great
quantity of wine would be spent, upon the numerous multitudes of them, that
would then the rather come and drink great draughts (which should not have been
thought upon here by them, seeing at other ordinary seasts and banquets they
stand not upon such charge, nor are so sparing of their wine) our Divines tell
them (and they should teach their people) that a sup of wine (as a morsel of
bread) may do well enough, and as well (if not better) then greater quantities
of each, at the Sacramental Communication, according as anciently they did, as
Gelasius Lyzicenus in Act is Council. Nicaeni, cap. 30. reports (...). For
this cause we take not much but little (of the Bread and Wine) for that we
know, we take them not to or for satiety; but sanctity. The like whereof is,
that of Eucherius Sermon. 5. de Pascha, Eucharistiae sacrae perceptio non in
quantitate sed in virtute consistit, quod corpus sacerdote dispensante, tantum
est in exiguo, quantum esse constat in toto. The participation of the holy
Eucharist, stands not in the quantity but efficacy, for that the body (of
Christ) when the Priest dispenses (the same holy Eucharist) is as much in a
little part (of the Wine and Bread) as in the whole together.

I have indeed said the more of this, as being (in my opinion) very needful and
necessary, to strengthen, and arm our selves and our people, against the
dangerous tentations of the Devil, wherewith he and his instruments (which are
many in these days) do mainly assault the minds, and scruple the consciences,
and pervert the faith of the weaker amongst us; (as indeed, they have done to
your self, Sir, by your leave) He as he goes about the earth roaring, and they
hissing, as they creep into houses, that their and your sprinkled baptism was
no true baptism, as being but a little water poured upon your face, but only
one part outwardly; and telling you, if you will be baptized indeed, and to
purpose, you must be dipped and immerged in your whole body, and in every part
outwardly; that your whole spirit, and soul and body, may be preserved
blameless against the coming of the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Thus they together
have cast a snare upon you, they have snared you into their nets, and caught
you with some other silly Fry, (as the Spider has the simple Fly) and have
dipped and doused you in your clothes under water, you being in their nets,
(the devil in a corner laughing, snearing and dancing the while over you, even
as the Spider does wind up, and truss up the Fly, being come into its Cobweb,
and then skips, leaps, and runs about it and (which I may mark) sucks and seeds
upon the poor Fly. Well Sir, if you be willing to come to the acknowledging of
the truth (as I am zealous to bring you to it) and to recover your self out of
the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him, and others, at his will
and theirs, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26 read, consider, believe the Truth I have set before
you; but read with impartiality, without prejudicateness. Consider with
indifferency, without precipitancy; and believe the Truth with submission
without resistance: and with many other words have I testified the Truth (in
the answer of your Brother before, as well as in this answer to you) and have
exhorted, and do exhort, saying, Save your selves, especially save your self,
from this untoward (and froward) Generation, Acts 2.40.

And if this be not enough that I have said, read on still; for I have somewhat
more to say unto you, as willing that you should not perish, but come to the
knowledge of the Truth, and the acknowledgement of your Errors: for so also
there is somewhat more that you say to me in your Letter; thus you write,
further, Sir, I wonder how you dare to say that you do embrace the Truth as it
is laid out by Jesus; did Jesus ever lay down, that a man should learn the
Latin and Greek Tongue, and so to a University to read Philosophy, and
commence Bachelor and Master of Arts, and Bachelor and Doctor of Divinity,
and so come to a Parish, there to take a Living from them, to the value of 100
l. per annum, more or less, they nilling willing, and there style himself the
Minister of Jesus Christ? Did ever Christ lay down, that you should take a
little water and sprinkle it on the face of an Infant, and say you dip them in
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? did ever Christ lay down, that his
Ministers should be his peoples Masters, as Lords over Gods Heritage? Did
Christ lay down, that you should take a Parish, a Church, and to them cast the
holy things of the body and blood of Christ, as unto a company, many of them
(if not the most of them) no better then dogs? I my self having been one, who
was not so good as a god, till the grace of God appeared, plucking me out of my
wicked ways to the knowledge of the Truth (which you fear I have not owned.)
But the day will discover, and God will judge between you and us.

Here is stuff indeed, enough to make an only Englishman to speak Greek and
Latin of purpose, to declare the vanity of such words against Languages, like
as the Sedentary Philosopher did presently arise and walk about, to show the
folly of him, who before him denied motion; Quis expedivit Psittaco suum (...),
Picasque docuit nostra verba conari? I wonder Sir, where you learned to speak
these our words, to spy out our Liberties, yea, to Pie and Parrat out our
Tongues, Degrees, and Learning of the University, your self never living there,
and now conversing with the Antipodes to the same?

Auditum, spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici! Truly friends and Readers (so
I would join you, for that I know, all Readers of me, will not be friends with
me) I had not written out this passage, but that I would at the closure of my
answer, present you with this spectacle of ridiculous stuff to move some mirth
in you (for there is nothing of Oracle or solid matter in it, to take up any of
your serious eyes, ears, or thoughts.) These indeed having been carried now a
long time, even unto wearisomness and tediousness I fear, through the washes,
deeps and dippings of Ponds and Rivers; it is time to bring you now to a fire
to warm and dry you, and in good time be it spoken, as done: Here Is an ignis
fatuus, a smoking firebrand, a sparkling squib, a blazing Comet, a crackling
thorn-bush (enough to smutch a whole University) but fear nothing, deest ignis,
there is no fire under the words, nothing but a little flash, and fume, and new
light, a noise, vox preterea nihil, if you cannot warm your hands at it, yet
clap your hands at it, and shout, and laugh at it till you have warmed and
refreshed your self sufficiently, whilst I go on with my answer to such words,
for there is nothing of matter in them, and show the vanity of vanity in them
also, and all to be but vanity here.

Sir, How dare you say you embrace the truth laid out by Jesus? did ever Jesus
lay down, that a man should go to School, and learn his Accidence and Grammar,
and so to a Scrivener to write a good hand, to cipher and cast account,
commence a shopkeeper, or Grocer, and set up shop, and sell by the pound Figs
and Currens (being never brought up to the trade) in the parish, they nilling,
willing, to make a living to the value of he knows what, more or less, and
there style himself a Brother and Teacher of Jesus Christ? but this is nothing.

Look about you all Apprentices, How dare you say, you embrace the truth as it
is laid out in Jesus? did ever Jesus lay down, that a man should go up to
London, bind himself to such a Trade for seven or eight years, and after a
Trade learned, and his years of Apprentiship served out, to get himself made a
Free man, and then to Commence Merchant or Trades master; after that, to come
to be Warden of his Company, and so Deputy of a Ward, at last to rise to be an
Alderman, and Lord Major of the City, and get a great estate there amongst the
Citizens to a value of 1000 l. per annum, more or less, they nilling, willing,
and then style himself a Citizen of London?

Once more, look about you Lawyers, How dare you say, you embrace the truth as
it is laid out in Jesus? did ever Jesus lay down, that a man should go to the
Inns of Court, learn the Latin and French tongue, and there read Magna Charta,
the Reports and Cases, and so Commence Barrister and Councellor, and so
Sergeant of the Coife, and lastly, a Judge of Assize, and so take Fees from the
Clyents for Causes, to the value of diverse 100 l. per annum, more or less, they
nilling willing, and there style himself a Counselor at the Law.

But why do I intermeddle here? The Narrator or Relator means not me sure,
for that he speaks of some Doctor of Divinity; who might therefore do well to
doctrine a little better, yea, and discipline the Indoct young man. But if he
be not indocible also, me thinks my self, but a Bachelor of Divinity, and but
an ordinary Pastor or Minister could do the one, doctrine him sufficiently (to
go to no higher degrees for this, and leave the other of disciplining him to
the higher Powers.)

Nay, even a Bachelor of Art (to go so low;) nay, I believe some Sophisters of
a College (not to trouble any of the degrees at all of the University, in so
mean a work) can tell you, and will tell you, in answer to your Audacious, bold
faced, daring interrogations.

1. That as there are in Scriptures laid out by Jesus Christ, orders and
degrees of Truth, so also a Truth of orders and degrees, even such as are in
our Church and Universities: See for your learning, Ephesians. 4.8. and 11, 12. When
he, Jesus, ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto men, (diversities of gifts)
and therefore he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers, or Doctors, (diversities of degrees) for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ, till we all come unto a perfect man, etc. Are all Apostles? are
all Prophets? are all Teachers or Doctors, etc? There is that whole Chapter, 1
Cor. 12, to this purpose, to show the diversity of gifts, and degrees of
Officers in the Church, from the foot, hand, eye, head of the natural body, and
the diversity of the parts thereof; insomuch that the same Apostle says, 1 Timothy 3.13. They that used the office of a Deacon well, purchased to themselves
a good degree, that is, a Presbytership: and howsoever you think otherwise of
it, Jesus himself, as he was present at the marriage in Cana of Galilee, John
2.1. to countenance that estate and degree of Matrimony, so he sat in the
midst of the Doctors, Luke 2.46. both hearing them, and asking them questions,
whereby he also Authorized that degree also, and all other inferior and
subordinate degrees tending thereunto.

So it is laid out by Jesus, both in Nature and Grace also, as that one Text
shows, Mark 4.28. The earth brings forth fruit of her self, first the
blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the car, and then when the
fruit is ripe, he puts in the sickle, because the Harvest is come.

Are there not mentioned in the Psalm 62.9. Men of high degree, and men of low
degree? and does not James bid the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is
exalted? Jam. 1.9. Will not you do the like, who are now but a Brother of low
degree, rejoice when you are exalted, to be a Preacher, and then a Dipper, who
is with you; a Brother of bighest degree? You have been a Surveyour in your own
Parish, and then Overseer, and now having a little better regulated your house,
may hope to be a Constable to rule the Town, and also you may rise to be a
Churchwarden, but that you have forsaken your Church, and the Church, if that
will exempt you, and now then, why are you so against our being Bachelor of
Art, and then Master, and so Bachelor of Divinity; and then Doctor; which are
our degrees of the University, like as the other are your degrees of the
Country.

2. He can tell you, that Jesus indeed has laid down expressly and absolutely
in particular Texts and words, That a man must serve and worship God, only in
Spirit and Truth, and place his faith and confidence in his promises, and
repent of all sinful habits and acts, and what are his duties to God and man,
in the place and calling that he is of, with all other particular and general
matters necessary to salvation, and of Moral concernment. But for other things
that are of an inferior alloy, and but of Ceremonial, or Temporal
Circumstantial nature, he has laid them down only inclusively and
respectively, in some general rules and dictates, of good order and comeliness,
upon a just occasion or need, unto edification and for good; and so left them
to common Christian reason, and humane prudence to undertake and prosecute
according to the same: amongst which things, are those that you except too,
education in the University, study of the Greek and Latin, reading Philosophy,
taking Degrees, Titles of discrimination, getting Preferments, diversity of
Orders, etc. of which you may read more particularly and largely in my book
before, if you desire to be a Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of heaven, in
such particulars.

Only I will either add here, or repeat here (fearing you will scarce be at
the pains (for so it will be to you pains) to read it) that the learning of the
Latin and Greek tongues (you might have put in the Hebrew too, if you had been
a true Israelite) and the studying of Philosophy, and other Arts and Sciences,
and the taking of the several Degrees (which are the honors and garlands of
the Universities, which they give to Proficients accordingly, to make them
first Students, then Graduates) all these are very useful and beneficial, not
only as the present aliments and encouragements of those Arts and Sciences,
but those Arts, and Sciences, and Languages, are good fortifications of the
understanding, and the enabling of Reason, yea, and of Faith too, to encounter
with Atheists, Heretics and Schismatics, strong preparatives to the
expounding of the Text of Scripture, being written in two of those Languages,
and a fuller qualification unto the work of the Ministry, to do it so as not
to be ashamed through ignorance, and say the book is sealed and he cannot read.

Sect. 3.
But particularly for the learning of the Greek and Hebrew Tongue, did not
Jesus lay down, that a man, I mean an interpreter and dispenser of the
Scripture, should learn them? he laid it down in the whole Scripture, for that
he caused the whole Scriptures to be written in those original Languages:
besides that, the Title and Superscription which Pilate wrote, and put on the
Cross (Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews) was written in Hebrew, and in
Greek, and in Latin, John 19.19, 20. guided therein, even by Jesus, and
confirmed in it, that what he had written, he had written, and would not alter.

And again, for the learning of Philosophy and the Arts, and going to the
Universities to do so, and that in order to the Ministry, did not Jesus lay it
down in Scripture, when as Saul (for so he was then) is called by Jesus, a
chosen vessel, to bear his name before the Gentiles, and to the children of
Israel, and in praevison of, and provision for that calling, was by the same
Divine mercy ordered to be trained up from his childhood, in the famous City
and University too of Tarsus, where he learned both Languages, fitting him to
bear the name of Christ, to both Nations, the Jews and Gentiles; and likewise
the Arts, as Philosophy, and the rest enabling him to disputation with, and
confutation of all the learned Philosophers of the Stoics and Epicureans, of
another famous University of Athens. Yea, and Paul himself makes it as an
honorable mention of himself, that he was beth born in Tarsus, a City in
Cilicia, where (there being also a University) he learned the grounds and
principles of Arts, as also brought up in the City of Jerusalem, at the feet of
Gamaliel, a Doctor of the Law, and taught according to the perfect manner of
the Law of the Fathers, Acts 22.3.

I shall desire the learned Readers patience a while (not much caring for your,
or any others impatient ignorance) that I may here also bring in a short
Historical proof of University-learning, from the persons and practice of the
ancient Fathers and Divines in their times and successions, as I have done
before, produced their practice and custom for Infant Baptism in their days
and ages; I will select out of them but some, the most remarkable, and that
briefly.

Fulgentius, an Affrican by birth, was brought up first by his mother in the
knowledge of the Greek and Latin Tongue, wherein he was excellent, and after
(though but young) got to be admitted into a Cloister or Monastery, of which,
Faustus a French Bishop had the oversight, and there lead a Students life a
good while; and being driven thence by the Vandals persecuting the Christians,
he got into another Cell, where one Felix governed; and driven thence by the
Barbarians, he went to Rome, and into Sardinia, where he settled himself, and
taught and instructed Christians resorting to his Cell in great store. But
Faustus the Bishop called him from that his privater life, and made him Priest,
and not long after, Bishop of Ruspa, a great and populous City. Once for all I
shall say, that Monasteries and Cloisters were such as our Universities and
Colleges are, for use I mean, where many Bishops had their Seats, and the
oversight of them, for the training up of Students in the Arts, and Sciences,
and so also Divinity and Theology.

Augustine an Affrican also by birth, was singularly well learned in the
liberal Arts, so that he taught Grammar in his own City of Thagasta, and
Rhetoric in the head City Carthage; after going to Millain, he was appointed
to instruct the Emperor Valentinian, (being the fifth of that name) and being
somewhat tainted with the Heresies of the Manachees, he by the wisdom of
Ambrose, Bishop there, and by his Sermons and Disputations in public, of which
he was a diligent hearer, was converted from it, and Baptized by the said
Bishop; and after he was ordained a Priest by Valerius, Bishop of Hippo, and so
after a while, with the consent and desire of Valerius, being old, was in the
life of Valerius, created Bishop of the same Hippo.

Chrysostom a Grecian, born at Antioch, was brought up in humane learning,
under Libanius the Sophister, or Philosopher, spent some time in secular
affairs, and after entered into the Priesthood at Antioch, was made Governor of
the Church there, and upon the death of Nectarius was made Governor or Bishop
of Constantinople. The Historians say of him, that Holiness and Scholarship
were joined in him, that he was excellent, and powerful, and judicious in
Morals, or moral learning.

Gregory Nyssen, a Grecian, brother to the other Gregory Nazianzen, addicted
himself much to the study of Rhetoric, and was eminent therein above all of
his time; who for the furthering of himself in the study of the Arts, and all
learning, embraced a Monastical life, (highly respected in the Ancient times,
for the cause above mentioned) that he might also join Theology to his other
knowledge: and after he was made Bishop of Nyssa (of which City he took his
name) and even after that also, addicted himself much to his former study of
the Arts, especially Rhetoric, until his brother Gregory Nazianzen in an
Epistle to him, reprehended him for so long sticking upon the same.

Ambrose, a Frenchman by birth, was brought up at Rome (then a Nursery of the
Arts and learning) where he gained wonderful knowledge in the liberal Arts,
(that place being then as the Academy of the world) giving himself to that
study. Probus, then Praetor, taking notice of him, and the same of his
learning, made him Governor of Insubria, Liguria, and Emilia; after going to
Millain, and Auxentius an Arrian Bishop deceased, He was cried up both of the
Arrian faction as well as the Orthodox, to be, and was created or made Bishop
there.

Epiphanius, a Phoenician born, learned the Hebrew Tongue of one Tryphon a Jew,
and was put to School to Hilarion, to learn the Arts, proved acerrimus
haereticorum oppugnator, and was made Bishop of Salamine.

Gregorius Nazianzen, a Greaecian born, was bred up in Humane literature, at
the University of Athens, and spent thirty years in those Studies, proved a
great Philosopher, and the most eloquent Orator of his time, and was surnamed
also of the Graecians (...), Theologus, or the Divine; He was Bishop first of
Sasima, then of Nazianzen, both in Cappadocia, and lastly of Constantinople.

Basilius, born also a Grecian, and contemporary with Gregory, was also
brought up in humane literature at Caesarea first, and then at the University
of Athens, under Eubulus his Master, a Heathen, whom he afterward converted to
the faith; and coming to Libanius the Sophister, and a Schoolmaster, who
thought to have posed him with some hard and difficult verses of Homer, he
expounded them with such readiness and wit, that he astonished Libanius, and
when he could not convert him from Idolatry to Christianity, he gave directions
to the young men his Scholars, concerning their deportment in their Studies. He
was surnamed (...), Basil the Great, and came to be Bishop of Caesarea and
Cappadocia.

Athanasius, a Grecian born, was brought up by his Parents in learning, and
excelled in all sorts thereof; was ordained Deacon, and received the order of
Priesthood about what time Arrius began to broach his heresies, to whom
Athanasius was the greatest opponent in the Nicene Council. Was after chosen
Bishop of Alexandria, by the general suffrages of all the Churches there, and
by the last Will of his Predecessor there.

Irenaeus, a Grecian, was a general Scholar in all Humane learning, as himself
shows by his refuting the Heretics in all their Sophisticated arguments,
showing them to be fetched only out of the Fables of Poets and Philosophers, and
therefore himself must needs be well versed in them, as who wittily uses their
Proverbs. Exhortations, and Examples to the confutation of them and their
errors: whom therefore Tertullian styles omnium doctrinarum curiosissimum
exploratorem He was after Bishop of Lions.

And as I have showed this truth in the famous Bishops, some of whom I have
made choice; I will do the like in three or four of famous Divines only, and
not Bishops, who were quallified at first with Humane learning. And I will go
downward as I went upward before.

Justinus Martyr, was a Palaestine born, and was a most acute Philosopher, Ad
Philosopiae tum nostrae tum posissimum prophanae summum evectus fastigium,
says Photius. He mostly lived in Rome, as the place of his abode; where, both
in life, speech, and habit, he professed himself a Philosopher, saying, he
found great profit by these Studies, yet made them subservient to his Diviner
ones. He was the first Champion that appeared against those Heretics, Marcion
and Valentinian.

Tertullian, an Affrican born, he was indeed well read in Poets, Grammarians,
Histories, Laws, well seen in Physics and Philosophy, of whom Hierom
testifies, that his works cunctam saeculi continent disciplinam. And what a
great Divine he was, the world knows, and especially Cyprian, who in all his
Theological doubts, still said, Da mihi Magistrum, intelligens Tertullianum.

Clemens Alexandrinus, a Grecian, and born at Athens, a great Student of
History, Poetry and Philosophy, and excellent therein, even in all the
Heathens, Sciences and Arts: and what a great Divine proved he, and a learned
Priest also, who having been an Auditor to Pantaenus, supplying the place in
the City of Alexandria, (next after the Apostle) and he dying, was chosen
Master of the Catechists; in which place, he maintained mightily the mysteries
of the Religion.

Origin, a Grecian, born at Alexandria, and Scholar or Auditor of Clemens
Alexandrinus, where he studied and learned Logic, Arithmetic, Rhetoric,
History, Poetry, Cosmography; and was experienced in all Arts and Sciences.
Where also in that City and University too of Alexandria, as some make it, he
taught a School, and professed the same Arts. Soon after he read the grounds of
Religion, and soundly instructed the Christians, and strengthened them against
the storms of persecution; so that Demetrius, the Bishop of Alexandria, thought
him a fit instrument to be placed in the Church, and so called him to be
Catechista, or Reader of Divinity in that City, in the place and room of
Clemens Alexandrinus deceased. They, the Disciples of Christ were from these
two last named, Origin and Clemens, first called Catechumenists, being about
the year, 226.

Lactantius Firmianus, of whose Country I read nothing, a Roman, or Italian
(most likely;) He was the Scholar and Disciple of Arnobius, and publicly
taught Rhetoric in Nicomedia; quasi quidam fluvius eloquentiae Tullianae; and
in his old age was called to Court, to teach and Tutor Chrispus the Son of
Constantine, the Latin tongue. This made him the better able to set forth his
skill in the diviner mysteries, so that by the help of his humane learning, he
wrote the more strongly against the Gentiles and Heathens in defense of the
Christians.

Hieronymus, an Italian, born at Histeria, was brought up at Rome, the best
Academy for learning then, (though there were Schools for learning also
elsewhere in France, Afric, Spain as I have hinted.) His Master for Grammar,
there was Donatus, (who is thought to be the same who has made-such learned
Comentaries, on Terence and Virgil) and for Rhetoric, Victorinus. He read
Porphyrius Isagoge, or Introduction to Logic, and the Philosophy of Plato and
the Stoics. He looked into Cosmography History and Antiquities, intending to
study Divinity, and to set it forth with all the luster that might, being now
sufficiently furnished with the Arts; He was also excellently learned in the
Hebrew, and Chaldee, and Syriack, and ordained a Priest at Antioch by Paulinus,
the Bishop there, and was a great planter of the truth, a rooter out of
heresies, and in saecularibus valde eruditus and in Divinis Scripturis
eruditissimus.

I have forborne to set down the Names and Books of the Authors, who report thus
of these learned Bishops and Divines, for that they are so many, and well
known, and for that the same Historiographers do speak of every one of these,
which to write out, would be too often to repeat the same; as Socrates, Sozomen,
Photius, Hyeronimus, Paulinas, Trithemius, Sixtus Senensis, Baronius, and
others who have set forth the lives and studies, the arts and sciences of these
worthies in the Churches of God.

And now, Sir, have I not showed you the good old way here also, wherein the
Ancient learned Fathers and Pastors and Doctors of the Church of old walked
prosperously in their ministry, and which Jesus Christ laid out of old for
them to walk, as who orders the steps and ways of these Righteous good men
and his Ministers, Psalm 37.23? Yea, I have compassed you about with a cloud of
witnesses, Heb. 12.1. and those not obscure, Tenebrios, but of the illustrious
lights and luminaries of the world, who were first Humanely, then after
Divinely learned, brought up at Universities and other Schools, in the
knowledge of the Arts and Languages, before they went forth, or were called
into the Church and Pulpits for the preaching of the Word and Gospel.

Into which cloud, if you will enter and come under it, (as you cannot avoid
it) and will be (to use the Apostles phrase) dipped or baptized into me, 1 Cor.
10.2. or rather unto the Worthies I have mentioned in the cloud; it will be
also unto you, as that cloud was, a Pillar of fire and light, to let you see if
you be not wilfully blind, that education of men at Schools and Universities,
in the knowledge of the Arts and Sciences, as also Tongues and Languages, is so
far from being a way shut up by Christ, as an Impertinency, or Impediment to
his Ministry, that it has been (and is still) a way laid open by him, even in
the times of his best and purest Ministry, as a great furtherance and
promotion thereof; and that his Humane learning which you so vilify, is
instrumental and subservient (so it ought to be as Hagar to Sarah) to the
better propagation and profection of the Divine truth.

But Sir, what is the reason you and yours are so much out of charity with
Scholars and University Learning? Sure it is because you are too much in love
with your selves and the Country ignorance, and like not those who are not
like you in ignorance, or whom you cannot be like unto in knowledge. Like as it
is said, that Hierom wrote somewhat against Bishops, and the Episcopal order,
because he could not be made a Bishop himself?

And yet I have heard, and partly know it, that you had natural wit enough to
have been a Scholar, (though God never gave you the gracious will thereto) and
I have heard you discourse a great deal more rationally then now you do, which
makes me think you were dipped in some shallow Pond, and not over head and ears,
otherwise you would not, after such declaiming and writing against the learning
of Latin, have within a line or two spoken and written Latin your self, as
you sililly do in those words of my taking a Living from them, to the value of
100 l. per annum; yea, and have spoken false English too (like a bad English
Scholar also) for I never took a Living from them the people, neither from them
as the owners, nor from them as the Doners, and so no way from them. I hope
that hereafter you will love Latin the better, now your self begin to speak it.

But I have done with that which concerns my self solely in your Letter; for
as to those other Queries or Interrogatories, Did ever Jesus lay down (my
sprinkling of water in Baptism upon the child's face, it is answered as being
the subject of this my last piece written to you) my being Master and Lord over
Gods Heritage, my taking a Parish Church, my giving the Lords Supper to no
better then dogs. These have been answered, as being a part of the Subject of
that my former piece written to your brother.

Thus, When the Jews had married wives, of Ashdod, their children spoke half in
the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews Language, Neh. 13.23, 24.
so you having made a separation and divorce from your Mother Church of
Jerusalem, and entered into a Communion and match with Ashdod, or Samaria, this
your Letter, as your child and offspring, speaks wholly, I may say, and not
half the speech of the Separation, or Ashdod; for in all these particulars
which you have mentioned, you plowed with your Samsons Heifer, and there is no
more difference betwixt that he first vented, and you now have added, then
betwixt Ephraim his Shibboleth, and Gilead his Shibboleth.

You tell me of some no better then dogs that I give the Sacrament to, and of
your self having been not so good as a dog, yet I see you are good at gathering
up the scraps, and eating the crumbs which fall from your Masters Table, your
Master Brothers Table, to whom you have committed your soul, and in whom you
have put your trust for your soul, (as I have heard you should say to him) and
so like a Parrat, or Pie, as I said, you speak no other but the (...) or
Language of your Master and Teacher brother.

In answering therefore him first, I have answered you also, who are but his
second, nay but the very first again; now also I will answer my own question
before, of Quis expedivit Psittaco suum (...) namely, Magister artis ingeniique
largitor venture. When he began to be in want, he went and joined himself to one
of the Citizens or Farmers in that Country, (...) (as now, so then, Citizens
had their Farms in the Country, and were Farmers also as well as Citizens) and
so he filled his belly with the very same Husks, the Swains or Swines do eat,
Luke 15.15.

And so I come to that in your Letter which you speak first, Of my Parishioners
to be no better then dogs; and secondly, of your self to have been one, not so
good as a dog, till the grace of God appeared, plucking you out of your wicked
ways, to the knowledge of the Truth, which you say, I fear, you have not
owned, but the day will discover, and God will judge betwixt you and us.

Sir, it is true, I wrote so, that I feared it, and do still fear, as I wrote,
that you owned not the Truth, for you own not the Scriptures in the right
sense, which are the Word of Truth, but wrest the Letter to prove your own
Errors; nor do you own the Church, but have forsaken it, which is the Pillar of
Truth, and betaken your self to a Synagogue of your own; and not only this
National Church of England, but the Universal Church in the world, as who have
withdrawn your self from the public Ministry of the Truth in the Word and
Sacraments. Yea, and have renounced one of its true Sacraments, your
Infant Baptism, (these things have been clearly and largely set forth already
in my answer to your Brother, and I must not tire my Reader, or trifle away
paper with needless repetitions.

And therefore though I yield you, that the grace of God has appeared,
plucking you out of your wicked ways, (which I am glad to see, as it
appears) yet I cannot say, as you follow on, that it has plucked you, to, or
into the knowledge of the Truth; for I find you not there, but rather (which
both your Letter and life make to appear) in the ignorance, and that wilful
ignorance of the Truth, which makes me doubt somewhat of the truth also of the
grace of God, you so boast of; for where true grace appears, it not only
sanctifies and plucketh out of wicked ways, but it illuminateth, and sets
in the knowledge and path of Truth.

Yea, and usually the grace of God does first enlighten the soul, and teaches
it the knowledge of the Truth, before it pluck him from his wicked ways; as in
the Prodigal, and Saul more apparently. There shined round about him a light
from heaven, and a voice thereout taught him the knowledge of the Truth, even
Jesus, whom he persecuted in ignorance and so there fell from his eyes
immediately, as it had been scales, and he received forthwith his sight; and so
after arose and was baptized, Acts 9.3, 18. and became a new creature and was
plucked out of his evil and wicked way, of persecuting Christ in his members,
and became a member of Christ himself; but whether it be the sanctifying grace
of God, or but the restraining grace of God, the Evangelical tidings, or legal
terrors, and faith Saint James speaks of, James 3.17, 22. or the fear Jamaica
put you in, I rejoice to see you plucked out of your wicked ways, and shall
much more exceedingly be gladded when I shall see you also brought to the
knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 2.25. and because I cannot in meekness instruct
you, opposing your self, for withal you absent your self, yet I will pray that
God would give you repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth. Yea, moreover,
as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray
for you, but I will teach you the good and the right way, 1 Samuel 12.23. Yea, I
have done it, and if you refuse to hear it and walk therein, but reject it, it
being the Word of the Lord. Take heed lest he reject you as he did Saul, for
refusing to do after the Word of God by Samuel; and so Samuel went to Ramah,
and Saul went up to his house to Gibeah. And Samuel came no more to see Saul,
until the day of his death, (like as Saul came no more to see Samuel unto the
day of his death;) nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul, 1 Samuel 15.34.

. 1.

I had done, but my zeal to you, and your knowledge of the Truth, wherein I may
be (or desire to be) helpful unto you, does carry me on a little further; as
first, to let you know, that though David called his Persecutors Dogs, Ps.
22.17, 21. and Peter called Apostates Dogs, 2 Pet. 2.22. and Paul called
Impostors Dogs, Phil. 3.6. yet will it not become you, neither is it consonant
to the knowledge of the Truth, or the Truth of your knowledge, to call a whole
Parish, a company, many of them, if not the most of them, no better then Dogs.
Like enough then they will be barking and bawling at you, if not biting and
tearing of you; but I will keep them off as much as I can, and bid them peace
and be still, saying to them as Peter, If ye be reproached for the name of
Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of Glory and God rests on you, 1 Pet.
4.14. whilst I shall say to you, Sir, you know not (another part of your
ignorance of the Truth) what manner spirit they are of, who for any thing you
know, may be true sheep of Christ: nay, you know not what manner spirit your
self is of; sure the spirit of Grace which is given to the meek and humble,
rests not upon you, for the Grace of God you said even now, appeared,
plucking you out of your wicked ways and works; had it been the sanctifying
Grace, it would also have appeared, plucking you out of your wicked words, and
uncharitable, and untrue calumniations. Sir, till you be endued with such
manner of spirit, as David, Peter, and Paul were, so Prophetical, and
Apostelical, so discerning, so authorized, forbear I pray such rash speech, and
judge not, that you be not judged with the same judgment; for with what
measure you meet, it shall be measured to you again, Mat. 7.1, 2. They will be
(as too likely) dogged, and dogging also of you and your company, and then what
coupling, and kenneling of Christians will there be; you will so make the whole
Island, the Isle of Dogs, otherwise famous for sheep.

If this will not do, take knowledge of another Truth, (seeing the Grace of God
has appeared, plucking you to the knowledge of the Truth) that whosoever shall
say unto his Brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the Counsel; but whosoever
shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire: and what shall he be in
danger of, that says, Thou Dog, nay, all of you are no better then Dogs, I
pray tell you me that, out of the knowledge of the Truth, that the Grace of God
appearing, has plucked you unto.

. 2.

To let you know, that though David styled himself a dead dog and a fleat, 1 Samuel 24.14. and Mephibosheth also called himself a dead Dog, 2 Samuel 9.8. and
both out of a true humbled spirit, in and under Glory; yet there may be a vain
glory in your humility, and if so, then will it not become you, neither is it
consonant to the knowledge of the Truth, or to the Truth of your knowledge, to
speak of your self, as one not so good as a dog; so Co^. 2.18. The Apostle
discovers a guile, or a beguiling in the voluntary humility of some, who were
voluntaries in humility; and so Col. 2.23, etc. St. Paul espies a vain show of
wisdom, even in the humility of the Impostors of his time, and in their not
sparing, but neglecting their bodies; for they would scourge their bodies,
macerate their flesh with fastings, and drinking only water, to make a show of
wisdom, and to get a repute of Religious humility, and savouring heavenly
things. This was but Frier-like, with the Flagellants; and is but Quaker-like,
with Parnellites; and may be Dipper like, with your self; to make a show of
wisdom, in this your will worship and humilty, to the beguiling of silly
souls, that you are ready to go through fire and water, neglecting the body: so
also that you mind not worldly repute, nelecting your name, or not sparing your
self in it, but calling your self not so good as a Dog in your former
condition; you might advance your new business, and your self therein, to be as
good as a Lion or a Lamb.

I think it was said either of Diogenes by another, or by Diogenes of another,
going but barely and thinly in clothes, that a man might see Pride as well in
a Philosophers threadbare cloak, as an Emperors rich furred Pall: so that
Ecebolius, who laid himself flat on the ground, in the Temple Porch, bidding
people to go over him, and tread upon him as unsavory salt, (Calcate me
insipidum salem) made therein but a show of wisdom or policy rather, and
savoured even of pride, in that his effected, and therefore ju ly suspected
humility: and I think Abigail did but Complement, in those words of her, being
sent for to be wife to David, Let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet
of the servants of my Lord, 1 Samuel 25.42.

But enough of this, and take it, I pray, not as my supposition in you, that it
is so, but rather my admonition to you, that it be not so, For I must now tell
you, my opinion is, it was not so with you then, nor so with those others,
either then or now, of whom you speak the same.

. 3. You may be bold with your self, you will say, and I say so too, bolder
with your self in calling or miscalling what you please, then you may be with
others upon that ground, that no man knows the things of a man save the
spirit of a man which is in him, 1 Cor 2.11. and a man's own heart will tell him
more of himself, then seven Watchmen that sit in a high Tower; yet I say, as
though the Grace of God given to me, to every man that is among you, (and you
especially) not to think or speak of himself more highly then he ought to
think, or speak, Romans 12.3. (as to think or speak of himself as an Angel, or
Lion (as I said,) giving out that himself was, or is, some great one, or the
great power of God, Acts 8.9, 10. so not to think, or speak of himself more
lowly then he ought to think or speak (as to think or speak of himself) as a
worm, or a dog, (as you say,) unless you be of the same spirit assuredly that
they were, who extraordinarily thought and spoke so of themselves: For the
Apostle says of the first, they do not think or speak soberly of themselves,
or unto sobriety; and I may of the second, they do not think or speak sincerely
of themselves, or unto sincerity; (there is an excess in the one, and a defect
of Truth in the other) and your anger and rage against another who should call
you so, would soon discover the truth and the sincerity yea or not.

There is a saying amongst the Moralists, that Nemo sibi injuriam infert, no
man can do an injury to himself: No man ever yet hated his own flesh; the
Divine adds, Ephesians. 4.29. Surely, either you are gone out of your self, or if you
be come to your self with him, Luke 25.17. you have injured your self, in
thinking and speaking your self a dog, (and not so good as a dog) from your
birth hitherto, until this year; When the Grace of God appeared, plucking you
out from your wicked ways, unto the knowledge of the Truth: For the Grace of
God which plucked you (as you write) to the knowledge of the Truth, is the same
Grace, which brought St. Peter to the knowledge of the Truth in this matter;
and appeared to him, Acts 10.15. and 28. God has showed me, says Peter, that
I should not call any man common or nuclean: and besides the vision, there was
a voice spoke to him also, What God has cleansed, that call not thou common;
and so the same voice forbids you; (though you see not the vision) hear it, and
call not any man hereafter, call not your self dog, or any other, common or
unclean, creature or name.

Indeed before the Election and calling of the Gentiles was make known to the
Apostles by our Savior Christ, the Apostles and others had some such thoughts
and speeches of the Gentiles, as dogs, and as unclean, as appears by Peter here
at first, and Apostles and Brethren that were in Judea, who contended with
Peter for going unto them, and eating with them; Acts 11.3. Yea, and Christ
himself told the woman of Canaan, a Gentile; It was not meet to take the
childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs, when she supplicated him for to cast a
Devil out of her daughter, Mat. 15.26. Dogs, because they were out of a visible
admission and reception into the Church-visible, For without are dogs, Rev.
22.15. but even she (as they, other Gentiles) when she showed the faith she had
in the mercy of God, and made profession of her Master, Christ, in that reply
(Truth Lord, yet the dogs do eat of the crumbs that fall from their Masters
Table.) Mutavit vocabulum, quia mutatum vidit affectum, says Augustine upon
the place, he changes his word and appellation, because he saw in her a change
of state and condition: now he says, O woman, great is thy Faith; no longer
now a dog, but a woman, yea and uses her, not like a dog, but as one of the
lost Sheep of Canaan, or the Gentiles.

But for your self, and those other of my Parish, who are born Christians, of
Christian Parents, and so within and under the Covenant of Grace, and also put
under the Initial seal of the Covenant of Baptism. (I my self baptized you,
thirty six years sithence,) and thriving under my Ministry of the Word, (your
self have often heard me preaching answered me, and well to my questions of
Catechizing; your Mother Eunice also bringing you up like a Timothy, in the
nurtriture and knowledge of the Scriptures, from a very child) and growing up
a Faith, by my administration of the Lords Supper. (If I remember well, I have
also taken examination of you, as of the young men, and found you, or made you
fitting and capable of the same, and exhibited the fame unto you) And what!
were all my people, the most of them, no better then dogs, and yoiur self not
so good as a dog, all this while, and no Grace of God appearing, and plucking
you to the knowledge of the Truth? A Christian dog is a word for a Jew, or a
Turk to speak; to look upon Christians as dogs, and to use Christians like
dogs, is an act for a Barbarian and Scythian to do.

. Nay Sir, you not only wrong your self a Christian, and my Christian
Parishioners, but you injury Christ himself, and the Grace of Christ, appearing
both in them, and your self, to the plucking of your self and them, from their
wicked ways, to the knowledge of the Truth, (I can be a better witness for
them, then yoiu, who are but herein, the accuser of the Brethren) for the Seal
of my Ministry are they, many of them, in the Lord, I can truly say with the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.2. I say again, you wrong Christ himself, and the Grace of
Christ, and the Covenant of his Grace, and the Seals of his Covenant, Baptism,
and the Lords Supper, and the fruits and effects of his Seals, and the Spirit
of God that daily wrought and brought forth such fruits and effects in their
lives. And lastly, you wrong your own eyes and conscience, that will not see
and acknowledge this, by your stiling your self not so good, and my people no
better then dogs, till you and they came out of your, and their wicked ways,
to the knowledge of the Truth.

What say you then to the children of Israel, and their children? by your
speech and reason, they must go for dogs too, as not yet plucked out of their
evil ways, to the knowledge of the Truth? but in the phrase, and language of
Scripture, they were a holy people, and their children not unclean, but holy;
The Root holy, and the Branches likewise Romans 11.16. and that by reason of the
Covenant of the holy God, and the Seals upon them, with the other Ordinances;
and even Saul in the Acts of the Apostles, was no dog, but a chosen vessel of
Christ, before the Grace of God appeared, plucking him out of his wicked way,
to the knowledge of the Truth. Yea, thus you wrong all the Elect of God, for
Gods Elect, as Saul and your self (it may be) may live in wicked ways, and be
ignorant of the Truth, a long while, as Saul did, (and you say of your self
that you did) yea, the Elect Ephesians, are said to be children of wrath by
nature, as well as others, Ephesians. 2.3. and Ephesians. 1.4. and yet were not, nor could
be called dogs, notwithstanding impure or hateful before God, because they were
in and under the love of God, which is called Amor Benevolentiae, the love of
his eternal good Will and Benevolency in electing of them, although before
their Conversion, and before they have Faith, they do not stand actually
reconciled unto God, which is called Amosr Complacentiae, the love of his
special delight and complacency in accepting of them, by the coming of Christ
into the world, and purchasing it for them: so that their persons are never
hateful or detestable, but beloved and accepted from all eternity, and
therefore cannot be as bad as dogs; though their state wherein they are in, may
be odious and detestable, as was Saul's when he persecuted the Church, and as
was yours when you walked in wicked ways, and both of you were ignorant of the
Truth: but this some similar act or quality of a dog, as impurity and ignorance
for a while, is not enough or sufficient to impute the Title and denomination
of a dog to such, whose persons belong to Gods Election, and are under gracious
favor of God in a Christ, and are parties covenanted with, and partakers of
the Seal or Seals: Does God take care for Oxen? 1 Cor. 9.9. what Dogs, who are
Gods? what a transposition of letters is this? what an Anagram? which none but
an Ingram and Agrammatical man, who is himself transported with a zeal without
knowledge, can or will affirm or make. The field that is intended for Wheat,
fallowed for Wheat, and Sown with Wheat, is not called, or to be called, a
barren Wilderness, and desert Land, though weeds come up in it every where, and
before the good husbandry has appeared, plucking them up, but it is called
Tilth-land, and a Wheat-field.

The ground of your error lies in this, that you thought of no other Grace,
but that of sanctification, when you spoke those words, of your self and
others, to be dogs, until the Grace of God appearing, plucking you out of your
wicked ways, to the knowledge of the Truth, so the words themselves do show,
and thereby show also your ignorance of the Grace of God, both that of Election,
and that of Justification, which is not any inherent Righteousness and quality,
as Papists also hold with you, which in matter of Justification or Election, is
but dung, as the Apostle calls it, for the Grace of God is one of his
Attributes, out of us, in God, and according to the use of Scripture, is either
metonymically, the special gift of Grace, or properly, the gracious favor of
God in Christ, by which Grace, we are elected, called, justified, sanctified,
and shall be glorified; and in this order they go one before another, as
several acts and degrees of Grace, sanctification being the end or effect, as
of our Election, Ephesians. 1.4. and of our Justificaiton, Luke 1.75. so of our
Vocation, 1 These. 4.7. Its a strange error of yours, to account your self and
others a sheep only in and under the Grace of sanctification; so you say, you
were no better then a dog, till the Grace of God plucked you out of your evil
ways; were you then a dog and no sheep in and under the Grace of Election, and
Vocation, and Justification? I am sure others are not. But what is your drift
and scope I pray Sir, in writing thus to me now at this time, that your self
has not been so good as a dog, till the Grace of God appeared, plucking you
out of your wicked way, unto the knowledge of the Truth.

Is it to advance the power and efficacy of your separate and dipping
Ministry, above mine and the Sacerdotal function? it must be so, and no
marvel; for you committed soul and body unto but one of them; my self and
others could seldom get your body unto our Churches and Ministry; I prepared
my dinner, and killed my Oxen and fatlings, and had all things in a readiness,
Mat. 22.4. but you made light of it, and went another way, or would stay at
home, or when you came, if the good seed I sowed in you, did not fall into good
ground, Mat. 13.4. to bring forth fruit; but you suffered the fowls, the wicked
one, to devour and catch it away, or the thorns of the care of this world, to
spring up and choke it, you must blame neither Seed nor Sower, neither
Ministry nor Minister, but even say of your self, I was a Highway side
Hearer, a Thorny-ground Auditor, like as you say you was no better then a dog
that while, and so I gave that which was holy to dogs.

But I do not say so, that you were that while any such for you did neither
trample the holy things under your feet (though they fell upon thorns, or by
the way side) neither did you turn again and rend me. Again, Let no one of you
be puffed for one against another, 1 Cor. 4.6. I acknowledge there is a
difference of Ministry; but who makes thee to differ from another? who is
Paul, and who is Apollos, but the Ministers by whom you believed? for neither
is Paul that planteth, nor Apollos that waters any thing, but God that gives
the increase, 1 Cor. 3.5, 7. you do well and wisely to say, The Grace of God
appearing, plucked you out, and so to ascribe the glory of your plucking out of
wicked ways to the Grace of God: The Grace of God is free, as the Spirit of
God, to blow where it lists, John 3.8. and upon whom, so by whom, and when it
lists.

Yet thirdly, I add, that According to the Grace of God which is given to me, I
have laid the foundation, 1 Cor. 3.10. of your coming out of your wicked way to
the knowledge of the Truth, for many years together, and another does but build
thereon; and the foundation I have laid in you, was none other then Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. The Covenant of the Grace of God in Christ, (I will
be thy God, and the God of thy seed,) made therefore with your believing
Parents, and your self, with the Seals thereof which have been given you, and
the conditions, which are to be performed by you; yea, I have built upon this
foundation, Gold, Silver, and precious stones, preach in Faith, and Repentance,
and Obedience, (in your own words,) coming out of wicked ways, unto the
knowledge and practice of the Truth: and just then, when the building should
have been raised up; unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, you fell a pulling down, as fast as I had built up; yea, you
suffered others to come in upon you by their sleights and cunning craftiness,
whereby they lie in wait to deceive, to build upon my foundation, Wood, Hay,
and Stubble, and such combustible things, and to set in many of their weak, and
impotent, and beggarly rudiments upon it, especially those three; your
separation from your Church, your evil affection to the ordained Ministry,
your new Dipping and Re-baptizing, with arenouncing of your old.

If you, or any of you, shall question farther, why the Grace of God by my
Ministry, did not pluck you out before, and sooner, diverse years ago, before
this last fatal one, out of your wicked ways, etc. it is answered, Because
there was the Grace of God in it, which is free to work, (as I said) and as
where, and by whom, so when it pleases; for Paul plants only, and Apollos
only waters, but God gives the increase; some increase I have showed you,
God gave, but the full increase, which is the Harvest, does not presently come
up after sowing: For so is the Kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed
into the ground, and the seed should spring and grow up, he knows not how,
(says St. Mark) For the Earth brings forth the fruit of her self, first the
blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the ear, Mark 4.26, 27, 28.
Conversion in some, comes as lightning from Heaven, and is done suddenly, in a
moment, at once; so to Saul and Zacheus; but to others, as the seed before
mentioned, it comes up slowly, and by degrees, in time, as to Nicodemus and the
Prodigal, and this is your case. Now, it is not the last stroke with the Axe.
that must baer the name of cutting down the great Oak from the stump and root,
but all the blows, from the first to the last; nor is it the sowing of the last
handful of seed, must go away with the title of bringing forth the whole (rop
Hosea 6.5. Mat. 3.10. God has been hewing you these many years, by the Axe of
my Ministry, which has been sharpened at times, in reproofs and admonitions
to you, both in the matter fitted for you, and in my thoughts fixed upon you in
the public, and so laid to the Roots of the Trees, to your evil ways, saying,
Bring forth fruits worthy, or meet for Repentance, else you must be hewn down
and cast into the fire. So for the same purpose, God and his Grace, by my
Ministry, has been seeding you with the good and principal Wheat, the pure
and precious Word of God, for these many years; and now shall the men of
yesterday, your new Seeds-men and Heads-men, your last Teachers and Dippers,
who have wrought but one hour, be made equal to me, Mat. 20.12. yea, be
preferred before me, who have born the burden and heat of the day; if God will
have it so, let it be so: It is lawful for him to do whatsoever he will with
his own; and mineeye shall not be evi., because God is good. Herein also is and
will be that saying true, One sows, another reapeth, John 4.37, 38. They in
the mean time reap that, they bestowed no labor upon: I labored with you, and
they entered into my labors, and have gotten you out of my hands, though to no
good praise and commendation for themselves, and it may so fail out, they may
find no great Crop or purchase of you, and neither may repay their craft more
then their charge; especially it you will do as you ought, Return and own the
first Grace of God appearing to you, and plucking you out from your wicked
ways to the knowledge of the Truth.

But fourthly, Is this all, Sir, that you new Teachers and Converters have done
for you, and is this all the Grace that has appeared to you, for to pluck you
out of your wicked ways, to the knowledge of the Truth? Nay, they have not
done all this, for they have not brought you to the knowledge of the Truth, but
of their Errors: they have pulled you from knowledge to ignorance, and from the
truth to falsities, and lies, as the Scripture phraseth such, and I will tell
you presently the particulars; but suppose it a while, they have plucked you to
the knowledge of the Truth, that is enough to prove you a true Convert by them,
for Judas was pulled up so far as to the knowledge of the Truth, yet proved an
Apostate at last for all that, and was an Hypocrite in the mean time; if you be
not plucked up farther yet, namely, to the love of the Truth, God may send you
(as in present he does) strong delusions, that you shall believe a lie and be
damned, 2 Thessalonians 2.11, 12. Yea, and yet farther, to the obedience and practice
of the Truth, else you may miss to be blessed in the end: for, If ye know these
things, blessed are ye if ye do them, John 13.17. Many shall say unto me (says
Christ) in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name? yea, and
in thy Name cast out devils? to whom he will profess, even to such Professors,
I never knew you; depart from me ye workers of iniquities, Mat. 7.22, 23. Oh,
but you are also plucked out of your wicked ways too, Oh, but Grace of God
has appeared in that also. But neither is that sufficint to show your
Conversion by them, for, Ahab humbled himself, and went softly, and abstained
selling himself unto sin a while, at the rebukes of Elias, 1 King. 21.29. and
Herod reformed somewhat, and did many things at the preaching of John. and
heard him gladly, Mark 6.20. and Esau mourned for his loss and sale of his
birthright, and sought the blessing again, and that carefully with tears, Heb.
12.17. If you ask what more would I require, what lacks yet? I answer to you
as our Savior Christ did to the young man, Mat. 19.20. (for neither are you
too old, if you be not too cold to learn) saying much as you do, ( All these
things do I now keep, though not from my youth up; the Grace of God has now in
my elder years appeared, plucking me from my wicked ways.)

One thing is lacking, and if you wilt be a perfect Convert, find the way to
change your mind (as the Author to the Hebrews adds) and not only to alter
your course, and turn to the Lord with all your heart, and so order that your
soul and spirit may be washed from evil lusts, and not only the body and
clothes dipped from wicked works.

But you add, The day will discover, and God will judge between us and you,
whether you own the Truth, to which and whom therefore I leave you.

. I proceed to a sit thing, which is this, That whatsoever good thing is
wrought in you (seriously and unfeignedly, I concongratulate it, whatsoever it
be, and would be instrumental unto the growth and increase thereof, in the way
of the Word of Truth:) let the Grace of God that has appeared to you, have the
glory of it, not unto them; not unto them, your ( new Land Teachers) and new
Pond Dippers, but unto the name and Grace of God, give the glory, of whatsoever
Conversion is wrought in you. If you do not, then with David I will say, Not
unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory, for thy Mercy and
Truths sake, Psalm. 115.1. They have plucked you only from the good old Way,
into a new, by, and bad path: from the public Ministry or Steeple Houses, (be
it so) to private mysteries or smokeries, rather of their Chimney-houses, from
your first true Baptism at a Font. to a second vain Dippism in a Pond. They
have been rather instrumental to your Confusion then your Conversion. Yea, I
say further, God does not use them, the Anabaptists, as Anabaptists, andtheir
doctrine as any ordinary means or instruments of his, to the Converting fouls
to the Faith and Truth.

I promised to give you a Particular of them, and their Doctrines, and this it
is, wherein they differ from us, and have forsaken the Truth of our Church, and
the Word of God, and which does denominate and constitute an Anabaptist.

They reject all Infant Baptism, renouncing their own Baptism they took in
Infancy, and therefore Re-baptize themselves and others, and keep their
children from Baptism, till years of discretion, and ability of profession, and
so in a manner deny the Seal of the Covenant of Grace to Infants; with whom
also God has entered into it, saying, I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed. They hold all stinted, and set forms of prayer, unlawful to be used in
Church or House, and even so also, the Lords prayer.

That there is no distinction betwixt Clergy and Laity.

That the taking of Oaths before, or by the Authority of a Magistrate, is
unlawful.

That the office of a Magistrate is neither lawful nor necessary: with
abundance more (for why should I stir the whole dunghill to infect the Air) of
coherent and coincident Errors and Lies, as the Prophetical Scriptures call
them.

Are such Teachers and Tenets, like to pluck you out of your wicked ways, and
to bring you to the knowledge of the Truth, whether private or public, who
hang so fast in the Bushes and Thickets of Errors, and stick so deep in the
Bushes and Thickets of Erros, and stick so deep in the mire of Vices, dipped in
both up to the chin and mouth, yea, over head and ears, especially, seeing such
were never called or sent about the work of Converting souls to either.

For my part, I am of Paul, and I am of Jeremiah, and so should you be of both
too, the Apostle and the Prophet. But first, I am of Paul the Apostle, who
says, indeed Faith comes by hearing, for how shall they believe in whom they
have not heard? But it is hearing of a Preacher; for how shall they hear
without a Preacher? And it is of a Preacher sent, for how shall they preach
except they be sent?

The Apostle is clear of the opinion, that only sent Preachers, who have
Mission and Commission from God, can bring hearers to the Faith, and seems to
wonder at those in his vehement and frequent Interrogatories, who say or think
otherwise.

This Text I may call Faiths Clymax, or Ladder, with its steps and gradations,
which none of your Lay-brethren could ever yet climb up to, or come down by;
if they begin at the lower end, as they ought, being the ground and foundation
of the work, and so offer to go and climb up, they m^ss of their first step
and footing, because they are not sent, and so must climb no farther or
higher; for want of Mission they cannot go up the Ladder in the Right way of
preaching and begetting faith in the Hearers, or your self. And if they begin
at the upper end, and top of this Ladder (as indeed presumptuously they use to
do, and heap to themselves at first a multitude of Hearers) and so come down
along to their preaching, yet they fall off the Ladder at the lower staff or
step again, because still they be not sent, and so can do no missive or
ministerial good upon their Hearers, nor your self, as to Faith.

It is Gods great mercy to them and you, that they cast not themselves down
headlong, or that they are not cast down by him that took them up into the
Pulpit, and set them on that Pinnacle of the Temple, to the breaking of their
necks, as well as making shipwreck of Faith, for they tempt the Lord their God,
and are not in their ways (which words must not be left out by you, as they
are left out by the devils citing of that Text) and therefore God has given
his Angels no charge over them, (being out of their ways) to bear them in
their arms or hands, that they dash not their foot against the stones. Yea,
they do dash not only their feer, but their tongues also against the stone,
the Head-stone of the corner, which these builders refuse, in ascending
Pulpits, or stepping into chairs, and preaching without his sending or
Commissioning them, according to his Prerogative given unto him, of which this
is a part, All power is given me in Heaven and in Earth, as my Father has sent
me, so send I you, Mat. 28.18, 19. John 20.2. So also I am of Jeremiah; who is
so frequent and fervent in the point, that I shall only name the Texts, and
make the proofs out of all together, Jer. 14.14. and 23.32, 21. and 27.14. and
28.8, 9. where I observe, that six or seven times, the Lord by the Prophet
says, that he sent them not, and thereupon it is said, thrice they prophesied
lies (once) otherwise then the word is, (once) deceits and dreams, (once) their
Errors and lightness, false visions and divinations, things of naught, and the
deceits of their own hearts, (enough one would think to keep off people from
hearing of them) and yet in plain terms, therefore they are forbidden (thrice)
to hearken to them or their words. And if for all this they will be hearing of
them, (as they have now very itching ears, and give themselves much to hearing
new men, as news-men) the Prophet tells and foretells them more plainly, They
shall do no good on it, at the 32. verse of the 23. Chapter, I sent them not,
nor commanded them, Therefore they shall not profit this people at all, says
the Lord.

Hear you this Sir, and hearken to this all ye separate people of England,
those of God unsent, uncommanded Preachers, false Teachers, of the
Anabaptistical separation (for are they not so that teach you the Doctrines and
Practices I have particularized but even now, and now may assimilate unto the
lies, dreams, deceits, vain visions of those false Prophets) those false
Teachers of the Anabaptisticall separation: I say, nay, says the Lord, shall
not profit you at all; therefore they have not, nor any Grace of God appearing
in, by, or from them; (for God does not give Converting ministerial Grace to
them whom he does not send, nor Commission them) plucked you, or any of our
people, nor shall pluck them or you from your wicked ways, to the knowledge of
the Truth; (for this is and will be, a great deal of profit) they have not
turned and converted you, or any of our people, nor shall unto the Faith, and
unto God, (for this is and will be, the greatest profit of all that can be.)
You say they have converted you, (and so say some others, I am sure) and done
you much good to your sou^, which you have said you would commit to them, and
trust them with: (a very foolish, almost blasphemous speech, if you said it)
And God faith here, they shall not profit you at all, and therefore do you no
good, either in soul and body, (as to Conversion and Salvation;) whom shall I
believe, God or you? whom do you believe, God or your self? Gods true
prediction, or your own false suggestion? Come, come Sir, Let God be true, and
every man a liar, Romans 3.4. as it is written also; for so your self, and every
other man that says he has profited in soul unto Salvation or Conversion, by
these unsent, and unordained Preachers of the separation, when as God says,
such shall not profit the people at all, by their Anabaptistical Doctrines and
Preachings. Mistake me not, I am not against the profit, that may come even
from them to you or others, by mutual and fraternal conferences, exhortations,
admonitions, supplications, so long as their words be seasoned with the falt of
Truth and Grace, and be good to the use of edifying, and your selves have your
senses exercised, to discern both good and evil, and be able to try and prove
all things, and hold to that which is good; for so God has allowed and
approved of it, and profit may come upon it, Col. 3.16. 1 These. 5.11.

But this from Gods Word I hold, That an usurped public taking upon them the
cure of souls, without Commission, (as teaching Anabaptists do in a manner,
yea, upon the matter, of the fraternity and sorority within their limits) and
also their dispensing and dividing the mysteries of the Word and Seals of the
Sacraments, without a lawful sending, ordination, and separation thereto, and
that in a rightly constituted and planted Church, where there is a power of
order and degrees, and a settled or fixed Ministry, will be of no profit and
benefit to you or the people, as to Faith and Conversion, that wait and attend
only upon such a service or Ministry (if I may so call it.)

For now lift up your eyes, and look on the fields; are they white unto the
Harvest, since people left praying that God would send Husbandmen into his
work, and Laborers into his Vineyard, and since people have left coming to, and
attending upon their own painful preaching Ministers, and have betaken
themselves to the hearing of self-intruding peakers, which were none of Gods
calling or sending? are they not rather smutched and smitten with blasting and
mildew, with pride, haughtiness, malice, variance, rancour, envy, fraudulency
covetousness, lying, defamation, hypocrisies, impu^ities, more then ever they
were, and compassed about of late, with such a dark cloud of Satan's witnesses,
and his Emissaries, every where transforming themselves into Angels of New
light, no better then darkness?

Besides the Schisms in the Churches of God, and destractions of men's minds,
the contempts of Gods Ordinances, the broaching of Errors and Heresies, the
Rapines, Sacriledges, and Massacres that have been committed, the slighting of
Laws and Civil Magistrates, the uprising of bloody Wars, and throwing down of
Order and Proprieties, Insurrection and Rebellion.

And now Sir, I return to you again, to whom I have a sixth thing to acquaint
you with, and then I shall take my leave, and subscribe a friendly farewell to
you.

. Sixthly, What shall I say more to you of these men? for that indeed a notable
change and alteration has been wrought in you, is manifest to all them that
dwell here abouts, and we cannot deny it; my self, (as I have said) rejoice at
it, yea, and the Angels in Heaven rejoice over one sinner that repents and
converteth truly and sincerely.

This therefore I will say, even the same still that you do, That the Grace of
God appeared, plucking you out of your wicked ways, to the knowledge of the
Truth; But I ask as St. Paul does, Gal. 2.3. This only would I hear and know
of you, Received you the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of
the Faith; so received you this Grace, or your Conversion of being plucked out
of yoru evil ways, to the knowledge of the Truth, from the Word preached by
your Brethren of the separation, or from the Word preached by my self, or other
ordained Ministers? I have proved before, that unsent Teachers and Preachers
shall not, and cannot profit you with their Doctrines, especially being not of
God and his Word, and therefore they have not wrought any such thing in you by
their Doctrines, and that you could not, cannot attain, and therefore have not
attained to Faith, but by hearing of a sent and ordained Preacher, and the Word
of God by him.

Again, received you this Grace of God, or your Conversion and plucking out of
your evil ways, from the Spirit of God, in and by your last Dippism, or your
first Baptism? not in and by your last dipping at Laver, for this requires
Conversion, and Faith, and Profession of it, before you can be partaker of it;
you must bring these with you, already wrought to your dipping, your dipping
does not work them at that time, but presupposes them: so, I cannot call your
dipping a Laver of Regeneration, but a Generation of I know not what, at Laver,
or a degeneration. Besides, I have showed this your dipping, which is but a
Re-baptizing at the best, to be a humane device, yea, Heretical practice; so
esteemed, and for such condemned, of the Churches of God, throughout all Ages;
and therefore it can be no means or instrument of God and his Grace, to pluck
you from your wicked ways, to the knowledge of the Truth.

Whither now Sir, will you go? as Hos. 2.7. so is yur case; She shall follow
after her Lovers, but she shall not overtake them, and she shall seek them, but
shall not find them; then shall she say, I will go and return to my first
Husband, for then was it better with me then now. Follow not therefore after
those your Suitors, and Solicitors, rather your inveiglers and beguilers, that
rather have tempted your spiritual chastity, and attempted also, somewhat upon
your body, but come and return to your first Husband, Christ Jesus, and your
first Covenant of Grace, sealed unto you in your first Baptism, from which, as
from the Fountain, has issued out all other Grace of God appearing to you
sithence; and even that, plucking you out from your wicked ways, and bringing
you to the knowledge of the Truth, through his dispensing his word, and your
hearing the same of Gods Ministers sent to that purpose; and through the
operation of his Spirit, stirring up the Grace of God in you, and the Grace of
the same, sanctifying your afflictions, and last sickness, and fears, and other
things that have befallen you. She did not know that her first Husband gave her
Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and multiplied her silver and gold, which they
prepared for Baal, Hos. 2.8. or (as in the margent) wherewith they made Baal.
And so you do not, or did not know, that Gods first Covenant of Grace in Christ
(I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed,) sealed unto you in your
Infant Baptism, your first Infant Baptism sealing unto you the Covenant of the
Grace of God in Christ, gave you your knowledge of the Truth, your Conversion
from your evil ways, your Repentance, your Faith, and increased these and
other Graces in you, which you and they prepare for, and ascribe to their and
your Anabaptism, and wherewith they and you would make Anabaptism, leaping upon
the Altar that they have made, and dousing in the Ponds that you go to, crying,
O Baal hear us, or, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, the dipping of the
Anabaptists.

Why halt ye, or how long, O ye people, halt ye between two opinions, or two
Baptisms? 1 Kings 18.21. if your first Infantbaptism, be the Seal of Gods
Covenant of Grace to you, follow it; but if the Anabaptists second Dippism, be
the Seal, then follow it. Therefore I say farther to them, the people and you;
not I, even I only, but we, even we also, thousands of us, remain the
Ministers of the Lord, and your Prophets are a great many more; (for every one
that will with you, may consecrate himself, and be a Prophet) we, as we do,
will still bring our children and Infants of believing Parents, unto Baptism in
our Churches, pouring on, or sprinkling water, In the name of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, with invocation or calling on the Name of the Lord;
and do you, as you use, go out with your grown, but born Christians, men and
women, whom you have withheld from their Baptism in their Infancy, or with
other grown persons formerly baptized, whom you have seduced into your
by-ways, and carry them to your dippings, and diving them over head and ears,
body and clothes, in your Ponds of the field; the Baptism or washing, that
answers by fire, I mean the Spirit, 1 Kings 18.24. and spiritual Graces,
bringing after to Repentance from evil ways, and unto the knowledge of the
Truth, let that be the right washing and Baptism indeed: All the people (I
know) will, and yur selves also must needs answer, The word is good, and it is
well spoken.

Now then I propose, and its my major proposition most true, That washing with
water, or Baptism, which answers by fire, (cavil not at the phrase, God, in
or by Baptism I mean) and has the Graces of Gods Spirit, Faith, Repentance,
Conversion, answerable and following thereupon, is that, and that only, which
is mentioned in the Scriptures, as of Gods Institution, so conjunction, Mat.
3.11. Mark 1.8. Acts 2.38. John 3.6. and in a great many other places, which
formerly I have brought, showing the correspondence or accompanying the one of,
or to, and after the other, the Baptism and the Spirit.

But I assume, and it is my minor proposition, yet no less true, That neither
of your two dippings, (I call them two, in respect of the Subjects, which are
of two sorts, some formerly baptized, and some not) are to be found in any part
of Scripture throughout the whole Bible, either instituted of God, or conjoined
with fire, or the Spirit, as my whole Book, and this annexed Treatise or
Censure, has cleared demonstrated.

And therefore I may conclude Negatively, against your diping by Anabaptists,
that it answers not by fire, and so you have received from them and it,
nothing but water; no fire, no Spirit, no Grace, no Regeneration, no
Conversion, no plucking out of your evil ways into the knowledge of the Truth.
What you have of these Goods or Graces in present, you have and received as
sparks, at your first Baptism in your Infancy, which being according to the
Scriptures, and to Gods Ordinance and Institution, answers by Fire in all
Gods elect children, as who are inwardly also baptized of the Spirit, whch is
the fire I mean and speak of; which answering also by fire in them afterward,
shows their Baptism in Infancy, to have been according to the Scripture, Gods
Ordinance and Institution.

To come up yet closer to you.

If you, Sir, be one of those that belong unto the Election and Covenant of
Grace, as I in charity judged of you, as I ought to do, when I baptized you,
and gave you Baptism, as the seal of the Covenant, then were you baptized with
fire, i. e. the Spirit, as well as water; the inward Grace being united to the
outward Sign unto such, and the Spirit as truly, and really, and actualy
applying the merits and blood of Christ, in the justifying and sanctifying
virtue, unto your soul, as I did the water to your body, or bodily part of your
face or forehead; and the invisible Grace of the Sacrament was conveyed to you
by such visible means; so that if you had dyed in your Infancy, this your
Baptism had been to you (supposing you still an Elect Infant) as a seal of the
Righteousness of Christ, extraordinarily applied by the holy Ghost, to your
Justification and Salvation.

God has now suffered you to live to years of discretion, I must therefore put
you in remembrance that you stir up the gift or Grace of God, which is in you,
as Paul speaks to Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.6. (I cannot say by the putting on of my
hands, but I may) by the pouring on of that water with my hands. The word in
the original is (...), to stir up that fire of the Spirit I spoke of, and to
quicken up the grace of Baptism that has lien under the ashes throughout your
youthful and sinful days of ignorance, that so now it may kindle and burn
brighter in you. You are now to bestir your self in reading the Word, and
hearing it preached by such Ministers as God sends into the Church; and
amongst them, him especially who baptized you at first, that so you may come to
Faith by such means, and by Faith now, actually lay hold on the promises of the
Covenant of Grace, touching, Justification, Remission, and Adoption, and enjoy
them to your use and comfort, which were but made and sealed in your Baptism,
as to every Elect Child of God, and estated upon you on Gods part as to your
Right and Title; I do not say, that your Baptism properly did give you, or
primarily, the Right and Interest you have unto God and Christ, (Gods free
Covenant and promise did it) but it sealed up only, and mainly confirms that
Right and Interest which you had already, even then in Gods Govenant and
Promise: Gods Word is as good as his Bond, and his Promise as effectual as his
Seal: your Baptism (as the other Sacrament) was not for the strengthening or
effectualizing of Gods Covenant, but to the confirming and supporting your
faith in apprehending it.

I would make this very plain to you, hoping it may be for some good to you.
Suppose an Estate made over unto you in your Infancy, by a Will and Testament
under Seal, you have not indeed during your minority, any sensible use and
benefit thereof, because of your incapability, but yet the Right and Title is
not vain, but true and real, and stands firmly secured unto you to be claimed,
and enjoyed to your use, good and benefit, what time soever you come to be
capable of it; so that you shall not need to look after a new Will, or sealed
Conveyance thereof, the first being in force and effectual: Even so, God by
Will and Covenant has made over, as it were, Christ with all his Merits,
Righteousness, and all Graces accompanying Salvation to you, as still supposed
an Elect child, born of believing Parents, in those words, (I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed) and sealed the same in Baptism unto you, and you have
made little or nothing of it for a long while, as to your comfort and benefit
thereby, by reason of your uncapableness of them, by your ignorance and want of
knowledge, faith, etc. yet your Right and Title to Christ and all his Merits,
was and is, good and real, and stood, and stands firmly secured unto you, and
sealed in your Baptism, and whenever you come to understand what grant God
has sealed to you in Baptism, and do actually lay hold upon by Faith, and
resolve to come out of your sins, as it seems lately; and you say, (The Grace
of God appeared, bringing you to the knowledge of the Truth, and plucking you
from your evil ways) then you may lay claim to them all, and shall have the
comfortable benefit, and find, and feel the effectual fruit of your Baptism,
so that you needed not have looked out after another new Will or Covenant, or
another new Seal of the same Covenant (the old being still in force and in
effect) to the slighting of God in his own Ordinance, and to the introducing of
a new Business; and so in a manner, setting your posts to Gods post, Ezekiel. 43.8.
and setting altar against altar, yea, Baal before God.

Is it not, because there is not a God in Israel, that thou sendest to enquire
of Baalzebub the God of Ekron? 2 Kings 1.6. so was it not because there was no
Baptism in our Church, or your baptizing of our Church was not (as you thought)
in force and efficacy, that you ran out to the Anabaptist to be dipped and
laver'd in a Pond, or to be ponded and plunged at Laver?

This indeed was occasioned through great ignorance and profaneness in part,
that you had so mean and base opinion of the outward Sign and Seal of your
Infant Baptism, and the virtue and efficacy thereof, as if it were a mere
mysterial Ceremony and sacramental Complement for the present time, to give the
Child a Name, and there an end, and no farther matter or benefit for the
future.

Know then, and I pray mark it seriously, that you may know it, and I may not
beat only the air and your ear, but also the heart and the fire in you, (if
you be of Gods Elect) that your Infant Baptism was of virtue, and effectual to
the taking away of the guilt of sin, and to the furtherance of your salvation,
not only in that hour it was taken and received by you from me in your
Infancy, but it is, and may be, and will be (if you be not the hinderance
thereunto, and to your self) of force, and powerful to the same good ends for
the time future, and to come; yea, throughout your whole life time, as also in
all other such, as are elect children of God, truly and inwardly baptized or
regenerate.

The which truth, as being of great moment in and against this new business of
yours, I will prove both by Scripture and Reason, and both briefly; (for I
confess I am too tedious and long, but it is that I might do you the more good,
and Baptism the more right) St. Mark 16.16. says, He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved; is baptized, in present for the act and some present
benefit; but it extends its virtue farther to time future, for he shall be
saved.

Col. 2.12. They are buried with Christ in baptism, and are risen with him.
They are so, now a long time after, finding the virtue and effects thereof, who
were long before baptized as to the act, and some initial fruits thereof, 1
Pet. 3.21. Even Baptism does now also save us; now in our latter days it
saves us, though in former times received by us.

So in reason it must be so, for Baptism is, and was to you, the Sacrament of
your insition and ingrafting into Christ, sealing up your setting into Christ,
the which you needed but once, and never after to be done again; for the force
thereof goes on and continues for all times, as a grafted Crab-stock holds
on and continues, bearing also fruit, if it be not broken off; Once
engrafting, though often nourishing, once regenerating, and always increasing,
is the Grace of Christ, and the life of a Christian: and if it were not so,
that the force of our once being baptized did continue and reach to the washing
off all the sins of our whole time, why then, you would have upon every sin,
which is a separation of you from God, a new ingrafting, and so a new seal of
it, Baptism, or somewhat else.

Secondly, because as long as the Covenant it self is of force and effectual,
so long is Baptism of force and effectual; that being the foundation and
substance of this, (as every promise or covenant is of the seal) in which God
promises and covenanteth to, and with the party, baptized inwardly, to be
their God, and the God of their seed. But this covenant of the Grace of God to
you, and all his Elect children, is eternal, and so effectual at all times; so
Esaias 54.10. The mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down, but my
mercy shall not depart away from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace
fall away, says the Lord, who has compassion on thee. And so Jeremy 32.40. I
will make (says the Lord) an everlastingcovenant with them, that I will never
turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts
that they shall not depart from me. So hence may fairly be inferred and
concluded, That he Covenant of Gods grace with you being eternal, the Seal of
this Covenant, which is Baptism, is also eternal for the efficacy thereof; not
limited to any time, much less the time it is in taking: and therefore being
imprinted upon you in your Infancy, according to Gods Covenant with you in your
Infancy, (the God of thy seed) it is of force and virtue to you, throughout all
your life time, yea, to all eternity.

Now then, Sir, did you not very evil to obscure the Grace of God appearing to
you, and to plunge your self into such an evil way, and show such ignorance of
the word, as to renounce and lay aside an effectual and powerful Christian
Baptism, ready and present at all times, in the fruits and effects thereof, to
comfort and support you upon your faith and repentance, and all this for
impotent, element, and beggarly rudiment, as the Apostle speaks, Col. 2.22.
(for I may add your Affirmative of Dip again, to their Negatives, Touch not,
taste not, which all are to perish with using) ordinances after the
commandments of men, having indeed a show of wisdom in Will Worship and
Humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of
the flesh, or sanctifying either flesh or spirit, or which is neither seal of
any Covenant by Gods institution, neither leaves any benefit behind it in the
present act, nor carries any good before it to the future life; as you will
see when the scales fall off from your eyes which now hang upon them.

In this you did but run along with the Papists, if you did not outrun them:
they teach that Baptism of Infants takes away all sin that goes before it,
(as Original sin) but for sins committed after (as actual ones) they must be
taken away by their devised Sacrament of Penance, or Repentance. And your
masters have taught and told you, that they must be taken away, and that after
Repentance has taken them away, by their forged Sacrament of Re-dipping; and
so both of you do, though in several ways, destroy the true nature and use of
Baptism, which is the Laver for all sins, past, present, and to come, to be
washed in, and away, as to the guilt and filth of them.

True, that Repentance is also another good way to take off sins committed, and
to procure the remission of them, according to Gods Promise and Covenant; but
it must not thrust out Baptism, to bring in it self to be a Sacrament of
Penance, as the Papists would have it; nor lay aside your Infant Baptism, to
carry you out to a Man-dippism, as the Anabaptists have served you: For that
your Infant Baptism being the Seal of the eternal Covenant, is ever effectual
and of force; and upon the repentance of your actual sins, at any time
whatsoever, will, and does comfortably assure and seal unto both, the pardon
and remission of them; so that there will need no new Sacrament to be set up by
them, of penance, nor any second dipping to be practiced by you, as a Sacrament
of profession, as I may call it.

Nay more, Repentance, Faith, etc. Conversion, Sanctification, are all but as
the fruits and effects of the Covenant of Grace, offered and sealed to, on Gods
part, by his Spirit of Grace; and also, but the parts and conditions of the
same Covenant of Grace entered into, and sealed to on your part to do and
perform by the operation of the same Spirit, in the use of the means of Grace:
so that therefore those, and all other such like, do continue and demonstrate
both to Papists and Anabaptists, the efficacy of the first Infant Baptism,
which runs along, and even lives in them.

And, Sir, as to your self, take it from me, and be no longer mistaken from
those who make but merchandice of your soul, as they do of the Word. Whatsoever
things are true, in you, to use the words of St. Paul, Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever
things are honest, in you, whatsoever things are just, in you, whatsoever
things are pure, in you, whatsoever things are lovely, in you, whatsoever
things are of good report, in you, if there be any virtue, in you, and if there
be any Grace of God appearing in you, plucking you out from your wicked ways,
unto the knowledge of the Truth, they sprang all, and are derived to you from
that first Covenant of Grace, with your believing Parents and your self (I will
be thy God, and the God of thy seed) and from the initial Seal of that
Covenant, your Baptism, which was imprinted upon you in your Infancy, and which
still remains in the force and efficacy thereof, if you will mind it, and
embrace it, and practice it; and none of all these Goods or Graces have been
wrought in you, or communicated to you by the Spirit of God, in or by your late
dipping, as being none of the Signs or Seals of Grace appointed of God: Do men
gather Grapes of thorns, or Figs of thistles? Mat. 7.16. you are not, nor will
be, any whit the better thereby, as to the salvation of your soul; and I
perceive you have been somewhat worse thereby, as to the health of your Body.

The which I somewhat wonder at, seeing your two Sisters, who were dipped at
your House, said (as I am rightly informed) in your chamber, as they were
shifting off their wet clothes, and putting on dry, The one of them, I have
been these many years in a Consumption, and now by this I find my self even
cured now; yea, and I indeed Sister, (replied the other) do find and feel much
comfort in this. Why Sir, how came this about, that you went farther, and fared
worse? had it not been better for you to have been dipped in your own Pond at
home, then to ride out, and be dipped in a strange Pond abroad? Are not Adgors
and Kettring's Ponds of Much-leighes, better then all the waters of either of
the Lavers? 2 Kings 5.12. might you not have washed in those, and have been
clean? sure your own Pond and water would as well have cured you of a
Consumption, and comforted your heart, as it it did your two Sisters: But the
reason was, The virtue and operation of Kettrings waters was not then known,
when you were to be dipped, as now they are, and are famous, even as the Laver
waters, whither you went and were dipped, only now there is this difference; The
Laver, Pond, and Waters are for the dipping of the Brothers, and they do
sometimes well and sometimes ill upon it, witness your self; but Kettring Pond
and waters are for the dipping of the Sisters, and they do always well upon
it, and are cured of Consumptions, and cheered up with comfort after, which may
redound to your credit and glory, and the reputation of your waters. Nay, this
has fallen out very happily to your profit and advantage also, and may be very
helpful to the paying of your Rent, more then either the returns of your Crop;
or the Retail of your Shop: if you would know how, I shall tell you: First,
make it to be more publicly known abroad in this County; and Secondly, give
notice hereof to Mercurius Politicus, to Print it in his weekly Intelligences,
to be communicated to all other Counties, and the whole Commonwealth, that at
Kettring's House in Much-leighes, of Essex, there is a Pond, wherein, upon once
dipping, two Sisters have been instantly, the one cured of a Consumption, the
other much filledwith Comfort; And you will have, out of hand, all the
sorrowful souls, and Consumptious bodies in the Nation, at leastwise this
County, come flocking to your House; as the blind and the halt did to the Pool
of Bethesda, Joh. 5.2, 3, 4. and then, I hope you know how to deal with them,
and to make your gain of your Pond; namely none to step in, until the Angel go
down first and move the water, and so make way for him or her; (for I believe
the water is as good for a him as a her, the man as the woman) And to encourage
you the more hereunto, I shall not take any occasion or advantage to raise your
Rent hereupon, one penny in the year, so that you will keep the Pond in good
Repair, and in its virtue and efficacy, by scouring and fencing about, so as it
may continue therein, unto my Heirs and Executors; only I pity the loss and
damage (if not undoing) that will hereby come to Tunbridge waters in Kent, and
Barnet water in Hartford-shire, and the Bath waters of Sommerset-shire, and the
waters of the Spaw beyond Sea may be somewhat endamaged hereby, and Ebesham
waters in Surrey: I, but here is comfort, You and this Town may be benefited
hereby.

But I will only tell you at this time, how much worse you are, and will be in
your soul salvation, and the peace of your conscience, but this your new
business of being Re-dipped, unless you repent of it timely and truly, and turn
again to God and his Covenant, and the Seal thereof, your Infant Baptism, and
renew them to your benefit and comfort, by faith laying claim and hold of them,
and never let your first Right and Title to them, and the grace of them go, and
so they will never let their hold and tenure go of you and your soul.

I know not whether I said it before, or no, for my papers are now out of my
sight, and so out of my mind, but if I did, I will say it again, after the
example, of the Apostle Gal. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. I marvelled you were so soon moved
away from him, (my self) who called you unto the Seal of Grace, Baptism, and to
the hearing of the Gospel, unto another Baptism and Gospel, which is not
another, (there being but one Gospel and Baptism) But there be some that
trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel Covenant, and Gospel-Baptism of
Christ, But though we (I think we shall not) or they, (they do it indeed) or an
Angel from Heaven (neither will any Angel) preach any other Gospel unto you (or
any other Gospel-Baptism, preach it, or practice it) then that which we have
preached (and practiced) unto you, let him be accursed: And now here, as the
Apostle adds, As I said before, so say I now again; If any man (from Earth
transforming himself into an Angel of light) preach any other Gospel unto you
(preach or practice any other Gospel, Covenant, or Baptism) then that ye have
received, let him be accursed. Let him be only of me accused; he may be both
of you and yours, both accused and accursed.

Sir, I have been the bolder with you, and the larger in my discourse, for that
I fear you have not been sufficiently taught (and yet even in this point of
Baptism, I have also formerly catechized you, with the other young men of my
Parish, when for three years together I made it my Afternoons business on the
Lords day) by your Parents, or those who did as Sponsors or Sureties, undertake
for you, the meaning and Doctrine of your Infant Baptism; when you came to
years of understanding, unfolding unto you Gods precious Promises therein, made
to you, and your strict Engagements stipultated to God by them: and if so it
be, then also you ought so much the more, now you know their default, and
understand your self, to be more earnest, serious, and laborious in learning it
out, and teaching your self the same. For thou which teach another, (as my
self you assayed to do in your Letter) teaches thou not thy self? Romans 2.21.

But if also you are not either able or willing of your self to do either, then
be content, another, and amongst others, my self, who being your Minister and
Pastor, notwithstanding your separation, have as much right and authority to do
both for your good, as any other; yea, and have showed the more love and
integrity toward you in so doing, by this piece, and my whole Book, then any
other. I add but a few words, and I also shall have done teaching you, and I
hope at leastwise learning of you, if not learning you.

I will not say to you, He that is ignorant, let him be ignorant still; but if
you have been ignorant, learn now to know; and if you have been slighting of
your Infant Baptism, have hereafter a high esteem of it; not as of humane
Custom and Formality of the Church, but an honorable Ordinance, and appointment
of God, who never imposed upon his people any Service or Order in vain, wherein
the covenanted Blood of Christ was, and is still mysterially and ministerially
sealed up unto you, for the purging away of that pollution you brought with you
into the world; by which Grace of Gods Covenant, and the Seal thereof in your
Baptism, you have stood hitherto in your relation to God, as a member of
Christ, under Gods protection and favor; and in discrimination from the Heathen
world, as a Christian of the Church, under the fruition and use of all its
saving and sanctifying Ordinances: And is this a matter to be vilified,
difesteemed, rejected, and renounced.

If the uncircumcised, through a wilful and voluntary refusing of that Seal,
was to be cut off from Gods people, and was called and accounted a breaker of
the Covenant; surely you can be no less then the same Covenant breaker, or
more, a Covenant dispiser, (and may fear some heavy visitation, if not an utter
rejection from Gods people, which is in part already fallen upon you in your
separation from a visible Church) by this your voluntary, peremptory, rash, and
resolute slighting and renouncing of your Infant Baptism as a Seal thereof,
conferred and imprinted upon you.

He that despised Moses law (and even that of circumcision, which was also Gods
law) dyed for it, Heb. 10.28, 29. Of how much sorer punishment suppose you,
shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden underfoot the Son of God, and has
counted the Blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing,
and has done despite to the Spirit and Covenant of Grace, in slighting the
Seal thereof, your Infant Baptism.

Sir, do not the words sound unto you as a Thunderclap with Lightning in it,
and make your ears to tingle and your heart to tremble, and your conscience to
trouble you? 1 Samuel 12.19, 20, 21. For you have added to all your other sins,
this evil to renounce your Baptism: yet I say fear not (you have done all this
wickedness, yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with
all your heart, and turn not aside, for then should you go after vain things
which cannot profit, nor deliver, for they are vain. And so you have done in
turning aside from your Infant Baptism, and going after that vain thing of your
Anabaptist Dipping, which cannot profit you, nor deliver you from any one sin,
the guilt or filth, for it is a vain and needless thing; yet I say, fear not)
for the Lord will not forsake his people for his great names sake, because it
has pleased the Lord to make you his people: nor will the Lord forget you his
servant, for his gracious Covenant sake, which he has also sealed to you, in
your Baptism, because it has pleased him to make you his servant, Moreover, as
for me, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for
you: but I will teach you the good and right way. Only fear the Lord and serve
him in truth with all your heart, Ver. 23, 24. And, Let my counsel be
acceptable to you; break off your sins (by repentance and) by righteousness,
and your iniquities (by turning unto the Lord, and calling for mercy upon your
poor soul, and) by showing mercy unto the poor (people) if it may be a
lengthning of your tranquillity, Dan. 4.27.

Sir, without any ifs or ands, do you so seriously and uprightly, and it will
be a lengthning of your tranquillity, and a stablishing of you in peace of your
conscience, notwithstanding your former breach of it, and of the Covenant of
Grace, in your despising your Birthright, your Infant Baptism: For, Behold,
Gods hand is not shortened that it cannot save, neither his ear heavy, that it
cannot hear, though your iniquities might have made a perpetual separation
'twixt you and your God, Esaias 59.1, 2. (especially those iniquities of
separation from Gods Church and Baptism) His Covenant of Grace is an
Everlasting Covenant, the seal of it, your Baptism, though but once
administered, loses not its strength and force, and is yet of virtue and
benefit for you, if you will make use of it; yea, it will be of continual use
and benefit to you, if you will return to it, and reflect upon it by your
faith, and lay hold upon the precious things and promises thereof. In a word,

Though you have departed away from your Covenant by breaking of the Seal
thereof, and slighting your Baptism, yet God is not gone from either, but what
he has Covenanted and Sealed, is and will be ever ready to make good, Come
therefore and return unto the Lord, for you have torn, and he will heal, you
have broken, and he will bind up; yea, and he has torn, and he will heal, he
has broken, and he will bind up; in all your sins and transgressions, which
are your breaches of the Law, and the tearings of Gods Covenant, in all his
afflictions and chastisements, which are his breaches upon you, and his
tearings of you in your estate, nay, in all your fears and doubts, return unto
the Lord, and his Covenant of Grace and Mercy; look back to your Seal of it,
your Baptism, and lay hold on it by Faith, even but now renew your Faith, in
the Promises thereof and renew also your Repentance for breach of Covenant and
Promise on your part) you shall find the effect of that you never saw, and feel
actual comfort, and even present benefit thereof. Once more, Have now recourse,
and go with all speed to your first Infant Baptism, and remember and believe
that God has therein. sealed up unto you his love, and favor to you in
Christ, and that his everlasting Covenant of Grace, and Peace and
Reconciliation, to be your God in Christ for ever, and will never fail you
seeking and having recourse to him, his Covenant and Seal. This will fill you
full of heavenly comfort in the midst of sorrow, and upon Repentance, give you
good assurance of the pardon of all your sins whatsoever, even of this, none of
your least sins, your causless Revolt and Separation from the Church,
Ministry, and Baptism appointed and approved of God.

A Communion with which, if you will truly re-enter into, and seriously return
unto, pleading (as you may even yet) your Right and Interest in the Covenant of
Grace, sealed unto you in your first Infant Baptism, once for ever, (you doing
the Condition thereof) God also will then remember his Covenant entered into
with you, then once for ever, and will have compassion on you, and run out and
meet you, fall on your neck and kiss you, Luke 15.20, 21. so that you shall not
only have a clear and full Remission of this, and all other your sins washed
away in the blood of Christ, (the substance of the Covenant) but also enjoy the
sweet and comfortable fruits and benefits of that your Baptism, the Seal of
such Covenant, even an assurance of God his being ^our God, and the God of your
seed, and that for ever; and of your being one of his people, and a member of
Christ Jesus, and that also for ever: So that you may say as the Spouse of
Christ, (for so the ^oul is contracted unto Christ, by the Covenant, and it is
espoused, or the espousals are solemnized and ratified in Baptism) I am my
Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine, Cant. 6.3.

And now, Sir, am I become your enemy, because I have told you, and others, the
Truth, and showed unto you the good, even the good old Way? If so, then the God
of Truth, who set me a work, be my friend, as Abraham's, and deliver me out of
your hands, and the hands of all mine enemies; and if God and the Truth be on
my side, I care not much who be against me, nor do I fear what man and error on
the contrary side can do. Magis amica veritas, maxim amicus Christus, qui est
ipsa veritas and vita.

But Sir, by that time you have sadly thought upon, and considered what I have
said, and fully digested and ruminated that over which I have written, you and
they, (but you especially I aim at) will see me a real, cordial, soul-friend of
yours, as who have endeavored to come unto you as a Pillar of fire, rather then
a cloud, not to darken you with obscure discourses, but to enlighten you with
clear evidences, and so to lead you out of your by-ways of Errors, into the
plain Path of Truth, and rather to Convert you, then confound you. I say your
soul-friend; for seeing once your soul also belonged to my Curam Animarum, and
you were formerly one of the sheep of my Pastor-fold, one of the souls that
were numbered into my Pastoral charge, you see I count you so still, though you
have broke loose, and separated your self from my flock and feed, yet, I have
not let you so go, nor have I released to you, though you have remised to me;
nor have I discharged you, though you have dismissed me; yea, you may see me
your soul-friend yet farther, in that I have (not run away, or lien hid in a
corner, as the Hireling) but as a loving Pastor, have followed after the Wolf
and the Fox running away with you, like as also David did go after the Lion and
the Bear, taking a Lamb out of his fold; yea, and when the Wolf also turned
head against me, and came upon me, as the Lion did arise and ramp upon David, I
caught him by the Beard, and mouth, and slew him, for all his roaring quirks
and howling quaeries; and so have delivered you (if you will be delivered) from
the spirit of bondage, and love not your chain and fetters of their Errors,
more then the Freedom and Liberty of Truth, for if the Truth, or the Son of
God, who is the Truth, have made, or shall make you free, then you are free
indeed. Now then, and lastly, Sir, show your self a true Israelite, come and
hear the Truth, and know your friends, the soul-truth, which is the sole-truth,
and your soul-friends; which are your sole-friends, and come away from those
Taskmasters that lay heavy burdens upon your bodies, and dip them under water
over head and ears, for their own gain more then yours, and for their advantage
to an evil cause. Forego your bondage, and darkness of Egypt, which goes
under the name of New-light and Liberty; forget your garlic, Onions and
Fleshpots, which they call, The Spirit, and the fruits of the Spirit; run from
their hot furnaces, and rash fires, which they term Zeal; keep away from their
Ponds and cold waters, which they call Dipping and Baptizing; depart from the
Tents of those that practice Rebellion under pretense of Religion and Holiness;
shake off your fellowship with their unfruitful works and words, and (as you
have heard) unprofitable Preachings and Teachings presumed upon, under the
Title of a gifted Brotherhood and Fraternity; leave the Citizens or Farmers
field, and the Husks there, and arise and go to your Fathers house, the Church
of God, where is bread enough, and to spare, for the servants, and much more
for the Sons. Get loose from those Bushes and Brambles where you are are
entangled, before you lose all the wool off your back, and be fleeced by them.
Come now then, and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be
as scarlet, they shall be white as snow, though they be red like crimsom, they
shall be as wool. If you be willing and obedient, you shall eat the good of the
Land; but if you refuse and rebel, you shall be devoured with the sword, for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Esaias 1.18, 19, 20. Yea, come and return,
as to the Lord, so to your Pastor. Here Is the right hand of fellowship and true
Brotherhood, I offer unto you, to set you free, and to help you out, and to
defend you against them; yea, and now that I have been long going after you as
a lost sheep; and one of my hundred fold, and have found your at last, I will
lay you on my shoulders, to bring you home again, and will undergo any labor
and pains for your Reversion and Reduction; bearing also with your former
defects or defaults, with patience and meekness, as the Apostle bids we should
bear one another burdens, Gal. 6.2. yea, and I shall call together our
friends and neighbors, to a public rejoicing and thanksgiving, bearing also
the Burden of the Song or Psalm my self, and saying, Rejoice with me, for I
have found my sheep which was lost; yea, and the blessed Angels above will be
of the Quire; and there will be joy in Heaven over one sinner that repents,
as your self; yea, and Christ Jesus, the Great shepherd of all the sheep, and
of all souls, will embrace your returning, delight in you, Who his own self
bare your sins in his own body on the Tree. 1 Pet. 2.24. For you was as a sheep
going astray, but if you shall return unto this Shepherd and Bishop of your
soul, When the chief Shepherd shall appear, you shall receive a crown of glory
that fades not away, whereby you will be glorified in heaven; and in the mean
time he will put a Crown of Righteousness upon your head that falls not off,
whereby you shall be both justified and sanctified also. Nay, your self will
thus become a Crown of rejoicing to us all, my self especially; For what is our
hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even you in the presence of our
Lord Jesus at his coming? Yea, you are our glory and joy, 1 These. 2.19.
Therefore, my brother, dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, Phil.
4.1. return unto the Lord, (the Lords Church and Flock, the Lords Ministry and
Pasturage, the Lords Covenant with Parents and their Children, the Lords
Baptism and Sheep-mark) and so stand fast in the Lord my dearly beloved. Now
the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great
Shepherd of the sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you
perfect in every good work (of righteousness and word of truth) working in you
that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory for ever and ever. Amen. Heb. 13.20, 21.

If yet, notwithstanding all this friendly invitation and fair warning, you
will not hear and hearken to come in, but will go still astray, My soul shall
weep in secret places for your pride; and mine eyes shall run down with tears,
because the Lords flock (and your self for one amongst them) is carried away
captive, Jer. 13.17.

Wherefore I take you to record this day (in which you have read over what I
have written to you) that I am pure from, the blood of you all; (you and all,
for what I say unto you, I say unto all) for I have not shunned to declare unto
you all the counsel of God, Acts 20.26, 27. in these particulars that he has
out of his Word revealed unto me.

And so I have delivered my soul, as to you and them, by foretelling and
forewarning you of the truth, as a Watchman set over you, Ezekiel. 33.9. if you
will not deliver your soul, by obeying the truth, and submit thereunto, when it
is held out to you, by him who has the rule, or guide and oversight of you,
and watches for your soul, and must give account, and would do it with joy and
not with grief (for that is unprofitable for you, Heb. 13.17.) Then, you will
die in your iniquity and obstinacy, your blood will be required at your own
hands, and will lie upon your own head; who can help it, unless God forbid it,
the which also God forbid, I pray God. Yea, once more also.

I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, Deuteronomy. 30.19. (or for
you) that I have set before you life and death, Blessing and Cursing; therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live, and that thou may love the
Lord thy God, and that his Covenant that he made (to be thy God, and the God of
thy seed) and that thou may obey his voice, and that command for the
baptizing of the Parent and his Seed: That thou may cleave unto him, and not
forsake your God in Covenant with you, sealed in your Infancy, by renouncing
your Baptism then, and now running after other unprofitable Dippings: for he is
thy life, and the length of thy days, that thou may dwell here on earth a
while, and also be in Heaven for ever.

And now to him that is of power to establish you, according to the Gospel and
preaching of Jesus Christ, and the Revelation of the mystery, which was kept
secret since the world began, but now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures
of the Prophets, according to the Commandment of the Everlasting God, made
known to all Nations, for the obedience of Faith; To God only wise, be glory
through Jesus Christ, for ever, Amen. Romans 16 25, 26, 27.

To which only wise God and his Providence, committing my self, and what I
have written here; as likewise to the same only good God, and his blessing
commending you, and what you shall read here, even to the Word of his Grace,
which is able to build you up, who are fallen from that of Baptism, and to
establish all that stand therein, I take my leave, and give you farewell,
resting your affectionate, and inseparate Pastor and Friend,

Jeffry Watts.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
EPistle to the Reader, page 2. l. 8. read Printer, p. 11. l. 22. r. (...), p
19. l. 16. r. word, p. 24. l. 27. r. even, p. 25. l 13. r. Hypocriticab, p. 27.
l. 18. r own p 32. Margin blot out, too, p. 43. l. 6. r. of, p. 44 l. 13. blot
out, that, p. 45 l. 4. r. ch^, p. 56. l. 17. r. then, p. 63 l. 18. r rusticity,
p 65. l. 14. r. intentional, p. 79. l. 7. blot out, save, p. 82. l. 12. b^ot
out, and not observe the 13. year, seeing Christ was baptized at 30. years old,
p 94. l. last. r. your, p. 99. l. 16. r. account, p. 101. l. 26. for our, r.
the p. 102 l. 2. r. offspring, p. 104. l. 12. r. useful, p. 105. l. 37. r.
ordinary, p. 122. l. 38. r. Presbyter, p 123. l. 8 blot out, to, l. 13. r.
Profession, p. 128. l. 33. r. must not, p. 155 l. 30. blot out, And do hope
that by reason, etc. l. 39. r. we bless, p. 169. l. 8. r moderate, p. 171. l.
12. r. injuring, p. 185 l. 13. add, gather, l. 34, add, it, p. 198. l. 2. r.
that, p. 226. l. 18. blot out, to our most agreeable, p 240. l 38 for as, r^a,
p. 250. l. 3. blot out, so, p. 252. Running title. for honor, r. beware, p.
256. l. 31. r. devising, p. 273. l. 28. r. brethren, p. 274 l. 31. r. comb, p.
276. l. 37. r. so, p. 278. l. 2. r. have made, p. 290. l. 1. add, you.

Of Baptism.

Page 24 line 31 read with, p, 56 running Title, r, not practical. p, 61 l, 3
r, or p, 72 l, 33 r, your. p, 73 l, 24 for Chap: r, Verse, p, 74 l, 3 blot out,
and, p, 87 l, 30 add, i^, p 100 l, 28 blot out, in. p 103 l, 21 r, they. p, 117
l, 19 r, always p, 131 l, 16, r, she. l, 17 blot out, of. p 140 l, 16 r,
Apostle. p, 142 l, 38 r, the p. 145 l, 35 r, procreating, p, 151 l, 37 r,
these. p. 157 l, 11 r, friend. p, 163 l, 35 for can, r, you. p, 164 l, 7 add,
was p, 198 l, 32 r, Apostles, l, 34 for yet are, r, were, l, 35, for to, r, do.

The Dipper Sprinkled.

Page 13 line 6 read fruit. p, 19 l, 39 r, naughtiness. p, 27 l, 26 r, sicca.
p, 28 l, 18 add, as: p, 30 l, 2 r, (...) p, 37 l, 8 blot out, die: p, 48 l, 14
r. four, p, 81 l, 18 r, potissimum.


