THE PICTURE OF Mercurius Politicus: OR Some of his Falsities and Mistakes,
mentitioned in his Intelligence of the twelfth of October, concerning the
DISPUTE In LVMBARDSTREET, Detected and Disproved.

Wherein the Carriage of the People resort-in to the Meeting Place there, upon
the said day, and other times, is cleared:

To the satisfaction of those that will not censure before they understand, nor
give up their Judgments to trust Vanity and Lies.

By John Webster.

-- Pictoribus atque Poetis
Quidlibet audendi, semper fuit aequa potestas.
Horat. London, Printed for T. Webster and R. Hammond.

The Picture of Mercurius Politicus.
I Met last week with a printed Paper, to which is prefixed the title of
Mercurius Politicus, one who seems to me to hold forth Intelligence of
Non-Entities, and to seduce the credulous of the Nation into as groundless a
belief of what he reports, as the information was from whence he received it;
and surely thinks the dirt of his scurrilous Pen to be authentic, because of
his consuetude in writing Liurnals: of whom (seeing without any perfect
knowledge of me, he has abused my name) I shall make bold to say something in
relation to his name, condition, and the subject that he handles; not that I
honor him so much, as to account him worthy of a Confutation, being but a
two-peny Mercenary, but only to vindicate the Truth, and satisfy the
innocent, who have suffered by the froth and vomit of his malevolent spirit.

Is your name Mercurius? surely you are not the Mercury of the States, but of
the Pagan gods, and have learned at them to forge lies, and invent falsities;
if your shoulders and heels be plumed, it seems your head was so too, whence
you writ your Intelligence of the Dispute in Lumbardstreet, for it shows more
of the lightness of the feather, then the gravity of the metal: and it may be
you can change shapes; for, if report belie you not, Mercurius Pragmaticus is
turned into Mercurius Politicus; but all men may see you retain the old nature
still, being more Pragmatical than Civil. But it may be you are metallic
Mercury, for surely your head was quick-silver'd, when you evaporated forth
such malignant fumes of gross Errors; and for my part, I shall look upon you as
common Mercury, non servus fugitivus Chymicorum, sed Mimorum: but perhaps you
are the Philosopher Mercury, which is so rarely seen, and so difficultly
attained, that many which think themselves very wise, scarcely believe there is
any truth in it, and so I am sure in this particular they may do of you. You
add the name Politicus, which surely you understand, being so great a pretender
to uphold Humane Learning, and yet your carriage in this point has been far
from the significancy, having expressed little of Civility in traducing him,
whose face I believe you have scarcely seen, whose abilities you know not, and
whose deportment in that business I am confident you were not an eyewitness
of: but I will say no more, but have a charitable opinion of you, hoping you
may live to make a Recantation, as a thing you are not altogether inexpert in.
Yet I would have you to know, that I neither am, nor ever was Cavalier,
Presbyterian, nor turn-coat; nor am stated so low, as not to look for
reparation for such insolent indignities as your ignorant and rash pen has
cast upon me. And though you may be licensed to write Intelligence, yet I hope
not to make Libels; and without satisfaction from you, know, I am able to know
your station, and understand your protection, and therefore blame me not if I
look a little after it. And so to the matter.

And first you say, that in a Church in Lumbardstreet there was a very famous
Dispute, as may appear both by the Opinions maintained, and by the management
of the business. Good Mr Politicus, the Dispute was in a Steeple-house, or
Meeting Place, built of lime and stone; now in what propriety of language your
Learning can call that a Church, I know not: Did the Apostles or primitive
Saints ever call the Meeting-places a Church? Sir, this relishes more of
superstition and profaneness, then of piety and learning; but he must needs
make a gallant progress, who has so fair a beginning. Whether the Dispute were
famous or not, I know not; but I am sure your report of it is false, and
infamous enough; but it may be you judged the Dispute as headless as your
lines: Well, for the Opinions and management, Were you an ear and eyewitness
of them? if you were, surely it was in a dream, wherein you were as uncertain
what was disputed, and how things were managed, as the World is, whether you be
Pragmaticus or Politicus: but I am confident, by reason of your gross mistakes
and absurd falsities, you were not present, but was only hired to blow the
lying Trumpet of Baals Priests. However, for the Dispute, I am loath to asperse
any man's person; I have charity to believe, that the Gentlemen that came to
oppose me, did appear, according to their own light, to seek the Truth, not to
stifle it; and therefore, without prejudice to them, I shall give a short
Narrative of the manner and matter. It had been often queryed concerning me,
and to me, whether or no I would by Dispute make good what I had delivered, and
therefore I did publicly declare, that I was always willing to give an answer
to every one that should ask me a reason of the hepe that is in me: (1 Pet.
3.15) Soon after, word was brought me, that they had found a Champion, and the
day was appointed, though until the very time I was ignorant, both who should
be mine Opponent, and what should be disputed of, so that I could have no
foregoing preparation, though mine Adversary came prepared, and furnished with
his Arguments and Papers of collected Notes: When I came to examine what should
be disputed of, he told me he came to confute some things in a little Treatise
that I had published; to which I answered, that it was an absolute
impropriation for me to admit of a Dispute of those things that were asserted
to the World, and not answered: But perceiving that their end was to gain
repute with the people, and to find any possible occasion to asperse me, and
that Truth that God has made me a weak means to make manifest; lest they
should vain-gloriously vaunt that I either would not, could not, or durst not
dispute (and so the Truth might suffer in my refusal) I was willing to admit
that he should refute what he could in the Book, so that he would pursue the
office of a Refuter, to take the Arguments in order, and so (if he could)
refell them.

The next thing was, I desired to know what order he would proceed to dispute
in, and he told me Syllogistically: To which I replied, that Syllogizing was a
tedious and unprofitable way, because all the Propositions must be made good
from the Text, which is the divine Authority, and so the last recurrence would
be to the Scriptures themselves; and therefore it were better only to allege
them, and argue forth of them; not, as I told them, that I denied Syllogizing
in Civil, Natural, Moral, and Artificial things, but if they would dispute of
any such things, I was willing to proceed either by Induction, Syllogism, or
Euclides way; and so they agreed we should argue by the Scriptures themselves.
I shall not need to relate what a bitter and invective Oration he begun withal
(looking upon his Notes) in application to the people, wherein (it is true) I
did interrupt him, and told him it was impertinent; if he came to accuse, those
Papers should not be my Judges: So then he proceeded to find something in my
Book to refute, but how long it was ere he could find what, or where to begin,
all those that were present can witness as well as I; at last he found
something concerning the Calling of Ministers, which when he could not tell
how, nor which way to state it, another person, who they call a Minister, did
offer to prove before any question was stated; to whom Mr Erbery answered with
some of those Arguments which he has published: at last I offered to state the
question, 1. Whether God alone ordained Ministers; 2. Or whether man alone; 3.
Or whether God and man conjunctively: But then they did divert from it, and
could not by any means be brought to argue of it any more. The next thing was
to refute, that of Humane Learning being sin, or sinful, where he would not
refute nor repeat the Arguments from whence it was drawn, but begun to make a
Syllogism, as though there had been a Thesis given, and he had had the
affirmative part, and so would needs go about to prove a Negative; to which I
opposed their own Maxim, de negativis non datur scientia: In a word, there was
no Argument offered, but what was answered, nor any Scripture brought but one,
which was cleared not to make for him; so that the people cried, that I should
go up, and speak something for their edification, which I did out of Genes. 11.
which God carried me forth to expound according to the Mystery, which one of
them called me a Deceiver for, and said, the Scriptures were to be understood
literally; but the people, by their noise, testifying their dislike, suffered
not his malevolent spirit to proceed, and so he departed. Afterward the
Moderator for mine Opponent did ask me many questions, to all which I gave full
Answers, but had not the liberty to ask one.

Mean while Mr Gardell, who was Moderator for my part, having born forth his
witness, that they neither knew the things of God nor man, was withdrawn, and
soon after I departed, and then mine Opponent begun to utter some reproachful
words against me, in which the people would not suffer him to proceed; but some
cried, that he spoke things that were false; and some wished him, if he had any
thing from God, to speak it; but if he did but rayl, they would not hear him;
and so he was got away. So that there was no tumult, nor I, nor Mr Erbery in
any danger of broken pates, as the broken-brain'd, and broken-conscienced
Politicus has most falsely divulged to the World. It may be there were some
such idle persons as himself, which came to make a tumult, and father it upon
others, but I neither heard nor saw any such thing: and truly if the Women lost
their Kerchiefs, they would be most useful to stop the mouth of all such liars.
I confess truly, that I had not said thus much, either to glory, or show any
man's weakness, but because many that are ignorant of, and Enemies to the Truth,
being prejudiced both against me and my doctrine, do falsely report, that I
would stand to nothing; which how impertinent and unjust, I leave to all those
that heard, and saw the carriage of that day; and what my deportment wa^,
hundreds can tell better then Politicus.

Now therefore Mr Mercury, I hope you will be ashamed of your own gross
mistakes, and cease to censure those you understand not: For Mr Erbery, he is a
godly conscientious man, and none but an Ishmael will deride, or hate him; and
for giving either him or me a true character, is not in the sphere of the
ignorance of poor Politicus. And for the Stage, and playing of the prize you
tell of, surely your Church is not now becom'd a Stage; surely you dream either
of Fencers or Plays, with whose Tribe, or Trade, it may be you have had some
affinity, and so may fit a man then either for Fool or Knave, if not for both.

And whereas you say, we endeavored to knock down Learning and the Ministry both
together, I am afraid you never understood what the true Ministry of Jesus
Christ is, for if you had, you would have known that no power of man can knock
it down, nor the gates of Hell prevail against it: What the Heavenly Father
has not planted, shall be eradicated; but what he has rooted, must stand:
What power knocked down that Ministry which we call Popish and Prelatical? the
same will, without me or Mr Erbery, knock down all that Antichristian Ministry
that man has set up and not God; and then Mr. Politicus, take you heed of a
broken pate, or a worse business.

And now I come to your learned c^nsure of knocking down Learning, wherein you
speak so learnedly, that doubtlessely you might with Cardinal C^s^n write
another Book de dicta ^gnoran^ia. Do you know what kind of Learning it was,
or in what respect I would have knocked it down? or do you not know that dolus
^ers^ in ^nivers^? doubtless you are very Logical, and yet remembers not the
four particulars in stating of a question: For I must tell you, I am for
setting up Learning as much as Politicus, or any in the Nation, and am also for
knocking it down; neither are these contradictory; and if it be a Riddle, I
will open it unto you. Is it not truly affirmed in a Solar ec^yp^e, Sol
obscuratur, et Sol non obscuratur? and yer both true, yet not in the self same
respect? So it is as true, I am a friend to Learning, and I am an enemy to
Learning; but not in the self same respect

First therefore, I would have you, and all the world to know, that I am for
the setting up of that divine Teaching, and learning of the Spirit of God, that
the Schools do call infusive; for we have not received the Spirit of the World,
but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely
given to us of God.

Secondly, I am not an enemy to humane, or acquired hearing, as it is considred
in a natural, civil, artificial, or moral respect, but as it is considered in a
Theological respect, I do and must hold, that it is sinful, because it is that
wisdom of the flesh that is emnity against God, and is not subject to the Law
of God, neither indeed can be: and because it is that wisdom which descends
not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and devilish; which is no such strange
thing but what those Authors that men call O hodoxal, whether ancient, middle,
or modern, do affirm as well as I. And thus much I offer to satisfy all honest
and conscie^ci^us spirits; and not to vindicate my self, but the Truth of
Jesus Christ.

For the rest that you report of Mr. Erbery, except his offering to prove one
of the parties, a beast and no man, a monster and no minister, at that time
there was no such thing spoken by him. And now Sir, though you may think I have
dealt something tartly with you, let your own conscience witness whether you
deserve it or no, seeing you have blazed such untruths to the whole Nation, not
so much to my prejudice (who does account my self the meanest of men) but to
the scandal of the truth of the Gospel, and of all those that love and partake
of it: yet I shall be so candid with you, that upon the least intimation to the
world of the acknowledgment of your mistake, there shall be none more ready then
my self to forget all, and freely embrace you; if not, let the guilt lie at his
door that deserves it.

October. 25. 1653.
FINIS.

