Weighty Queries Relating to the PAST, PRESENT, and FUTURE State of Ireland;
Calculated for the Present and Future BENEFIT of that Unhappy KINGDOM.
And Tendered to the Serious Consideration of all who are willing to be Informed
How it became Unhappy, and how it may yet be made Happy again to Posterity.
WHETHER the Majority of the Irish were ever true, or the Majority of the
British ever false to the Crown of England?

Whether the most Considerable of the said Majority of the Irish, are not at
present better Subjects to King Lewis, than either to King William, or the late
King James, which is made evident, in that so many of them chose rather to be
Slaves in France, than Freeborn Subjects in Ireland; and lost their Estates,
and left their Relations, with their Native Country, and much of their rich
Plunder they got from the British, rather than live under King William's
Government?

Whether one of a hundred of the British of Ireland, was an Enemy to the
Government of King William and Queen Mary, or one of ten thousand of the Irish
a Friend to it?

Whether the Degenerate Irish of English Extraction, be not more Jesuited,
Frenchified, and more inveterate against the British, than the Ancient Irish,
and needs not a much more Circumspect Eye of the Government over them?

Whether in all Ages there has not been observed a greater aptitude in the
British to turn Irish, than in the Irish to become British?

Whether the Successors of the degenerate Posterity of many British Families,
whose Ancestors got Estates for their fidelity to the Crown of England, have
not as deservedly lost them in the two last Rebellions?

Whether any one of the Irish restored, either by Provisoes in the Act of
Settlement and Explanation, or decreed innocent in the Court of Claims, They,
or their Posterity, were not now again in Rebellion? And whether any one
Instance can be given, that any Irishman ever expressed any sorrow for what he
did in this Rebellion? and whether they are not ready to do the like, had they
again the like Occasion?

Whether all the Irish real and personal Estates, can satisfy for the Robbery,
Plunder and Devastation, made by them upon the British in this last Rebellion?

Whether the Reduction of the said Rebellion has not cost more than a hundred
thousand British Lives, and more than two hundred thousand Irish?

Whether more than one half of the Kingdom is not at present laid waste by the
said Rebellion?

Whether those Governors who most effectually encouraged the British Interest,
and discouraged the Irish, were not always celebrated as the best Governors of
Ireland, and best Servants to the Crown of England?

Whether the Irish, having in all Ages been so rebellious to the British Crown,
and so destructive to the British Subjects, ought to be entrusted with Places
of Trust or Power? and whether the disabling them from those Imploys, can, or
ought to be interpreted, by any Foreign Roman Catholic, a Persecution upon
account of Religion?

Whether the Irish have not in all Ages grown rich and prosperous under the
English Government? and whether there is any possibility that the British can
be so under theirs?

Whether it is not demonstrable that the Nocent Irish have been Millions of
Pounds Gainers, and the Innocent British as much more Losers by their two last
Rebellions?

Whether what the Irish usually lose by pusillanimity in the Field, they have
not as constantly recovered by Flattery at Court?

Whether ever they kept faith in any Articles made with the English, either in
this, or their former Rebellion.

Whether the Articles made with Sir Thomas Southwell and his Party, were not as
solemnly made to indemnify those British, as the Articles made by the Lord
General Ginkle was, to indemnify Galway and Lymerick Irish?

Whether, notwithstanding the said Articles, the said Sir Thomas Southwell, and
his Party, were not imprisoned, tried, sentenced, and condemned as Traitors;
and when they produced the said Articles, were told that Articles of War could
not invalidate the Laws of the Land?

Whether the said Lord General Ginkle did not to his immortal Renown,
frequently and publicly declare to the Irish, both at Galway and Lymerick,
That he was a Stranger to the Constitution of their Country; and that they
must expect no Articles to be made good, that was contrary to the Law, and not
in his power to grant?

Whether the Laws of War can extend to vacate Acts of Parliament, or are not
to be limited to Life, and Personal Estate in the Place, and not to Real or
Personal Estates elsewhere?

Whether the Articles of Peace made in the Year 1648. at Kilkenny by the Duke
of Ormond, were not as solemn, and more binding, than the Galway and Lymerick
Articles; yet the said Articles of 1648. were not only accounted of no value by
the Parliament of England, as to the Irish's Real and Personal Estates, but
were also utterly rejected, and disallowed by the Parliament of Ireland, and
made a Bar of Innocence to any claiming by them, as appears by the Act of
Settlement?

Whether the Galway and Lymerick Irish capitulating with the said Lord General
Ginkle to have the said Articles confirmed by King and Parliament, is not a
Tacit Consent, That they knew the said Articles could not answer their end
without the Concurrence of the King and Parliament?

Whether all Persons who acted in, aided, assisted and abetted the two last
Rebellions of Ireland, were not attainted from the 1st of March, 1640. by Act
past decimo septimo Caroli Primi, for endeavoring to introduce Papal Authority
into the Kingdom of Ireland?

Whether it is not evident, as well by the Orders of the Supreme Council in
their former Rebellion, as by the Acts of their pretended Parliament in this,
that nothing short of the Sovereignty of that Kingdom, and the Extirpation of
the British, will be ever satisfactory to that Party?

Whether the vacating of Poyning's Law, and abrogating all Writs of Error, and
all Appeals into England, does not sufficiently evidence, That the Absolute
Sovereignty of that Kingdom, is the Mark, whatever has been the Butt, they
aimed as in all their Rebellions.

Whether their pretended Act of Reversal and Attainder, does not as evidently
prove the Extirpation of the British to be the chief Design of that Party?

Whether the said Act of Attainder does not on the beginning of August, 1688.
forfeit their Lives and Estates, and corrupt the Blood of about Three Thousand
of the chief British Inhabitants of that Kingdom; and wanting other matter,
Whether their pretended Crime was not the Aiding, and Assisting the Prince of
Orange's Invasion into England; when His Majesty that now is, (whom God for
ever Bless and Preserve) made not his Descent into England, till the 5th of
November following, and managed that Heroic Design with that Privacy, that the
Irish themselves well knew, that not one of the Attainted British did know it,
or could then contribute any Assistance to it?

Whether a parallel Law to this Attainder, for the destruction of so many known
Innocent Persons and their Posterities, can be found among all the Records of
Jews, Christians, or Heathens Laws?

Whether King James did not by this pretended Law divest himself and his
Successors of any Power to Pardon or Mitigate any of the Penalties mentioned in
the said Act?

Whether his Father King Charles the 1st. did not by his Act of Attainder made
decimo septimo Caroli Primi, with more Justice and Reason attaint all such
Irish as should be aiding or assisting as aforesaid, to introduce the Authority
of the Sea of Rome into that Kingdom?

Whether all the Freeholders of Land, and all the Freemen of Borough Towns who
chose Representatives to sit in the Supreme Council, or pretended Parliament,
to introduce or maintain that Authority, are not attainted by that Law?

Whether by the said Act all the Forfeitures of that Rebellion were not vested
in the then King for the uses of the said Act; and whether a Moiety of the said
Uses, were ever satisfied?

Whether the King by the said Act did not divest himself and his Successors of
any Power to Pardon any of the aforesaid Attainted Irish, without the consent
of the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England?

Whether any of the said Irish, or their Posterity, can have any Legal Right to
the Estates they enjoyed or possessed in the Two last Reigns; they being never
pardoned or restored by the consent of the said Lords and Commons; and none of
the said Acts ever yet Repealed or Reversed, but continue in force to this very
day?

Whether upon Examinations it will not appear that the said Irish and their
Posterities have but a very weak and imperfect pretense to the said Estates by
the Act of Settlement and Explanation, past in the Parliament of Ireland; and
that for these following Reasons?

1. The said Act of Settlement and Explanation does as the Acts of England,
vest the Forfeitures in the King for the Uses therein mentioned, with only this
difference. That the English Act vests Remainders, which is not in the
Vestiture of the Irish Acts. 2. The Enacting Clauses of the Irish Acts, raises
Rents above the English Acts, and retrenches one Third what is allowed by the
English Acts to the Adventurers. 3. The Uses mentioned in the said Irish Acts,
were as the aforesaid English Acts, never half paid or satisfied. 4. Both the
said Irish Acts declares chief Favor to the Protestant Interest; and provides,
That none of them should be removed, before reprized with other Lands of equal
Value, Worth, and Purchase; yet not one of twenty of the Protestants have
received any Benefit by the said Clause, but after Ten years Possession many
were turned out without any Reprize for Lands or Improvements, when the said
Improvements were of greater Value than the Lands were worth, when they entered
on them; and the while, large Donatives were given by the said Acts to all the
Irish Generals that were then alive, who had not only their former Propriety
restored, but most of them had new Honors conferred upon them by the King, and
Large Donatives given them by Provisoes in the Irish Acts, or were made
Innocent by the Decrees of the Court of Claims. 5. The Acts of Settlement gives
a twelve Months time for its Execution, and prescribes those strict Rules for
Adjudication of Innocents, that an Ingenious Irishman upon reading the said Act
affirmed, that his Countrymen might as well plead Innocence upon the terms of
the Decalogue with God Almighty, as with his Vicegerent, on the Qualifications
of Innocence by the Act of Settlement; yet however the proof of the Irish
Nocency being placed on the British, and the Irish having made all within their
Reach either accessory to their guilt, or subject to their wrath, there were
few or none left alive to give Evidence against them; the Officers and Soldiers
who served before the year 1649. having arrears due by the said Acts, were
adjudged parties, by the Commissioners and Irish Evidence, being refused as
Participes Criminis, so there being but little Evidence left, many times
Innocents were made as fast as Claims were read. 6. The Commissioners for
Claims were so long delayed, that the twelve Months time allowed by the Act of
Settlement was effluxed before the Commissioners met, which defect was supplied
by another Act of Parliament, commonly called an Act of Periods, which gave the
said Commissioners six Months time for restoring of Innocents, and six Months
more in Case the Lord Lieutenant and Council should consent thereunto; but the
said Lord Lieutenant and Council were so little satisfied in the justice of the
said Commissioners proceedings, that they positively refused any Enlargement of
the said term, however the Commissioners proceeded and restored six times more
Innocents, when they had no power or authority for so doing, than they did
before. 7. The Irish Claimants do most of them under their Hands and Seals
confess that they enjoyed their Estates Real and Personal till turned out by
the Usurpt power, when it is well known, no British could live in those
Quarters, and by the Books of Distribution of Quarters, made by the Cessation,
it is clear that nine parts in ten of the whole Kingdom was Irish Quarters.
Lastly, Many of the Irish under their said Hands and Seals claimed the benefit
of the Articles of Peace, made Anno 1648, which as well as the former are
excluded from any claim of Innocence by the express qualification of the Act of
Settlement.
Memorandum, That the Act of Settlement confirms only such Decrees of the
Commissioners as are pursuant to the said Act.

1. Quer. Whether the Irish could have any Legal Title to the Estates they
possessed and enjoyed in the two last Reigns on color of such Decrees upon
those Claims?

2. Qu. What Right the Irish can pretend to the Estates they were restored
unto, when the Commissioners had no power to make such Decrees?

Were the Irish Claims, Decrees, Acts of Periods with the Qualifications of
Innocence, mentioned in the Act of Settlement. compared together, not one of
fifty of the said Decrees would be found Legal, or pursuant to the said Acts.

Whether his Majesty by the Articles of Galway, and Lymerick, is now obliged to
give the Irish a better or more Legal Title to the Estates they enjoyed, and
possessed in the two last Reigns?

Which Right appearing to be none, by the aforesaid English Laws, and so lame
and defective by the aforesaid Irish Acts, and the Galway and Lymerick Irish
having many of them in person, and all of them by their Representatives, made
null and void the said Irish Laws, by their pretended Parliament, with that
Declaration of Abhorrency and Contempt, that they caused both the said Acts
publicly to be burnt by the hands of the Common Hangman.

Query. What Justice can they pretend to the Estates they possessed and enjoyed
in the two last Reigns, only by virtue of the said Acts, so annulled and
contemned by themselves?

There being as aforesaid, difference in the Vestitures, and the Enacting
Clauses of the English and Irish Acts,

Whether it may not be a dangerous President to Posterity, that the Parliament
of Ireland should assume a power to Alter, Change, Reverse, or Repeal any Acts
or Clause of Acts past in the Parliament of England?

Whether the sitting of a Parliament in Ireland, continued from 1640 to 1647,
whilst the Parliament in England past the Laws 17o and 18o of Charles the First
to bind Ireland, was not only a tacit and implicit, but a full consent beyond
all contradiction, that Laws made in England, even when there is a Parliament
sitting in Ireland, are binding there, seeing in all that time it was not
questioned by that Parliament of Ireland then sitting?

Lastly, Since that the Laws of England and Ireland are so jarring as
aforesaid, Whether it would not contribute much to the improvement, quiet and
satisfaction of that now desolate Kingdom, and a good Expedient to root up
those mischievous Fibers which have constantly Repullulated into a forty years
Rebellion?

Whether it be not desirable, that his Majesty will be Graciously pleased,
that one and the same Act should pass both Parliaments of England and Ireland
to secure the Titles of the British, and such of the Galway and Lymerick Irish
as his Majesty knows most deserving his favor, and most likely to live well
and Loyally with the British, and to leave the rest of that Rebellious Herd, to
stand or fall by their present Titles?

And whether it is not as desirable, That His Majesty would be further
graciously pleased to grant an Act of Registry, to secure Property against
Perjury and Forgery; whereby the Ruins of that Kingdom would soon be repaired,
His Majesty's Revenue highly improved, Trade Increased, Expensive and Vexatious
Suits of Law prevented, and without which Ickabod must be the Character? A
Foreigner may be the Master, when that unhappy Country is made a Habitation for
wild Beasts, or worse Creatures under only the shape and resemblance of Humane
Features.

State Tracts: Being a further Collection of several Choice Treatises relating
to the Government; from the year 1660 to 1689. Now published in a Body, to show
the Necessity, and clear the Legality of the Late Revolution, and Our present
Happy Settlement, under the Auspicious Reign of Their Majejesties King William
and Queen Mary. Printed for Richard Baldwin.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane,
1691.


