ACADEMY. By the Kings Privilege.
THe most curious and most profitable Engine that ever was invented, is that
which the Kings Majesty has given leave to John Wells to establish thorowout
all England, by virtue of His Letters Patents sealed with the Great Seal of
England, forbidding all other persons to undertake, make, or imitate the same,
under the penalty specified in the said Letters Patents, without the power and
leave of the aforesaid John Wells.

By the means of the foresaid Machine, composed of Artificial Horses, there
shall be from Morning till Night continual Entertainment and Divertisement; and
all Persons may learn with great facility to hold themselves steady on
Horseback, to carry the Lance, to run at the Ring, to lance the Javelin, to
shoot a Pistol with evenness with one Bullet only, and all other Exercises
which are taught in the Academies, which are the Noble Employs of a true
Gentleman, for to make a perfect Horseman.

The Ladies will receive as great pleasure and satisfaction as the Gentlemen,
and may learn the same Exercise as they; which they shall perform either upon
Horses or in Chariots drawn by the same Horses.

Each person shall pay but One Shilling, and shall take Tickets to enter, where
they shall have the liberty to perform all the forementioned Exercises at one
time; but if any shall desire to perform them more than once, they must pay
another Shilling, and to avoid confusion, every one must take a Ticket, which
he is to give to the Commissary before he gets upon the Horse.

For your greater Recreation and Satisfaction, there will be several sorts of
Musical Instruments befitting the Subject.

In the MILITARY GROUND between LEICESTER-HOVSE and the SOHOE.

Accademye par Privilege du Roy.
LA Machine la plus belle curieuse divertissante and la plus utille au public
qui jamais aye este mise au jour, est celle que Sa Majeste a accord le
privilege d'establir a Jean Wells Anglois par toute l'Angleterre, en virtue de
ces Lettres Patente scellee du grand Seau, portant deffence a toutes persons
d'entreprendre fair n'y contrefaire icelles sous les peines portees par
lesdites Lettres pour le temps y continu sans le pouvoir dudit Wells.

Par le moien de ladite Machine composee de Chevaux Artificiels, l'on aura tous
les jours depuis le matin jusques au soir, un Carousel continuel, and chacun
apprendra en se divertissant sans peine and tres facillement, a se tenir ferme
a Cheval, bien porter la Lance, tirer la Bague, coure les testes au dard and
l'espee, l'ancer le Javelot, fair le coup de Pistolet avec Justesse d'une
balle seulle, and autres Exercices d'Academye. Le tout a cource de Cheval, qui
sont les Nobles Emplois d'un veritable Gentilhomme pour render un Cavallier
parfait.

Les Dames y prendront le pareil divertissement que les Cavalliers and
apprendront comme eux les mesmes Exercices, qu'elles y feront ou sur les
Chevaux ou dans des Chars tresnez par les mesmes Chevaux, ou else y seront
tres commodement.

L'on prendra des Billets pour entrer and l'on ne pajera qu'un chelin pour
chaque person, ou l'on aura la liberte de fair une cource: S'y l'on veut
recommencer a cour' l'on payera de nouveau, and l'on prendra des Billets de
cource qu'il faudra donner au commis avaunt que de monter a cheval pour esuitter
la confusion.

L'on joindra quelque Instruments de Music convenable au Sujet pour la plus
grande Recreation.

In the MILITARY GROUND between LEICESTER - HOUSE and the SOHOE.


