I being moved of the Lord, does call unto you that are gathered together in
Parliament.
O Sons of men, eat your meat with trembling, and drink your wine with trouble,
and carefulness, and cease from the evil of your doings, least it should be
said to you, as it was by Ezekiel, the Lord ordered him to declare this, I will
set my face against that man, I will make him an example and a Proverb. O, if
there be any here that are haughty, I beseech you in the fear of the Lord, come
down to that low little principle placed in every one of you, which does check
and reprove you in secret, this is the way by which you must enter into the
Rock, I say hide your selves there for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of
his Majesty, for the day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that is
proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, for he shall be brought
low, and upon all the Cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up (Mark)
what are you lifted up from; or what is it you are a joining too? are any of
you as oaks? are any of you as high as Mountains in your own thoughts? are any
of you as Towers in strength? come to know that pow^ that can shake you, are
any of you as fenced walls? turn in, and feel who is your fencer and try, can
you dwell with everlasting burnings? if not, your fence will be consumed and
your walls thrown down, for the Lord alone will be exalted in this the day of
his Power; Therefore let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the
mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches, but
let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me,
that I am the Lord which exercises loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth; for in these things I delight says the Lord; if
there be any of you now here that is truly noble, come to the trial, have thou
received the word with all readiness of mind? if so, then thou know how to
search the Scriptures; O be not satisfied with the piece of nobility which
Felix had, nor with that measure which Festus enjoyed, behold not many wise men
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, but God has chosen the
foolish things of the World to confound the wise; Therefore he that will be
wise, must first become a fool, that he may be made wise, and he that will be
truly honorable, must know the fear of the Lord by that pure principle which
is placed in you, which will lead you to humility; This is that which reproves
for a vain life, namely covetousness which leads to idolatry, pride,
uncleanness, swearing, lying, evil speaking, foolish jeasting, idle
communication, let it not be once heard amongst you, for, for these things
comes the wrath of God, he that refuses instruction, despises his own soul,
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. Friends, one thing more I have
to lay before you, which I have been long burdened with, (it is namely this)
that which you call your Church Government; who ordained those houses to be
called Churches? who ordained those Priests which receives hire? from what
fountain arises their words? consider, is it not from the letter? These are
such whom I deny their voice, for these are strangers, the sheep of Christ
knows his voice, and they follow him; the Lord in his infinite love has
opened my understanding, that now I know a Minister of the spirit from a
Minister of the Letter, their fruits makes them manifest, the one is College
bred, taking his degrees there, thus he is made a Minister of men, the other is
fitted and furnished with the Spirit of the Lord, sometimes called out of their
shops, some from their handi-craft Trades, and some from the Plow, those being
made able Ministers of the Spirit; think this not strange, for it was the way
of Christ when he was upon earth, to call men from their nets these are as they
were, having the same spirit as they had, they have had power given them to
turn men from darkness to light, from the power of Satan, to know the living
God, and to love him, and to fear him, and in keeping his commandments they are
not grievous but joyous; these Friends which have been sent forth to declare
this truth, which has been a word of Life unto me and many others, they need
no Steeple-house, neither a hundred nor hundreds a year, neither want they
Curate, Clerk or Sexton, nor Bells, wherein many thousands of pounds are laid
out wastefully; Consider how many Widows and Fatherless Children there be which
wants bread, lying up and down the Streets; Down with your Bells and make money
of them, and cloth the naked, and feed the hungry, and come to know what the
Bell of Aaron is, come to know what the fast is which the Lord God accepts of,
so shall you come to know the everlasting Sabbath. Friends, I would have you
really believe this, That God is no accepter or respector of persons, but in
every Nation he that fears him and works righteousness is accepted with
him, wherein the Righteous does rejoice and are exceeding glad; for all the
upright in heart have cause to rejoice, for their crown none shall take from
them.

O all ye Inhabitants of the earth
WHo are in the profession and not in the possession of a Sabbath, be awakened
out of the sleep of your security, for the Lord our God has a controversy
with you for your hypocrisy; Behold, he is weary of your lip-service, ye have
drawn near him with your mouths, but your hearts have been far from him; Oh
consider if this be not your state.

This that you call your Sabbath, Have thou not put it to this use? there has
been more preparation for the flesh, then for the Lord, in the cost of thy
apparel, and the fullness of diet, instead of spending this day holily, thou
have spent it idly, wantonly and vainly, (Mark) If it be not your studies
against that day what to eat, and what to drink, and what to put on, and when
you are richly clad, and full fed, I speak to you as have enough as to the
outward; Consider, was your talents given you for this end? is this the way to
be accepted of the Lord, either in the day or in thy action, you that are of a
lower degree, do ye not also strive to follow the steps of these that are
mentioned before in working wickedness with greediness; Turn into the measure
of God, I say turn in both old and young, rich and poor, for I have a witness
in every one of you which does, or shall set these things in order before you;
therefore whilst it is yet time, whilst it is called to day, Consider in the
pure fear of the Lord, if it be not high time to cease from vanity, O thou that
art rolling thy self in vanity, thou know not how soon thy breath may be
stopped, this know assuredly, that thou must give an account for thy actions
done in the flesh, your words and your thoughts also, which has been evil, and
that continually, I say continually, feel my words, thy prayers, thy fastings,
thy Sabbath keeping, and all is abomination to the Lord so long as thou abides
in the fallen state; consider, are you not as those people were who did eat and
drink, and rose up to play (I say to play) the generality of you on that day
which you call your Sahbath, when you are full feed; do you not go to the
Steeple-house, and there behave your selves as in a Playhouse, gazing and
viewing each other, for your new fashions; The Lord our God is wearied with
these your wicked and profane practices, And for this cause has he a
controversy with you; I hate and abhor your Fast days, (...) the Lord, and I
will not smell in your solemn Aslemblies, But ye being ignorant of God, you
observe days, months, and times. Behold the Kingdom of God comes not by
observations. See what the Lord says, nay rather feel, I will cause all your
mirth to cease, your Fast-dayes, and your Sabbaths, it is your iniquities which
hides good things from you; O repent, repent, forsake the evil of your doings,
before the Vials of his indignation be powered out upon you; for the day is
come, and coming, wherein the Lord will take vengeance on them that knows not
our God, and that obeyes not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: The Lord is
raising up witnesses to declare unto you the folly of your vain observations;
(mark) One man esteems one day above another, another man esteems every day
alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind, he that regards the
day, regards it unto the Lord, (is this your state) and he that regards not
the day unto the Lord, he does not regard it: Romans 14.6. Let no man therefore
judge us in meat, or in drink, or in respect of a holy day, or of the Sabbath
days, which are a shadow of things to come; But the body is of Christ, 2
Colos. 16, 17. O my Friends, let us walk worthy of the Lord; unto all
well-pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and witnessing the increase
of the knowledge of God, Quit your selves like children of light; Let no man
beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility, if ye be dead with Christ
from the Rudiments of the world, why as though living in the world are you
subject to Ordinances; touch not, taste not, handle not; for all these things
are to perish: and we are to trample upon them in this present life; who art
thou that can limit the holy one of Israel, how he shall work, or by what
means, I find the spirit without limitation, this query is in love, these lines
are from a friend to the whole Creation, and a lover of Righteousness; I am
known by the name of Mary Web, whom the world scornfully calls Quaker.

The End.
London, Printed by Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth, near Aldersgate,
1659.


