THE ANSWER Of the ASSEMBLY of DIVINES By Authority of PARLIAMENT Now sitting
at WESTMINSTER. Unto the Reasons given in to this ASSEMBLY BY THE Dissenting
Brethren, Of their not bringing in a MODEL of their WAY. And since Published in
Print, under the Title of A Copy of a Remonstrance. Which Answer was humbly
presented to the Right Honorable the House of PEERS Assembled in Parliament.

ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That this Answer be forthwith
Printed and Published.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed by John Field for Ralph Smith, and are to be sold at the Sign
of the Bible, near the Royal Exchange. 1645.

The ANSWER of the Assembly of DIVINES, by Authority of PARLIAMENT now fitting
at Westminster, unto the REASONS given in to this Assembly by the Dissenting
Brethren, of their not bringing in a MODEL of their Way.
Whereas the Brethren who Dissent from this Assembly in some particulars of
Church Government, did upon October. 22. 1645. instead of the long desired, and
much expected Model of Church Government, to be communicated to us by them,
give in to the Assembly a Paper containing some seeming Reasons, why they
declined the bringing in of such a Model at this time; which since has been
divulged in Print under the Title of A Copy of a Remonstrance, etc. We have
been put upon this necessary Vindicating of our Selves from those unjust
Mis-representations and Mis constructions of our Proceedings, under which we
must otherwise undeservedly have suffered, if this Remonstrance should
altogether go unanswered.

The Design of the Brethrens Paper is, to beget an Opinion of their
Willingness and Forwardness, to make known what ever they hold in
Church Government; and to give an account what the Reasons are, Why they have
not given in a Model of Church Government according to their Judgments.

I. Of their Willingness to make known what ever they hold concerning
Church Government, even since the beginning of the Discussions, they say they
have had public Testimony in this Assembly, and have given manifest Proofs and
Evidences of it.

This public Testimony, we suppose, is but the Testimony of some few single
persons in the Assembly; and not (as some might be induced to believe) the
Testimony of the Assembly, such we are sure they have not had: And, we doubt
whether even such single Testimony have been given, as that they were so
forward, and willing to make known what ever they held in Church Government.
Now if the Testimony of single persons, because given in a public way, may be
called a public Testimony, we doubt not, but we can produce more public
Testimonies of their Unwillingness, (not only from the beginning of this
Assembly, but before) to declare what they hold in Church Government, then they
can of the contrary.

Our Reverend Brother Master Dury in a Letter from the Hague, March 7. 1643.
Stilo veteri, now published in Print, gives them this Testimony, that He had
required from them, but never could obtain, to know the true point of
difference betwixt them, and the other Reformed Churches.

Besides, the Brethren know that there are many Reverend Ministers of the City
of London, and some Members of this Assembly, that must give them this
Testimony, That whereas there was, long before the sitting of this Assembly, an
agreement between some of these Brethren, and sundry Ministers of the City,
That the Brethren should give in to them a Narrative of their way of
Church Government, that agreement was never yet performed, but on the contrary
the Paper that was the Record thereof, was upon some pretense privately
withdrawn by one of them out of the hands in which it was deposited, and was
never to this day restored though often demanded, (...) the Narrative exhibited
though often desired.

Nay, and themselves have given a public Testimony of no great Willingness
and Forwardness to make known what ever they hold concerning Church
Government, even since the beginning of the discussions in this Assembly, in
that Apologetical Narration by them published: Which, how far it is from making
known what ever they hold concerning Church Government, we leave to themselves
to judge.

And when upon occasion of this Apologetical Narration, Master Apollonius being
appointed by the Classis of Walacbria, to set down the judgment of those
Churches, concerning the Controversies now agitated in England: Sent to them an
express Letter, desiring them to inform him what their Opinion was in those
Points, that he might not mistake them; he could not yet obtain it from them,
as himself has complained, and themselves well know.

II. Yet as a proof of their pretended Willingness, they tell us of their
constant, free and open expressing of themselves, upon all occasions, and in
all questions propounded to the debate*

These are but words; we could as easily, and might more truly say, they have
been inconstant, obscure, reserved in expressing themselves, as they can say
they have been constant, free and open. And whereas they say, They have done
thou in all questions, and upon all occasions, we desire them to ask their own
hearts, Whether they did ever clearly, and openly express themselves, what
they unanimously hold in the great question of Gathering Churches, or in the
question of the Power of the People, or in that of the qualification of Church
Members, or Whether they did ever clearly and directly endeavor to prove that
way of Church Government, which they practice, to be the only way Jure divino?
Though they know they have been often urged to it, upon several occasions, and
fair opportunities put into their hands; as in their Debates and Reasons
against Presbyterial Government, and against Appeals, besides many others: And
particularly March 21, 1644. it was earnestly pressed upon them by many in the
Assembly, That they would bring in what they thought farther needful, for the
Reformation of our Congregations, and what they would desire in reference to
their own. And the question was formed up in those terms, and a Vote ready to
be passed upon it, had not they themselves then (who had been silent in it so
long as any objections were made against it by others) so vehemently opposed
it, when we saw the Assembly ready to order it; which we conceive they would
not have done, had they been so willing as they would now he thought, freely
and openly to express themselves upon all occasions, and to make known
whatever they hold in Church Government.

III. As a further evidence of this their Willingness, they further instance
their offers to give an open account at any time, in whatever should be asked
by any Brother.

We confess these Expressions are large and high: An open account: At any
time: In what ever: By any Brother. We believe our Brethren upon second
Thoughts must ab^te somewhat of these large Expressions; and that at least some
of them never made such in offer. But if there were such offers, and those
really intended by all of them; How is it then? That at this time when All the
Brethren of this Assembly, have desired a full Account of their way, and had
expected it above six Months, they plainly ref^se to bring it in.

IV. As for their proffering to state questions to their own sense* We (...) it
has been usual with them many times, after sundry days spent in the (...) a
Proposition, and when it was now ripe for a question, to desire to have it
otherwise stated: Which the Assembly has not seldom granted, and themselves
have acknowledged it a favor. But when the question has been stated by them,
it has been far more perplexed and obscured then it was before; as in that
particular of Ordination which they instance in, and complain their Papers were
laid aside: Of which we give this faithful and just account.

The Committee that was appointed to prepare Propositions about Ordination for
the debate of the Assembly, did, for their more clear and orderly progress
therein, cast the whole under these five questions. 1. What Ordination is? 2.
Whether Ordination be necessary to be continued in the Church? 3. Who are to
Ordain? 4. What persons are to be Ordained, and how qualified? 5. The manner
how such persons are to be Ordained.

In Answer to the first, this Proposition was brought in, That Ordination is
the solemn setting apart of a person to some public Church Office: Which,
after the debate of a whole Session, was voted true Nemine contradicente. After
four days spent in the debate of some of the other particulars, and some
progress made in the third question, our Brethren finding themselves
unsatisfied in that Proposition, concerning the substance of Ordination
(already resolved Nemine contradicente) as in their apprehension not
sufficiently expressing the substance of it; The Assembly thereupon ordered on
the Wednesday, That Master Goodwin, Master Ny, Master Burroughes, Master
Bridge, Master Simpson, and Master Carter, Jun. Be a Committee to consider
further of the substance of the Act of Ordination, and to report to this
Assembly on Friday morning. And so willing have our Brethren been to make known
what ever they held, That this Order was not accepted without reluctance by
some of them, whereupon it was put to the question, and resolved by a Vote.

On Friday morning one of them brings in a report prefacing with thanks to the
Assembly, that they would give leave to a dissenting party (so they first
called themselves before the Assembly called them so, and before they had
formally entered any dissent,) to set down their own sense which they did in two
Propositions, as follows.

1. Ordination for the substance of it, is the solemnization of an Officers
outward call; in which, the Elders of the Church in the Name of Christ, and for
the Church, do by a visible sign design the person, and ratify his
Separation to his Office with Prayer for, and a blessing upon his gifts in the
ministration thereof.

2. That the power which gives the formal being to an Officer, should be
derived by Christ's Institution from the power which is in Elders, as such, in
the Act of Ordination, as yet we find not any where held forth in the Word.

These two Propositions were taken into consideration, and the Assembly finding
nothing in these Propositions concerning the substance of the Act of
Ordination, more then what was in the first Proposition, which the Assembly had
already voted; but rather a complication of sundry questions, some of which,
the Assembly had already resolved, and others, the report which they had made
progress in, would more clearly and distinctly lead them to, and which, the
Assembly could not debate all at once; and besides, considering that many
phrases in these Propositions, were general and ambiguous, as namely, the term
of Solemnization, Of Elders (whether only Preaching Elders, or others also,
which was a question distinctly drawn up in terminis in the Assembly) for the
Church (though the Report interpreted that to be vice Ecclesiae, yet was it not
so expressed in the words of the Paper) a visible signs design the person: As
also, that the second Proposition was not de veritate rei, but de veritate
intellectus, the Language of it being, as yet we find not any where held forth
in the Word: Upon these, and the like Considerations, their Paper was laid
aside; and whether the Assembly had not just reason so to do, let them judge
who can distinguish between perspicuity and obscurity, between method and
confusion.

However, the Brethren have little reason to complain of laying aside their
Paper, who know that the Assembly have often laid by Papers received from the
h^^ds of other Committees, as well as theirs, yea, and several Papers received
from the Reverend Commissioners of the Church of Scotland. And one of them,
though transmitted by the Committee of Lords and Commons, and Divines appointed
to treat with them, not a week before the laying aside of their Paper; when one
of these Brethren argued earnestly for the laying it aside, and that it should
be lest for the Comm^^^es to make use of, as then did of other Writings, and
Books in Print.

V. And as little reason have they for their next complaint about Papers, which
(they say) we of our selves brought in, giving the state of the question about
that extraordinary way of Ordination. The occasion of which Papers was this,
The Assembly not being likely suddenly to perfect the whole Body of Government,
that it might be speedily established in all the parts of it; and there being
at present a great want of some way of Ordination for the present supply of
Ministers in the Army, the Navy, and many parts of the Kingdom; The Right
Honorable House of Peers sent an Order to the Assembly to consider of
expediting Ordination, because of present Inconveniences for want of it. Upon
the receipt of which Order, the Assembly laid aside for the present, the
consideration of the ordinary way of Ordination, which they were then upon, and
appointed a Committee to bring in somewhat concerning an extraordinary way of
Ordination for the present necessity, which Committee accordingly brought in
these two Propositions.

1. That in extraordinary cases, something extraordinary may be done, until a
settled Order can be had, yet keeping as near as possible may be to the Rule.
2. That it is lawful according to the Word, That certain Ministers of the City
be desired to ordain Ministers in the City, and the vicinity jure
fraternitatis.
After many days spent in debate of those Propositions, and several Votes
passed about them, our Brethren not being satisfied in the stating of them,
especially of the latter, were often desired several days by diverse Brethren to
propose how themselves would have it stated: Which they as often declined,
saying, They could not do it presently; to which it was at last replied, That
though at the first motion they could not do it presently, yet now the Assembly
had been already three days about the stating of a question; and this the
fourth day, only to satisfy these Brethren, they now had had time to consider
how they would have it stated: Hereupon, one of them stood up and spoke to this
purpose, I should not have said thus, but that I was called upon; But it is not
so fair and rational a way, That as soon as we object rationally against the
stating of a question, it should be said, Then bring in a better state. Yet we
have brought in a Paper as follows.

For the second Proposition, That it is lawful according to the Word [that
certain Ministers of the City of London, be desired to ordain Ministers in the
vicinity jure fraternitatis] We conceive it does really, and de facto set up a
Presbytery before the Government, that is the ground thereof be disputed. For
the sense of many of the Brethren in the debates, have represented this,
saying, That it was but a mould for other places, to be perfected and
continued; some affirming it to be a Presbytery, another, that it was a
Presbytery both materially and formally, but not in the formality, and urged
such Arguments as for a Presbytery; another, that it was the Seed of a
Presbytery.

Secondly, That it was an Act of Jurisdiction, and therefore jure fraternitatis
must be left out; for a Presbytery is a company of diverse Ministers in one City
that join together to perform an Act of Jurisdiction, and this 1 Timothy 4. 14. is
made peculiarly to be the work of a Presbytery; from which place the
continuance of a Presbytery is mainly argued.

Thirdly, If any thing be extraordinary in it, that is not in an ordinary
Presbytery, yet the first Proposition, supposing we must come as near as we can
to the Rule, does evidently suppose that Presbytery is the Rule.

Fourthly, We cannot dispute against it, but by bringing in all the Arguments
against the Presbyterial Government, yet is would be denied us, as being beside
the Proposition. This is the Gravamen we are under, the term extraordinary that
wipes off all the Arguments against a Presbytery, and yet it is for the
substance of it a Presbytery.

And after him another of them gave in a Paper to this purpose;

We conceive concerning this second Proposition, being connected with the
first, it is thereby made an extraordinary Act, coming a^ (...) the Rule as may
be; and yet the ordinary Rule for Ordination is not first known, nor argued
upon, nor the proportion, how far extraordinary, distinctly set d^^n, nor a
parallel made with the instance in the first Proposition, which all must be done
before this can be judged; a^ likewise, what our judgment it concerning
Ordination and Elders. Our Judgment is this in these two head^.

1. Ordination, and other like Acts of Church power, especially jurisdiction,
are ordinarily to be done by the Ministers and Officers of those Churches
whereof they are Officers, and by the consent of that Church: And so as to
this, that Preaching Presbyters are capable of the Act of Ordination, two
things are more to be required: 1. That they be in Church relation.

2. That then (if more) they be combined in a Presbytery of a Congregation: As
Parliament men, as such, may not make a Law, but its requis^^^; First, that
they be of such a body politic, and then secondly, that they be orderly (...).

2. That Ministers of another Church may not warrantably do it, as wanting this
relation.

Now here are three things h^^h fle^^, First, That they is not only do it as
an Act of Order, but of Jurisdiction, in this Church where they have no
relation. Secondly, Not in such Combination. Thirdly, For these Churches which
are not within their Combination.

Th^se Papers, say they, which we of our selves brought in, being read, were
returned back unto us. To which we Answer.

1. This W^ was but ^wo of these seven, who brought in each of them a Paper,
but neither of them presented as the sense of all these Brethren; but, for
ought we know, as their single sense; saving only, that they used the word We,
which might give the Assembly some ground to think it was the Act of some
others; whereupon, about the end of the debute one of them was asked, In whose
name they presented those Papers, whether in his own name, or in the name of
some others also, because he spoke of We and U^? And th^^ if it were in the
name of others, it was desired it should be expressed, who they were. But it
was not even then affirmed by him to be given in, in the name of all these
Brethren. But he excused the word We, because that others were upon the
negative in the debute, as well as himself: Nor were they expressly owned when
presented, but by a third person (so far as either our notes or memories can
inform us) who upon occasion of that question stood up and said, I own them
with the rest of the Brethren; but who these Brethren were, or how many of
them, was not expressed. And we question, whether these seven Brethren will yet
say, That all of them had so much as seen them before they were brought in to
the Assembly: And therefore it seems something strange they should now all say,
we our selves (as in the Printed Paper) or We of our selves (as in the Paper
given in to the Assembly) presented Papers; when neither all did present
Papers, nor did it of themselves, but upon the reiterated motion of diverse of
the Assembly.

2. And as (...) is it they should say* These Papers (...) ^he state of the
question. It appears from those Papers themselves, that the one of those Papers
was nothing else but a troubling the state of the question with cavils and
jealousies, and undue complaints of Gravamina, as that they should be
surprised, and by this means a Presbytery set up before disputed, and the like:
To prevent which, and satisfy them therein (so little reason have they to
complain of slighting these Papers) the matter of extraordinary Ordination,
notwithstanding the Order of Parliament above mentioned, was left in medio the
Session following, and the large dispute of the lawfulness of a Classical
Presbytery dispatched, before we returned to it again; and then we first settled
the ordinary way which was the Rule, before we concluded of the extraordinary
way for the present necessity. And the other of those Papers was not a stating
the question, but a disputing and arguing the question, and yet not properly
that question, of Ordination in an extraordinary way, according to the present
necessity; but the question of Ordination in an ordinary, and settled way (which
was the work the Assembly had been about, for many days:) And, which after a
resolution in the Assembly, had been proper for them to have put in by way of
dissent (according as the Ordinance by which we sit, does provide) but not
while it was in agitation, by way of Argument. For our Brethren know the
disputes of the Assembly are managed by speaking, not by writing, and were it
otherwise, the disputes would be endless.

These Papers therefore were as they say, returned back: Being but the sum of
what these Brethren had objected and argued against the question in the debates
past, and having therein been fully Answered.

VI. But whereas they say, It was professed publicly, that it was not an
allowed way or course of this Assembly, for any of the Brethren to bring in
Papers, unless they were made a Committee.

We say first, possibly the unwary Reader may think this and some other
passages in their Paper, that speak the same Language, to have been the public
Vote or Declaration of the Assembly; which, whatever it were, was but the
expression of one Brother: And our Brethren know well, that it has been often
asserted in this Assembly, that nothing spoken by a particular Brother, can in
equity be charged upon the whole Assembly; or reputed us their sense, unless
so resolved by Vote or Order of the Assembly; else were the Assembly
accountable for every Speech of any of these Brethren dissenters, as well as
the Speech of any other.

And secondly, It seems very strange, that it should be publicly declared, to
be no allowed course to give in Papers, when even at this time out Brethren had
been desired to give in Papers, and no exception made against it (Though not
such Papers.)

Thirdly, How capable the words spoken in the Assembly at that time are of the
sense these Brethren put upon them, let the words themselves declare, which
were to this purpose, I shall give you my thoughts in a few words to the
Papers: It was expressed before, upon what occasion these Brethren were desired
to help the Assembly, in that which they and we did apprehend to make us stick:
They have brought in two Papers, they say, in the nature of a Gravamen. I take
it to be a Gravamen, and of ill consequence for the time to come, when we have
liberty to give in Reasons to the Houses, that they should in writing give in
Gravamen 's to us. I suppose the Honorable Houses have given no such power. I
move, they may have their Papers delivered again, that we have no such
Presidents. But our Brethren who can remember this, might please to remember
that it was at the same time proffered publicly, That if they would tender
their Papers as Reasons of a dissent, we would so receive them; But this was by
them declined.

Fourthly, And as for stating a question, our Brethren know very well, that it
is no ^nusual course, but very frequent in this Assembly, for any particular
Brother to tender the state of a question in writing; which is sometimes taken
into debate, and sometimes laid aside, as the Assembly thinks fit; and
sometimes several statings of the same question offered by several Brethren: of
which, some one is pitched upon. Yea, and that very day after the giving back
of these Papers, one of these Brethren amongst others, tendered two several
statings of a question in writing; So that our Brethren need not pretend their
laying hold on one Example (as they seem to do afterward) of something brought
in by one Brother, and accepted, for their offering the state of a question in
writing: As if from the time of the giving back of these Papers, till the
bringing in of the Seven Propositions there mentioned, there had been but one
Instance of a Paper tendered by a particular Brother, and accepted. Nor were
they, as they here pretend, by the refusal of these Papers, prevented for the
time to come of doing the like, viz. The like to what these are pretended to be
(Papers giving the state of the Question) though perhaps they might be
prevented of giving such Papers, as those were (to wit, unjust Complaints of
grievances) in such a way.

VII. Their Complaints about stating the question were, they say, frequent. We
say so to, and wish that some had not set themselves more to vex and puzzle the
state of the question, and to render a Proposition clearly stated, perplex, and
obscure, then to dispute the truth or falsehood of it by the Word of God: Who
have sometimes contended much against the stating of the question, which when
it has been resolved on to be so disputed on in terminis, have neither
disputed, nor voted against it.

But thus we answer, Their Complaints were many times unjust; for the
Propositions brought in to the Assembly, were stated by Committees, where these
Brethren had the liberty, and it was their duty to have been present, being
some of them Members of each Committee, and ought to have contributed their
thoughts toward the stating of questions there, and not to have troubled the
Assembly in this kind; which yet they have often done, and often without
cause: For many a time, when upon their quarrelling with the state of the
question, proffer has been made to offer a fitter stating of it, if they liked
not this: It has been replied, They knew no such law nor the Assembly, that
whosoever finds fault with the stating of a Question, must have this penalty
laid upon him to find a better. And yet their frequent Complaints about
stating the question, received other Answers then what they are now pleased to
mention [viz. That the Assembly sat not to argue the Opinions of a few men] of
which Answer, we only say thus much. First, That if there were such an Answer
given, it was but the Answer of some one man, which the Brethren would, at
least by insinuation charge upon the whole Assembly. Secondly, We wish these
words true; and, That the Assembly had not sitten to debate the Opinion of a
few men.

VIII. The next thing they allege, and which they say, is A sufficient
Testimony of this their willingness, is their earnest contending to have some
Questions, which (say they) you all know are the greatest and most fundamental
points, fairly disputed and debated.

To which we Answer.

1. Their earnest contending for some Questions (wherein they might possibly
hope to advantage themselves, either by dividing the Assembly or otherwise) is
no sufficient Testimony of their constant willingness, and forwardness to
make known what ever they hold in Church Government: The rather because,

2. Many other points as Fundamental, in reference to differences between them
and us, they have never offered to debate or prove, but have rather shunned
them when they have had fair opportunities before them, and Arguments put into
their mouths: As for Instance, when that question was debated, The Scripture
holds forth, that many particular Congregations may be under one Presbyterial
Government, against which they disputed about thirty days together; and (as
has been said by one of them publicly in the Assembly) they must confess
they had fair play; Especially they having the advantage to dispute about half
the time on the negative, before the Assembly brought one Argument for the
affirmative; yet all this time, though the Argument lay fair before them, if
they had pleased to use it, That if every particular Congregation have all, and
sole power within themselves Independently, then there may be no such
Presbytery over many Congregations: And though it were often hinted to them,
both then and at other times to use it, they still declined it in their whole
dispute; and likewise in their Reasons exhibited to both the Honorable Houses
of Parliament, insisting mean while upon Arguments from Incongruities and
Inconveniences. And when moved to use this Argument, from the Institution of
such entire Independent power in single Congregations (which had been the
fairest way of disputing against that Proposition) it was replied, That the
Assembly was not to prescribe them their Arguments, but while they were
Opponents, they might use what medium they thought fit. We might Instance in
many other points, which we all know to be great and Fundamental questions, in
reference to that way of Church Government which the Brethren practice, as

1. Whether their gathering of Churches here in England, was just, necessary,
seasonable.

2. How far every particular man and woman may go according to their own
judgment, in separating from those Congregations wherein they have orderly
Communicated.

3 What power single men and women have of Congregating themselves together, to
become a Church as their own discretion leads them, without the guidance of
able Ministers, and Authority of the Magistrate.

4. Whether people so congregated of their own accord, have all power within
themselves for admitting or refusing Members, choosing or ordaining Officers.

5. Whether people are to rule over their Officers.

6. Whether every Congregation ought to have a distinct Presbytery, or whether
many may not lawfully have one common Presbytery ruling immediately over them.

These and the like questions we know to be some of the greatest and most
Fundamental points (as to their way) but we do not remember, that ever they did
earnestly contend to have these questions fairly disputed and debated: Neither
do themselves we think remember it.

IX. To the two particulars they insist upon (for they mention no more) as
questions which they contended to be debated; and which they say, is a
sufficient Testimony of this their willingness, (to make known what ever they
hold in Church Government) We Answer particularly.

To the first of these, That there is a Platform of Government for the Churches
under the Gospel, laid down in the Scriptures. We Answer,

1. That it is a Fundamental point in reference to Church Government, we
acknowledge; but deny that it is a Fundamental point of difference between
these our Brethren, and the Presbyterians. For our Brethren may well know, that
those of the Reformed Churches who practice a Presbyterian Government, pleaded
a Jus Divinum for their Government, long before this way of our Brethren was
thought upon; and therefore, neither is their conteding for this question, any
such Argument of their willingness to declare themselves in Tenants that are
peculiarly their own.

2. That this question, or some other to this purpose, was contended for to be
debated in the Assembly at the beginning of their debates about
Church Government, we do remember: But our Brethren may as well remember, that
this motion was not only theirs, but was as well contended for by the
Commissioners from Scotland, and many others in the Assembly, as by themselves;
who did not yet find themselves agrieved that the major part of the Assembly
were not of their minds in point of method.

3. That this question was then* for the present (after some debate) laid
aside, we grant; but say withal, That the Assembly conceived themselves to have
good reason so to do, it being so often urged as Immethodical to Vote a
Platform to be laid down in Scripture, before we had ever inquired, Where it
was so laid down, or knew Whether we should find such a Platform there: But,
that if upon search after particulars, we could find them in Scripture, the
Resolution of this question, Whether there be any such Platform there, would be
an easy result from the whole; but would at first entrance be found exceeding
intricate and difficult. Which considerations, together with many others then
alleged, persuaded the Assembly to lay aside that question at present.

4. But that this question was so laid aside, as never to be taken up or
renewed in the subsequent debates; we think our Brethren have no cause to
affirm. For that they may well remember, That after the Assembly had concluded
a Sovereign power of Government in Christ, the Head and King of his Church:
And, that the Apostles had received the Keys from the hand of Christ
immediately, and did exercise them in all Churches of the world, upon all
occasions, (which Method, the Assembly conceived was a fair way of proceeding)
they proceeded to inquire, Whether there were any such Government now in the
Church? And did not only debate it, but resolved upon the question nomine
contradicente, That Christ has instituted a Government and Governors
Ecclesiastical, in the Church. And that he has furnished some from time to
time with Gifts for Government, and Commission to exercise the same when called
thereunto. And this Antecedent to the main debates of Government, having not
then Resolved of any other ordinary Church Officers, save only Ministers of
the Word, much less of the Body of Government which has been twice sent up
(amongst others) to the Honorable Houses of Parliament.

5. Whereas they add, That they desired it to be discussed, What are the sure
and certain ways to find out what of Government is held forth jure divino in
Scripture. We know no other way of finding what of Government is held forth in
Scripture, then by examining the several Arguments drawn from Scripture for the
several parts of Government, as they came in order to be considered; and this
way we have used all along.

6. Neither do we see any Reason for that Complaint of theirs, that by laying
aside this question at that time, their Arguments were cut off. For 1. That
this was not wholly laid aside appears, we conceive, from what is said already.
2. Others who contended for that question as well as themselves, have found no
such cause to complain of their Arguments being cut off; who might, for ought
we see, have made as good use of Arguments drawn from such a head, as these our
Brethren. 3. We cannot see how this principle, though granted on both sides, is
such a great and necessary medium, by which the particulars should have been
confirmed, and in a manner, the whole controversy decided, as they affirm. The
Controversy between our Brethren and the Presbyterians not being so much,
Whether there be a Government jure divino, as Whether it be this or that?
Whether that which our Brethren pretend to and we deny, or that which the
Reformed Churches have so long practiced and pleaded for, and they deny. 4. But
if this were so great and necessary a medium for their Cause, the laying aside
the Resolution of the question in the Assembly, at that time was no hinderance,
but that they might have used it: For our Brethren very well know that they
have used other mediums, then what have been resolved in the Assembly, and
might so do without exception. And that they have been often called upon to use
this medium for their particular way (as was said before) and would doubtless
have made use of it, if they could have made it out, That their way was thus
instituted, which yet they never went about to prove. 5. And to conclude, If
this were so advantageous a ground for their Arguments, as they seem here to
make it; we have the more reason to believe that it was not merely a
willingness to make known what ever they h^ld, which was the cause of their
contending for this question, but rather some advantage they hoped to make of
it.

X. As to That other next great question (as they call is) about the entire
power of Congregations, that have a sufficient Prebytery for all Cons^^r^s;
which (say they) as it is the first in order, that presents it self for
discussion, so also it is one of the greatest points in difference between us.
We Answer; 1. It is indeed one of the greatest points in difference* But
secondly, That it must necessarily have the first place in our discussions, we
deny. Our Brethren know the method of the Assembly in these debates about
Church Government, was this; We began with Christ the Head, the great King,
Priest, and Prophet of his Church (as was intimated before) From him we
proceeded to inquite of Officers set by him in his Church extraordinary and
ordinary; then of the power of th^se Officers; after that, of the subject about
which this power was exercised. First, The general Church visible, to which the
Officers, Oracles, and Ordinances of the New Testament were given by Christ for
the Edification thereof. Secondly, Particular visible Churches Members of that
general Church. This, though we do not contend to be the only method, yet it
was that which the Assembly judged fittest to proceed in* And we know not that
our Brethren have just reason to except against it, but that the Assembly might
thus proceed. And what Reasons have been alleged by themselves or others (for
it pleased them to intimate, that some others were of their Opinion in this
point, of the order of our Disputes) why in some particular question the
Assembly should decline this Method, were either hearkened to or answered.

XI. And whereas it is said to be expressly commended by the Grand Committee of
the Honorable Members of both Houses. We Answer;

1. We do not know, that the said Grand Committee did at any time recommend it
to the Assembly to debate, The entire power of particular Congregations which
have a sufficient Presbytery for all Censures, as our Brethren here assert.

2. But we acknowledge, that the said Honorable Committee did recommend same
other questions far otherwise stated, of which the Assembly returned such
Answer, as (for ought we know to the contrary) they were satisfied with; as may
appear by the Order of the said Committee; and the Assemblies Answer to it,
which so s^^ as they concern the present business, we have thought fit here to
insert.

August 19. 1644. At the Committee of Lords and Comment, Assembly of Divines,
and Commissioners for the Church of Scotland resolved.

1. That the Assembly be desired to return to the debate about
Church Government, as s^^n as they have done with Ordination.

2. That they then take into their debate the business of Excommunication, and
therein ^^ discuss these three questions in order: 1. Whether there be such an
Ordinance as Excommunnication, and what it is. 2. Whether particular
Congregations may Excommunicate. 3. Whether Classical Presbyteries, and greater
Assemblies may Excommunicate.

After which, the Assembly received from the said Committee another Order as
follows.

At a Committee of Lords and Commons, and Assembly of Divines, appointed (...)
with the Commissioners of the Church of Scotland.
October 11. 1644. Resolved, etc.
That whereas about two months since, this Committee did among other
particular^ which they recommended to the Assembly of Divines, desire of them,
That when they did return unto the debate of Church Government, they would then
discuss the matter of Excommunication, and therein to debate these three
particulars in this Method and Order. 1. Whether there be such an Ordinance as
Excommunication, and what it is. 2. Whether particular Congregations may
exercise it. 3. Whether Classical Presbyteries and Synods may exercise it. The
Assembly be entreated to return in writing, what they have done in the said
particulars, and that this Committee may receive an Answer at their next
meeting on Tuesday next.

To which Order the Assembly did accordingly return an Answer, as was desired,
which (after an account of what was done in Reference to the three first
Requests of the former Order) was as follows.

Upon September 4. the Assembly having finished the business of Ordination,
etc. The Report of the Grand Committee was desired to be taken into
consideration again, and in the debate thereof, according to the fourth desire
of the Committee, it was ordered, That the Assembly should return to the debate
about Government. It was farther debated, whether the Assembly should proceed
according to the Method of the Grand Committee, expressed in the fifth and last
desire. This was moved by some of the Members of the Assembly; others moved to
proceed upon the Report of the first Committee concerning some additional
proofs for the Presbytery, over more Congregations then one. Others moved to
consider of the Report of the Committee for the summary, in case the Assembly
did not think fit to proceed in the Method of the Grand Committee: Others moved
next to consider of the several sorts of Assemblies for Government, and their
subordination. This last was urged by the Commissioners of Scotland, partly,
that so the Assembly might hold out what Government they would advise the
Parliament unto; which would be of great use for the perfecting the
Propositions agreed upon by both Kingdoms; and partly, because it was agreeable
to the course of the Assembly, to debate those things first wherein the
Assembly would be most uninamous. After a large debate it was Resolved, that
this shall be next debated, That it is agreeable to the Word of God, that the
Church be Governed by several sorts of Assemblies. The Assembly accordingly
proceeded in that debate, and having concluded of the several sorts of
Assemblies, and the Members of them, were entering upon the Consideration of the
subordination of them, and the power that they have in common: When it was upon
the 23 of September moved to consider what to do with Excommunication, whether
to refer it to a new Committee, or to the second Committee to perfect the
business of Excommunication, which was formerly committed to them. Whereupon
it was Ordered, That the second Committee shall perfect their Report concerning
Excommunication with all convenient speed.

The second Committee met accordingly, and upon the eight of October made their
Report, in which Session the Assembly finished the last Proposition that they
had in debate about the power of Assemblies in Common, etc. [viz. It is lawful
and agreeable to the Word of God, tha^ all the said Assembly have some power to
dispense Church censures] This Proposition being Re^^^ved, it was Ordered to
debate the Report of the second Committee: Which the Assembly has now entered
upon. But for the point of Method they have concluded nothing, but it is yet
free for the Assembly to take what Method they shall see fit.

By which Papers it appears, what were the particulars recommended to the
Assembly by the said Grand Committee; and that they had hitherto fulfilled
their desires. Only (for the Reasons therein alleged) they had interposed a
debate concerning the several Assemblies for Government, and concluded that
there was such Assemblies before they considered what they might do; And, That
they had some power in censure, before they came to that particular, Whether
they might Excommunicate. And in that point of Excommunication recommended,
they had not as yet departed from the Method, but were in debate of the Report
of a Committee appointed to draw up Propositions concerning it, and had not
proceeded beyond what was in Answer to the first of the three particulars
proposed. viz. Whether there were such an Ordinance as Excommunication, and
what it is. And, whether the Assembly did afterward break that Method desired,
or were justly blameable herein, will appear by what follows in our Answer to
what they charge us with.

XII. Two things there are, wherewith our Brethren charge us in this matter,
(viz. The entire power of Congregations which have a sufficient Presbytery for
all Cons^^^es) 1. That the debate of this was denied the first place. 2. That
it was to this day declined by us, though thus and thus urged, etc.

The first branch of which Charge, we conceive to have no great weight, partly
by Reason of what we have said before, and partly, because breach of Method in
the Order of debates, if the Assembly should be guilty of it (which does not
yet appear in this particular) would not be accounted any great crime by those
who know the nature of such proceedings. The second we confess, if true, had
some more weight in it, and might seem a Charge of consequence, if the Assembly
in their whole debates of Church Government should yet never from first to
last, consider what power is to be allowed to particular Congregations. But we
shall Answer particularly to both, branches of this Charge, and to the latter
first.

To this therefore: First, Will our Brethren upon second thoughts assert, That
to this day the Assembly has declined it. Was the power of Congregations never
before the Assembly? Were there no debates upon it? Were there no questions
formed up? No Resolutions on it? No Propositions of that nature sent up to the
Honorable Houses of Parliament? Surely there were, and our Brethren, we think,
cannot deny it. If they have forgotten us we shall put them in mind of some.
Our Brethren may remember, that there were large debates in the Assembly
concerning a difference, much insisted upon by our Brethren, between
Congregations fixed in their Officers and Members, having a Presbytery of their
own, and Congregations not fixed, but fluid: Whether such fixed Congregations
as well as those not fixed, might be united under one Classical Presbytery:
Which was argued at large in the Assembly, from April 4. 1644. till the
fifteenth following.

Our Brethren may remember further, that there were many debates and
resolutions in the Assembly about particular Congregations, Whether such ought
to be? Of what Members they consist? How divided and bounded? What Officers?
And what Ordinances ought to be in such Congregations, from the said April 15.
till May 6. following.

Our Brethren may remember likewise, that there was this Negative brought in by
a Committee of the Assembly, of which some of these Brethren were Members, This
no single Congregation may ordinarily assume to it self all and sole power in
Elections, Ordinations, or Censures, or in Forinsecal determining Controversies
of Faith, Cases of Conscience, and things indifferent. Which question, we
conceive does fully reach the debate, which they say, they so much desired, and
was largely debated in the Assembly (first for some days entirely, and
afterward per parts) in several Sessions from that May 6. 1644. till May 16
then following, and many Resolves of the Assembly upon it: And among the rest,
this for one (after a long debate) That no particular Congregation which can
conveniently Associate may assume to it self all and sole power in Ordination.
Which was afterward alleniated by prefixing some words upon a distinct ^ote
thus, It is very requisite that no particular Congregation do assume, etc, and
Arguments were brought in and voted by the Assembly for the proving of it, and
sent up to both Houses of Parliament.

Our Brethren likewise may remember, that the Assembly procee^ed in debating
the power of Elderships in particular Congregations, till May 20 following; and
it was in several Votes Resolved, That they have power authoritatively to call
before them any person within the Congregation, as there shall be just
occasion; to inquire into the knowledge and spiritual estate of any Member of
the Congregation; to admonish and rebuke, Which Votes have been likewise sent
up to the Houses of Parliament.

Our Brethren likewise may remember, that the Assembly then proceeded to
debate, Whether they have power authoritatively to suspend from the Sacrament,
a person not Excommunicated. In five several Sessions, from May 20, till May
24; and again, October 24 and 25 following: And Resolved it affirmatively, and
carried up their said Resolution with the Proofs annexed.

And when we should have proceeded farther about the seat of the power of
Excommunication, we consulted ways of Accommodation. Which business of
Accommodation was thus occasioned, and thus carried on.

The Assembly having fully and unanimously agreed, that Excommunication is an
Ordinance of Christ; found their progress in the further debate of that
subject, made difficult by some diversity of judgments, which appeared among
them concerning the proper seat of the power of Excommunication. Toward the
composing of which Differences, some of the Members of the Assembly drew up
certain Directions for the Administration of Church ^ensures in the Church;
which being communicated privately to some other Brethren, were with their
consent and liking, brought into the Assembly; where being read, it was
excepted against by one of these dissenting Brethren (to whom it had been
before Communicated, and left some time in his hands to advise upon) That this
which was tendered, did accommodate the difference about the seat of the power
of Excommunication, as to two parties that differed, but not as to the third;
and moved withal that that point might be committed to an equal number of each
part, to see if they might find a way of Accommodation that all might agree
in. This motion was assented to, and the thing so committed, and (after some
days spent in consultation) Jan. 10. 1644. there was a Report brought in as an
Accommodation, and so agreed on by that whole Committee, Nemine contradicente,
and as such presented to the Assembly, and such received by them, with
expression of much content and joy therein.

Jan. 14. It was urged by one of these Brethren, that having now accommodated
in one point (in the seat of the power of Excommunication) it would be to their
prejudice, unless all other particulars expressed in the Paper might be
accommodated also. Upon this, the whole was committed; both what was before
concluded, and what was yet remaining to be discussed. And out of a tender
desire not to break with our Brethren in this great point of Excommunication,
wherein we hoped we had so happily begun to accommodate; there was such
condiscention to them, as that in conclusion (that clause only excepted which
concerns the Order, Peace and Unity, which Christ has established in his
Church) that whole Directory of Excommunication, both for matter and words, is
as we conceive, according to our Brethrens mind. And the Assembly to gratify
them, and out of an earnest desire and expectation of an accommodation with
them, did express many, if not most of the particulars in that Directory, in
such terms and after such a manner, as otherwise they would not have done: Yet
after all this, when that Paper was Voted to be sent up to the Honorable Houses
of Parliament as an Accommodation: These: Brethren, contrary to what we
expected, entered their dissent to this as an Accommodation; Which themselves
moved, and which had the concurre^^e of their Votes ((...) Clause excepted) all
along. And by this means have left us bound by our own Votes, and themselves at
liberty to practice what they please in Church Censures. Their dissent was as
follows.

Feb. 3. 1644.
The dissent of the Brethren, whose names are underwritten.
We and diverse others in the Assembly, having held forth all along this treaty
of Accommodation, that the intent thereof was, That there being different
Judgments in this Assembly about Excommunication; the words of this Directory
are so penned for Accommodation of all, that each may retain their sense and
practice of the Censures in the Church accordingly, without breaking the common
Rule: We whose names are under written do enter our dissent to it as an
Accommodation in any other sense,

Thomas Goodwin, William Bridge, Jeremy Buroughs, Phillip Ny, William Carter.

To which dissent we did then and do now give this Answer, That our Brethren
then (when the Accommodation was brought into the Assembly, and as such
accepted) put in no such restriction as now they do, of excepting it as an
Accommodation in such or such a sense; nay, the Reporter made it a request from
the Committee to the Assembly, That the form of words there agreed upon, might
be accepted, and the sense not debated at all. And our Brethren know it was so.

2. Although they did sometimes in the ensuing debates, mention such a sense,
yet never urged to have this expressed as the sense, intent, or condition of
the Accommodation, till the very day of their entering their dissent.

3. Although one of the dissenting Brethren, did January 14. occasionally in
another occasion mention differing practices that might be in administering
Church Censures, yet this was not pleaded for, no not by him, as the sense or
condition of the Accommodation.

4. But the very mention of it was by him who had brought in the Report for
Accommodation, condemned as a thing injurious and prejudicial to Accommodation.
So far was it from being held forth as the sense of the Committee or Assembly.

However we desire it may be observed the dissent our Brethren enter here, is
not to this Directory, as not agreeable to the Word of God; but, as not being
such an Accommodation as will serve them.

All this being considered (besides other debates, both before and since,
concerning particular Congregations) we believe our Brethren have no cause to
Charge us with laying aside to this day, the debate of the entire power of
particular Congregations, which have a sufficient Presbytery for all Church
Censures.

XIII. And thus having cleared our selves from the main Charge, and showed that
it was not declined to this day: We shall with ease acquit our selves of the
other also, about denying it the first place; for neither is this justly
charged upon us. Whether the debate of the power of particular Congregations,
might justly challenge the first place (viz. Before the debates about the power
of Classes and Synods) or not; yet we are sure it has had the first place in
the debates of the Assembly. For all those Votes and Resolutions forementioned,
concerning the power of particular Congregations, were passed long before the
power, either of Classes or Synods, was concluded or debated; so that neither
was it declined to this day, nor was it denied the first place.

XIV. After all this, as a further evidence of their willingness to dispute
their way, they mention a Paper delivered in the Honorable Committee appointed
by the Honorable House of Commons, to find out ways of Accommodating
different judgments in the Assembly.

Now, though it might sufficiently clear the Assembly to Answer that no such
Papers were ever reported to the Assembly; and therefore the Assembly cannot be
accountable for them; yet we further add;

1. That this Paper was not the Act of those Brethren, nor of any party of them
alone, but of four other Members of this Assembly joined with two of them in a
Sub-Committee, as themselves acknowledge.

2. That this Paper in the utmost they can say of it, did but hold out the main
and most of what they practically desired; and how can a Paper which was the
Act of others as well as of themselves, and contained but most of what they
practically desired, be a suffiient Proof and Evidence of their willingness to
make known what ever they held?

3. There were some nine Propositions prepared by the Sub-Committee, in all
which they, did not agree; but the parties did in most of them counterlock one
another. At the foot of these Propositions; as we are Informed by the Chairman
of that Committee, was written as follows, We having weighed our Brethrens
principles, do find no probability of Accommodation for them ordinarily to
enjoy Congregations: Unless, when it shall happen in a Parish, that the
Minister cannot Administer the Sacraments to all in the Parish, whom possibly
the Neighbor Ministers, or the Classi^ may judge fit to be admitted, such
persons shall have power to procure to themselves the Sacraments, either by the
help of a Neighbor Minister, or some other provision he made by a
proportionable allowance, out of the Tithes, according to the wisdom of the
state.

Whereunto our Brethren add as follows, Or otherwise, if in a Parish it
happen there be a considerable number of such as cannot partake in the
Sacraments with the Minister and people, they shall have liberty to dispose of
themselves, as a distinct Church, and to choose a Minister or Ministers as
their own charge to be maintained to be their Pastor.

If such a liberty shall se^^ to the wisdom of this Honorable Committee to be
so prejudicial to the peace of the Church, as not to be permitted, we humbly
desire the Doctrinal Principles wherein we differ about Church Government, be
taken into serious consideration, and some other way of Accommodation in
practice be thought upon, as shall seem fit to this Honorable Committee.

This say the Brethren was presented to that Honorable Committee to be
transmitted, whether to the Honorable Houses, or to the Assembly, as they
should think meet: But before any such thing could be done, it pleased the
Honorable House of Commons to supersede the whole business.

XV. They yet press us farther with Papers, and tell us, How upon occasion of
something brought in by one Brother and entertained, they took hold of that
example; and one of them with consent of the rest brought in seven Propositions
containing matter of difference betwixt us, professing, that if this Reverend
Assembly would debate them, or any one of them, they would bring in more, until
they had brought in the whole frame; and the Assembly themselves should pick
and choose what they would debate, and what not: These Propositions say they,
were rejected with a refusal to debate any one of them.

The true story of this business stands thus, On March 2^. 1644. it was
earnestly desired by several Members of the Assembly, that the Brethren, the
dissenters, might be entreated to be a Committee, to bring in what they thought
further needful for the reforming of our Congregations, and what they would
desire in reference to their own, as has been touched already. This was by
those of the Brethren dissenters who were then present opposed with greatest
vigor: After some time spent in the debate of the business, when the question
was drawn up in terminis, and ready to be put, perceiving the extreme
averseness which was in these Brethren to undertake such a work we forbear
putting the question, l^st the Brethren should complain, as they do in this
Paper, of our imposing upon them.

What Councels the Brethren took we know not, but March following after an
Intimation given in the Assembly by a Brother, who was none of these
dissenters, That one of these Brethren hid something to offer about the rights
of particular Congregations; and a motion made and assented to that he might
bring it in: One of them after some Expressions of unwillingnesse, drew forth a
Paper containing seven Propositions, and this was the true occasion of their
bringing in these Propositions, and nor as they pretend their voluntary
taking-hold of a Paper brought in by another Brother. The Propositions (so far
as our Notes and Records will help us) were as follows.

1. That there is a platform of Church Government for the Church, laid down in
Scripture. 2. That this is immutable, and binding the conscience to the
observation thereof. 3. That the Officers which are to be employed in those
Churches, as Pastors, Teachers, Ruling Elders, and Deacons, are of divine
Institution. 4. That the people have an Interest in the choice of these
Officers. 5. That these Officers are to be designed each of them to their
Functions, by imposition of hands, and by Prayer. 6. That what power these
should have, and over whom they should have it, is of divine Institution. 7.
Where there is a sufficient number of Presbyters in any one Congregation, then
may the two great Ordinances of Excommunication and Ordination be Administered.
These Propositions we conceive were brought in by the consent of all these
Brethren, because now they say so, which is more then themselves affirm of any
of their other Papers, unless the first which was given in about Ordination;
yet themselves in the debate of them, did not agree upon some of the terms,
nor will they we suppose say That all these Propositions contain matter of
difference betwixt us.

But as to the laying of these Propositions aside, we Answer.

1. These Propositions were not to the purpose of what was then before the
Assembly, nor what was desired, and expected from us, viz. What they thought
further needful in the Reformation of our Congregations; and what they desired
in reference to their own. All or most of what these Propositions contain,
having been before debated in the Assembly.

2. They were not tendered as already formed up for dispute, but it was added by
him that brought them in, These Propositions we are ready to form up, if the
Assembly think fit.

3. It was then particularly objected, that they had not brought them in with
Scriptures and Proofs annexed, as had been formerly used in Committees, and
offer made several times, that if they would bring them in with proofs annexed,
the Assembly was ready to receive them.

4. Neither indeed can they be said properly to be brought into the Assembly;
for when the Reporter had read them, he put them up again without leaving
either the original, or a Copy of them in the Assembly, and refused to give
them in, though called for by diverse; as likewise another time, another of
these Brethren, having delivered a Paper to a Committee of the Assembly for
Accommodation, desired afterward, that he might have it to peruse and
transcribe it; which being obtained, we could never recover from him to this
day, either the Paper, or a Copy of it; and when it has been called for in the
Assembly (as it has been very often) he still replied, that he had it not
about him, only once he drew it out, and read it over in the Assembly, with
speed more then enough, and being desired then to deliver it in, he refused
then to deliver it in to the Assembly, but said, if he must deliver it again,
he would deliver it to the Chairman of that Committee from whence he had it;
who not being then present, did not then or since receive it from him; though a
Paper much called for, and desired, and often demanded by that Chairman.

All this while the Brethren have been complaining about Papers they brought in
to the Assembly: But all this is but to shape an excuse for their not bringing
in Papers as was expected, viz. Their Frame or Model of Church Government,
according to the desire and order of the Assembly.

XVI. The occasion of which Order was indeed, as they say, A Book entitled The
Way of the Churches of Christ in New England, and published here by N. H. and
J. H. who in their Epistle to the Reader say, they have been informed that
these their Brethren (speaking of the dissenting Brethren in this Assembly)
formerly tendered themselves, that in ease they might be put into a Committee or
like meet posture, they would bring in the whole Frame of their judgments in a
body, with their Grounds and Reasons, That now very lately they gave in
Propositions to be discaused with promise of more; but neither of them was
debated.

This Book say the Brethren they had no band in, no knowledge of; but they do
not say they had no hand in giving Information, to the Prefacers to this Book:
So they say they had no hand in publishing the Papers called A Copy of their
Remonstrance. But they will not (we hope) say, that none of them had a hand in
showing or communicating the written Copy or a Transcript thereof, either
before or since it came into the Assembly.

The Assembly finding themselves nearly touched by that mis-representation
which these men had made of their proceedings to the world, and knowing that
they had often desired (and almost enjoined) the Brethren to be a Committee to
that purpose; but not remembering that the Brethren had tendered themselves unto
such a capacity, took the thing into a strict inquiry; and the most that could
be alleged particularly of that nature for our Brethren, was but this, That
upon February 11. 1644. one of them made an offer of being made a Committee,
which upon review of that days proceedings, we find to be thus: Upon a motion
of another Brother in the Assembly, that they would use this Argument against
the Propositions in debate (concerning the lawfulness of Appeals) That if
every Congregation ought to have all and sole power Independently, and that
their sentence cannot be resc^nded by any other power, then there can be no
appeal to another Court, desiring that they would prove such irrevocable power
in Congregations, or if they did not like the torms of the Propositions, they
would be a Committee, and bring in Propositions to their own sense; one of the
Brethren replied, With all his heart, because it was said they were still upon
the Negative, and that it was said abroad, they did not hold forth their mind,
they would bring in Propositions (if the Assembly pleased) to be desputed,
which presently was well resented in the Assembly; many of them expressing
their approbation of the motion, and that they were very glad to hear it, being
that which they most desired, and nothing would please them more, then that
these Brethren would clearly hold out their judgments; and the Assembly in the
midst of the other debate, were going about to make them a Committee, to bring
in what Propositions they pleased, according to the Ordinance of Parliament.
And when in the Assembly it was called to Order it, many having approved the
motion, and none speaking against it, the Brother who had before professed his
willingness began to object, That they must know first for what they should be
a Committee, and what was meant by according to the Ordinance of Parliament;
and that the Assembly must first move the Parliament about it, and then they
should see what they these Brethren would do. And another of these Brethren
moved expressly against it upon the same grounds, that are now objected: That
there were many things already concluded; that it was to no purpose to make
such an overture; that they could not bring in what was their judgments,
without contradicting what was already Voted: Whereupon the offer being made
but by one of these Brethren, though indeed, as they use to do, he used the
word We (and not seconded by any of the rest, though there were diverse of them
present) but flatly opposed by one of them, and even by himself, clogged,
notwithstanding the Profession of his willingness. The Assembly desisted and
returned to their former debate, about the Proposition before them, which is
the true Reason why the motion so well resented in the Assembly, did not
proceed.

The Assembly therefore for Vindication of themselves from this aspersion, did
upon the fourth of April, notwithstanding much opposition of these Brethren
unanimously Resolve upon the Question, That the Brethren of this Assembly that
had formerly entered their dissent to the Propositions about Presbyterial
Government, shall be a Committee to bring in the whole Frame of their
judgment, concerning Church Government in a Body, with their Grounds and
Reasons: In the last part of which Order, we thought fit to retai^ the words of
the Prefacers, though sc^rce sense.

XVII. To this Order they pretend they yielded with willingness, provided,
they might bring it in part by port.

With what willingness, their debate against this Order, prossed with
vehemence the first day, and repeated again the second day, bear witness,
wherein all those disadvantages wherewith this Paper clogs the business, were
urged and answered; as namely, The main part of the Presbyterial Government (as
namely, that about Ordination, and Government of Presbyters over many
Congregations, and the Subord^nation of Classical, Provincial and National
Assemblies) had been voted by the Assembly, and sent up to the Honorable
Houses. And so they were before the 11 of Feb. (which yet was the time, and the
only time, so far as we can remember) that any of these Brethren made any
overture to this Assembly, of bringing in a Model of their Way. And if the
voting of these things were not looked upon as advantages; then why are they
pleaded as disadvantages, to have undertaken it on the 11 of February? Why were
they so averse from it on the 21 of March, and on the fourth and fifth of
April? They cannot but remember (yea, they do remember it was said, That
something of Church Government remained undiscussed; but was that all?) It was
said, and by several Brethren make evident, that what the Assembly had voted
and transmitted to the Honorable Houses, had not so precluded them, but they
had scope enough still to bring in whatsoever they could assert, and prove,
about the power of particular Congregations; and there was scarce any thing
voted to the prejudice of the presumed or supposed Rights of particular
Congregations, save only in the matter of Appeals. For what ever had been
voted lawful for Classes and Synods to do, did not thereby exclude
Congregations from having such a power likewise, if they could prove that by
the Institution of Christ, such a power belongs to them; besides, many other
things which these Brethren suppose to be the Rights of particular
Congregations, and that Christ has invested them therewith, which the Assembly
had not determined against; and the question about Excommunication (at least if
the Assembly have as they charge us, declined to this day the entire power of
Censures in Congregations) about election of Officers, and the peoples power
therein, as likewise, the sufficiency of election to constitute Officers
without Ordination, about the Constitutions of Congregations, and the way of
gathering and constituting of Churches, their Church Covenant, and the
qualifications of those that are to be Church Members, and what it is does
constitute a man a Member of a visible Church. These and many other
particulars, were yet Res integrae, as was then declared. And it was further
declared, that even in those things which the Assembly had Voted and
Transmitted to both Houses of Parliament; yet we did not so lean to our own
understandings, nor so prize our Votes; but that if these Brethren should hold
forth such light unto us as might convince us of an Error: we should not only
desire the Parliament to give us leave to revise our Votes, but to revoke them
if there should because. And when it was moved by some in the Assembly to add
a proviso, that they being not in any thing which has been already determined
in the Assembly, it was gain said by others, moving that there might be no such
restriction, but that they be left to bring in what they would, so that they
brought it in with their Grounds and Reasons, and accordingly the question^
drawn up March 21, and the Resolved April 4, were without any such restriction.
But this reasonable satisfaction was not, (we suppose) the ground why they
yielded to be a Committee: That which overruled the case was, That they might
take away all jealousies, that they were unwilling to discover what they held;
which whether they can do, or no, by the carriage of this business, time will
give them to understand.

XVIII. Well, however purposed they were, and Resolved among themselves to do
this work, but to do it in as convenient a time as a work of such a compass
could in such a manner a^ was purposed by us, be dispatched by them.

It seems then the manner purposed by us, that they should bring in the Model
entire, and not part by part, was it that troubled them. Indeed, it was
contended for with some earnestness, That they might bring it in part by part,
as the Presbyterian Government was brought into the Assembly. And one of the
Brethren was so earnest in this contest, as that he did professedly disclaim
having any hand in it, unless it might be brought in part by part. For our
parts, we counted it our unhappiness, and found it to be greatly to our
prejudice that we were necessitated to bring in the Presbyterial Government
part by part; but our Brethren know it could not be avoided; for the Assembly
being by the Ordinance, whereby they sit bound to treat only of such matters
as shall from time to time be propounded to them by both or either of the
Houses of Parliament, and no others, could not appoint Committees to consult
and make preparations for matters of Church Government, till they had received
an Order from the Honorable House to that purpose. And having received this
Order, they stood obliged now to lay by the Articles of Religion, in the review
whereof, they had hitherto spent their time, and to fall upon the consideration
of Church Government, which being now by Ordinance of Parliament put into the
hands of the Assembly, and made the subject of our debates, the Committees
could not have time to perfect the whole platform, but must bring it in by
parts as they could dispatch them, least the Assembly should have no work at
all before them; but if the Assembly had thought fit to have chosen seven men,
and made them a Committee to bring in a Platform or Model of Government,
according to their own judgments without respect to the judgment of other
Brethren; and left them to their own time as these Brethren were left, and
privileged them from other services and attendance in the Assembly and
Committees, as some of these Brethren have taken themselves to be, we doubt not
through the Grace of God, but they would have brought in a Model of Government
perfect and entire, in fewer months then we have waited for theirs.

As for the Assemblies bringing in of the Government per parts was by
constraint; but our brethren made it a matter of choice and contest; what the
design of this should be we know not, unless to gain time and conceal
themselves still, and detain us yet longer in expectation and suspense; they
having the more opportunity thereby to express themselves in what they please,
and in what they please to be still reserved.

XIX. It likewise seems to greive them, that the Assembly (though pressed by
them) would not declare what they would do with that Model, and those Reasons
they should bring.

But let the Brethren consider, whether they did then positively and expressly
declare, Whether they would bring in such a Model, though pressed to it by the
Assembly; and if they would not declare the one, why should the Assembly
declare the other? And the Brethren know it is not the custom of the Assembly,
to tell Committees beforehand what they will do with their Report when they
bring it in; but when a Report is brought in, then they consider what to do
with it, when they see what it is.

Moreover, the Brethren need not doubt, but the Assembly would at least have
made as much use of this, as they were by one of these Brethren advised to make
of the Paper of this nature, given in by the Commissioners of Scotland.

XX. But the Assembly (say they) hastened the voting of what yet remained in
Church Government; and when not long after upon occasion of debate of one
particular point wherein they differed from the Assembly, they moved it might
be deferred, because they should present their Judgments, and Reasons about
it, with the rest. It was publicly answered, that therefore the Assembly
should the rather go on to the concluding of it, because they intended to bring
it in; and accordingly the Assembly sent up to the Honorable Houses, as well
what had been sent up by pe^c^^ before, as what was since concluded in one
entire Frame.

For the hastening of the Votes, and the sending up our advice for Government in
an entire Frame: The Brethren know the Reason of it, but they are pleased to
conceal it. The Honorable Houses had sent several Messages and Orders to this
Assembly, requiring them to hasten the dispatch of their advice concerning
Church Government, and to send it up entire: Which Messages and Orders of the
Houses, we are bound to obey, by that Ordinance whereby we sit; and it is not
free for us to detain our Votes, when both or either of the Houses call for
them. Our Brethren therefore deal hardly with us, when they impute that to us
as a fault, which was our duty.

As for the particular which they say they desired might be deserred: We know
not what it was they mean, nor when debated; if they had instanced in the
particular, we could more clearly have Answered to the Charge. But if there
were such a motion made by them, and if any Brother should Answer, that their
Model being to come in, and like to hold the Assembly in long debate, we should
therefore make the more haste to dispatch what was before us, that so we might
be the more ready to receive what they should give in (though the Assembly be
not bound to give an account of the particular Speeches of every Member) yet we
conceive there might be some Reason why a man might so speak, especially
considering that they were not limited, but left to their own time for bringing
in their Model; for there was no day set from the fourth of April, when they
were first made a Committee, till September 22, and then only, That about a
fortnight after they should make a Report of what they bad done; nor had they
all this time declared, that they would bring in a Model: But it seems they
were resolved to take time large enough, for they tell us

XXI. That the Collection of materials cost them two or three months.

Strange! Have the Brethren decryed the Government of all other Churches, these
many years, and engaged themselves in a new way of Church-gathering, and
governing; And when they are called upon for the proof of that way, their
materials are to seek have they told the world in their Apologetical Narration,
That they have searched out what were the first Apostolic directions, pattern,
and example of those primitive Churches Recor^ed in the New Testament: And in
this inquiry looked upon the Word of Christ impartially, and imprejudicedly, as
men made of flesh and blood, are like to do in any juncture of time, that may
fall out? Do they spend almost three whole Pages of the Apology, in setting out
the advantages they had in their inquiry above all other that were before
either in this or other Reformed Churches, yea, or in New England? Do they
profess Page 9, 10. That in the primitive pattern, and example of the Churches
erected by the Apostles, they found principles enough, not only Fundamental
and Essential to the being of a Church; but superstructory also for the
welbeing of it; and these to them clear and certain, etc. And are their
materials still to collect, and must no less then two or three months be
spent in the Collection of them? But grant it so, they have had not only two,
but six months time, for the preparing of their Model; Why is it not yet
brought in?

XXII. They Answer, the Assembly has ten months since received this Dissent
and Reasons against the Subordination of Synods, which contains a main part of
that wherein they differ, and is of all other, of the greatest moment both to
this Church and State; yet notwithstanding, these Reasons have not been
Answered by any Reply brought into this Assembly, and so not ready to be sent
up to the Honorable Houses; although the Votes concerning Subordination were
sent up, by which, we see say they, that this Assembly can assume the liberty,
if it so pleas^, to reserve those we shall present unanswered, as they have
done the former.

We grant, that about ten months since, These Brethren brought in a Paper
containing Reasons of their Dissent, against the Subordination of Synods, which
we presently committed to the same Committee that had drawn up the Answer to
the former Reasons.

We grant, that as long since our Votes concerning Subordination were sent up
to the Houses, for these Votes having been passed in the Assembly long before,
and no Dissent to them entered; when upon occasion of the Treaty at Uxbridge,
which though it was not then begun, was in preparation; it pleased the
Parliament to require us to send up to them, what had passed the Assembly in
Church Government; and the Assembly thereupon, appointed a Committee to draw up
the whole, which had passed in the Assembly into a method fit to be presented
to the Parliament; and the Report of the Committee considered by the Assembly;
and the whole, Voted to be sent up to both Houses. Our Brethren then entered
their Dissents to some particular Propositions of it, and desired that the
sending up of the whole might be respited till they had brought in the Reasons
of that their Dissent; which because the Assembly could not assent unto,
because of the Order of Parliament, calling for them in reference to their
preparation to the Treaty; These Votes, together with the rest, were sent up to
the Parliament before the Reasons of their Dissent were brought into the
Assembly; and the Subordination of Synods soon after Voted in both Houses of
Parliament, and sent afterward among other Propositions, to the Treaty at
Uxbridge, which made us not over solicitous of dispatching our Answer to their
Reasons in all the Formalities, because these Reasons and Answers are not to be
sent up till called for by the Parliament: And we conceived it not very
probable, that the Houses would call for Reasons against their own Votes; yet
thirdly, the Committee had prepared their Answer to these Reasons in less time
then the Brethren say they were put to the expense of Collecting of the
materials for their way; for in Janu. last, about twelve Sheets of an Answer to
these Reasons against the Subordination of Synods, were read and approved in a
Grand Committee of the whole Assembly (these Dissenters only excepted) and
wanted but the formality of the Assemblies Vote; and since another part of our
Answer to their Reasons of Dissent, to another Proposition, were read and
approved in the Assembly. Our Brethren therefore need not to have vaunted
themselves, as if their Papers were such as the Assembly could not, or would
not grapple with, but can assume liberty if they please, to reserve unanswered.

What remains of this Paper, rather reflects upon the Parliament, then upon us.

XXIII. If what they would now bring in, should be undertaken to be answered by
the Assembly: yet they are sensible of so much remediless prejudice, by being
bound from replying again, as makes them justly wary.

And surely if what they should now give in, be in their own power (as
afterward they say it is; Although our former Reasons given in former Disputes
to both Houses, ^^^^rding to their Ordinance were therefore not our own, but to
be disposed of by their appoinment: yet what we might now give in, we conceive
to be in our own power.)

If this can be made good, that it is in their own power, viz. In their power
to Reply, then is their fear of being prejudiced by being bound up from
replying, but pretended: But if there be indeed any such Restraint, it is from
the Honorable Houses, not from us: whose Wisdom and Piety we doubt not will
provide, that controversies shall not be lengthened to eternity, whatsoever
some have threatened; nor does it stand with reason and equity, that they who
are first heard in their own cause, should speak last also. If by being in
their own power, they mean in their own power to divulge or to publish as it
seems by the publishing of what they now gave in that they thought so indeed:
But to this we Answer, that there is no greater obligation on them in this
kind, then is on the whole Assembly, and they have no Reason to complain of
that to us.

XXIV. For a conclusion, the Brethren say they think the Assembly has no cause
to require a report now of them; nor will that report be of use, because
reports are for debates, and bebates for results, to be sent up to the
Honorable Houses, who have already voted another Form of Government then what
they shall p^^sent.

To which we Answer, the Assembly has still great and just cause to expect a
report from these Brethren: Those of their way having published in Print that
these Brethren are willing to do it. The Assembly having Ordered it, the
Brethren having held the Assembly six months in expectation of it. Some of
them pleading this very ^^ployment, as an excuse of there absence from the
Assembly, it having been reported in City and Country, that the Model was
finished, there being no just and satisfa^^^ry reason presented in those
Papers, why they should not yet do it; but only pretenses, subterfugies,
imperfect and unjust Relations of the proceedings of the Assembly, and other
specious diversions. But whereas they say, that such a Model would be of ^^ use
now, we Answer yes, of much use in this great business of Accommodation, which
i^ has pleased the Honorable Houses again to put us upon. Upon which
consideratio^^ we think (not That the Brethren have no cause to decline the
bringing in their Model ^^ this time, but that they have some other cause then
what they pretend to, and th^^ something lies behind the curtain, which does
not yet appear: possibly not any one of them is yet at a point in his own
judgment, nor resolved where to fi^; they having professed to keep as a
reserve, liberty to alter and retract, which if their Model were given in, they
could not so fairly, and honorably do: Or possibly they are not all fixed in
^^^ and the same point; Possibly they cannot agree among themselves (for it is
easier to agree in dissenting, then in affirming) or possibly if they seven can
agree, yet some other of their Brethren in the City, to whom it may be the
Model was communicated, did ^^^ like it; or if so, yet possibly the Brethren
might foresee, that if this Model should be published, there are some who at
present are a strength to them, and expect shelter from them, may disgust it;
or at least they are resolved to wait a further opportunity, ^^ improve what
they have prepared; it may be when the Assembly is dissolved, and so ^^^ in a
capacity to Answer them, or when the Presbyterian Government begins to be s^^
^p; when they promise to themselves there will be discontent among the people;
and lo^t upon that, it may be, as the most advantageous time of putting Pen to
Paper. But whatsoever the cause be, we commit our cause to the Lord, who loves
truth and simplicity, and will we doubt not discover it in due time.

Cornelius Burges, Prolocutor pro tempore. Adoniram Byfield, Scriba.


FINIS.

