THE DANES PLOT DISCOVERED AGAINST THIS KINGDOM.

WITH, The meeting of Van Trump Dutch Admiral at Sea with them, upon the
English Coast near Hull: Wherein is related their Battle, flight, and
apprehension of two of their ships at Plympton Mary's, in the County of Devond.

Which was sent to the Lord Burrowes, and diverse other the Peers now assembled
in Parliament, by Sir Henry Waddam of the said County, and by him Ordered to be
Printed.

As also an Order sent out by the Honorable Court of Parliament, for
consummating of the State Affairs.

JOHN BROWN, Cler. Parliament*

London, Printed for Andrew Cor, and Marmaduke Boat, 1642

THE DANES PLOT DISCOVERED, Against this Kingdom.
RIGHT HONORABLE, AND my thrice noble Lord*
I am sorry to receive such intelligence as is daily presented to my hands,
concerning the present disturbances of the times: no peculiar or particular
part therein, but requires him that bears the badg of loyalty enclosed in his
breast, not only to commiserate, but also to use all diligence that may be
comprehended in the circuit of his mean abilities to remove the same; sparing
neither in endeavors to confiscate those errors, already grounded in the hearts
of malignants, nor means to nourish proficients in their good intentions, the
State of this Kingdom now requires valor to defend it self, Counsel to
maintain those Heroic parts, and a head to encourage and reward good deserts.

1. We were never more able, nor as I conceive never more willing (being
magnanimous, and valorous persons) this Kingdom may reply without boasting,
that they need not fear any private or forrai^^ ^nemies, if but once united in
a correspondency of agreement; and this correspondency being in larged but with
an unanimous coherence of the protestant party, must by the assistance of the
Almighty, the Father and Author of truth, prove invincible and victorious? What
age, or what times formerly and already past in Times Diurnall, could ever
challenge to themselves more abilities? What persons can, though guided with
the malicious spleen of Herefie, attract or draw less hopes of a victory over
us then now. Were there but a removal of those disagreements, which cause a
general sadness in his Majesty's Subjects.

2 When was a Land better counseled, if accepted: can there be better advise
given, then what proceeds from a Parliament of both Lords and Commons, every
motion therein, and by them moved, concerning the principal affairs of this
State; and against whom no tainture of disloyalty could be assert, without just
grounds, as proceedings from the Ventrim and bowels of Europe: long do I (with
a zealous affection to that Assembly) wish continuance of these blessings
aforesaid toward us, and an addition of the latter.

3 Being the return of that head to joynwith you, for whom we all mourn: This
Land had never so much need of care to be taken in the settling of the Militia,
and putting the Kingdom in a Posture of defense, as now; as does quotidialiy
appear by the infinite commontions at home, and sundry insurrections and
peenicious attempts of our enemies abroad.

My Lord, Hull, affrighting the people there by their daily report, proceeding
from their own mouths; that they were bound for Engand, to receive satisfaction
for some wrongs done them. Whereupon the Rumor spreading abode, through these
their threats, intelligence was given to some of his Majesty's ships then at
Sea, being The James, and the Rainbow, there being with them six Merchants
ships; who resolved to go and meet them, thereby to enquire the truth of this
report: But ere they came near, they perceived a small Company of Dutch ships,
men of war, ready provided for an encounter with the Danes; which gave them
occasion of beholding the prospect, they begun the encounter about twelve of
the clock on monday last, being the 21. of March, continuing fight for the
space of two hours very hotly, Van Trumpt the Dutch Admiral being then
present, behaved himself very valiantly: insomuch that they sunk many of the
Danes ships, ere it was two of the clock; when having spent much powder and
shot of either Party, they resolved upon parley, which continued for an hour;
wherein Van Trump desired the perusal of their Commission, and to know whether
they were bound, the ground of their intents; which being denied, they fell to
it again, and continued till it was dark: when taking the opportunity of the
night, being very Cloudy, they fled; but the wind being contrary, some were
driven upon the Western Coasts of Dorset and Devonshire; Whereas two of them are
apprehended at Plympton Mary's in Devonshire, until the Owners shall be
examined. When I shall give your honor real intelligence concerning their
profession, if so be they are not sent up to London to those other Rebels; And
in the mean time, I shall rest,

Your Honors obliged Servant, HENRY WADDAM.

Vicessimo tertio Die Martii. 1641.
IT is Ordered by the Honorable, and high Court of Parliament, that there be a
speedy course taken for giving up the account of the several Counties in
England and Wales, that have taken the Protestation of formerly set down, and
giving in the Names of such as shall refuse it, that that bus^^esse may be
perfected; as also the account of Pol-money be likewise delivered up with all
expedition, that by it and the last four Subsidies, the Officers and Soldiers
entertained for the Irish affairs, may be sent ever.

John Brown, Cler. Parliament.

FINIS.

