A SERMON Touching the DIVINE RIGHT AND DUE OBSERVATION OF THE LORDS DAY.

Preached before the LORD DEPUTY, and the Lords SPIRITUAL and TEMPORAL of the
Kingdom of IRELAND; In time of Parliament. At Christ-Church Dublin. On Sunday
the 6th. of October, 1695.

With a PREFACE humbly addressed to the whole Body of English Protestants:
Especially those inhabiting the Kingdom of IRELAND.

By EDWARD Lord Bishop of Cork and Ross.

DUBLIN: Printed by Joseph Ray in Essex-street, and are to be sold by John
North Bookseller in Skinner-row, 1697.

A PREFACE to the ensuing SERMON. Humbly Addressed To the Whole Body of English
Protestants: Especially those inhabiting the Kingdom of IRELAND.
I Have long grieved to see the Sacredness of the Lords Day run so low, as too
plainly it appears to do, in the opinion of Multitudes, who profess themselves
of the Reformed Church of Ireland; From the Irish Papists I never expected
better, since I came to know them: They will never have veneration for any
thing which Protestants account sacred; as witness their constant treatment of
our Bibles. Nor do I apprehend any possibility of Reforming them, either in
this or any other of their Ill Principles and practices, while they have a set
of such Managers as their present Priests allowed them: and those too, with so
absolute a Dominion over them, as is usual in that Church.

But for men, that own the name of Protestants, and glory to be thought English
Protestants, for these I say, openly to espouse the calumny of Figmentum
Anglicanum, in case of a Divine right for the Lords Day, and pursuant hereto in
their Practice perfectly to fall in with Papists, laying aside all Afternoon
worship on the Lords Day, as is done now in very many Country Parishes in this
Kingdom, and only in the Morning sometimes, for fashion-sake to come to
Church, as the others do to their Mass*houses, is a sad demonstration that
either they never were true Protestants (because not understanding, or not
receiving and observing the Doctrine, Laws and Worship of the Church, whereof
they profess themselves Members) or that they have now most deplorably
degenerated and fallen off from its constitution.

There is yet a farther and more abominable neglect, than that, which I have
complained of, (and proceeding no doubt from the same Principle, that is mean
and common thoughts of the Lords Day) perhaps not so constant as the other, but
very common in Country-Cures, namely that they are not supplied any otherwise
but once a fortnight, or in some places once in three weeks; yea even where the
revenues of the place, either of it self, or by unions, would well pay a Curate
resident, and constantly attendant.

With an eye at redressing these so insufferable and unchristian evils, I first
delivered in a great audience, and now publish to the World the ensuing
discourse. In which I struck at the root, the Principle before taxed; and have
laid together, in the clearest light, briefest compass, and most Natural order
(as near as I could comprehend) all the best Evidences, I remember produced, i^
plea for the Divine right of the Lords Day, and the true Christian way of
hallowing it. Which latter point I have stated, I hope; so as to conduct all,
who will hear, into truly Holy practice; but not to burden or entangle the
Conscience of any, who will consider. And all along, as Argumentum ad homines,
and a Plea which I had great confidence in, I have urged sincerely, what I take
to be the Doctrine of the Church of England, in this matter. It is not to be
expected that in so short a piece, all should be said in such manner as is
necessary to prevent the Exceptions or answer the Cavils of many: I accounted
it therefore necessary, here to add a few things, as well for the one purpose
as the other.

I have asserted a Divine right to the Lords Day. Now a Divine Right may arise
from a Divine Institution, Immediate or Mediate: And again, either of these may
be express or virtual. There are not wanting Authors, of great Name, who have
maintained the Lords day to have been appointed, for the day of public
Christian Worship, by our Lords own mouth, at some of his Apparitions, and in
some of his Discourses to his Disciples, in the interval of his Resurection and
Ascension. If so, then would there be a Divine Right by immediate express
Institutior. But I will frankly acknowledge this (although not at all unlikely,
but rather of the highest probability, yet) to have been advanced, in my
judgment, with better Intention than Evidence. I have therefore mainly, as to
Authority immediate from our Lord himself, insisted upon his own practice, by
his frequent presence at, and solemn meeting in, the Assemblies of his
Disciples and faithful followers, on that day; And when he appeared no more,
sending in their Assembly on that day, the Holy Ghost upon them all; which I
aver to be Virtual Institution: And if an Institution, there is no question at
all, of it is being immediately Divine. Then in pursuance hereof, I insist also
on the continued practice of the Apostles, from the very day of our Lords
Resurrection, as far as is Recorded, solemnly assembling, still on that day
(which can hardly be conceived without some private directions suggested from
himself) and their giving order in the Churches (especially of the Gentiles)
which they planted for the public Assemblies to be made hereon. Their practice
I aver to be a continuance of a virtual Divine Institution, and their Orders
given, an express Divine Institution, but both indeed Mediate. And if there be
any of our Church who are not willing to allow these, and especially the
Apostles practice and orders, to be sufficient grounds of a Divine Right, I
desire, that they will not herein be too peremptory, least they be found less
constant to themselves; particularly, in denying that to be a Divine Right in
case of the Lords day, which they not only admit but plead as a Divine Right,
in other cases, to some of them perhaps of more comfortable importance; suppose
Episcopacy and Church-Rights.

As to styling the Lords day a Christian Sabbath (which I have not done, but
after our Church) I acknowledge it can be called so only ((...),) by proportion
and not strictly. THE Christian Sabbath, properly and eminently, is that, which
remains to the people of God. Heb. iv. 9. A Christian Sabbath, I conceive, it
may with much more propriety be called. For if it be a Sabbath at all (or a day
of Rest ordinarily from servile labor) it must be acknowledged a Christian
Sabbath: Jewish, Turkish, or Heathen we are sure it is not. And for giving it
the Name Sabbath, though I confess the frequency of this style is more Novel,
and peculiar to some People, yet it is plain, by our Homilies, that Our
Reformers did use it. And I am sure Origin so styles it, and if I am not
mistaken another of the Fathers also, whom I name not for fear of error; the
best part of my books having been strangers to my Eyes, now above seven years:
for which reason I have forborne to cite parricularly most of the Authorities I
have alleged as I pass along. But if need be I promise sacredly particular
citations in a new Edition, when God shall restore my books to me. I allege,
what I do now, mostly out of Excerpta, taken many years ago by my self, but not
with connexions and references so particular, as I can fully trust to. But to
Return. That which makes many persons of sound and good Judgment shy of this
name Sabbath under Christianity, is I conceive, for that they, who use it most,
seem under this style to endeavor the introducing a Judaical Yoke, and
entiteling the Lords day, to all the Sabbatical strictnesses or severities of
the bodily Rest, imposed on the old people, by the letter of the fourth
Commandment, and the Precepts appendant to it, in the Law. As to Duration of
time, they would oblige all Christian people to a Natural day of twenty four
hours, from Even to Even, or from twelve of the Clock Midnight to twelve of the
Clock Midnight; in all which space, they would bear us in hand, nothing is to
be done, which was not lawful for the Jews to have done on their Sabbath. Nay
indeed as to the strictness of the Rest, diverse Liberties allowed (because not
forbidden) the Jews, are by these teachers, upon the pretense of a Sabbath
Spiritual as well as Corporal, said to be forbidden Christian people; even by
the letter of the fourth Commandment. And thus, intolerable burdens, and
inextricable snares, the particulars of which would require a volume to set
down, are prepared for us. As to all which, I conceive, if People would duly
heed, no more need to be said, for the disentangling Conscience, from the
scruples these men have injected, than that truly Apostolical Canon, Acts xv.
It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay no greater burden upon you
than these necessary things; That ye abstain from meats offered to Idols, and
from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication: Amongst which
necessary things, there is no Syllable importing any of the Sabbatical Rites.
Nor can it be said, the Reason of such silence was, the sense the world had of
the immutable Obligation of the fourth Command; for the Obligation of the
sixth, and seventh Commandments must be acknowledged as immutable; yet is there
mention here of Fornication, and of Blood, in the very Conciliary Decree. I do
conclude therefore, as well from hence, as from Colloss. ii. (urged in the
discourse) that all the Ceremonial part of the fourth Command, with the
appendant Laws, are truly ceased; nailed to the Cross of Christ, and by it
taken away; which is amply sufficient for the setting Conscience at liberty.
But I must together conclude that the Natural and Spiritual part of that
Commandment are no whit at all infringed. The natural part was and is nothing
but immutable and Eternal Equity. That God should have a due proportion of our
time; And that not so much privately, by secret Devotion of our own (though
that be necessary also) as by a public separating it, or cutting it off, from
Common Employments, to public sacred Offices. Thus much of a Sabbath I insist
on to be perpetually, and naturally Moral, from Paradise in Eden, to Paradise
in a better World. And as to the Spiritual part of the Command, that certainly
is so far from being abated by the Gospel-Oeconomy, that it is rather set
higher. There is none deny the Christian is bound to the Spiritual Rest: only
some tell us, and that not without Reason, that this is our Duty, for our whole
life, and not for one day in the week only.

I embrace with all my heart this Doctrine, of Christian peoples being obliged
to endeavor, their whole life may be a Spiritual Sabbath, a Rest from Sin,
Carnality Voluptuousness, etc. And I only desire we may hold to it. Let all
those therefore, who hold this Doctrine pardon me, if I adventure (according to
their Concessions, Minus aequo petere, ut aequum feram) to entreat them, and
all Christian People, but to keep the Lords day as such a Spiritual Rest. In
plain terms, I would desire no more toward the keeping Holy the Lords day,
than that the Christians of the present Age, would in private keep the Lords
day as perfectly a Spiritual Sabbath, as the Primitive Christians did every day
in the week: only with this Addition; That what public Offices the Primitive
Christians observed constantly on each Lords day, may also be observed thereon
by us at present; and what Liberties they forbore always, may be forborne on
this day.

The point of controversy falls mainly on private or Family Duties. These some
men cannot endure that all Christian People should be obliged to: And for the
shifting off the necessity of these, and setting the ordinary people free to
Games and Sports on the Lords Day-afternoon, diverse Laborious, and some truly
not unlearned Books, have been written. Wherein I must confess I cannot but
wonder to see Protestant Doctors hunt for, and greedily snap those Nice
distinctions, in use with the Popish Schools, for the defense of the
corruptions of their Church, and gravely apply them for the decision of Cases
of Conscience against their Protestant Brethren: I will (...) lanch forth into
particulars of Controversy, but instead thereof, pursuant to what I now
desired, only lay down two conclusions, which I suppose must approve
themselves, by their own intrinsic Evidence, without Controversy, to the
conscience of all who understand and will consider them. 1. None who call
themselves Christians may, in this Age make such Liberties, Sports, Games and
Recreations, as it cannot be proved the Primitive Christians allowed themselves
on any days, to be their ordinary divertisments on the Lords Day. And if so, I
am sure Cards, Dice, Tables, etc. within doors; Dancing, Pipeing, Revells, etc.
without doors, must all be laid aside. For none can show, the Ancient
Christians used these any days. On the contrary many Canons of the ancient
Councils severelly condemn them at all times; especially to some Persons. And
if there should be any of our Clergy, who plead for those within-door Games
mentioned, they will do well to consult the XLII. Irish Canon, and the Old
Injunctions in the Reformation of King Edward and Queen Elizabeth, whence most
probably the Compilers of our Canons more immediately took those parts of them,
and whence I hope they may be satisfied. But to proceed: I say 2dly. In all
doubtful cases, it is still the best to take the safer side, and that, which in
it self cannot be sinful, but is Pious and commendable. Now certainly, upon the
Lords day, preparing our selves for our public Devotions by private Prayer,
Examination of Conscience, and composing our minds to a serious temper and
awful apprehensions of God, whom we are to worship, before we go to Church;
Recollections in convenient time when we are returned, Examining and
Instructing our Children and Servants, causing them to attend Reading and
Family-prayers and Psalms for some reasonable time, and restraining them all
the day long from many Liberties usual on common days, all these can have, of
themselves no sin in them; but are pious and commendable, and will turn to our
own and our Families account one day, if not at present.

Herein, let the forced Concessions of some of the keenest disputants in behalf
of Sunday Sports be heard. 1. Whatever may hinder either the worship of God it
self, or our profiting therein; should be forborne and avoided. -- For all such
things, whatsoever, Ironsides 7 Questions. Cap. 24. p. 224. p. 269.
as keep us from, or hinder us in the Publik Worship, are altogether unlawful
on the Lords Day. (2.) It is not unlawful to observe the Lords Day with as
great strictness as the Jews did the Sabbath: provided we have no opinion, that
such rest is of necessity to be observed, under pain of sin, putting Religion
therein [p. 227.] And that we censure not others who use their liberty; nor out
of a superstitious fear decline the doing any work of Necessity or Charity, the
benefit whereof would be utterly lost; were the present opportunity neglected
(3.) Those who can and will spend the vacant time of the Lords Day, in the
private Exercises of piety, ought not to be discountenanced or disheartened,
but encouraged rather p. 268. In a word, let all follow thus what their own
consciences, when they are serious cannot (what the very learned defenders of
such Liberties as they are fond of, when they consulted their own consciences,
could not) but confess, and there is little question but the whole Lords Day
will be generally spent as in this discourse is pressed.

It may be observed, I have not pressed such severities, as exclude due
refreshments, and keeping the spirits in vigor and cheerfulness: Nor do I
suppose those expressions giving the whole day to God, and the like, which I
have produced out of holy men's writings, use to be taken in such a rigorous
sense that the private and public duties having been conscientiously performed
and secured, any should conclude it unlawful, for people to walk abroad awhile
in fresh air, and Contemplate the works of God, and enjoy themselves in
beholding and moderately using them. No nor for them sitting at home, to let
drop, at their Meals or otherwise, out of the times of their Devotions,
something of innocent cheerful discourse; or, as occasion offers, to speak
touching matters of concernment to them, or of the common Occurrents in Human
affairs: though the less of this the better. In a word: That, which I insist on
as required, is, that All this day, Christians take care, not to disorder their
hearts for the worship of God, but that, after their several refreshments, they
may return again, with composed minds, to the thoughts of God and Heaven, and
their duties; and in the Evening sweetly commit their Souls and Bodies, their
family and substance, to the Divine protection, reposing themselves comfortably
in Gods favor, and in the good hopes of his acceptance in Christ Jesus. If
thus the day be spent, it is as much given to God, as our present condition
will suffer us.

But will some say, if this be all you contend for, who denies the Divine
obligation of the Lords Day, or its observation, thus stated? I answer, many
have done and still do deny it. Only it comes to pass in this particular case
(what does more generally, when men write in defense of such Doctrines, which
their Interest rather than their Conscience approves) that by their own
concessions in conscience, they sometimes contradict, what they have said for
Interest. And hence it is that we may easily pick, out of our very Adversaries
writings, sundry memorable passages which favor us, and so sometimes they
deny, what we contend for, and sometimes they grant it. In the mean time, what
is the effect which these Learned men's denying (flatly and directly) sometimes
in their writings; sometimes in ordinary discourse (and it were to be wished
they did it not in their most sacred discourses too) what I say is the effect
which their denying the morality of the fourth command has in the World? Truly
nothing but the growth of Licentiousness and Irreligion. I know they pretend
only to Innocent Liberty, and easing peoples Consciences of endless Scruples:
But is not Conscience easy enough by asserting such a Morality and Observation
of a Christian Sabbath as above? They would be understood to deny merely such a
Natural Morality of the letter of the fourth Command, as there is in the first,
Thou shall have no other Gods but me. That is thou shall worship the Lord thy
God and him alone shall thou serve; The Justness and Obligation whereof, the
very light of Nature, or reflecting upon the very Terms, does dictate to us.
They would be content, they will say, to allow unto the fourth Command a kind of
Equitahle morality and own the command too in some regard as positively Moral.
Nor do I deny, but that when they thus speak, they speak what, if strictly
taken and well understood, is reason; and as far forth as there is reason and
truth in it, I have owned it: But the People in the mean time understand not
the Nice and distinct degrees of Morality. And when they read or here learned
men deny the Morality of the fourth Commandment, they take all at Random; and
think themselves at liberty. They say with themselves If indeed we keep the
Lords Day, it is true we do well; but if we see fit to travel, or if we take our
pleasure, or bodily ease, all that day, we sin not: For the fourth command is
not moral: And the Lords Day is only a Church Holy day. All days under the
Gospel are equal as our most learned Doctors teach us. Now is it not evident
that by these Terms, such learned men have betrayed poor plain people into
Licentiousness Profaneness and Irreligion? And were it not better, to be more
cautious, and allow all the Decalogue to be moral, as indeed it is in one
degree or other (though one command, or one duty, may sometimes give place to
another, as Sacrifice to Mercy) and only to teach, that the fourth command had
one sense to the Jews, and another to us Christians; as had the Preface to all
the commands, Thy God that brought thee out of the Land, etc, and diverse
passages in other Commands. And finally to press the Evangelical sense of all,
which none question to be moral enough: were not this I say much better, than
by our Learning and exactness, by terms unknown to Scripture, and distinctions
not understood by common people, to become Authors of their sins? I leave this
to the conscience and consideration of all prudent and serious Christians, and
pass on to another point in the following discourse, which some happily may
censure.

Amongst the constant public Duties of the Lords day, I have reckoned
Communicating. And herein some will conceive I have gone beyond the Law of our
Church, which Requires, as they may think, by her Rubric, that the people
Communicate but three times a year. To this I say, this is indeed the least
which, according to the Laws of our Church, will exempt people from Censure;
but this is far from being all, which she would bring her Sons to. For she has
provided a Communion-service, not only for every Lords day, but for every
holyday in the year; And by diverse passages of the Rubric (more than I am
willing to insist on at present) it appears she desires more. I may not wave
that particular Text of the Rubric In Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, where
there are many Priests, every Sunday at the least, except they have a
reasonable cause to the contrary, etc. And further to back this Rubric, I must
solemnly profess, I do not see how any Christian can satisfy himself, that he
walks according to Scripture and Primitive Rule, who (except in cases of
necessity, or want of opportunity) Communicates seldomer than each Lords day.
In the beginning of Christianity, it is plain from Acts ii. 42. they
Communicated daily: And this Custom continued in a great part of the Church
for above four hundred Years after Christ, St. Austin particularly (who dyed
not till the year of our Lord. 430) not only mentions it as then Customary, but
exhorts to it. I will not urge, that in the Romish Church we may observe the
Footsteps of this practice still, from their daily private Masses. But I must
note that the (minimum quod sic or) most seldom returns, that we read the
Administration hereof had, in the Apostolical age, were on every Lords Day. On
the first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break Bread etc.
Acts xxi. And I wish those words which St. Paul reports as in the Body of the
Institution, from our Savior, and which our Church from St. Paul inserts into
the form of Consecration, Do this as often as ye Drink it in remembrance of me,
had been better considered (especially as they stand in the Original) than they
are, by most interpreters. I think I could easily and evidently make out, that
they import no less than an express command to this purpose, every day whereon
you publicly assemble, see you celebrate my Supper. Let this be a constant
part of every days public Worship. But the due Deduction of this sense would
take up more room, than I may at present allow my self. However still I
challenge, any instance to be produced from Scripture, of Christians in the
Apostles age communicating seldomer than each Sunday. I may therefore
reasonably conclude touching this Rubric of our Church, not punishing the
negligence of such as Communicate but thrice a year, as our Lord does touching
Divorce, Because of the hardness of men's hearts it is suffered to them; but
from the beginning it was not so; nor is it the mind of our Church it should be
so. The Lords Supper was and still ought to be, as occasion requires,
Administered oftener than on each Lords day; but, it being plain that the
constant celebration of the Lords Supper and the Lords Day coming in as it were
together, and that neither any order or practice of the Apostles, nor any Canon
of the Church, has separated them, or excluded the Lords Supper, from the
public duties of the Lords Day; the separation of them, which is now come into
the Church, can only be made by the corruption and degeneracy of the latter
Christian ages: And whether either the corruption or degeneracy of others, will
be a good plea for the like in us one day, it behooves us to consider in time.
For my own part I am resolved, I and as many as I can prevail with shall never
run the venture. I will Communicate or Administer, if I can get but three
Christians with me, at least every Lords day: And let others forbear it at
their peril, and as they will answer, before God and Christ the Righteous
Judge, at the last day.

It remains now I only add a word or two for removing those neglects which in
the beginning I taxed, as so frequent, especially amongst the Irish Protestants,
in most Country Parishes.

The Neglect of afternoon public worship, and so of Catechizing youth with
that constancy that the Laws have enjoined, is ordinarily pleaded to be
necessitated, or made in a manner unavoidable, by the distance of the
Parishioners dwellings from the Churches in the Country. But to this I answer
(1.) This is not so constant every where, but that there are some competent
number of Protestant Inhabitants within such convenient distance, as that there
might be a smaller Congregation in the afternoon: And then, families might be
warned by turns, and in course, to send their younger people on afternoons to
Catechism; which thing might be made convenient by a hundred little
Contrivances, that the meanest capacities (if people had but a good heart for
their duty) would quickly find out. As for instance, if my young people came
with me to Church in the morning, I could easily let them stay a dinnertime at
their Neighbors house nearer the Church than my own, that they may be at
Evening service and Catechism. If they do not, I can order them to be ready, by
such a time as I come home, to take the Horse or Horses, with which I and
others of my Family went to Church in the Morning, and they will be early
enough for their duty. A true good will, and a little zeal for our Religion, may
find out more and better expedients as circumstances may vary. (2) If the
Ministers house be so far distant from the Church, are his and all substantial
Religious Neighbors Houses, so out of the way, that there can be no small
afternoon-Assemblies, in any of them? If any be unwilling to have their house
so constantly troubled every Lords Day, convenient Houses in several districts
may be taken by turns, and in the morning notice given at the Church, that
evening Prayers will be at such a Family this day, and at such a one the next
Lords Day etc. Now here young people may conveniently appear for Catechism.
This will be made much the more tolerable to poorer Inhabitants, if there be a
rule set up, that there be no such custom at any time permitted as giving Drink
and Entertainments to the Neighbors that Assemble* any more than there is at
Church. But I am ashamed to descend to such minute matters; I leave this to
good Christians piety and prudence: And take notice in a word of the other more
gross neglect above taxed, namely the Clergies coming to their Cures but once a
fortnight, or seldomer.

Where the slenderness of the maintenance is such, that better provision cannot
be made, this is to be born and lamented. But in other cases I hope the
Governors of the Church will not bear with it, and I am sure, it is
inexcusable on any other score, save that of necessity. At least it is no
excuse to an Incumbent (what is too usualy pleaded) My Neighbors are content
with once a fortnight, what need I trouble my self any more? To this I say (1)
This plea is made many times where it is not true: Some Neighbors are content
so, not all. And they, who cannot be so confident, as to complain to their
Ministers face, will do it in his absence: Or, though happily they dare not
accuse him to his Bishop, will mutter of it to persons of meaner rank, and
amongst themselves at home. (2) If the people are so satisfied, yet is not this
practice a satisfaction to the Law of God, or to the Church; nor will it be a
satisfaction one day to a man's conscience. In short, Is the Lords Day to be
kept holy? Is the public worship thereon a Christian Duty or No? If it be, How
then dare any person, to whom the Charge of Souls is committed, be Author to
them of Neglecting one, or Profaning the other? Will not one Day all such his
Peoples neglects and Prophanations, all their Alehouse-meetings, Revelling,
Drunkeness and other Debaucheries, acted on the Lords Day, be charged on such
their Minister? And lastly, in case the people really be thus content, it is a
shrewd Argument they are grossly Lukewarm and Irreligious. Now it would be
enquired, and will one day, is not the peoples lukewarmness, their Ministers
sin? Has not he been a Precedent to them therein? Has not his neglect of his
duty bred them thereto? If they had been better instructed, more constantly
warned and called upon, they would have had more knowledge, more warmth, more
sense of their duty, more Faith and belief of its obligation, than to have
satisfied themselves with such slender attendance on God, and so little minding
their Souls. But it is time to finish this large Porch to so small a Fabric.

What I have said, is from a serious conscience of my own Duty, and in the real
fear of God. If it have effect to amend any, I shall rejoice therein and bless
God. If it have not, I have born my testimony in this great and public concern
of Religion. I will not by Gods grace be an offender against my own rules: And
I trust one day, that whatever my Defects and Omissions have been in other
cases, (as they are and have been, God help me, very many) yet that God through
Christ will one day pardon them all, and judge touching me, as to this Matter
that Liberavi animam meam. God deliver us all from those judgments, both here
and hereafter, which our Relapses after our late Repentance, and vows in our
Miseries, or to speak it in Scripture language, which our returning to our
vomit, may most justly bring upon us, and for which I must declare, before all
the World, I daily expect yet a return of an over flowing scourge, in one kind
or other, if not prevented by a sudden Reformation; to which I know no one
thing that will be of more general conducement, than a strict and constant
observation of the Lords Day, the thing I have aimed at in this paper, and in
the following Discourse.

Cork. Nov: 17. 1696
THE Reader may be pleased to understand the whole Paragraph included in
Crochets thus [ ] page 13 and 14. as also another out of Ignatius, page 27, 28.
were passed over, for haste's sake, at the delivery of this Sermon, but were
notwithstanding now thought fit to appear in their places.

ERRATA.
PAge 19. l. 21. for thereon read then. p. 26. l. 7. for seen r. been. p. 28.
l. 26, 27. the words (namely by our Lords appointment, as in other cases)
should not have been put in Italick letter, for they are not the Fathers words.
p. 36. in the margin r. from ill imputations. In Pref. p. iii. l. penult. r. a
Virtual. p. ix. l. 3. r. severely. Other literal escapes crave pardon on course.

A SERMON Touching The LORDS DAY.
Revelation I. Ver. x. First part. I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day.
FRom these words I purpose to The design of the Discourse.
assert, First, the Divine Right of the Lords Day; Then, the true Christian way
of keeping it. I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day; which day I shall not
doubt, after some of the Fathers, but especially after our own Church, both in
her Cannons and much oftener, and more expressly in the Homily concerning the
Time and Place of Prayer, to style a Christian Sabbath.

The style of the Text asserts the Lords Day to be of Christ's appointment.
Greek (...). An Epithet [or Term] but once more occuring in Holy Writ, viz. 1
Cor. xi. 20. where the Holy Communion is called (...). The Lords Supper: Both
equally the Lords, because both, by the same appropriative term, styled such:
And if both equally his, then both Instituted by him.

Touching the Lords Institution of his Supper none doubts: And why should any
doubt of his Institution of the Lords Day? when it is the same Lord to whom both
are holy: And when by a word peculiar, or which seems coined on purpose to
assert his claim, he, the same Lord, has avouched them both his; and nothing
else, throughout the whole Scripture, in the same style avouched his.

Sons of our Of the term, a Christian Sabbata
Church, too many, who really place the Lords Day upon the same level with (if
not below) other Church Holy Days: they do so at least, if we may judge of their
Faith by their Works, which some think surer both discoveries and tests of what
men believe, than any words can be. I crave your patience therefore while I
remove that insolent demand, (it is so at least, as some use to put it) How can
you make out the Institution of the Lords Day? and where find you, or what
ground is there for, a Septenary Christian Sabbath?

The answer is: A Christian Sabbath according as Christian Temples, a Christian
Priesthood and other necessary appendages of Christian Worship, we cannot
expect to meet with elder than Christianity it self. But a Sabbath, no less
than Temples or places dedicated to Divine Worship, no less than a Priesthood
and such like adjuncts of Worship we find much elder, even before Moses's Law,
as well as under it; and all perpetual, all positively moral; though as the new
Law came, it must be confessed all, and particularly the Sabbath, received
thereby some new modifications as well as new names. The sum of the further
proof.
clear this matter, shall be directed to those three Points.

A Sabbath or certain day of rest for Public Worship is dictated by the Law
natural.

A Seventh day by God's eldest Laws positive.

This Seventh day by the Law Christian; I mean the eldest Records of our
Christianity.

I must for that brevity's sake, which use has made necessary, wave the
deductions I had prepared at length from the Law of Nature, as to this matter,
and say in few words, summarily.

Nature teaches, God is publicly to be worshipped. Public Worship cannot
Natural reason for a Sabbath.
be without times publicly ascertained for it. If such times be either too
short, or too seldom returning, the impressions of God, of Holiness, and of an
Unseen World, which such Public Worship is designed to make on the
Worshippers, will either be very slight, or by infrequency defaced beyond
recovery: In either of which cases, the worship is rendered unprofitable.
Further, since it is impossible for us entirely to attend two things at once,
therefore on such days as this Public Worship is to be paid, common business
is to be laid aside. There must then, through all Bodies or Societies of
People, be frequent vacations from ordinary Employments, for the Public
Worship of God: That is a Sabbath or fixed and certain time of holy rest; for
the public Offices of Religion is from Nature.

Law positive) we may The first institution of a Sabbath in Paradise.
with humble reverence conceive, it was, that the most holy and wise God has
provided there should be extant a very early Revelation, and most ancient
Record of his resting immediately upon the finishing of the Creation, Genesis ii.
v. 1, 2, 3. Thus the Heavens and the Earth were finished, and all the host of
them; and on the Seventh day God ended his work which he had made, and rested
the Seventh day from all his works which he had made, and God blessed the
Seventh day and sanctified it: because in it he had rested from all his work
which God created and made. By these words there must be designed either a
direct Command given, or at least a precedent, in the Economy of God's
actions, proposed, which might be instead of a Command for keeping a Seventh
day from the beginning Holy unto God. For mine own part I am of the mind, with
the Rivet alleges 30 of the Reformed Divines beyond Sea: Besides diverse of
the Fathers and even of the Romanists. Dissert de Orig. Sabbat cap. 1
generality of Interpreters, both ancient and modern, It is a Command. For what
less can be meant by Gods blessing the Seventh day and sanctifying it. Let
blessing it signify what it can, sanctifying it in the very primary sense of
the word signifies, separating it, namely to Religious purposes. Now how could
it be thus separated without a Command?

Prolepsis here, or that this was spoken and recorded Objections answered.
out of time, only as a kind of antedating the Fourth Commandment, besides that
it is forced, if not rash (and with all likelihood, in that great person who
first advanced the Notion, due merely to an excess of zeal against Judaism)
is, no better than a bold begging of the Question without any ground in the
Text or Context: rather indeed, against the manifest import and scope of both.
For it is plain thence, that the Six days and the works thereof being ended, God
did then [or on that first Seventh day of time] actualy rest, that is as St.
Austin expounds it, cease from making other kinds of Creatures. But how
incongruous is it to refer things spoken continuedly, and connected as done in
one and the same instant, to refer such things, I say, to so distant parts of
time? (viz.) Gods resting to the first Seventh day of time, and his blessing
and sanctifying the Seventh day to another like Seventh day, above two
thousand-years after? This is forcing wide asunder what God joined. Who can
digest this Paraphrase on the Text? God having finished his Six days work, then
Rested the Seventh day; and two thousand five hundred and fourteen years after,
he Sanctified the like day of the Week, or appointed it to be kept Holy. If so,
I say here are two Seventh days spoken of in one and the same word: the Seventh
day whereon God rested, and the Seventh day which recurred in the weekly course
so long after; which I think all men of sense must acknowledge to be as great a
violence as was ever used to a word; and never allowed in interpreting any
other place of Scripture; wherefore not to be admitted here.

Add hereto, that when this Institution came to be reinforced at Sinai (the
observation of the Sabbath having been discontinued by the Israelites during
their travel, and perhaps during their bondage too) the very wording of the
Command bespeaks the thing commanded to have been of elder use. For Remembering,
is of things formerly known. Now Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, is
the very letter of the Text: On which the Jews tell us, as Tertullian hinself
reports it, that God sanctified the Seventh day from the beginning, by resting
thereon from all his works; and therefore Moses said Remember the Sabbath day.

If it be objected the sanctifying a Seventh day could be no Command from the
beginning, for then we should have had it amongst the Precepts of the Sons of
Noah, I answer (to say nothing of the uncertainty of the Tradition of those
Precepts any otherwise than as they are grounded in Moses's writings) Neither
have we in these Precepts any mention of Sacrifices, of Prayer, of a
Priesthood, etc. Yet are we sure that Adam had Command, or which is much the
same, Directions or Revelations from God touching all these; And that they were
practiced by him and his posterity before the Law. If it be said these were
included in the Precept [Gnal Birkath Hashshem] touching Divine Worship, (or,
against profaning the Name of God. for I think the words may be rendered either
way) I say, so may this of the Sabbath well be too: and the rather, in as much
as it being impossible to perform an outward act, without time, the same Law,
which commands that Act, must be understood to command time for the doing it.

Gods Example Obligatory.
can it not be denied, that God by declaring, and causing to be recorded this
his Procedure, of gradually finishing all his works in Six days, and resting
the Seventh did propose his practice as a precedent to our first Parents, for
their Ordinary passing their time. God was under no necessity to take up Six
days in making the World. He could have done it, had he pleased in Six hours;
Nay in Six minutes. Nor was he under any fatigue by working, so that he needed
to talk of resting; therefore his proceeding thus, and not wraping up his
procedure in darkness and silence, but making all matter of Revelation, and a
standing Record, plainly shows he designed thereby to teach Adam and in him all
mankind, they were neither to live Idle any of their days (for God worked Six)
nor to work each day as they listed, for God rested the Seventh and blessed it,
that is he made it a Holy Rest, a Sabbath.

The Sabbath observed by the Church before the Law.
even before Moses's Law, the Observation of The Sabbath amongst all such at
least as adhered to the worship of the true God: which observation has been by
diverse learned men amply proved both from Scripture and Fathers: the proof is
too long, here to insert. I will only mention that St. Epiphanius expressly
distinguishes betwixt (...), etc. The Sabbath by nature [or Law Naturall]
appointed from the beginning, and (...), etc. The Sabbath ordained under the
Law; which shows a Sabbath before the Law was in his time, or at least by him,
in no wise doubted of.

For mine own part, I am in that Paradox (with submission to better It Is
probable, Adam and Eve observed the Sabbath in Paradise.
judgments) that the Sabbath was kept by Adam in Paradise (notwithstanding what
the Rabbis talk to the contrary) and that it was the only entire day he stood
in his Innocence. For that Adam fell not on the Sixth day (as many have
thought) Eves being Created late that Day, and God's pronouncing all very good
for the conclusion of the day seem to me little less than demonstration. And
whereas God having finished his works, immediately rested, blessed the Seventh
day, and sanctified it, it looks not likely that the day which God blessed and
sanctified should be the day on which the curse entered into the World.
Therefore I say it seems to me most probable, that our first Parents received
the revelation of Gods resting, upon the very day he rested, and so kept the
first Seventh or Sabbath day in Paradise.

But be that as it shall, I contend not. [However, I think it cannot be denied,
but to them, who in those early ages knew the History of the Creation (which
undoubtedly Seth's Race in general till the Flood, and many of them long after
it, did know) there was, as also there will be to the end of the World, more
reason for keeping one Day in Seven, than one Day in Six, or one in Eight,
Nine, or Ten, etc; for that the first Period, by which, even from the beginning,
Time was distinguished, was that of a septenary of Days or a Week: God worked
Six Days, and rested the Seventh. Nor is it improbable, but that to such a
periodical distinction of days may that passage (Genesis iv. 3.) be referred. At
the end of days, (so stands it in the Hebrew Text, what we too largely render,
In process of time) that is, not improbably I say, upon the Revolution of some
certain Week, namely upon some Sabbath Day, Cain and Abel brought their
Offerings. The like may be believed of those Texts in Job, (a History generally
granted to be elder than the Law) There was a day when the Sons of God (as the
Holy Race are styled, Genesis vi. 2.) came to present themselves before the Lord,
Job i. 6. and ii. 1. This cannot be better fixed, than as by Learned Persons it
is, on the Sabbath Day,

The fourth Command, of the Decalogue, Moral.
of the command of the Sabbath from Mount Sinai amongst the other Commands of
the Decalogue. It is delivered in a style more emphatical than any of the
other: And therefore a man would wonder, that it alone of all the Ten should
not be Moral. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy: which words, that they
should enjoin matter of mere Ceremony, of concernment only to the Jews, and of
no lasting obligation to Christians, as to a weekly day of a holy rest for the
public Service of God, the Arguments which I have yet known offered, I must
confess are much too feeble to persuade.

It Is true indeed the Apostle tells us (Colloss. ii. 16, 17.) the Jewish
differencings of Meats and Drinks, their Holy days, their New Moons and
Sabbaths [Sabbath days, is not in the original, but Sabbaths] that is their
great variety of Carnal Rests, their Sabbaths of Years, and their, Sabbaths of
Months, and their Sabbaths of Days, for all these they had; their
Feast-Sabbaths and Fast-Sabbaths, and the peculiar ways of observing them, by
feeding on certain appointed Meats, and abstaining from others usual enough at
common seasons; all these were a shadow of things to come. But will this which
concerns only a part of the Ceremonial Law, evacuate one of the branches of the
Decalogue, all whose other Commands are confessedly moral? Let that precise
Seventh day, namely the last day of the Week be Temporary, and only obligatory
till the fullness of time were come, Let bodily rest, and strictness of the
rest thereon enjoined to the Jews, not to do so much of servile work as to
kindle a fire thereon: let these I say be Ceremonial, significative of a
speritual Rest under the Gospel; Was therefore a weekly Sabbath holy to God for
his public worship a shadow too? and no certain constant proportion of time to
be allowed as separate to God, because the multitude of Jewish Festivals, and
even the Judaism and Ceremonialness of the Sabbath, were to be abrogated, which
is the utmost can be concluded hence. Let us beware of arguing thus, there
being no reason for such conclusion as the Objectours would infer.

Before we resolve of laying aside any part of the Law of God, let us consider
it better.

There was more in the Command then a mere Carnal Rest, and therefore more
than a Ceremony, Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day. Resting from common
labors thereon was a Ceremony; but somewhat of this Rest a Ceremony necessary
and pre-requisite to the keeping of it Holy; the main substance of the Command,
or chief matter commanded, was keeping it holy; that is, worshipping God
thereon, in public; contemplating him and his works, in secret; being wholly
free to him, for that day. Is Divine Worship and Holy Contemplation, and
Converse with God a Ceremony?

Further; Somewhat there is too in the Command, as to other days, which we
cannot account Ceremonious. Is it a Ceremony, a thing in it self merely
Indifferent, how we spend our time? the Regulation of which is most plainly the
sum of this Commandment. Six days to be spent in our common calling, as
persons of such or such condition, or occupation: And a Seventh in our holy
calling as worshippers of the true God.

this Command is merely Ceremonial, I am sure no The Judgment of our Church
herein.
Son of the Church of England must say so. For if this as well as the other
nine Commandments be not, in the Judgment of our Church, a part of the Moral
Law, why were we just now upon our knees, before God, by order of our Church,
beging Gods mercy for our breaking it, and his Grace for inclining our hearts
to keep it? What to keep a Jewish abrogate Ceremony?

No no, Its moral obligation is by our Church and us, before God, solemnly
acknowledged in these very Prayers, as often as we make them: and further, as
before hinted in the Homily of the time and place of Prayer, to which I refer
my self, it is more at large asserted. Now sure our holy Mother never intended
both her self to falsify with God and Man, and to breed her Children too, to so
hopeful a practice: A hopeful practice, I say, to falsify with God in her
Prayers, even in her most solemn Office, the Communion Service; and with Man,
in her form of Doctrine or Homilies; both which she does, if this be not her
sense. It is then the Judgment of our Church what we have otherwise proved,
that by the eldest positive Law of God, a Seventh day is holy to him.

this Seventh day is now the Lords day, or First day of the Week, The
Reasonableness of Christian Peoples observing the Lords day instead of the
Jewish Sabbath.
by the Law Christian; Here also the evidence is too long to give it in, in
full, at present. But.

First, a word or two for the reasonableness of the First day of the Week under
the Christian state. The very self same reasons, with which God of old bound
the Seventh day-Sabbath on Adam, and on the Jews, bind the observation of the
First day of the Week upon us Christians.

The reason to Adam was, on the Sixth day God ended his works, that he had
Created, and Rested the Seventh: In like manner, the Seventh day of the Week
being ended our Lord Jesus had finished his work of the new Creation, in that
thereon by his resurrection, he made Man again the second time happily
immortal; and having wrested from Death its Sting, from the Grave its Victory,
opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers; entered into it himself, and
began the everlasting Sabbatism of the new World: Which work had he not
finished, what had it advantaged poor mankind to have been Created once? Alas!
had not the work of Redemption been completed, Man's first Creation had only
capacitated him to have been eternally miserable. This reason therefore from
the Divine Rest thereon, holds, to us Christians, much stronger for this
Christian Sabbath.

The Reason to the Jews in special was, because the Lord thy God brought thee
out of the Land of Egypt through a mighty hand and an outstretched arm,
therefore the Lord thy Deuteronomy: v. 15.
God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath day. On the Sabbath or Seventh day, say
the Jewish Doctors, their Forefathers sung their (...), or Triumphal Hymn to
God at the Red Sea, over the drowned Egyptians. And on the first day of the
Week, while it was yet early, Our Lord rose from the dead, as out of a Red Sea
of Blood, and brought with him the raised Bodies of many Saints which slept
(the Bodies of our first Parents says an old tradition) and having thus
rescued mankind from under the bonds of Sin and Death, and of him that had the
power of Death, the Devil, he made a show of them triumphing over them openly.
Thus also there is the like reason for the First day of the Week to be a
Christian Sabbath, as there was for the Seventh day to be the Jewish.

Institution for this day, in the Records of the Of the Institution of the
Lords Day. 1. By Christ himself.
New Testament?

I answer our Lord Instituted it the most effectual way imaginable, namely by
his own practice. His frequent, if not constant, showing himself to his
Disciples on this day, during the Forty days after his Resurrection, his
meeting them in their Assemblies, sometimes with some of them breaking bread,
with all of them always speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of
God, was as solemn a dedication of this day to the Christian worship, as well
can be conceived. John, XX. 19. The same day (which was ver. 1. the first day
of the week) at evening the doors being shut for fear of the Jews, came Jesus
where the Disciples were assembled and stood in the midst of them and said,
Peace be unto you; and showed them his hands and his feet. And on the Eighth
day, which (reckoning after the Jewish use, inclusively) was the next Lords
day, they are met again (ver 26.) and now Thomas was with them: for the course
of Sunday-Assemblies was begun) and Jesus came again the Doors being shut, and
said Peace be unto you. Then addressing himself more particularly to Thomas,
for the satisfying his doubts, and thereby confirming the Faith of them all, he
pronounces a Blessing, not only on them, but on all that should believe on him
to the end of the World. How often, in those Forty days, our Lord appeared to
his Disciples, it has not pleased the Holy Ghost precisely to set down. Two
Lords days apparitions to them, in their assembly, we have thus seen expressly
on Record: and on the same days, several private apparitions to diverse of them
apart, are recorded also, which we may not stand to examine.

Thirdly, the most famous and often fore-appointed appearance, on the mountain
in Galilee (a place distant enough from Jerusalem, that none might fear
disturbance from the Chief Priests and their Partisans) is by some very great
men placed on the Lords day: at which time he was seen of above Five hundred
Brethren at once, speaking no doubt (as his use was) of the things pertaining
to the Kingdom of God. And being that this his appearance cannot, consistently
with St. Paul's account, be 1 Cor. xv. 6, 7.
coincident with that at his Ascension, there is little probability (all
circumstances being considered) for placing it on any other day.

Last of all, our Lord chose to bless the First day of the Week by that most
illustrious manifestation of his being the Son of God, in sending the spirit of
Promise. Acts. XI. 1. When the day of Pentecost was fully come (Pentecost, that
is the Fiftieth day (there is no reason to regard precisely the Jewish
Festival, or to make a proper name of a common one) on the Fiftieth day, I say,
which from the Resurrection must needs fall on the First day of the week,
reckon it at leisure) they were all with one accord in one place (continuing
still their Assemblies on the First day of the week) and suddenly there came a
sound from Heaven, as of a mighty wind. In a word the Holy Spirit most
miraculously came upon them all, as the Lord had promised. Here is from our
Lord himself another sanctifying of the Lords day to the purpose. For indeed,
with it, he miraculously sanctified the whole body of the faithful assembled
thereon.

Subsequent hereto, or after the 2. By his Apostles:
mission of the holy Ghost, the Apostles, and Apostolical Churches constant
observing the Lords day in its weekly course, as is most probable upon
Apostolical Orders for it, was a continued or reinforced practical Divine
Institution of the same. Divine I said: For none will doubt whatever Orders
proceeded from the Apostles, as Planters of Christianity in the World, were of
the same authority, as if they had come immediately from Christ who sent them.
As to the practice of the Church: At Troas, St Paul passing to Jerusalem, upon
the first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break Bread
preached to them. Acts xx. 7. St. Pau'ls preaching, at that time, might be as
to that Church casual enough: but it appears to have been the stated and usual
course, the Dies Natus for the Churches meeting together to break Bread.

Besides this solemn and continued practice, we have the footsteps of the
Apostolical mandate it self. 1 Cor. xvi. 1. 2. Now concerning the collection
for the Saints as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia even so do ye;
upon the first day of the Week, let every one of you lay by him in store, as
God has prospered him, that there be no gathering when I come. The Churches of
Galatia, were of a great extent. He had given orders in those Churches; and now
gives orders also in Corinth for Lords day-alms. The private laying aside at
home, if we will interpret it consonantly to what we are assured to have seen
from the beginning the usual practice, was only in order to the depositing all
in the Assembly, with the Chief Minister of the Church, called in Justin
Martyrs days the (...), or Bishop: For if this had not been designed, the end
he mentions would not have been obtained. There would have needed still a
Gathering of all when he came. But at the celebration of the Eucharist, styled
in those days Breaking of Bread, the Deacons collected, what each person
offered, and delivered it to the trust of the Bishop, as we read more at large
in the Ancients. This collection therefore proves a Communion that day, and the
Apostles order being plain for what was Accessory, must be acknowledged for the
Principal. Now if the Apostle gave order for the Communion, and Collection
thereat, on the Lords day, no doubt he gave orders for the Assemblies thereon,
at which the one was to be celebrated, and the other made. And then if we
admit, that the Doctrine and Tradition of all the Apostles was one and the
same, as the Ancients affirm, and I know not on what good reasons any can deny,
it will follow, that it was an Apostolical Order, that the Lords day should be
the day of public Christan Assemblies.

sacredness of the Lords Day, partly from the The Ancient Fathers are Unanimous
herein.
Institution of Christ and afterward by the Order of the Apostles, the Ancient
Fathers are unanimous. Above all others, memorable is that large Text of St.
Ignatius, (an early Martyr of Christ, who himself avows, as his Text is
commonly rendered, that he saw our Lord Jesus in the flesh, after his
Resurrection; and who was ordained Bishop of Antioch, by the imposition of the
hands of St. Peter himself; truly therefore St. Peter's Successor, and an
Apostolical Father) (...) says he. Let us therefore no longer Jewishly keep
the Sabbath [that is, neither on the day, nor in the manner the Jews do, which
manner he there exposeth] -- But let each of us spiritually keep the Sabbath,
rejoicing in meditations on the Law of God, admiring the works of his hand --
Let every one that loves Christ keep the Lords Day -- the Queen of days -- on
which our life rose, and victory over death was gotten: with more Elogies of it
there to be seen. Now here the Jewish Sabbaths and Sabatising are expressly
required to be laid aside, and a Spiritual Rest, and the Lords Day enjoined
instead thereof. But St. Athanasius, in his Homily De Semente, goes farther and
teaches us, the Lord of the Sabbath (...), etc. translated the Sabbath Day to
the Lords Day. And further: The Apostles and Apostolical Men did ordain (namely
by our Lords appointment, as in other cases) that the Lords Day should be kept
with Religious Solemnity says St. Austin; And much more on the same purpose
have others which I must wave. Sunday then does not stand on the same foot with
other Church Holy days. It is more sacred, truly of Divine Right, the Lords
Day, or a Christian Sabbath.

I was, says St. John How the Lords day is to be kept.
in the Spirit on the Lords day.

Time will not permit me to present the various glosses on this phrase. To
shorten all: I will readily acknowledge, we now adays cannot be in the spirit
any Lords day, as St. John was on this, in the Text. He was in a prophetic
ecstasy. But that, which in all likelihood led him into this exalted temper, and
which in our state of things bears analogy thereto, may be and ought to be our
entertainment each Lords Day. St. John was now in Patmos, a small Island in the
Archipelago, between Crete and Asia minor, banished thither by Domitian for the
word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ. Here was no assembly of
Christians for him to join with; But the Lords Day coming upon him in course,
we cannot well but conceive him taken up in this his Solitude with Prayer,
Praise, and Contemplations suitable to the day; and in these being transported,
to have had his Soul wholly possessed by the Holy Spirit, and to have received
from our Lord all those Revelations, which in this book he Records. And thus
past that whole day (at least far the greatest part of it) with the beloved
Disciple. For in one day, as is conceived by very learned Interpreters, had he
all those apocalyptick visions.

They who cannot ascend into heaven, may yet go up to the mountain. We are not,
in the present state, to expect Visions and Revelations each Lords Day. St.
John himself had them not, that we know of, but while in Patmos, and when God
made his Church amends, as I may say, for the want of his common Ministry, by
extraordinary Revelations, which were to convince the World and all the Powers
of Hell, that their malice could not suppress the Gospel, but only make it
shine another way clearer and farther; and that however Tyrants might drive the
messengers of those glad tidings into desolate corners, so as some Assemblies
might for a season want their living voice, yet should they not be able to
hinder, but the whole World should ring of their testimony wherever they were,
and thereby know, in what methods and disguises, the Grand Master of all the
Tyrants on earth (the Devil) has and shall, in the several ages of Mankind, set
them on work, to the end of all things; so that I say, St. John's being thus in
the Spirit was not common even to himself.

Waving then what was extraordinary, Let us attend to what is ordinary and
ought to be constant. We may, and ought on the Lords Day to be (1) in Spiritual
Exercises, and (2) in a Spiritual temper for attending them.

Spiritual Exercises, I call the offices of Worship, or ordinary duties Of
Spiritual Exercises on the Lords Day.
of Devotion on the Lords Day: and those are either Public, Private, or
Secret: which cannot commonly be omitted without sin.

Public duties, are those which are performed in Church Assemblies; And they
are chiefly four: in their Scripture Names, Praying, Singing, Doctrine, and
Breaking of Bread: There is no reason to surmise, from what we have extant in
the Acts, and in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, that any Lords Day in
the Primitive Church passed without each of these in their Solemnity. What
amongst us is most neglected, give me leave to touch upon.

Of which sort is constant communicating. The Christian Church while it
continued in any tolerable purity, never spent a Lords Day without the Lords
Supper; on which of old it was more Scandalous for any Christians to turn their
backs, than it is now for Men amongst us to live Excommunicate: (this I could
easily prove at large, but must forbear.) And that our own Church esteems the
Lords day but half celebrated, without the Communion, appears, by her having
provided a Communion Service for every Lords Day in the Year. The Communion, as
we have heard, was ever attended with a Collection for the Poor, now called
Oblations. Never Eucharist without Offertory. And this we have seen to be as
ancient as St. Paul's planting the Gospel.

Doctrine was subdivided into Prophesying (or Interpreting of Scripture) which
we now call Preaching, into Reading, Exhortation, Teaching, and perhaps
otherwise. Now the word commonly used for teaching is, (...) to Catechize. This
Office was of so great note in the Primitive Church, that it was committed to
some choice Person appointed purposely thereto; but him commonly most learned.
And by Catechizing I do not mean, mere hearing young People repeat the words of
their Catechism, but expounding to them the Doctrine of it; Examining them upon
such Expositions, and by all the several plainest ways possible, inculcating
these Doctrines, till they understand them. And for gaining reverence to this
Office, as well as for other reasons, which I will not name, Elder people ought
to fit by. In a word all foreign Churches outdo us herein: And if we take not
more care, than yet usual amongst us as to this work, we shall without a
miracle, in the next age, go very near to loose our Religion.

Private Duties I call those which are performed in private Families; Parents,
Children, Sojourners, Servants, joining in Prayer and Praises to God, and in
reading his Word, and other good Books as convenience offers.

Secret Duties are such as every Christian should perform by themselves in the
Closet or Retirements Such are Meditation, self Examination, Recollection of
our improvements, and in the close, Prayer and Thanksgiving as occasion
requires.

Proof for these, being duties of the day, will give me leave to ask them
whether Proof for these Duties.
such practices in the Family, or in the Closet, be necessary, and duties on
any day? If they be so, there is no sufficient reason for their omission on the
Lords day, when by Law of God and Man there is most leisure for them. Besides
they will be pleased to consult Numbers xxviii. 9, 10. where they will find the
peculiar sacrifice for the Sabbath, both Morning and Evening, was required of
the Jews, over and above the continual daily Burnt offering; the like too upon
the New Moons, ver. 24. and on other Festivals, ver. ult. That which I infer
from hence is, that the public Lords Days Worship, and other Festival Offices,
must not supercede or abate our ordinary Private or Secret Devotions on those
Days. These are to be faithfully superaded to them.

Fanaticism, Puritanism, Sabbatarianism, and the like. A Vindication of this
Practice from ill imputations.


I answer, there may be a Fanatical (and perhaps a Pharisaical) way too of
doing these duties; but the practice of the duties it self is not Fanatical or
Pharisaical; and much less is it Sabbatarianism. We must make Fanatics and
Sabbatarians of the most Ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church, and the most
learned Doctors and Pillars of our own Church, if we can find either
Fanaticisme or Sabbatarianisme in spending the whole Lords day in a succession,
or holy exchange of such Duties, as these mentioned. Justin Martyr was no
Fanatic nor Sabbatarian, yet in his second Apology he tells us the Christians
of that age, which was but one hundred and forty Years from Christ, used to
repeat at home what they had learned that day in the Public Assembly. Origin
and St. Chrysostom were no Fanatics, nor yet Sabbatarians, yet both (nay the
later more than once) press the spending ((...), etc.) This whole day in the
exercise of Spirituals.

And to wave others of the Ancients and come nearer home. I scarce think any
Son of the present Church will adventure to brand the Reformation in King
Edward the Sixths days with Fanaticisim or Sabbatarianism: yet under that, I
find a Canon acknowledged for spending the Lords Day in private Prayer and
Thanksgiving, acknowledging our Offenses, reconciling our selves to our
Brethren, visiting the Sick, comforting the Afflicted, relieving the Poor, and
instructing Children and Servants in the nurture and fear of the Lord.

But to be sure, the Authors of the Book of Homilies we must not say were
either Fanatics or Sabbatarians: For the Homilies we are bound still to
subscribe and approve at least, if not publicly to read: yet they teach, that
on this day people shauld cease from all common and bodily labor and give
themselves Wholly [note that word] to the exercises of Gods true Religion.

Arch Bishop Whitgift, against the Admonitioners, was no Fanatic, Puritan, or
Sabbatarian, yet says he; no man doubts the meaning of these words, Six days
shall thou labor, etc. to be this, that seeing God has permitted us Six days
to do our own works in, we ought in the Seventh Wholly to serve him.

Bishop Francis White, in his Book against the Sabbatarians, was neither
Fanatic nor Sabbatarian, yet he tells us our Church requires, that upon the
Lords day Parents and Masters, instruct their Children and Servants in the fear
and nurture of the Lord.

Mr. Hooker was neither Fanatic nor Sabbatarian, yet he teaches, we are to
account the Sanctification of one Whole day in the week, a Duty which Gods
immutable Law does enact for ever.

Finally, I believe no sober man will say that Excellent Book, The Whole duty
of man, savours either of Fanaticism or Sabbatarianism, yet Partit: 2. Sect.
17. The Author teaches all in their Families the practice I have persuaded.

But will some say, there were in our Church who have taught otherwise, who
have justified Sports and Revels on this day. Yes, and there are too many at
present who practice otherwise; but I fear not to say, both the one and the
other, were and are (I will hope not intentionally, yet in reality and effect)
in this part the depravers of Religion, the corrupters and disturbers of our
Church. It were easy to take off that thin vail of learning, with which such
liberties have been set off; but I must not divert thereto.

Of spiritual Temper.
indeed to possess us every day, but more especially on the Lords day. That I
called a spiritual temper. The term I ground on those Texts. Jude 26. Praying
in the Holy Ghost. And Ephesians: 6. 18. Praying always with all manner of Prayer
and Supplication in the Spirit: by which term, Spirit, no doubt both the
Apostles meant, not praying with any such imaginary spiritual gift of Prayer,
as is cried up for absolutely necessary by many, but praying with a devout holy
temper of mind; a temper consisting in the union of those several Graces of
Gods Spirit, which ought to be exercised in Prayer: In short, praying with a
heart full of Faith, and of Love toward God and Mankind; of the hopes of
Glory, and so of contempt of this World. I may not now take time farther to
open this Temper: but with such temper as this, should we this day perform all
those parts of worship, which we* any where offer. And to be employed in prayer
and praise, and in like offices mentioned, with such temper, is to be as much
in the Spirit on the Lords Day, as in the present state of things, we can be.
But I must draw to a conclusion.

Conclusion.
Lords Day, and how we may and ought to spend ours: Now give me leave to ask
you (or will you be pleased to ask your selves) how you spend yours?

In the Morning, if you can, many By way of Reprehension.
of you dress your selves more Vainly and Phantastically, than you do all the
Week; that is your first labor: Then some of you get a better Breakfast than on
other days. Then to Church, and show your selves; where if you are a little
demure in part of the Prayers, that is the sum total of your Devotion. At other
times you Gaze, one while you Whisper, Talk and Laugh; another while some
compose themselves, and Sleep. How small is the constantly-Serious, Devout and
attentive Part? How strange a body now now adays is a Christian Assembly? Then,
when the Morning Offices are done, a more liberal Dinner than on other days,
and what diversion we can find within doors, or without, as the weather serves,
entertains the generality of us, the rest of the day. Good Lord forgive, Good
Lord amend this.

Wherefore, In a word, let what has By way of Exhortasion.
been said prevail with all for a more reverend esteem and strict observation
of the Lords Day: Let us distinguish it from other days, by something else,
than Holy Day Clothes and Holy day Fare, and Holy Day Liberties. I must stand
to it; the keeping up, amongst us, not only that small remain of the power of
Godliness, which is yet left, but the very face of the Reformed Religion (which
God be blessed we have fairer than our neighbors) depends very much hereon.

Works of mercy may be, and ought By way of Caution.
to be done on this day, as well as on any other. When they come from a pious
heart, they are Acts of Devotion, in his esteem, who has said, I will have
mercy and not sacrifice. And works of necessity, or grand convenience, such as
securing necessaries of life when perishing, dressing fit food, or the like,
forasmuch as they are near akin to works of Mercy, are not on this day
unlawful to Christian People. St. Ignatius, in the place before mentioned,
taxes the feeding on cold Meat, this day, as a point of Judaizing. And there is
an ancient Canon, amongst those called Apostolical, against fasting on the
Lords Day. Wherefore certainly such refreshment of our Bodies, and regard to
their vigor, as may keep up our Spirits in the service of God, is not to be
neglected. We ought this day, if any day, to eat our meat with gladness, as
well as singleness of heart. But in all these things, we must be faithful to
God and our selves; not framing necessities of business where there are none,
and taking care, we in such sort use not the succors of Nature, as to turn
them into burdens and hindrances.

I have done, and beseech God, what I have thus plainly, though too
precipitantly, and briefly said, may effect in all, or some of us at least, a
more constant, conscientious and spiritual discharge of our Public, Private
and Secret duties on this day. By this means a vein of intelligent and serious
Religion will soon run through Families, and, by them, through Parishes,
through City and Country. And this will soon settle and secure Religion to us;
and Religion settled will certainly settle and secure the Nation; At least, if
God see not fit to settle any of us here in this World, it will prepare and
lead such of us, who are spiritual Worshippers of him, to an eternal
settlement; to a better Country, and therein to that glorious Sabbatism which
remains for the Children of God. To which our Heavenly Father bring us all
through Christ Jesus. Amen.

FINIS.

