PRAECOGNITA ASTROLOGICA: OR, ASTROLOGICAL JUDGMENTS, And MONTHLY OBSERVATIONS,
SHOWING, What Material or Grand Changes or Revolutions are like to happen in
the World, But more especially EUROPE, in the so long and much talked of Year,
1688, To which is added An Account of the so much Admired and Amazing PRODIGY
By Joh. Whalley Student in Physic and Astrology.

Aug. 13. 1688. This may be Printed.



LONDON, Printed for F. E. in the Year 1688.

To all the Legitimate Sons of the Divine Urania in the Kingdom of Ireland.
Gentlemen,
NOtwithstanding former Discouragements mentioned in the Dedication of my last
years Observations, I did (at some of your Importunities) compose an Ephemeris
or Almanac for this Year 1688, like that of 1686. And being under some
misunderstanding with the Assigns of His Majesty's Printer about the Price of
my last years Copy, I met with one T. M. -- a Bookseller lately famous is
London; who (as I since though not then understood) having stepped to one side, and
straggling in Dublin just as I had got my Copy licensed, for a certain Sum
agreed upon, and part received in hand, he by Bond under his Hand and Seal,
obliged himself to deliver it at Chester printed on the last of October; when
for Honesty having retired himself from the reach of Justice, and it was too
late to get them printed elsewhere, he instead thereof complemented me with a
Lie, of their being seized in the Press; which upon examination I found as
false as himself, and good grounds to believe he was procured by the abovesaid
Printers not to print it all, lest it should hinder the Sale of their Trash,
published in the Names of Plunket and others not in being; but have been forged
from Ritchisons or my Copy. So that I had not published any thing so late, but
to remove the Fears about the late PRODIGY, and Year 1688. and Trouble and
Danger of transcribing these Observations frequently pressed upon.

Globe Cook-street Dublin, March 12. 1688. Urania's Votary. John Whalley.

Observations on the Prodigy seen at Dublin Jan. 27. 1688.
PRODIGIES are things seldom seen, and coming to pass unexpectedly beyond
imagination, beget miraculous Contemplation, Horror, and Amazement. And
therefore that seen at Dublin, on Sunday Jan. 27. 1688. may well receive that
Name; for that it amazed not only its Beholders, but also most that then heard
of it, just as if they expected it a sign of nothing but of utter Ruin and
Destruction to be immediately shower'd down upon these Nations, but more
especially Ireland.

I did not see this Prodigy my self; but for the aforesaid Reasons, and the
many Enquiries frequently made of me about it, I endeavored to obtain the most
absolute Relation that could be procured; which was from the Watch of several
parts of the City, who agree, That at midnight a Crack like that of a Cannon
was heard, and immediately a great siery Blaze seen flying from the South-west,
over the City toward the North-east, at one end like a half Ball, and thereout
a great long Stream; which, by this Description, I conclude to be of that sort
of Prodigies, called Meteors; and of them, such as Naturalists call Beams, and
Judge to be generated of Exhalations hot and dry, like the Lightening or flash
of Thunder, of a vicious clammy nature, resembling Pitch, by being of thin and
light parts, are by the Sun drawn and forced into the upper Region, and there
by excessive heat, and nearness to the Fire, kindled, and by the Wind and
Clouds carried through the Air, as this was in form of a Beam, to the terror of
all its Beholders.

The Ingenious Mr. Gadbury, in his Treatise of Prodigies, page 57. gives an
account of a Meteor, Anno 1384. the most like this of any I can read of since:
but neither he nor any other, of any extrordinary consequences that attended
that or any other, but what might rather be signified by the Stars; and
therefore I conclude this so admired and amazing Prodigy in no wise so
threatening or evil, as terrible and feared, especially to England and Ireland,
and that the rather because in it self it is but an effect of other natural
Causes, viz. the Stars, who only are the grand Signs or Natural Causes of
Terrestrial Mutations.

Tho I cannot show any Prodigy like this of late, in respect to its noise;
there have been several of the same nature seen in and about Dublin, as in June
1682, July 13. 1685, and the 6th of March following, all about 11 at night, the
likeness of Armies were seen fighting in the Air; and last Summer a Prodigy or
Meteor like this in form and all things but its noise, was seen several times
to fly over this City of Dublin, and yet, God be praised, no such bloody
effects as are now feared have hitherto succeeded, or indeed are thereby
threatened.

General Observations on the Year 1688.
IN my Almanac for this Year I had Observations on the Winter Ingress and
three past Months, January, February, and March, which being before the
publishing this expired, I omit, together with the Scheam of the Vernal
Ingress; the better to contract this into the narrow room of one Sheet, to make
the Price easy, and for satisfaction therein, refer the curious to Mr.
Mac-Combs Almanac, being the only one this Year public in Ireland, that is
worth buying; where the time of this Vernal Ingress is taken from the
Rudolphine Tables, and agrees within twelve minutes of time with that taken
from Mr. Gadburies Ephemeris March 9th. 1 hour 12 min. P. M. when in the
Meridian of Dublin we have 10 degrees. of Leo ascending, and about twenty of Aries
culminating, Mars Lord of the 10th in the 10 th week in Taurus, his detriment
among the Pleiades, a turbulent Sign and Constellation, and in square to Venus,
his Dispositor in the seventh, which, according to the ancient Rules of
Astrology, signifys a Necessity in Princes, and persons in Authority, to borrow
Moneys, or impose more than usual Taxes on the Subjects, and will animate them
to Choler, Cruelty, and Rashness; one King, Prince, Nobleman, and chief
Commander, will be subject to contend and quarrel with another upon slight
occasion, or for what they have little right to. Some eminent Prince or Princes
in foreign Parts, will even in this year be subjected to the Contempt and
Reproach of his or their pretended Subjects or Neighbors, great Treachery,
etc. from all which I hope and pray God will for ever deliver His Most Gracious
Majesty of Great Britain, and his Dominions. If any shall dare to forget their
Allegiance justly due to him the Lords Anointed, as I fear too many do; let
them cast an eye back to, and remember in the Tragedy of England and Scotland,
1685. how graciously he extended Mercy even to those that would have shown
little to him, if their Malice had prevailed. And, Dear Countrymen and
Neighbors, consider the Blessing of Peace and Plenty, and that the best of
Natures cannot for ever brook of Abuse, Wrong and Ingratitude; but when
provoked beyond measure, justly become the most severe Punishers, and no longer
the Vessels of Mercy, but Justice in so doing. And therefore let us, who call
our selves Christians, show our selves so in obeying the Lord and his Anointed,
and no longer fool our selves with seditious Spirits and Fancies of what can
only work the ruin of our selves and Posterity; For Kings have long Arms, and
when thereto extended, strike severely. What People in Christendom enjoy the
Blessings and Mercies we do under the best of Princes? Who studys not so much
his own as the good of his People, and Glory of God, how to give every man, by
Law, Liberty to worship their heavenly Father in their own way; and that is so
far from using the Severity of his Predecessors, that he studies to relieve all
those oppressed and persecuted for Conscience sake, even those of Foreign
Nations that fly to him for Succor, and are of different Persuasion from his
own, even forty thousand poor distressed French Protestants, that justly owe
their Lives and Liberties to his Gracious Goodness and Favor. What can his own
Subjects expect or crave more than he so bountifully vouchsafes Strangers both
to his Country and Religion? Is it reasonable for a dutiful Child to expect
less from his Father, than he freely bestows to Strangers? If not, why should
men study to heap coals of Confusion upon their own heads, when they may with
more ease avoid it? Let all men vouchsafe their due Allegiance to their lawful
Sovereign, the only means to prevent the Ruin which otherwise may attend them;
and the Woe, Sorrow, and Affliction which is threatened to several parts of the
World, even in this year, by the last and this Ingress. I know some Authors are
of opinion, that Venus in the 7th, as here, is for reconciling Kingdoms and
Persons at variance, and as now in Trine to and Reception with Saturn, and
Sextile of Mercury conduces much thereunto to some, and to the Grandeur of the
Nobility of Ireland in particular. But as she is there in Square to Mars, the
clear contrary to others, viz. the promotion of Wars, Bloodshed, Differences
and Discord, unusual Lawsuits and Controversies; and shows that some one
ominent Female will be subjected to the Frowns of Fate, if not the Malice of
Death, or Comtempt of her Lord. And with this, that Square, and those of
Jupiter to Mercury, Saturn, and Luna, threatens abundance of Cold, Rain, Snow,
Storms, Losses and Damage at Sea, both by that and Pirates; more than usual
Engagements or Sea Fights, Disputes about Religion and Church Affairs; and the
broach or growing great of some new Sect or Sectaries; many Removals among
those of the Gown and Bench, and some of the more aged of them into the other
World, but more particularly one of the most eminent Ruling Clergymen in
Christendom.

Luna just separated from the body of Saturn, and void of Course, promises but
little Satisfaction to the Vulgar, but rather Disappointments, Woe, Grief,
Sorrow and Affliction, wherever Providence shall dispose of the Effects, and
that partly by their own Folly and Stiffneckedness; Yet the Lord of the second,
and Part of Fortune, free from the malignant Beams of the Infortunes, with the
Position of Jupiter and Venus in the second, in the preventional Lunation,
promises much less cause of Complaint for want of Trade than last year.
However, I advise the Husbandman to provide well against a bad Harvest, and
hard Winter.

But that which is most observable in this Revolution, is, the Partile Square
of Saturn, and Jupiter from Cardinal Signs, which will in earnest usher in, and
that speedily too, the Effects of their Conjunction in the years 1682, and
1683. and make the World sensible, that such Congresses have influence upon the
state of Laws, Customs, Constitutions, and Prviledges of Nations, Persons,
Places, and things Ecclesiastical, and to change them too. And therefore it is
not to be expected, Astrologers should, under them, preach Peace and
Tranquillity, when the contrary is so severely threatened as now; and I dare
aver, will be felt by most States and Degrees of Peoplein Europe. While some
that have been long wallowing in Blood are preparing and contriving to ease
themselves of those burdens; others are as fast running into like extremes.
Great Overtures are made by the Turks; the Poles and Venetians seem inclinable
to embrace them; the Christian Emperor more slack, but not so backward as of
late. France and Spain seem indifferently friendly, the Swede and Dane to jurr;
the Poles and Muscovites as of late, the Algerines pay for the Roast: Scotland
in Wisdom may be happy, and Ireland not inferior: the Dutch are imperious, and
will meet Correction from those, whom I beseech God ever to enable to correct
the Insolences of their Enemies, and bless with Health, Peace and Plenty. Amen.

Observations on the last 9 Months of the Year 1688.
APril. Besides being so at the Vernal Ingress, Jupiter continues still in
Square to Saturn, and great part of the last and this Month in Square to Sol;
which with the Opposition of Sol and Saturn, and other Configurations of this
Month seem to threaten ten much Sickness about this time, Dissatisfaction,
Grief, Trouble and Vexation, if not Death, to some eminent Grandee or Grandees
of Europe. And indeed to persons of meaner quality, frowns of Superiors, loss
of Honor, Office and Employ, the downfall of some one, or more, eminent
Gown-man, Disputes about Religion, or matters of Faith, and great mischiefs at
Sea both by Storms and Pirates, Engagements or Sea Fights may succeed, but not
this month; I fear the London Merchants will share in the woeful effects of the
cross Configurations.

May. Matters seem now rather tending to Counsel than Actions; however all are
not idle, but rather contriving or preparing for the Actions of the following
months; some endeavoring to create and others to destroy the Peace, not only
of particular Persons and Families, but also Nations and Kingdoms; the first
seems to take most place now; and may all just endeavors so succeed. Great
Britain is much concerned in this months Proceedings, and Holland is not idle,
but rather preparing for Action; I wish it may prove for good, but fear the
contrary, however that Nation is about this time making more than usual
preparation for fitting out Shipping, or some considerable Naval Action.

June. Now the Actions of the year begin to show themselves in their colors;
those concerned hasting to oppose and engage each other, and will not be
wanting to furnish us with the news of some considerable Fight, yea and perhaps
at Sea too; if not, there will arise more than ordinary Disputes about matters
relating thereunto, if not about Religion also. But if not this month, we shall
certainly hear plentifully of such matters before the Summer be over, wherein
Holland will be more than a little concerned.

July. Of all earthly blessings, certainly there is none so precious as health
and peace; and yet there are an Israel-like pampered People, with Wantonness
stust to that degree of Pride and Ambition, that no state but Ruin can satisfy
their Jew-like desires. It was the Murdering of their heavenly King that made
the Jews Slaves and Vagabonds; and, the crying Blood of his Anointed, that
already has brought loads of Misery upon these nations: And therefore Dear
Countrymen and Neighbors, let us for the future endeavor to Expiate that, and
not study to heap Coals of Confusion upon our Selves and Posterity; but instead
of that, what may make both them and us happy; for every Kingdom drvided
against it self is brought to Desolation, Luke 11.17.

Now the Effects of the last great Tripple Conjunction, begin to show
themselves to purpose, and most degrees feel it, especially Superiors; some
through Disobedience and Folly, others against their Wills.

Death spares none, but equals all;
The Mighty, Mean, and Poor must fall.
August. Many hopeful endeavors are used this month to heal the Evils of those
past, and for settling things in a more secure slate for the future, for the
Peace and Satisfaction of Nations, Kings, Princes, and private Persons at
variance; yea, even between the two mighty Emperors of Germany and Turkey, they
may palliate, but cannot heal. Some grave Statesman, long clouded, begins to
Luster forth Rays of Comfort to himself and others equally grieved; Males and
Females, Gown-men, and indeed almost every State to be satisfied with Reason,
finds this a month of Comfort in one degree or other, in England, Ireland, and
several other parts of Europe, as well as America. Merchants meet satisfactory
Returns from Foreign parts; those of the Gown and Bench with Preferment, and
several Females, but one of most illustrious Birth in particular with most
Honorable Marriage.

September. Were it not for the malignant, treacherous, and twice reiterated
Square of the two Superiors, beginning within Orbs in January, being Partile at
the Vernal ingress, and continuing even to the years end, I should have judged
the many friendly Aspects of the last and this month sufficient to compose all
the Feuds in the World, and create a Jubilee; but alas! that were a happiness
too too great for so sinful a People as this Age contains; for though it might
satisfy some, and those too lately afflicted, yet it can not all, for what is
one man's Meat is another man's Poison, and what the Stomach cannot bear, it will
either reject, or when forced upon it cast out; there is a certain Sympathy and
Antipathy in Nature, which Wills some to Love what others Abhor, and oftentimes
there is Necessity to use force for Ease and Safety, and perhaps may now for
Cure of some State Distempers.

October. Reason seems to confirm the season past for Public Action, and the
Stars declare it in its Prince for Council; many deep and weighty Consultations
and Debates are now on foor, and I hope much to a general good and
satisfaction: but, whether for past or present offenses, the common People are
afflicted about this time with Imprisonment, and such like Troubles. False and
lying reports are daily spread abroad to hurry people into Fears and
Distractions: and one Friend and Neighbor is ready (...) accuse another, and
that unjustly too, by which Offenders are brought to Justice. The season is
stormy, yet Merchants meet happy returns; Women in Travel and young Children
find it but an indifferent season.

November. Poor Jupiter continues still weak and afflicted both by Saturn and
Men in Conjunction with the Dragons Tail. What is it base men cannot do when
Able, Strong, Joined and resolved for Mischief? This Month is not inferior to
the former for Council and Contrivances, but of different Natures, those
public and tending to Good, and these private tending to evil. Ay! even to
dishonor Authority, and Disturbance of Government and most sacred Divine
Matters, and to that end many base scrolls and Storys are broacht and pack't
about, but a short time will show their Event in the Destruction of the
Founders; the design is general, but particular to some great person,
Statesman, etc. who must fall by their Malice before their work can be
accomplished. But Saturn and mars changing their Signs in Conjunction will
suddenly change the balance of Affairs, bring Offenders to punishment, occasion
very bad Cold, Snowy, Stormy Weather, and many Changes in Affairs of Government
Church and State.

December. The coldness of the Season and the Friendship of the Stars seem to
promise more Health than in several months past; Increase of Trade, and more
general sitisfaction especially to England and Ireland. An eminent Female
receives Affliction, or a garment of her first Element, and many others
Removals from their Honors, Office, and Imploys, to make way for others
conceived more deserving. many secret Ambassys are sent privately from one
place and Princes Court to another, about Matters of very great moment; it is
some business which should produce nothing but good, and yet little will acrue
from hence but evil.

Of the ECLIPSES, 1688.
THere will be four Eclipses this year, the first of the Moon, April the 5th,
at on the Afternoon.

The second of the Sun April the 20th. at one in the Morning.

The third of the Moon September the 29th. half an hour past 9 in the Morning.

The fourth of the Sun, October the 14th. near 7 in the Morning, but all
invisible and not to be seen, or felt by us.

FINIS.

