The Lord Whartons Speech, To the Petitioners for PEACE: On the eighth of
December, at Habberdashers-Hall, in LONDON.

With the true relation of all their proceedings therein.

Also the Lord Majors Message to them, concerning the delivering their Petition
to the Parliament.

With many more remarkeble passages.

London Printed, for J. H. December. 12. 1642.

The Lord Whartons Speech to the Petitioners for Peace, on the ninth of
December, at Habberdashers-Hall, in LONDON
THere has (it is apparently manifest) a great party which have joynned
privately together, and framed a Petition, with intent to present it to the
High Court of Parliament, (the particulars whereof I shall for the present
forbear to mention) only, the carriage of it in some special particulars, I
shall remonstrate unto you

On Thursday last in Cornwall, a man of a considerable fortune was taken
gathering hands to the said Petition, which being discovered by an Officer,
(knowing that if such things were suffered, it would go near to breed a
Commotion in the City) therefore he carried the aforesaid person before the
Lord Major, who after examination, took the said Petition from him, and gave
the Officer command to carry him up to the Parliament, but after a little time
spent in consideration of this business, his Lordship altered his former
intention, and gave Command to restrain the said person till night, intimating
that at night certain Lords would be at Habbardashers Hall, and then he should
be carried before them.

The Officer having received this command, went from the Lord Majors, and
having gone a little way, the man began to consider with himself, and demanded
whether the said Officer would carry him, he replied, to remain in custody
till such time as the Lords should come into the City, he demanded where his
Warrant was, answer was made, that he had no other warrant then my Lord Majors
Command, he replied, that he would not then obey him, the Officer commanded him
them to go back to the Lord Majors, he denied that likewise, and would neither
go forward nor backward, insomuch that the said Officer was enforced to
command the passengers to aid him, which was accordingly done, and he carried
to some place of restraint.

This was noysed about the City, especially among that faction, for in a short
time there were assembled near 300. with Torches, and Linkes, who in a
Tumultuous manner went to Habberdashers-Hall, every man thinking himself happy
that could get in first, being come in, they began to call out with loud
acclamations, A Petition, A Petition, the Lords having had notice of their
intention, and the chief cause of their Assembly, (namely the Lord Wharton,)
applied himself unto them, and spoke to this effect.

That they had received information of of their intentions, but for their parts
they were sent upon a Message from the House, which according to their duties
they now came to discharge, but for the receiving of their Petition, they could
not do it; therefore they must apply themselves to the Houses of Parliament,
from whom Doubtless they should r^ceceive sufficient saisfaction concerning
their desires.

This for the present satisfied them, so that then they cried out, To their
first Resolution, to their first resolution, then away they went toward my Lord
Majors, but before they could get thither, a Trained-Band stood at the Lord
Majors, Gate to entertain them, which they seeing, presently altered their
resolution, and went to the Guild Hall, coming thither they found the Gates
shut up, but after some small time the Gates were opened, and they went into
the great-Hall, where being arrived, they went up to the end of the Hall, where
one of the chief of them read the Petition with a loud voice, so that all that
were there present might hear the same.

After the reading of which, there was a great Humme, and applause, by their
own Faction, then a general cry was made, that all men that stood affected to
that cause, should draw near and subscribe.

During this business, there was a Troop of Horse came into the Yard, and two
Companies of the Trained-Bands, which they seeing, began to separate themselves.

At which time one of the chief of their Company came from the old Majors with
this Message.

That for their Petition, he would deliver it to the House, and if it were
relished, and approved of by them, they might then lawfully proceed, but if not
they must expect the issue.

They having received this answer, departed every man to his Habitation.

What the event will be, is not yet known, but it is greatly to be feared, if
these factions be suffered to grow to a head, London will become a second
Jerusalem, and be destroyed by her own children, which God of his mercy avert
and let all those that wish the peace of Sign, say Amen.

FINIS.

