Refractoria Disputatio: OR, The Thwarting Conference, IN A DISCOVRSE, BETWEEN
Thraso, One of the late Kings Colonels. Neutralis, A sojourner in the City.
Prelaticus, A Chaplain to the late King. Patriotus, A well-willer to the
Parliament.
All of them differently affected, and disputing on the subjects inserted after
the Epistle, on the dissolution of the late PARLIAMENT, and other changes of
STATE.

Porv. 12. 15. The way of a fool is right in his own eyes, but he that
hearkneth unto counsel is wise.

The wise man foreseeth the evil to come, and preventeth it,

Eccles. LONDON, Printed by Robert White, and are to be sold by Thomas Brewster
at the three Bibles in Paul's Churchyard 1654.

To the intelligent Reader, whether Royalist, Malignant, or howsoever affected.
Gentlemen,
IT is a facete observation of Mou^tague in his Essays.
a Person of honor, that a diligent Reader may apprehend more then the Author
himself ever meant or intended; If then it shall be either thy fortune or
neglect in reading this Thwarting Conserence, to understand less then is
intended for the general instruction, that is the Readers fault none of the
Authors; If so much as is presented for the rectification of particular men's
judgments (doubtful of their own principles) and unsettled in their minds;
here is that which (if they be aforehand not infatuated) will compose their
distractions; out of the whole, the Reader may recollect his memory in some
particulars of State as happily are either forgotten or unknown unto him, and so
he may take a review of things past as they were carried on in their various and
mystical traverses of Court, and thence to foresee what may be the event of the
late miraculous change of Government. If on thy first view of the Title, thou
find any itching desire to know the scope and whereat the Discourse ayms (as
all novelties provoke appetite) take this in the way of an advertisment, that
here are vetera, vera, novaque intermixta, old, true, and new passages,
cursorily presented in an interlocutory Conference; then look over to the next
page, and happily the Contents may set a new edge on thy desires; then read all
or none; and not unlikely thou may go very near henceforth to know how to
order thy self to the best advantage under the present powers, and therewith
judge of the universal destiny of the Nation, should it revert into Monarchy;
and on casting up of thy account, take these following Animadversions into thy
more serious consideration; first, with what labor, travel, care, and vexation
of spirit, the two late Kings even from the very Ingress to their Crowns, to
the period of their days, prepared the way to their own ruins, by pursuing
their ambitious designs of heightning their Soveraignties above and beyond the
bounds and limits thereof; whereas with much honor, love, loyalty, content,
and profit to themselves, peace, pleasure, security, and tranquillity to their
Subjects, they might have spent those their vexatious days in the full fruition
of all worldly happiness; But intoxicated with those restless desires of
greatness and of ambition, to climb above the right end and orb of Government,
and inflamed with those over-high heats of strengthening themselves with that
frail support of the arm of flesh, verified in that their long continued and
chargable negotiations, to contract Alliances, and intermarriages with Spain
and France, Families of contrary and Idolatrous Religions (aspirations) which
were never yet prosperous to Princes, professing (as they pretended) the purity
of Religion without intetmixtures; what Apologies and Defenses have been made
either by themselves (living) or by others surviving and exposed to the world,
in vindication of their actions and too too manifest errors, are no other then
the superfluity and fineness of men's wits, biased without judgment to discern
between truth and falsehood, the infallible testimonies of humane frailty and
the Devils juglings, only to deceive the common belief, whereas truth is still
the same, and will one day clearly appear and discover those dark traces and
ambages of the greatest Masters of Art and Policy, though for a time they may
be inveloped and hidden from the sight of the Vulgar, and happily predominate
on the credulity of too many that think themselves wise above the ordinary
sort; yet at length they must be unmask't and laid open to the Worlds view; for
magna est veritas, etc. and it cannot be resisted. It Is most true, they were:
Princes of great parts and endowments, though now in another World, whether we
must all follow to render an account of our Stewardships; howsoever without
prejudice to their memories, both for our own and the instruction of posterity,
we may take into observation what they were living, and what instruments they
made use of for carrying on their ambitious Designs, to their own dishonor, the
blemish of their fames, the disturbance of their domestic peace, the public
tranquillity, and of that secure settlement which the old King found here in a
most perfect establishment on the decease of that unparalleld Princess
Elizabeth; and as to the late most unfortunate King to the destruction of three
flourishing Kingdoms, himself, his Posterity, the Royalty, and the ruin of
many of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of England, Scotland and Ireland.

In the next Scene, we may take a short view of that remarkable fate which
befell the Authors, Promoters, Incendiaries, and principal Workmasters, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, both before and throughout the whole managery of the
late prodigious War, and work of darkness to their own ruin, as a just reward
to such as in assistance and advance of a lawless and unlimited Sovereignty,
most unnaturally and treacheously steered in the Regal course of attaining, and
well-nigh to the accomplishing of more absolute power over the three Nations,
then ever was attempted on the Theator of this Kingdom; whence we may learn and
set up our rests on these infallible Aphorisms, that

Consilium malum consultoribus pessimu^. evil counsel is most inauspicious to
the Councillors themselves; and on that other which by lamentable experience
we have found most true, Quicquid delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi:

whatsoever Kings project, the poor innocent people must suffer for all and for
their faults.

Gentlemen, to come a little nearer unto you, and more openly to explain my
self; you have in the following Discourse, not only a part of the old case
between King and Parliament cursorily disputed, but what the issue (in all
probability) will be, in case the Scotch King comes in by the sword, with the
fearful consequences thereof, both in relation to your selves and the universal
people; ye may by the way remember what work the late King made in all parts of
the Land wheresoever his Armies and Garrisons were, how many Counties he made
the constant seats of a furious and bloody War; how long he continued to embrew
the land with innocent blood even to desolation; in how many places the poor
Inhabitants had neither bread left them to eat, nor houses wherein to put their
heads; and that had his power been answerable to his will, how much worse it
would have been with the whole Nation, had the Danes, French, Lorra^nres,
Scots, and Irish came to his Assistance; all which how earnestly he solicited
their coming over, his own Instructions to Cockrans, his Letters to the Queen,
Montross and Ormond, sufficiently declare; Yet there are of you that d^re
publicly say, that you are not ashamed to own his cause, and disown the
Parliaments, which is no good sign of your eternal being, when you are known to
glory in evil, and stand fixed in the defense of him, and a cause that was most
unjust in the beginning, bloody (beyond example) throughout the whole managery,
tragical in the end to himself, loss of honor, estate, and fortunes of most
that sided with him; and should the Scotch Pretender come in, how much worse
and more oppressive and more bloody it must be, I leave to your own
consideration.

For a close, I wish you all better to bethink your selves, and take this into
your more serious thoughts of the wisest of men; He that justifies the wicked,
and condemns the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.
15. Then as you please, read on, and happily you may find somewhat that will
terrify your consciences, or rectify your judgments in your erroneous
principles, and turn the torrent of your depraved affections to a hearty
compliance with the present Powers, as they are set over us by the hand of the
Almighty, which doubtless, is the best and safest course you can take for your
future happiness;

Which that you may enjoy, are the hearty wishes of an unknown yet your
unfeigned friend

The principal Contents of the following Discourse.
1. OF the necessity of continuing the Contributions on the people, with the
Reasons thereof.

2. Of the hopes wherewith Royalists flatter themselves in mending their
fortunes, by bringing in the Scotch Pretender.

3. Of the States Power, and strength for upholding the present Government.

4. Of the difficulties which attend the Scotch Kings coming in, being to
invade by Sea.

5. Of the parallel between the Hollanders case and this of the States here in
their first establishment.

6. Of the miserable condition that of necessity must befall this Nation,
especially the City of London, in case the Scotch King comes in by the sword,
with the consequences of changing the Laws, and constitutions of the old
Sovereignty.

7. Of King James his plot, for abating the power of Parliaments, and
improvement of the Sovereignty, by disowning them, furthered by the Bishops,
and pursued by the late King.

8. Of the necessitated Reasons that induced the Parliament to cut off the late
King, and to exclude his Posterity.

9. Whether the present establishment in the nature of a Republic, accompanied
with the Taxes imposed on on the people, will not be more safe and less
chargeable to them, th^n the admittance of the Scotch Pretender to the Regal
Government.

10. Of the grand objection of Royalists, that the late Parliament was not a
legal Representative of the people, after it was lamed, lessned by want of the
King, the Lords, Prelates, and major part of the Commons excluded; Answered.

11. That the Parliaments after the coming of the Norman, the Witengagoment^
of the Saxons, and those magna Consilia of the old Britains, were not always of
one form, but one and the same in substance.

12. Of the various alterations and changes of Governments throughout all Ages
of the World, and that all Powers had their original by the sword, which once
obtained, Whether by right or wrong, ought to be obeyed submitted unto, as the
Ordinance of God.

Refractoria Disputatio: OR, The Thawrting Conference.
Thraso. GEntlemen, you are all well met; I perceive you are as good as your
words; but now Signiour Patriotus, tell me what is become of your late piece of
a Parliament; have they not enacted hand somely to Act themselves out of their
usurped powers, by their injustice and self ends, without any respect either to
the public good, or any poor man's private interest? has not God in his
justice dealt with them, as they did with the late innocent King, and all of us
of his ser^ants? Tell me I beseech you what will be the issue of this
inter-meddly of Government, and whether in the end, confusion will not
necessarily follow these strange mutations, and account taken of them for their
extortions, and corrupt d^meanors toward the whole Nation?


Patriotus. I find you are still in your old ^one; but as in our last
conference and elsewhere, I have often told you, so now, I shall not take upon
me to justify every of their actions; for they are men made up and composed of
flesh and blood, subject to sin and error; and that the same God who gave them
the power they have had, would as soon divest them of it, as (beyond all
expectation) he bequeathed it unto them, in case they carried not themselves
with an upright heart; As to those your Prophetical issues to follow in
confusion, and of after-reckonings, may it befall them that deserve it; for my
hope it, and I doubt not, but that Almighty God i^ his providence, on this
great change of affairs, has another manner of work in hand then lies within
your kenning to discern, and will raise us up such unbyassed Governors as shall
set straight all obliquities, both in the Church and State, to his own glory
and the comfort of all good men; therefore let me advise y^u, not to be too
rash in your censure, on that whereof you are not able to judge, neither
de^cant on his judgments, which are in^crutable and past your finding out.


N^us. But Patriotus, I remember at our last con^erence, you also were pleased
to vent your self in the way of predictions, intimating that we must expect
worse calamities then heretofore we have endured, which as you then supposed,
would of necessity befall the universal Nation, not only in the continuation of
the Contributions and Taxes imposed on the people, but in other grievous
afflictions, which I prosess have ever since very much troubled my cogitations;
for God knows we have all suffered too much already, and more then the ability
of poor people can longer endure; though I confess, for any thing I can as yet
discern out of the motions of the State, the Contributions must of necessity be
continued, if not increased, for maintenance of their Armies both by Land and
Sea, and not unlikely will be long lived, and continued for a Prentiship, happily
of seven years endurance.


Patri. Yes, Neutralis, and longer then you imagine; for considering the work
the States at present have in hand, within our in-works, to suppress the
malignant Party; and in our outworks, for defending the Dominion of our Seas,
against the invading and ungrateful Hollander; we The necessity of the
continuation of the Contributions of the people.
cannot in any reason expect any cessation or remission of our Taxes, but that
constanrly they will be continued, if not increased; and of this we have a
president in the change of the Government in the Nether-Lands; where, on their
revolt from the Spaniard, the States were enforced to raise their Excise on all
things which the Natives did eat or drink, and to impose Customs on all sorts
of Merchandise, either imported or exported; without which, they could never
have been enabled to pay their Armies, and to wage war with so potent a Prince
as the King of Spain, and that for 80 years endurance at least; which shows
out unto us what we are to expect, even a continuation of our Taxes, and well
it would be if we escape so.


Prela. Its a fine liberty and freedom then, that the late Parliament and your
reformers have procured to the Nation; and indeed Patriotus, I am of your
opinion, that the States here (as you style them) must of necessity continue,
if not increase the Contributions, when as all the Kings Lands and goods, the
Bishops and Delinquents Estates are sold and spent, and when the King comes in
to multiply their charge, and enforce them for payment of their Armies, to take
any thing (as often they have done) wheresoever the Soldier can find it;
there being but one only way left us to preserve the Nation from utter ruin
and a final destruction.


Neut. I beseech you Doctor, what one way is that? I shall be very thankful
unto you to show me that learning, that so we may see an end of our miseries,
and that such as my self (who never bore Arms on either side, neither had a
hand in shedding of one drop of blood) might come at length to know the
uttermost of our pain, and enjoy our wonted tranquillity.


Prel. In brief Neutralis, it is the admission of the King to his Royal Rights;
for without a King, and the restitution of the Crown Lands, and the Churches
Patrimony, never expect an end of our calamities, but an everlasting war, with
the continuation of the Taxes, and oppressions of the poor people, so long as
those innocent Princes of the Royal Line are unjustly kept out of their
Inheritance; the example whereof we may see in Holland, very judiciously even
now instanced by Patriotus, to whose judgment I appeal, as the readiest and
surest remedy to cure the convulsions of the Land, and to settle peace
throughout the three Nations, which otherwise is impossible to accomplish.


Patri. Doctor, give me leave to dissent from your Opinion, and in the first
place, to remember you of that wherewith even now you and the Colonel taxed the
Parliament with, the oppressions of the people, wherein you over-shoot the mark
without looking to the original causes and the reasons which have enforced the
States to impose those payments on the Natives, which are necessitated for
keeping the poor people from farther bloodshed and oppression: It Is in part
true, that in case the King of Scots could be as readily admitted as you speak
it, and in a peaceable and safe way for the Nation, both in respect of the
present and suture security, it might happily conduce somewhat toward a present
settelment of affairs for a time, which would not be either long or lasting,
but never disburthen us of our payments; for as the case now stands, on
admission of any one of the late Kings Lineage, he would doubtless on all
opportunities have an animum revertendi, a mind to the old way, viz. to rule
at will and pleasure, (an ambition inseparably united to the Sep^ers of all
Kings, especially to these which claim successively and de jure Coronae;) so
that in a short time, we should be in statu quo prius enforced to fight over
again and again the old quarrel for preservation of the common Liberty;
Therefore I beseech you Doctor, consider well of the present condition wherein
we are, together with the settled resolution of the State here in being, which
have not only taken away the late Kings life, as the only remedy left them to
settle a firm peace; but farther have resolved to exclude his Posterity, a^ not
holding the Fathers blood either a sufficient expiation for the infinity of
blood spilt throughout the three Nations, or the Royalties and Possessions of
the Crown, neither the Lands of the Bishops (which without all question were
the grand sticklers and promoters of all our late concussions) a competent
amends for the injuries and losses suffered by the three Nations, but in
detestation of Kingly Government (whence through all Ages has proceeded such
numberless oppressions and imbroylments) never to admit of any more Kings;
besides, you may take it in the way, what an essay the States have already made
for the settlement o^ an Aristocratical Government, in im^^acion of the Romans,
after their cuting of Tarquin us and his Posterity for Ty^anny; an^ a^ of later
days* the States of Holland have done, and prosperously accomphshed; I app^al
to your own judgment, (whether the King of Scots coming in by sorce of Arms or
not at all) w^ll The destructive consequence of the Sco^ch Kings coming in by
the sword.
not plunge the Nation into an irreparable condition? yea, into ten degrees
worse then at present we are in? and that of necessity i^ must be so, and can
be no other; please you to have patience, I shail render you many infallible
reasons, and such as I believe cannot be gainsaid; besides, it is well known,
that the present Pretender is affected, happily infected with his Fathers
principles of absolute Sovereignty, which will never suit with the genius of
the States here in being, which have the staff in their hands, with the Powers
and strengths of all the Land at their only command, and for ought I can
perceive, are both able and intentive to uphold the present Government, and so
to establish it, that in man's reason its impossible to divest them otherwise
then by a stronger power, which I believe lies not within the Scotch Kings
reach to compass.


Prel. Doubt not you of that; for the King is not so destitute of friends and
means to accomplish his designs as you imagine; neither am I of your opinion
that the Kings coming in will make our condition worse then now it is; for
worser it cannot be; but on the contrary, he will out of his innate goodness
and compassion toward the poor oppressed people, relieve them in what possibly
he may, and that by an act of Oblivion, all old grutches with the late
dissentions shall be coffined up and forgotten, in his gracious and general
pardon to all parties; And I am clearly of opinion that there can be no safer
and readier way to compose all feuds and differences to ease the people of
their Contributions, and reestablish an everlasting peace throughout the three
Nations, then the acceptance of his Majesty to be our King, as of right he
ought to be, and as I doubt not ere long he shall be in spite of all his
enemies.


Patri. Doctor, I be^eech you, let us reason this case amongst our selves in
moderation, and with patience, and let the first Quere be whether the States
Government, as it is now settled, or shortly may be, with our present
Contributions for payment of their Armies, will not be more safe and easy for
the people, then the Scotch Pretenders coming in by force of Arms to assume the
Kingly Government; Since, by a peaceable and conditional way, I suppose, he
will never be admitted; So that Doctor, without all question he has no choice
left him, but that of the sword, and then judge you of the issue, and into what
a lamentable condition the poor Natives will necessarily be reduced, when the
right of the crown comes again to be disputed on English ground, the king (as
you would have him) being personally present; And after this Quere, Let us
compute the hopes, helps, strengths, and assistances, whereon both parties may
dep^nd for support of each others cause; For one battle either by Sea or Land,
happily will not determine the controversy, as it was conceived by some, that
one battle (as that at Edghill) in the beginning of the late wars would decide
the business, which proved to be like the pullulation of the Monster Hidra's
head, which begot others in infinitum, and when the late King was in person in
the head of his A^my. Of the hopes, assistances and Forces which the Scotch
King may have to recover the Kingly Government, compared with the strengths the
States have to maintain the present Government, argued on all hands.
I say then, Let us make an ^stimate of the forces and assistances of each
party; which on a due examination, and on consideration of that which must
necessarily follow, when at once (as we may conjecture) two, four, or happily
six several Armies may be in the field, will be so far from easing, or
d^sburchening of the people, that what by free Quartering, and enforcing of
contributions by one or the other party, that the Natives will curse the time
that ever your King came amongst them. Now Gentlemen, do one of you tell me,
what Forces and Assistances (as you conceive) the King may have or presume
upon; for I believe he will come short of his expectation in receiving any
considerable Assistance, either from the Scotch, or Irish, and then I will tell
you, that which all men and your selves do know to be most true, what the
States here have, and may have, as well in their present power by Sea and Land,
as by their Politic managery, in fastening friends unto them, whereby to make
good the present establishment: Colonel, You being a Soldier, and (not
unlikely) having better Intelligence, from abroad, then any of us, what
preparations the Scots King has in foreign parts, what friends at home and
elsewhere, begin you if you please, and I will rejoyn.


Thraso. With all my heart; In the first place I Will assure you, that since the
death of the late King my Royal Master, his Majesty that now is, whom the
States here would exclude, has ten friends for one, more then he had before,
thoughout the three Kingdoms; so much your States have gotten by the bargains
in Martyring their King: neither ought you to believe, but that the King has
both in Scotland, and Ireland, a very considerable party that will join with
him as soon as he arrives, and not a few even in the City of London, which
expect a good time, though they lie still and quiet; however the King has
their hearts, and will have their hands on all fitting occasions; Besides, He
has at his devotion all the Catholics, and most of the Clergy of England,
with all the Lords, so lately and Injuriously thrust out of their house,
together with the better part of the Members of the Commons house, pul^ed out
by the ears, by the Independent Souldery, all which refused to take the
Engagement, and when time serves will appear in Arms for him, besides all the
The Scotch Pretenders hopes in assistance for recovery of the Crown, summed up.
old Royal party Banished the Realm for their fidelity to their old Master:
Thus much for the ayds and assistances his Majesty may rely on from his own
Subjects; And as to his foreign assistance, you may rest assured that all the
Princes through Christendom (when the time serves) will engage for him, since
it stands them upon so to do; Neither may you doubt but that all the Princes,
his near Kinsmen, and Allies will furnish him plentifully with all sorts of
Ammunition, and the Hollanders with shipping, so soon as they have mastered the
Seas, and made all things ready for an Invasion; for believe it as an evident
truth, that in the present quarrel by Sea between them and this State, the
Kings Interest is involved, and will be pursued, notwithstanding their late
brush which they reckon not of, neither of a few inconsiderable Ships, they
having enough of others to recrute in a trice; so that you may evidently see,
that as soon as time serves, the King cannot want men: and for money, good
Swords and Pistols will fetch it in with a vengeance; Whence you may discern
what an unwildy task the late piece of a Parliament, and these new sprang-up
States have undertaken, and what will necessarily befall them, through their
own divisions and when the King appears in power, (as of that you may be sure,
he will sooner then you think on) then you shall see a world of the Parliaments
friends to fall from them, and for their own sakes will fight for him; and
probable it is, that a good number of the States Soldiers, now in their pay,
on his Majesty's landing (with another manner of equipage then all of you are
aware of) will run from them to him, with all their hearts as their indubitable
Lord and Sovereign.


Partri. Colonel, you have indeed succinctly summed up what Forces (as you
surmise) the King may have and expect both at home and from abroad: wherein you
are very much mistaken, and do reckon without your host; you speak rather what
you would have, then in reason what the King can have: still discovering your
malignant heart, and flattering your self (as most of your party use to do)
with vain and imaginary hopes, not considering how the late King,
notwithstanding all his wyles and attifices, failed in all his designs and
practices, and at last, brought him self and his friends to utter ruin, to the
great detriment and desolation of three Kingdoms, still soothing up himself
with the goodness of his cause (which was as bad as bad might be) to the last
gasp; neither take you the least notice of Gods providence in the disposure of
this wonderful work and change of Affairs, neither the continued series of the
many mitaculous Victories which it has pleased God to give to the States
Armies, wherein the very hand of the Almighty is most perspicuous to all good
men; but to you and your accomplices hidden and unseen, even to obduracy and
hardening of your hearts. The heathen Poet methinks should teach you, Quos u^lt
perder^ Jupiter dementat, whom God intends to destroy, he blinds and hardens
them as he did Pharaoh. But Colonel; I b^seech you, on your better
consideration, tell me what assistance can the Princes the Kings kindred afford
him, were they able and willing to aid him? and in what Region are they, and
The States power and strengths at present.
in what Climate we? are we not both severed by the vast Ocean? I shall tell
you a story, and of one of the greatest Princes Christian of his time, even the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, who on a defiance sent him by Henry the Eighth, made
this Answer to the Herald, Tell my Uncle from me, he talks big, and like the
Fox in h^^ burrow when he knows himself in safety, so your Master environed
with the Sea, but were he on the Continent, happily then he might be talked
withal on better terms then he sends ^e: You may gue^s at the application. What
hurt I pray can the Kings of France, Spain, Portugal, Denmark, Sweden, with
other the Princes of Germany do to this State (in humane judgment) as it is an
Island environed with the vast Ocean, provided with all Instruments and
Abiliments of War both by Sea and Land^ could their own domestic wars,
jealousies, and differences give them leave to attempt against this State:
Which without doubt is backed by the power of Heaven, had you the grace to see
it, and therewith to call to mind in what strength the late King was but 1645,
and of how many strong Garrisons posseft, and what Armies, (almost) in every
County of the Land; how many of the Nobility and prime Gentry in every Province
at his devotion, how powerful in Scotland and Ireland? and yet within 15
Months beaten in all places, his many Garrisons and himself taken. Look upon
the attempts of his Son, whom all of you so much adore and desire, that he
would pursue his obstinate Fathers quarrel to the further destruction of the
Natives; look upon the Scots beaten under Hambleton with the whole Nation, by
the now Lord General Cromwell; and Ireland likewise reduced by him, and the King
himsef with his powerful Army beaten to flitters at Worcester; the Hollanders
at Sea; and yet all of you of the Royal Party still flatter your selves with
vain hopes, by reembroyling the Nation in a new War, which can be to no other
effect but to the ruin of your selves, in kicking against the pricks, and the
immediate hand of the Almighty. Now Colonel, I shall tell you particularly what
the States Forces are at present, and what a posture of defense and offense
they are in, and will be on any Invasion from abroad, or rising at home; First,
they are possessed of all the Forts, Ports, Castles, and Ammunion of the Land,
together with a very great Naval Force, and as occasion requires, more they may
and will have; the whole revenue of the Nation being at their command;
Moreover, they have a very great veteran and Victorious Army, ready disciplined
on all occasions, under their pay, and maintained at the Natives charge, all
the Commanders and Soldiers inured to the Wars, and as I may say, of one
Corporation and fraternity, such as knows each others minds, and what they are
to do on all Invasions and homebred disturbances; and this is obvious to all
men, and known to your selves, when as all those numbers you speak of to be
here for the King hand and heart, yet is it evident they will never be able to
imbody to any purpose, but will be cut all in pieces whenever they attempt
it, and that by the States horse dispersed throughout the Land: Again, You must
of necessity admit that the Scotch King can never make his preparations so
silent, but that such is the vigilance of the States (wheresoever his
rendezvous shall be) but that they will have particular intelligence thereof,
and will be ready with a powerful Fleet to impead the transport of any
considerable Army so soon as it puts out to Sea, and to fight or sink them
before ever they shall set one foot on English ground; and suppose his Naval
Forces be never so great, without all question, the States Flect here will be
every way equivalent; so that on a right judgment to be made, the Scotch King
has a far more difficult task in hand (being to invade by Of the difficulty
that the Scotch King bath to invade by Sea.
Sea) then any of us can imagine: Besides, you may remember what numbers of the
Gentry and Yeomandry of the Land are tied and fixed to the States, and most of
the Commanders and Troopers which have bought much of the Kings and Bishops
Lands, are all bound to fight as well for the Venders interest as their own; so
that you may be sure they will rather stand to the work for their own sakes,
then run to the King to their own undoing; now besides all this already
recited, I pray take into consideration, the terror which the late
sequestrations have impressed on all Delinquents and adherents to the late King,
with the present poverty and dejection of all that party, which both disables
and disheartens them to arm in the behalf of a King that eats no other bread
then that of Alms-deed: It Is true, there is a numerous party in the Land both of
close and open Malignants, some whereof (answerable to their old humor) will
talk big and at large in the Kings behalf; but to fight afresh for him, they
will be very cautious, especially those which have any thing left them to lose,
and when they very well know how many Watches and Sentinels attend their
motious th^oughout all corners of the Land.


Prelat. Its most true, that the King has a very difficult task in hand for
the recovery of his rights, (oeing to inwade by Sea) if we reason ad captum
humanum, according to man's understanding; but it is far otherwise, when we come
to consider what God will do, who never forsakes the righteous cause, but in
his own good time never fails to remember and help the afflicted, when they
least think on it and when; he that knows his own time will confound the wicked,
and such as most impiously have intruded on the Regal Rights, with the
administration of justice to the people, which with what equity they measure
out unto them, your own knowledge and the clamours of many an honest man can
best restifie. Now as to your late instance in the Hollanders revolt, and with
what success they encountered so powerful an Adversary as the King of Spain,
worsted him and established their Aristocratical Government, and in humane
reason have so fortified it that they seem impregnable; between this case and
the late Kings there is a great difference; for as your self has observed, the
grounds and reasons of their revolt first sprang from the impetuous demeanor
and Tyranny of Don Alvas de Toledo, who as Lipsius reports, in that short time
of his Vice-Roy-ship, put to death and massacred ^ not so few as 100000 of the
Natives, amongst which the Counts Egmont and Horn, with others of the Nobility,
were the chief which withstood his Tyranny, and stood up in defense of their
immunities, which the King of Spain by power would have taken from them; which
was a just cause given to the people to revolt, both for safeguard of their
lives and privileges, which the four great Dukes of Burgandy suffered them to
enjoy; so that on a right understanding of the Hollanders case, which was just
and but reason, that when they could not obtain right from the King upon their
many Petitions and complaints of the Tyranny of his Ministers, they could do no
less then endeavor the preservation of their lives and fortunes; And therefore
under the conduct of the Prince of Orange, they seized on diverse of the
strongest Towns, and the people unanimously fell in with the Prince, and ever
since manfully and fortunately have defended themselves. But in the late
defection of the English with the Parliaments raising of Armies against their
Sovereign Lord, there is no manner of similitude with that of Holland, or any
such cause given or ground of the peoples defection; since I presume you will
confess that not so much as one guiltless man (during all the late Kings reign)
has been put to death, unless you object and instance in those which by the
fatality of the late War befell both parties, which you know to be no other then
fortuna de la gu^ra, not the Kings Tyranny or the least desire of his that a
drop of innocent blood should have been spilt; and that which was, was in his
own necessitated defense. But I pray take the case as now it stands between the
present King and your States, then you may soon see the difference; for in
confirmation of the Colonels assertion, I dare affirm the King has ten
friends for one to those on whom the States may rely as firm and fixed to them
since his late Majesty was put to death; and that major number, (you may be
sure on'^) are all his in body and soul, and do utterly detest that his Royal
Father and ^ himself should be so unjustly cut off and excluded of his
birthright; and by whom think you, but by an inconsiderable part of the
representative, the Soldiery, and a handful of the people theirs adherents?
and therefore I say, that the King on a right estimate of his party, upon the
least turn of the wheel will have a surerer and a stronger side then possibly
the States here can have.


Patri. Doctor, in this your last reply, I observe some notable particulars;
first you approve of the justness of the Hollanders defection; yet you say,
that it parrallels not with this of the States here and change of the
Government; the reasons you have given for justifying the Hollander, I confess
are most true, self preservation being just and allowable by Gods Law and man's;
But that now you should defend their cause, which none of your said party ever
did till of late, is somewhat strange, unless it be for that (as you believe)
they are secretly engaged in the Scotch Kings Cause; and yet you condemn the
late Parliament for defending themselves and their liberties against the late
Kings Tyranny, which you shamefully endevor to excuse, and would quit him from
all blood-guiltines^. To which I answer, That had you thought upon your own
instance of 100000, of the Natives massacred by the Tyranny of the Spaniard, it
would have put you in mind of a million of people throughout the three
kingdoms slain and murdered, by the mere Tyranny, Plots and practices of the
late King, of which you take no notice, but after the wonted manner of all
Royalists, you justisty his innocence; so that to the worlds-end you give
occasion to the Parliaments party to rip up the faults of the dead, and cause
them to display all his Falsehoods, frauds, breaches of Oaths and Protestations:
But as to your assertion, That the major number of the people here, are for the
Scotch Pretender in body and soul, is in part granted you, yet therein you
extremly delude your self; for the odds in that major number will little
advantage him or his party, since the major power lies evidently in the lesser
number which are for the States; what then? will it avail a prince
(unexperienced) to lead a great yet an undisciplined Army, against a lesser
number but well disciplined, valiant and armed Soldiers; though you cannot be
ignorant that the States Armies are very strong and numerous in all the three
Nations. As to your denial of the similitude and parallel, I say on the same
reasons that the Hollanders took up The Hollanders case and of the States here
al^ke parallel.
arms in defense of their liberties, the people here did the same for defense
of themselves and their Representative; so that the parallel on the actions of
both States holds and is alike, save only in the ^nanimity and universal
promptitude of the Nether Lands in their joining and uniting of all their
Forces, with the Princes Orange.
retinn^e; it is most true, the parallel in this holds not so fully; for I must
confess the State of the matter and manner of the revolt of a part of the
people from the late King is different, and remains doubtful what may fall out
in the issue, in respect that the other major part of the people are conceived
still to wish well to his Son the present Pretender, and that all the three
Nations stand in a kind of distracted condition, in regard that they are
divided into parties, sides, factions, fractions, fects, schisms and opinions,
which I acknowledge may sooner mar the work of the States now in being then
they are aware of. But in a word more to the point, that the major number of
the people are for the Scocth Pretender, I say again, that that number
considered as they are a naked, awed, and dejected bulk of discontented
animals, signifies little or nothing, compared with that power of which the
States here are possessed; neither in humane reason can we see how or by whom
they can be dispossessed. But let us on all hands suppose that the present
Pretender shall land again in England or Scotland, (as of late he did, where
you know he was beaten, there, and at Worcester, and forc'^ to fl^e for his
life;) again, suppose he comes in with a n^merous Army of French, Dutch,
Lorrainers, Germans, Sweeds, Dants, together with all the prescribed Cavaleers,
and all these united with a good party of Scotch and Irish, admit them to be in
all 60000 fighting men (which will be too great an Army to be transported
without a very powerful Navy) such numbers you will grant cannot stay long there,
unless they mean to eat one another; well then, you will say, they may
instantly march into England, (as of late they did) and not unlikely in two or
three several bodies, and in diverse ways, the more to distract our Armies;
where you ought to remember that this State has both in Scotland and the
adjacent parts, a very considerable force to encounter these Invaders; but
admit again, that the King advances so far as York, though you cannot imagine
but that he will be fought with twice or thrice over before he comes thither
with fresh men, and not unlikely rebeaten, as at all places he has been; but
let us again admit that he s^rmounts all difficulties both by Sea and Land, and
becomes victorious, and triumphantly marches toward London, and that the
States Force cannot withstand him, and that on the noise of such sad news, the
prevailing party (as you are pleased to style them) being confound^d with
terror, betake themselves to their heels as their ultimum refugium, and the
best way to shist for themselves, and that after this, all is left to the Kings
absolute disposement, (as all this not impossible, but exceeding improbable,)
what then, on such sudden change of fortune think you, may be the issnes
thereof, and what advantage either to your party or the generality of the
people, and all Countries through which his Armies shall march and Quarter,
accompaned with so many Nations dive^sly affected?


Prel. I confess the people must ne^essarily suffer, and happily in a greater
measure then hitherto they have done; yet am I confident, his Majesty will be
very sensible of their sufferings, and in prevention of their farther
oppression, and for settling of all things, will immediately call a new
Parliament, and reduce it to the ancient Form and Institution of the three
Estates, King, Lords Spiritual and Temporal, with the Commons, and then commit
all things to a sober, legal, and Parliamentary discussion; and in what manner
restitution may be made of his own Lands and goods, the Churches Patrimony,
with the many other loosers of his own party; and after all this, in
detestation of the foulness of the late War and bloodshed, to bu^y all
discontents and heart-burnings (as Judge Jenkins very j^diciously proposes) in
an Act of Oblivion, with free pardon to all, except some special persons that
had a principal hand in his Fathers death, and for all other of his Subjects,
to spare and cherish them in what possible his affaits will permit.


Patri. Doctor, excuse me, since I utterly dissent from your opinion; for it
stands not with reason, or with the Kings then present affairs to take a piece
of that course, which you suppose; and should he be willing, there would be so
many of the old Cavalry attending his person, as well Natives as Forraigners,
which would thrust in to be served and gratified, that he should not be
suffered to put in practice a title of that which is by you so vainly surmised;
but you may build upon it, he would take a clean contrary course, and such a one
as the necessity of his then urgent occasions would enforce, and not tie up
himself to his own disadvantage by an Act of Oblivion, which necessarily must
disable him either to help himself or friends, when the power is in his hands
to do what he pleases, and carve as he lists.


Prel. Since you are so diffident of his Majesty's good nature and intentions
toward his Subjects, tell us I beseech you, what you conceive he will do for
the speedy settling of peace and amity through the three Kingdoms.


Patri. May I obtain your license, and a favorable construction of that which
I shall deliver, I will tender my opinion, and leave you all to make your own
judgments thereon: In the first place, I believe that whereas then he comes in
by the sword, in order to his necessities he would rule by the sword and by an
Army, with Garrisons throughout the Land, (as now the States upon the point do
and must do, if they mean to go through stitch with their work) and thenceforth
begin a new Government (as in like manner the States here intend to do) the
Laws of the Land (which under the present power the people yet enjoy, as they
were wont to do in quiet and peaceable times) would necessarily be subverted
and turned topsie-turvie, and such introduced in their room as should best suit
with the will and pleasure of a Prince that comes in by Conquest, and by the
same power will have them to be no other then agrees with his Affairs and
resolutions, or as they are in France, if not worse and more absolute, where a
single paper signed under the Kings hand has the same efficacy as an Act of
Parliament in England: and in order to this, you must expect that his mercenary
Soldiers must and would be remembered: If you demand in what; I answer, with
the whole plunder of London, as the readiest means to give them all content for
their service; and if this seem strange to you, I pray call to mind, that in
the late Kings time when no occasion of wars or raising of Armies in any reason
were necessary to be levied, but such as our late Grandees, the Earl of
Strafford, Canterbury and Cottington would have to be raised against the Scots;
that Earl spoke it openly at the Councel-Table 1640, and to no other man then
the Lord Mayor Sir Henry Garway, and others of the Aldermen upon their refusing
to lend the king 100000 l. for the Scotch War; It will never do well, (says he)
till the King hangs half a dozen of you Aldermen, and then put the whole City
to ransom: Which was proved against him at his Arraignment; neither did the
king forbear the seizing of the Mint for supply of that needless War: so that
it is evident when Princes have power, they will make no scruple to act any
thing that conduces to their designs, or to take all things where they can
find it, as it is well known he did in the late barbarous War; neither will it
be impertinent to put you in remembrance of another instance of this kind,
when at or before the beginning of the War, the king took his journey toward
Scotland, and overtook the Scotch Army in their march homewards 1641, where he
dealt with the principal Commanders to turn head on the Parliament, in reward
whereof they should have the plunder of London, with Jewels for security; an
overture which some of them were not so dishonest as to conceal, but gave
notice thereof to the City and their own Commissioners then here residing: Now,
if you farther demand, What the present Pretender would do in the pre-supposed
case, I shall again answer you, that in reason of State (which with Kings and
Conquerors has an Of the miserable condition that will befall the Nation,
especially the City of London, in case the Scots Pretender comes in by the
sword.
immense latitude) he would and could do no less, then to take present order
for the satisfaction of his Countrymen the Scots, as also for gratifying the
proscribed and fugitive Lords, Cavaleers, both English, Scotch and Irish, which
first took part with his Father, and in this supposed Conquest, joined in aid
of himself; so that the estates of the Parliament Members would be much with
the least to make them all compensation for their services and losses sustained
by Seisures, Sequestrations, and many total Confiscations; nay, you may rest
assured, that there would follow upon such a Conquest, a more exact and
rigorous search for Delinquents estates against the king, then ever the
Parliament made for Delinquents against them; and you may build upon it, that
not a common Soldier, whether Native or Stranger, but would press the king for
some considerable recompense for his service; Insomuch that there would
necessarily fall out such a strange change of affairs, and so much oppression
of the people above that which we now suffer, as that it would amaze the
universal people to look upon the miseries which would befall them; neither
ought you to esteem of that ridiculous surmise of Judge Jenkins, annexed to the
conclusion of all his juggling fragments, to wit, that the late kings Act of
Oblivion would have been the readiest and only way both to reconcile all
differences, and (as he infers) settle peace throughout all the three kingdoms,
that being a subtle kind of begging the Question, and only for his own
private ends, having a tacit relation to himself, though craftily umbrated
under the vail of the common good, and in a cunningness to endeer the Souldery
to him, with a super-indulgent seemingly Of the juglings of Judge Jenkins in
Lex terrae.
care he pretended to have them paid by all means; when the crafty fox only
intended his own indemnity, in freeing himself of all debts, acompts and
moneys, trusted in his hands, and for many years most unjustly detained from
the right owners Mr. John Earnly by name of the county of Wilts.
; you may take it in the next degree of an article of your faith, that the king
coming in (by the way of the sword) cannot (for the reasons alleged) be so
prodigal of his grace, as to spend so lavishly on the stock of his new gotten
Conquest, to grant a piece of an Act of Oblivion; for farther proof whereof, I
pray remember, that when the late king, after the battle at Edge-hil, fortified
Oxford, and as then (to most men's judgment) was in a sairer way to carry all
before him, there was not any debate in that mungril Parliament (as the king in
his Letters to the Queen calls them) that pleased him, and glad he was to be
rid of the tumultuous motions there made unto him; for even that Conventicle
composed of the Fugitive Members of Westminster (plotted by himself) had not
the right measure of his foor, but in a confused and streperous manner fell
always athawrt his inclinations, which were secrets he meant not to discover
but to such as could guess at them, and comply with his designs before himself
came to disclose them; and such as had that faculty, were the best instruments
for his turn; and believe it Gentlemen, he was too dark and cunning a Prince
for any that he ever employed; and certain it is, could he then, or at any
other time have destroyed this Parliament, he would have altered the
Government, and hanged by degrees most, if not all the Members, together with
all their adherents, and consequently to have made use of their estates as the
exegency of his affairs then required, to gratify such of the Nobility and
Gentry as he had befooled in, to side with him, though to their own loss, and
that of the universal Nation, and this was well known to all men of an ounce of
wit, that made any resort to his Oxford Garrison, as it has been openly
confessed by some of his chiefest Commanders Colonel Leg and others.
, and of greatest trust about his person, since the rendition of that City, and
in this particular I appeal to you Colonel, who then waited on his Majesty.


Colonel. That which you now avouch Patriotus, is a known truth, and the king
in reason of State, and in reference to his own profit, and the designs he had
in hand, as also for our sakes which stood to him, would do no less then change
the The change of the Laws and Government, which of necessity would follow a
Conquest.
Laws and the Government, but especially to quit himself of all Parliaments,
which throughout most Raigns have been so cross and opposite to their kings;
and so to any Act of Oblivion after a Conquest obtained, and that then a
general pardon should have been granted to all sides; the Judge was out of his
sphere and pratled like a Parrot; for admit that the king should so much
overshute himself, as to grant an Act of Oblivion, in what a condition should
we of the Soldiery be? what then could we expect in reward of our service,
(which for his late Majesty's sake and the Kings that now is, or shall be in
spite of the Devil) have hazzarded our lives and fortunes? Sure I am, my late
Master, not only promised me, but granted to diverse of us his Commanders, such
and such Parliament men's estates; yea, and o^ Witness Colonel Gunters estate of
the County of Pembrook, and diverse others.
Delinquents, both Lands and Goods; and you may be sure, more he would have
given had he obtained his ends, then all of you are aware of; and I doubt not,
but that his Royal Successor in good time will do the same as his Father
intended, so soon as he comes to be invested with the Septer; otherwise, he
would be the most ungrateful Prince, most deficient and wanting to himself,
that ever was in the world? Nay, reason persuades me Patriotus to concur with
your opinion, as touching this treacherous City of London, from whence the
Parliament in the very beginning of the War had their only assistance, and were
first enabled to wage War with their King, which I hope his now Majesty will
never forget, whenever he comes to be Enthroned, and then I doubt not, but to
have a good shane of the Citizens money, Gold Chains, Rings, Plate, Jewels,
Silks, Satins, Velvets, Of the implacable batre: the Cavaleers bear to the City
of London.
and that in plentiful measure, since I have taken special notice that they
bequeathed not all their Riches to the Parliament; some I am sure, and that
good store, are left for such as better deserves them, then such Mecanicks as
knew not how otherwise to use their goods, then to the destruction of his
Majesty and the Kingdoms detriment.


Patri. Colonel, I profess I am bound to honor you, for that you have heartily
and like your self spoken the truth, and what in reason (in such a case) would
befall the City, not only in the total plunder thereof, which will be much,
with the least to satisfy such a multitude, both of Natives and Strangers;
neither can it sink into my understanding, that the ransacking of the City will
be the worst that may befall it; such an implacable hatred do you of the old
Cavalry in general bear toward the Citizens, that if God ave^t it not, in all
probability the whole City will run the same fortune with Saguntum in Spain,
Carthage in Africa, and Jerusalem in Asia, and this fate the Cavaleers
themselves have often in my hearing wished unto it.


Neut. Gentlemen, your divinations seem strange to me, and they very much
trouble my cogitations to hear you talk in such horrid language; I hope you
believe the King of Scots to be a Christian, and not that he will destroy
himself, which will be as good as done, whenever so great and oppulent a City
becomes ruined, which is the key of the Kingdom, and from whence issues the
greatest Revenue and Income the Kings of England have ever received by Customs
and Imposts from the Merchants; but more especially, since he cannot be
ignorant that he has within this City a world of loyal Subjects, (as I my self
for one) which never bore arms against his Father, nor voluntarily contributed
to the Parliament one groat, otherwise then needs he must whom the Devil
drives; therefore I doubt not, however the game goes, he will remember his
friends, and distinguish them from his foes.


Patri. Excellently well inferred Neutralis, it seems then you conceive your
self safe and sure, for that in all the late Wars you have carried your self in
a neutral way, and according to the old adage, been vivit qui been latuit, he
fares best that keeps himself close and out of the scuffle. But suppose the
King after his Victory and march, comes to be possessed of the City, accompanied
(as that you may believe) with four or five several Nations, can you imagine
that so numerous an Army attending his person, will or can Quarter elsewhere
then in the City, and when they are there, think you not but that the Soldier
will have a mind to the business, viz, to take A continued description of the
lamentable effects that will^ besal the Nation in the case aforesaid.
up their pay out of the ransacking of the Citizens, and that without any
distinction of persons? happily you conceive that the King out of his Grace and
good will toward his friends, will cause a mark, or some cross to be set up at
their doors, whereby to difference his loyal Subjects from those which assisted
the Parliament, and took up Arms against him and his Father. No Neutralis, let
not such a Chimaera enter in your thoughts, when you shall find your imagined
cross to be no other then in so promiscuous a plundring, that your self or any
others of your mode shall escape scot-free, or that whenever the Souldierie
falls to riffling, think you, any of them will be so nice and mannerly, as to
forbear any that lies in the way of their fury, or that in such a confusion,
the King himself (were he willing) can stay them, which aforehand are prompted
to enr^ch themselves with a booty, which lies so readily before them, or that
the Soldier will be so modest as to omit so fair an opportunity, and suffer
the Citizens to convey their cash and commoditities out of the way of their
needy, and greedy clutches: Let me I beseech you dispute this case a little
farther with you, for rest assured, that not only those which had a hand in
his Fathers death, (whom long since he has doomed to death and confiscation by
his own D^clarations) but even all those which assi^ted the Parliament, or
stood neutral, will necessarily sall into the number of plundered persons, yea
all such as at the beginning of the War took up Arms, and were listed under the
Earl of Essex (which indeed were the first that broke the Ice, and made the way
open to the new Model under the Lord Fairfax, and the now Lord General
Cromwell;) Do you think that any of those of the first establishment, which laid
down Arms when the Lord General Essex laid down his Commission, diverse of
which, either before or after have been chosen Parliament Members: and were
known to be bold speakers in the behalf of the late Kings readmission to the
Kingly Government, will or can escape? If you conceive they will, your
imagination is vain and reasonless, since it stands not with reason of State,
or the Kings necessities to lose the least grist that otherwise may come to his
wanting Mill: Moreover, you may be sure on it, that in order to all the premised
plundrings and confiscations, you shall find all rich men, or so accounted,
will be called to an after reckoning, and holes picked in their coats (of what
party soever they have been) to the end to supply the Kings great debts and
urgent necessities; for who knows not, but that he has borrowed much, and yet
wants more then can well be Of the fearful consequences that attend a Conquest.
imagined, and that having the sword in his hand, he will and must have money
wheresoever it is to be had; and then believe it, the next bout will be a
strict inquisition, whom they are or have been, which have taken the old
Covenant, and the new Engagement, or have bought any of the Crown-Land;, or
goods of the late Kings, the Bishops and Delinquents estates; and in order to
this progress, a rigorous inquiry will of course fall in, who they are which
the Parliament has employed, as actors and inst^uments for the promoting of
their designs, whether in the City or elsewhere in the Country; neither may you
doubt on'c, but that all the Judges, Sergeants at Law, Officers, Clerks of the
Crown and Chancery, Sheriffs, Justices of peace, Commissioners, Committees,
with all other inferior Clerks and Officers, whom the Parliament have employed
throughout the Nation, acting by, and under their power, will by degrees be
fetched over and enforced to come off with greater Fines then possibly they are
able to bear, and this (in part) was put in practice by the late Kings
Commissions thoughout all his Quarters, and wheresoever his Armies had
prevalence, when he resided at Oxford and elsewhere; and enough there will be,
which will not fail to instruct and inform this King, that all the riches of
the Land, (saved from the spoil of his Father) will not be sufficient to make
him satisfaction for the infinite losses which the Crown has sustained since
the beginning of the late War, and to recompense such as have suffered by
taking his part.


Thraso. Signiour Patriotus, dam me, if all that you have now said be not
Oracles; and the King ought not, or can in honor do less then that which with
well measured reason you have declared, and in case he does it not to a hairs
breadth, I shall take him not to be so wise as he should be; for in
confirmation of your opinion, I Will tell you a story, and it is a true one, on my
life, and the reputation of a Soldier, that all of us at Oxford concluded This
is a known truth, and has been often aver'd by many residing at Oxford 1642.
when to all men's think^ng the King was in a sairer way to have carried all
before him.
that after the destruction of the Parliament, the King undoubtedly was
resolved both to alter the Laws and change the Government, hang all the
Parliament men at Westminster for high Treason, and then banish all the
Puritans in England; and next the design was, to take the same course with the
Presbyterians of Scotland, (as the greatest Enemies to Monarchy and Episcopacy
in the World;) and if ever the King comes to be Master, and in the way, wherein
I doubt not but he shall be with the sword in his hand, and we of the Cavalry
at his heels, if he hangs not ten thousand of these Puritans, Independants and
Presbyterians, I shall for ever hereafter judge him incapable of the managery
of any other Scepter, then that of a sweetch or an hon^st riding rod; and be
confident Gen^lemen of the truth of this Story, in confirmation whereof I
remember, that my Master commissioned the chief Justice Heath, the Attorney
Harbert, with diverse more of our Lawyers at Oxford, to go in their Circuits (as
I remember they called their Commissions of Oyer and Terminer) with Authority to
hang all those (as they well deserved) of the Parliaments party, but a pox take
them, they were so much aforehand with us of his Majesty's party, that the King
was compeld to The reasons of the late Kings withdrawing of his commissions of
Oyer and Terminer.
retract his Commissions, for saving of such of his own party, then in the
Parliaments custody; though one Francklin, whom I took prisoner at
Marleborough, and one Sir Hugh Owins, Burgess of Haverford-West, both
Parliament Members; the first whereof indeed dyed in prison at Oxford before
his Trial, but as to the other, I well remember he was designed by the King
himself to be tried in his own Country, and for High Treason; however, as
afterward I heard, he escaped the halter, but no otherwise then for the reasons
before told you; moreover, I am confident, that if his Majesty that now is
comes once to ride on the fore-horse, he will not fail to make sure work with
all The late Kings design to quit himself of all Parliaments.
Parliaments, and that neither himself or Successors shall stand in fear to be
farther controuled by them, or made slaves to their Subjects.


Prel. Gentlemen, you have all spoken according to your fancies and affections;
sure I am, it is very fit that restitution should be made, where estates have
been been injuriously taken from the right Owners, and services rewarded by him
for whose use and benefit they were performed; and it is Divinity, That the
Labourer is worthy of his hire: but in case the King cannot come to his own
otherwise then by the sword, I say, that such as shall assist and enable him to
obtain that which no man can deny to be rightsully his own, ought in all equity
to be recompenc't by some means or other, for as the present condition of the
King now stands, I see no other means left him, but by seizure of the
Parliaments estates, and plunder of the City, from whom my late innocent Master
received his bane, and the Parliament the means both to furnish and maintain an
Army against him at an instant.


Patri. Pardon me good Doctor, since I perceive you somewhat mistake me, for I
say not, that in case the King comes in by the sword, he then ought to ransack
the City, but that of necessity he will be compelled to do it, otherwise the
Soldiers will of courle do it of themselves; since it is well known to be the
design of the Royal party both at home and abroad, to be revenged on the
Citizens whenever opportunity serves them; for it is confessed on all hands,
that in the beginning of the War, they voluntarily came in with their moneys,
jewels, and plate, and trusted it on the public Faith, without which, on an
instant the Parliament could not possibly raise and pay such an Army as they
did; and there is no doubt on it, that in case the King shall make scruple to
plunder the City, yet am I confident he shall be sufficiently pressed and invited
to do it, or at least to impose such a ransom on it, as the Citizens shall
never be able to undergo; but God forbid either of them should be put in
execution.


Thraso. Now Patriotus, I perceive your meaning, but what you would not should
be put in execution, rest assured, If I can help it on, it shall not be left
undone; and I farther say, that in case any such opportunity shall be offered,
God forbid it should be omitted.


Neut. And I am glad, Colonel, I know your good meaning toward the City, but I
hope God will so provide for us (as hitherto he has done) that as yet we have
not tasted of those cruelties which you of the Kings party have committed in
several parts of the Land, whereby you have made the Kings memory odious to the
present times and future; so I doubt not but the same God will preserve and
defend us from your malice: But I beseech you Patriotus, may there not some way
or other be thought upon to admit of his Majesty (who now is) on safe and
honorable terms, and such as may suit with the security of the Nation?


Patri. Surely, in my poor judgment, as the late King, and present Pretender
has handled the matter, there are no hopes left to any of that Family, by a
peaceable way to reinvest themselves with the Regal Dignity, but only that of
the sword, and then I have already told you in plain English, what in all
probability will be the sad issues; either continual attempts made on the
present power by the Pretender, or a perpetual continuation of war, so long as
any of the Family and dissendants of King King James the first plotter of
absolute sovereignty, and projector to dissolve and destroy Parliaments, and
this design farthered by the Prelates.
James remain alive; who to speak the truth, lead the way to all our miseries
and concussions both in the Church and State, and his Successor pursuing his
principles, what through his own inclinations to absolute Sovereignty, the
Queens Mother and her Daughters Councels, furthered by the Bishops and other
corrupt instruments, so brought it about, both to his own ruin, and the
dis-inheriting of the present Pretender; so fatal a thing it is, when Princes
will be more then of right they should be, and will not remember that they are
no otherwise to govern their people committed to their tuition, but by the same
Rules, Daniel in vita Reg. Johannis.
Laws, and conditions, as at their first ingress they received their Crowns on
Oath; and when the Grand father and Son shall forget their own Engagements, and
recede from their own principles, viz. that if Vide Basilicon Doron.
Kings would but consider that they are ordained of God for the good and
benefit of their people, and not their Subjects destinated to be governed by
their own will and pleasures, they should then never stray out of the right
Orb of Government: Moreover it is most true, that the Grandchild and present
Pretender, neither in the beginning of the wars nor since, took the right way
to gain the love and acceptance of the Parliament and people, but in his open
purluance of hostility both by Sea and Land incensed them, and made himself
utterly incapable of acceptance.


Prel. For Gods love, What would you that the poor innocent Prince should have
done on the massacre of his Father, and when all of his undeniable rights,
(divolved on him) were taken from him, and no means left him whereby to eat
bread, otherwise then to beg or borrow it, and you know he cannot
(Camelion-like) live by the air.


Patri. Doctor, it is of too transcendent a nature for me to direct Princes
dispossessed, or rather forfeiting of their Patrimonies by Tyranny, what course
to take for their recovery; but you cannot forget how unhappily he was set on
and engaged in his Fathers quarrel, which had he not been, but in such a
contest born himself in a neutral way, or sat still as his cousin the Count
Palatine did, I cannot disce^^ any reason why the Parliament should have
excluded him, but rather admitted him, as the States formerly did Edward the
Third after his Fathers deposition; but alas, he was so much, and so far
interessed in the quarrel, both in his Fathers life time; and more unhappily
since showed The reasons of the Parliaments excluding the King of Scots, and
the rest of the Descendants of King James.
himself the Son of that Father, from whom he received all those destructive
principles of Tyranny, which have utterly undone all those of our English
Princes that pursued them, as the instances of King John, Edward, and Richard
the Second, manifestly demonstrates; some of his Commissions issued out in his
Fathers life time whilst he was a Prisoner I have heard of, which shows him not
to be overindulgent toward Parliaments; but to this, doubtless an utter Enemy,
and to speak the truth, he took not the right way to win the hearts of the
people, since it is evident, that he has granted sundry Commissions, to rob and
spoil the Merchants at Sea, viz. to his cousin Rupert and his brother Maurice,
as his Father not long before Commissioned both the said Princes to spoil and
plunder the poor people by Land; more may be alleged, which shall rather be
concealed then ripped up by me; only in a word more to you Colonel, and all of
your party, whom I could wish to look about you, and bethink your selves of the
sad issues, which (in such a change as we have presupposed) will necessarily
befall your selves and posterity; happily the King during his own time, and to
some few of you may carry a favorable respect, but that his Successors or
himself intend to bestow Charters of Immunities upon you all, and intail them
on your Heirs-males, is a very vain and idle imagination; for after a Conquest,
and not unlikely within a Quarters time of a Century, it will of course fall
out as it did with Jacobs Posterity upon the decease of Pharaoh, when his
Successor would not so much as look upon, or know Joseph, but his whole raze
and Posterity fell altogether into the common-shore of bondage and Slavery; And
yet, such is your infatuation like the Israelites, which cried for a King, and
soon after would have been quit of him, but God told them he would not hear
them; and indeed few there are amongst us all that judge aright, or know our
own happiness and freedom in this present change of the Government.


Neut. Patriotus, Give me leave in a word or two to interpose; It appears to
me, as by your discouse I have collected, that our submission to the present
power of some special selected Gentry, without King and the late privileged
Lords, (which I confess were wont to do what they listed) will be more safe,
honorable, and profitable for the people, notwithstanding our Contributions,
then such as necessarily will befall us, should the excluded King come in by
force of Arms; I profess in such a case, I know not which side to take with
safety; advise me to the best, and I Will thank you.


Patri. Neutralis, I perceive you to be a crafty fox; you are best able to
judge what party to incline to; I leave you to your own choice, whether to side
with the present power (in case of an invasion) or to assist the Scotch King;
for I find it is your own safety, not the common good, that you aim at; only
this, take heed that reason do not invade you before it persuades you, though
it be already both sufficiently intimated and proved, that your adherence to
the present establishment will be your best course, yea, on any Invasion of the
Scotch King, to fight for your liberty, and not sit still as you say you have
done.


Prel. Patriotus, In all our conference hithereto, we have omitted the
principal verb which governs the sentence, and that is, concerning the late
Parliaments sitting at Westminster, acting according to their own wills and
pleasures; what they Vote, was without any more ado Enacted for Law, as a Rule
to the universal Nation; right or wrong, it must be obeyed; Now whether 160 at
most, of 560 at least, which formerly sat in both houses could be a
Parliament, is the Quere. I pray resolve me in this point; for in Law, or in
any rational man's judgment, a The grand objection of the Royal party answered
in the next Reply.
Parliament they could not be, but rather an usurpatious and despotical number
backed by an Army; therefore I say, speak your own conscience, what you conceive
them to have been, without King, Lords, Bishops, and the major part of the
Commons, all summoned by the Kings Writ, and chosen by their several Countries,
and violently pulled out of the house by the Soldiers for dissenting to the
Votes of no more addresses, the remainder being so few, that in any reason they
could not so much as pretend to be a Parliament, much less the Representative
of the universal people; yet had they the confidence that whatsoever they
Enacted, to assume it to be done in the name of the Commons of England, which
is one of the strangest pieces of Nonsense that ever was heard of in the
World; you may call to mind what became of those thirty Tyrants at Athens; the
parallel is not at a very wide distance; therefore before we depart, I beseech
you deliver your opinion for the better satisfaction of my conscience, and tell
me how it came to pass that none or very few of the Lords sat there with the
Commons, which till of later times, never were admitted to sit with them,
neither called to sit by them; for all our ancient Parliaments were only
composed of King, Bishops, Abbots, Earls and Barons, without the scum of the
Vulgar.


Patri. Doctor, it is most true, that upon the first view, that remnant which so
lately sat at Westminster, in most men's understanding, seemed to be no other
then an usurped power, and these backed by the Soldier; but when we come to
the Examination of their mutilation, and how their number came to be diminished
you will be of another mind; for as the Author of the Kings Life and Reign
exactly lays it down, and resolves this doubt, and tells you by whom it was
first lamed and disordered, this we all know, that it was at first legally
summoned by the Kings Writ, with Lords, Bishops, and Commons, which by your
favor are not the scum of the people, but as good Gentlemen as any of the
Lords; but as afterward it fell out by the Kings practices and artifices, it
was first lessned in both Houses, near to a moity, to make up his Mungril
Parliament at Oxford; and yet the King himself and that Conventicle, both calls
them and acknowledges these at Westminster to be a Parliament, though much
against his will; The late reli^k of the old Parliament, though lamed and
lessened by the late King.
and it is a plain case, that since the exclusion of another party by the
Soldier, that remainder or relick was still the Parliament, and stood upon the
same feet, as 'twas first summoned 3 Nov. 1640. with their full number; and
that piece of a Parliament left as you call them, acted by the same power; so
that you must always take Powers in their present being, not as they have been,
when enforced from their old presidents and usages, which I find not to have
been always one and of the same form, but varied in all Ages, according to the
Revolutions of times and accidents; for without all question, that Magnum
Consilium or Commune Consilium, as Caesar calls it, of the old Britons, was not
altogether Caesa. Com. lib. 5.
of the self-same form with the Witenagomots of the Saxons, neither those with
the Parliaments as they were after called on the coming in of the Normans; and
since the Conquest, we find them very much to vary; Parliaments throughout all
Ages not one and the same in form, though in substance; neither is there any
Record extant, that shows the time when the late form, with King, Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, with the Commons, had its institution; but doubless
it is both a new and false assertion, that the Commons had not their free voice
from the first foundation of Parliaments to this present, as it evindently
appears by the citations within mentioned, which are authentic and
incontradictable.
as for instance, Quarto conquestoris, Rex fecit summon^ri per universos
consulatus Anglos nobiles, and sapientes, and sua lege eruditos, ut eorum jura
and consuetudines ab ipsis audiret: the fourth year of William the Conqueror,
the King caused to be summoned out of every Country of England all the
Nobility, the wise men, and all such as were Learned in the Laws, to the end
that he might hear and understand, what their Laws and customs were. Hoved,
lib. de Litchfield; Moreover, Hen. 1. apud fontem Clericorum fecit summoneri
omnes Arch-Epis. Episcopos, Abbates, omnes nobiles Angliae, and sapientes, and
omnes incolas Regni; The King caused a summons go Clerkenwel, of all the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, all the Nobles, Wise men, and all the
Inhabitants, or as I conceive, by (Incolas) the chief dwellers in the Kingdom,
which seems to be a multitudinous Aslembly. Math. Paris, Edm. de Loud. Again,
Hov. 2. decimo Reg. praesentibus Arch-Epis. Episcopis, Abbattibus, Prio.
Comitibus and proceribus Regni. Math Paris: But Hoveden and Fitz-Steven, make
mention of Clerus and Populus, the Clergy and People to be then assembled; the
tenth of Henry the Second being present the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls and Barons, together with the Clergy and people. Paris calls this
Assembly Generale Consilium, a General Council; Now amongst many other
presidents, I shall only instance in one or two more, viz. Sexto Ioban. at
Oxford, Communi consensu Arch-Epis. Episcoporum, Comitum, Baronum, and omnium
fidelium nostrorum Angliae; by the common consent of Archbishops, Bishops,
Earls, Barons, and all our faithful men of England, Parl. Rot. pat. 5. and
there are some presidents which only mention Barons and liberos bomines totius
Regni, only the Barons and all the freemen of the Realm; tempore Henrici 3.
and another of this reign, and before the Grant of the great Charter, has it,
Convocatum est Londoniis, praesidente Arch-Epis. cum toto Clero and tota Sect a
Laical^: An Assembly at London, the Archbishops being President with all their
Clergy and all the Laics, without any mention of Earls, Barons, or Bishops.
Auth. Eulog. which seems to be a strange kind of Parliament; so that in an
hundred more of Presidents which may be instanced, it will manifestly appear,
that our ancient Parliaments though they are acknowledged for a National
meeting, made and un-made Laws according to the vicissitude of times; yet were
they not always of one constant and set form, though tending to no other, and
the self-same end (salus populi) the safety and conservation of the people, by
their Enacting such Laws as then were thought fit to be established for the
common welfare of the Nation, to which all our Laws and Statutes in the same
words have special reference, though, it is confessed in ancient times, often
varied in the form, but never from the end; And it is very observable that
neither the ancient summons to our Parliaments were always of one stamp, but
varied in Neither that the summons to our Parliaments, are of one and the self
same form.
most our Kings Raigns; sure we are, that last of the kings was much different
from those of old, which evermore had in them inserted, viz. ad tractandum,
consulendum and ordinandum cum nobis, etc. the principle Gerund (Ordinandum)
being purposely omitted, least it might intimate a greater power in the Commons
to act by, then the King was willing they should have; just in the same manner
as the Archbishop curtald the most material clause of the Kings Coronation
Oath, that so he might assume to himself a greater power then of right belonged
unto him; but this is a subject which to dispute to the full, would take up
more time then we can at present well spare; only in a word, that the Commons
sat not in our ancient Parliaments, and that now they only sit there, where
the King and Lords sat alone without them; Truly Doctor, I retract not from
that which I have often said, viz. that these late times have produced such
Monsters of men, such Traitors and shameless Vipers that have endeavored to
blot out of memory those ancient Rights and Liberties which the Natives have
for so many hundred years enjoyed, and to devour the mother that bare them,
most unnaturally attempting to enslave themselves and their Posterity: I shall
particularly name some of them. Judge Lex terrae, and Mr. Pryns Book.
Jenkins, and another, under the name of Mr Prynne, which have avouched that
the Commons were not summoned or sat in our ancient Parliaments: which is a
most imputent lie and false assertion, as it evidently appears by those old
authentic Authorities even now recited; and indeed, I have spent many an hour
in a diligent search into Antiquities, to find out the time when our late form
of King Lords, and Bishops, with the Commons, all called by Writ from their
respective Buroughs, had its beginning; though it may be enough, to satisfy
rational men, that it has been at least of 500 years standing if not 600, as
by Archyton.
Mr Lambert and many other better Authors, and far better seen in the Laws,
then that false Judge Jenkins ever was it manifestly appears. Doctor, to put a
period to this particular, let me tell you, for your own and the better
satisfaction of thousands more of your opinion, that new powers will have new
Laws, new Forms; and we of the people must and ought to obey them or smart for
our disobedience; and so would the King have had, (you should have found it too
true) had he prevailed.


Prel. I confess indeed, you have given me full satisfaction, as well to my
first question, Whether that relick of the late Parliament was a legal
Parliament, as to my last concerning the sitting of the Commons in our Ancient
Parliament; but what say you to this new form, that merely is summoned by the
power of the Soldiery, and almost half Soldiers that now sit at Westminster?
by what right of a legal Election do they sit as a Parliament? for by the Law
and right of the people they were to have made choice of their own
Representative?


Patri. By the right of the sword, which in all Ages has been the original
foundation of all Laws and Powers; and where that weapon has predominance, we
must not altogether insist upon Law; for silent leges inter arma, but look upon
Gods Providence with the effects which this power may produce in the issue for
the good of the universal Nation, since that after the States Army (by Gods
great blessing) had no sooner freed the people from farther bloodshed and
rapine, the late Parliament being at ease and not playing their parts so
dexterously as they might have done, but minding their own interests more then
that of the public, 'twas thought fit by the Council of war, to put a period
to their fruitless sitting, as formerly they did to the Kings exorbitant
Government, and for his often breaches of Faith with God, and his trust with
the whole Nation, over whom he was appointed to rule by the Laws of the Land,
and not by his own will and pleasure; for bonus pastor ponit vitam pro ovibus,
the good Shepherd lays down his life for his sheep, he never flayes or destroys
them.


Thraso. I hope Sir, you cannot say (as your intimation imports) the King my
late blessed Master was ever known to flay his Subjects you will never leave the
Roundhead lies and slanders.


Patri. No Sir, I do not positively say so, or that the King was guilty of
pulling his Subjects skins over their heads, as S. Bartholmew is reported to
have been served by his cruel Persecutors; but by your favor, since you are so
captious and uncivil to asperse me with lying and slandring, as that you can do
when you please on innocent children, and then make them good with volleys of
dam-mees, and other fearful Oaths and imprecations, it is well known that
before the king levied war against the best Subjects he had, some have had
their ears cut off by the roots, their bodies whipped all over in gore blood, and
their foreheads branded with hot Irons, no man knows well for what, more then
to please the great Arch-Prelate, who would have it so; and the Lords of the
Star Chamber, and others of the High Inquisition, could do no less or durst do
no other then vote as he would have them; and as sure it is, that you and your
Accomplices under the Kings Commissions, killed, plundered and shaved the poor
innocent people wheresoever you march'c or quartered, which in many places of
the Land you perpetrated without mercy; so that by your leave, the King himself
was the sole Author and cause of all the blood and miseries that besell the
three Nations, as himself sometimes has confessed; but good Sir, enough of this;
for it grows late, and a time we must have to retreat, as you my good Colonel,
have had a time to rob, plunder, and spoil the poor people, though I believe,
you have not purchased any great store of Lands with the remains of your stolen
goods; but in case you have any store left you, there are yet very good
peny-worths to be had of Delinquents estates, and you may likewise buy wood and
timber if you have any use for it, if not, that you will keep it by you, for
some other mischievous purposes, and not live quietly and peaceably under the
present Government, the State you may be sure on it, will find out a parcel
that may serve your turn.


Neut. Colonel, I have often told you, that he would be too hard for you at
this kind of fencing; yet you will take no warning; do you not understand
Patriotus his meaning, that the State will soon find out a parcel of Timber
for you, if you stir and foment more mischief; you may guess at his meaning; if
not, take it into your second consideration, that there is an intent of
erecting a new Court of Justice, which will tell us all our fortunes, in case
any of us should be overbusie and plot new insurrections.


Thraso. A pox of him, and the Court of Justice to boot, that ever I saw or
heard of either of them; I pree-thee Doctor, suffer not this
round-headed-fellow thus to go away with the Bucklers, and to send us away like
mutes, and with a fly in our ears.


Prel. Colonel, to deal plainly, your langnage is insufferable; at our last
conference you gave the first offense; and now again, you are at your old lock;
for more boldly and uncivilly yon durst not have spoken, when you were in the
head of the greatest Army the King ever had; the truth is, you too much forget
your self, and think not where you are, and to whom you speak; should I judge
of most that the Gentleman has said, I should be a Witness my self, that he
has spoken truth, and that with well measured Reason; but I beseech you
Patriotus pardon the Colonels incivility, and be pleased to satisfy me in some
particulars, which I suppose you may do in a few minutes of time; then I shall
both thank you and wish you a good night, and at your better leisure, shall not
fail to give you a friendly visit; Sir, in brief, King John was a known Tyrant,
an Usurper, and a murderer of his own Brothers children, an Enemy to the
Clergy, and the greatest depopulator of the Kingdom that ever before it had;
and yet the States and Nobility forget all his Tyrannies and misdeeds, and
after his poisoning at Swinsteed, admitted of his innocent young Son, after
called by the name of Henry the third, and soon quitted the Land of Lewis the
Dolphin of France, whom before they had called in to their assistance, and to
whom most of the great Lords had sworn fealty; In like manner the Parliament,
after the deposiog of Edward the second for his Tyranny, made choice of his
young Son Edward the third, who proved a very galland Prince; likewise on the
Parliaments deposing of Richard of Bordeaux, for his misgovernment, the State
made choice of his cousin-german Henry of Bulling-brook, who though not the
next in blood, and consequently an Usurper as to the right of Succession, yet
was he made King by consent of the Parliament, and he approved himself a very
wise and politic Prince; whence it appears that the Parliaments and Nobility
of those times had ever an eye on the next Successor, or to such a one of the
Blood Royal, as in their judgments they conceived to be most capable and fit
to undertake the kingly Government, as it may be instanced in their Election of
Steven Earl of Bulloyn, in the absence of Maude the Empress next in blood; and
since that, of Henry of Richmon, after the killing of that Tyrant Richard of
Gloucester; on these premises I beseech you, a little extend your patience, and
tell me what you conceive to have been the reasons, that the late Parliament
not only took away the Kings life by a new president, and under color of a
legal hearing, to the great regret of the major part of the Nation, but have
rerejected the young Prince of mature years, hopeful and able to govern,
together with the Duke of York and Gloucester, with all the discendents of King
James, and have changed the Royal Government into a Commonwealth, have sold
all the Lands, Honors, Manors, and Revenues, anciently by right belonging to
the Crown, as the proper Inheritance of the Kings of England; Now Sir, By what
Law of God, man, or reason of State, they have attempted on so strange an
enterprise, passes my understanding; especially the exclusion of the poor
innocent Princes, goes directly against my conscience; yet if you please, I
shall willing hear what you can say, for my better satisfaction.


Patri. Doctor, your questions necessarily will require a long search into the
reasons wherefore the Parliament enterprized on so high a concernment; yet in
brief, I shall tell you what has been told me, and by some of the late Members
on the same Queres you have propounded: First, they say, that on consideration
of the Kings seldom calling, and often dissolving of such Parliaments as he
summoned without their due effects, and that for ten years together he refused
to summon any, but ruled (during so long an intermission) at will and pleasure,
whereby the common interest and liberties of the people were so much invaded,
and so many grievances and oppressions crept both into the Church and State,
that when this late Parliament was (through the extremity of his wants) called,
the Assembly was to seek where to begin to rectify and repair the decays of
the Commonwealth, which through his own misgovernment, the prodigaltie and
dissoluteness of the Court and Clergy had befallen the universal Nation, which
although he wholly then left to their rectification, yet immediately thereupon
he not only went from his word, and falsified his promise, but by the
continuance of innumerable practices, and his uttermost endevors, he sought
nothing more then to obstruct their Reformation, ruin the Parliament, and put
all the Kingdom into consusion, by a most bloody and destructive war; which the
Assembly perceiving, and that his intent in pursuing his designs full six years
together, and so long as he was able, aimed at the utter overthrow of the Laws,
and envassaladge of the people, and that he had entailed this quarrel on his
Son and his Heirs-males in perpetuum; how impossible then it was for the
Parliament to settle a firm peace throughout the three Kingdoms, by
re-admitting the King full fraught, (though a prisoner) with his wonted
Principles and designs, or to take in any of his Posterity (aforehand
indoctrinated, in their Fathers frauds and subtilties) might amaze the wisest
of men, even Solomon himself, to find out any other way how to free the Nation
from pe^petual Tyranny and bloodshed, but by cutting off both the Father and
Son which were so deeply interessed in the controversy; and to make the same
use of their victories for the future security and indemnity of the people, as
the King himself intended to do in the behalf of himself and his Successor, had
the fortune of a Conquest befallen him; thus much in general, as to the grounds
of the Parliaments resolution of cutting off the King and his Posterity; as to
the particular reasons, I pray take them in their order.

1. They allege, that they had no choice left them whereby to save the Nation
from utter ruin, but were by the Law of necessity enforced upon them by the
King himself and of his own seeking both to cut off him and exclude his
Post^rity.

2. That having had so long patience, and taken such infinite pains during all
the wars, (after he had lost all and was a Prisoner,) to satisfy him from time
to time, in what possibly they could in all things questionable between them,
and on all his exceptions to reason the case all along with him in their
several Answers and Replies to his Papers, Expresses, and Protestations,
attested before God and his Holy Angels, pretending still how really he meant,
when by long and sad experience, they found all his pretenses fraudulent; yet
could they never satisfy him with any Arguments either of Law or Reason, but
that his own Reason, his Will, his Honor, his Conscience, must be the only
Directory to the Parliament, theirs of no esteem with him.

3. That notwithstanding their many Addresses and humble Petitions presented
unto him (after his causless recess from the Parliament) for his return with
honor and profit, with this only reservation to leave Delinquents to the
judgment of his Supreme Court, they prevailed not, but he defended them, and
was the skreen to most notorious Offenders, professing still a willingness to
peace and Treaties (only to get advantages) when he most intended War and
Conquest.

4. That such was the obstinacy of his natural inclination (which himself
miscalls constancy) from which they found it was impossible to dissuade him, or
yield to any (reason never so well measured by them,) but that they must yield
to his, though never so unreasonably pressed by himself.

5. That in this wilsull pursuance to obtain his most unjust ends, he
incorrigibly persisted to the last, without the least reluctation ^or
acknowledgement, that any fault was in himself (until he was a Prisoner) but
evermore laid all the blame on the Parliament.

6. That in this long persistance, he had wearied and beggered all his friends
and assistants, at home and abroad, to the desolation of three flourishing
Kingdoms, by the continuation of his Hostility, to the destruction of a million
of poor Innocent souls, without any remorse of so much blood spilt, more then
of one man, his wicked Straford.
Instrument.

7. That when he protested most, and to the height of imprecation, the
Parliament at last found by the Testimony of his own Letters under his
handwriting, that he meant nothing less and more contrary, then to his usual
Protestations.

8. That neither all the Honors, Manors, and Lands of the Crown, or his own
blood, (without true repentance) could be a sufficient expiation to God, or
recompense to his subjects, for the infinite bloodshed, rapines, and
dilapidatins made on the Natives of three Kingdoms.

9. That such was his insensibility of bloodshed, that the many Lords,
Gentlemen, and infinite others of inferior quality (slaughtetered in his
bloody quarrel) he made no other reckoning of them then this, viz. that they
suffered no more then of duty they were bound to do for their King, which he
avouched on the death of the Earl of Northampton.

10. That those unjust pretenses which he made, under the notion of his Royal
Prerogatives, viz. the Militia, power of War, Peace, Leagues, Treaties, Array
of the people, his negative Voice in all Parliaments, pardoning of Murderers
and Fellons condemned by the Laws of the Land, were all at his only disposure,
whereas by the known Laws of the Realm, they have been only entrusted and
conferred on our Kings by the indulgence of the people in their
Representatives, as hereafter shall manifestly appear.

11. That all his Treaties with the Parliament for peace were persidious, and
his Propositions evermore umbrated under ^pecious pretexts, subtilties,
subtersuges, and mental reservations, as 'twas evident in that at Colebrook and
Vxbridge, and more apparent by his own Letters to the Duke of Vide, The Kings
Letters to the Duke of Rich. mond, with others to the Queen.
Richmond, viz. Not to forget to cajole well the Scots; and by that at Oxford,
by Registring in the Councel-books his calling them a Parliament with mental
reservations, though not ex animo so acknowledged, yet summoned by his own
Writs, and often so esteemed and called by himself, and acknowledged to be a
legal Parliament by his own mungril Conventicle at Oxford.

12 That in all his Declarations and Expresses to the Parliament, he evermore
seemed to have a tender regard both toward them and the people, when he only
intended his own interests with the advance of the Sovereignty to absoluteness
by the power of the sword, and to convey his designs to his Successors, as in
the instance of the Vide, One of the Kings Expresses, where he yields the
Militia during his own life, but not sor his Sons.
Militia, is most perspicuous, when he perceived that the Parliament would no
longer trust so dangerous weapons in his hands.

13. That some of his best friends suspected him to be too much vers't in the
Florentine Principles, as indoctrinated by a French and Italian party
constantly resident in his own Court, and stickled on by the in^usions of the
Queen Mother and the Daughter, both which had gained a great interest, and had
chiefest influence on his Concels; and as'tis well known, was wholly governed as
the Queen lifted, and at last, his inclinations so strictly tied up as that
they were not subject to any other alteration then as she prescribed, which was
a Rule to whatsoever he undretook.

14. That he was not wanting to himself (for promoting of his arbitrary
designs) to make use of Machiavels principle, Divide and impera, evermore to
sow divisions, and to cherish any dissension arising between the Parliament and
their friends, thereby to ruin them by themselves.

Thus Gentlemen, according to your desires, I have given you an account of
those Reasons which have been given me, wherefore the Parliament enterprized on
the change of the Government by cutting off the King and his Posterity, the
premises being so true and undeniable, that they satisfied me, and prevailed so
sar on my belief, that I conceive the Parliament could not otherwise possibly
have secured the Nation from farther ruin; as also that their resolutions
therein were directed by the special hand of God, considered together with the
and great constant charge incident to Monarchy, the often pressures, and
oppressions of the subject through the Tyranny, ambition, and prodigality of
most of our Kings, the two last having beggered and impoverished them most of
all others, on which considerations, the Parliament in reason of State, and as
the state of the controyersie then was between them and the King, they found it
much better to quit themselves and the people of Regal Government, and to
change it into a Republic, as a more safe and cheaper Government, rather then
any longer to hazard the common liberty on the Rule of any one Prince
whatsoever; especially not to trust those of the Sotch Nation; all our
Histories and the Parliaments sad experience having taught them, that of late
years, the Sovereignty by the ambition and artifices of both the late Kings was
strained and tentered up to so high a pitch, that it would not stoop to a lower
power then that of absolutenes.

Now more particularly to answer your Querie as concerning the King of Scots,
the two Dukes, with the rest of the late Kings loins; it seems likewise, that
the Parliament knowing them to be the Sons of that father, who had more wasted
the Land then all of the Norman Race before him, they had small hopes left
them; that any of the same line would be much better, being tutored aforehand
by the Father, and at present residing in a French Academy, which if admitted
to the Government, in all likelihood would be no other then the cause of more
blood, more charge, trouble, misery and sorrow to the people; very few of our
Kings having given the Nation any great cause to be overmuch enamoured with
their Governments, but most of the best much repentance, through their
Tyrannies and oppressions.


Prel. Sir, I profess, you have given me fuller satisfaction then I could
expect; and I believe that you have taken the right measure of the Parliaments
foot, with the true reasons wherefore they have not only cut off the Father,
but excluded all his Discendants; only in the point of their changing the
kingly Government into a Republic as more secure and cheaper for the Nation,
this is a riddle to me; for lamentable experience enforms us, that all the
oppressions and grievances of the people, by all, or most of our Kings, and
those so much upbraided and caft in the face of the late King, I dare affirm
amounts not to the fisth part of the charge and Contributions imposed on the
Natives by the Parliament; if you grant this for truth, as I presume you cannot
gainsay it, doubtless then the State here in being, have brought the people to
a very bad market, since it is manifest, that what by the Monthly Contributions,
the rigorous exactions of the Officers of the Customs on all Merchandise,
together with the Excise on all we eat or drink, with the free quartering of
the Soldiers in most parts of the Land, are far beyond all the Taxes,
Impositions and Subsides which the late King imposed or intended to lay on the
people, which gives them no great cause to rejoice and make merry, either for
their safety or the cheapness of the exchange; Answer me to this point, and I
shall (as the Colonel even now said) give you fair leave to carry away the
bucklers, and henceforth acknowledge you for an expert Fencer.


Thraso. God amercy honest Doctor, in good faith, thou have now given him a
bone to pick that will stick in his teeth; if he answers this to any purpose,
he shall not only carry away the Bucklers, but I shall willingly give him my
sword into the bargain, and then dam him for me, that will ever fight one
stroke more in the quarrel.


Patri. Colonel, you and your party have gotten such a habit of swearing, and
in such fearful volleys of Oaths, as that had your cause been much better then
it was, God could not bless it or give you any good success therein: but I
beseech you leave your profanation, and then have patience a while, for you
have very good reason to leave fighting, when you are so ready to depart with
your weapons; but lay your sword to the stake, and then see what in the end
will become of him; for whatsoever the Doctor has objected concerning the
present impositions, (which are confessed to be very heavy on the poor people)
yet when you know all, it would have been much better he had said nothing,
since I perceive none of you all ever sounded the late Kings depth and what he
intended, or took the least measure of his foot; for indeed he was too dark for
any of your light to see into his designs; and to tell you more, he was too
cunning for any that he employed; though some there are which accounted him for
little more then an Iguoramus, but one of the shrewdest ones for his reaches to
his own ends, of any Prince of his time: True it is, that the Parliament,
though they suspected him at the first sitting down, and before, yet knew not a
long time what he had in hand, otherwise The Juncto and the Kings Letters taken
at Nasby, the only means that the Parliament came to the knowledge of his
Intentions.
then at random, until the discovery of the Juncto, which was the star that
guided them to know somewhat more of his designs, then they could clearly
discern before; and by degrees (as God would have it) more they came both to
know and feel, when a long time after his private Letters were taken at Nasby,
wherein more then enough came to light of his pernicious intents, or was
fitting for a King so much courted and beloved of English Nation) to have
attempted for their enslaving; a design (as I have said) though long since by
some of the more intelligent sort understood, yet till that time never
publicly known or visible; the only bar to the accomplishment, was that
Bellum Episcopale, the Prelatical was against his Native subjects the Scots,
which brought it so about, that the Kings game which was a fair fore-game,
became in the end by the Scots resistance and managety, to an after and a lost
game; and the truth is, the Scots were too subtle for all the kings Arbitrary
Instruments, and understood more of his reaches then happily all of us here
shall ever know. Now Doctor, as to your Objections concerning the present
Taxes, Excises, Customs and Free Quarter, I crave leave for a while to lay them
aside, to which anon I shall particularly make answer; In the mean time, I
think fit to present you with a Preparative, whereby to show you that all
changes and alterations of Government, are and have evermore been accompanied
with innumerable difficulties and hardships, especially where the sword begets
them; and who knows not but that the sword is a very chargeable weapon, and
such charges are most incident to green and new sprung up Governments, and
cannot be avoided, as in this case, and alteration here with us you see cannot
possibly be made good, without a vast expense, which necessarily ought to be
defrayed by the people, for whose sakes and conservation of the common freedom,
their Trustees the Parliament thought fit and best for their future indemnity
to adventure on the change of the Government, and then as the Adage speaks it,
They which reap the gains ought to endure the pains; and it is most true, that
although new gotten liberty be a sweet bait, yet it often falls out that the
enjoyment thereof brings with it a great deal of sufferance, and yet must it be
born with patience in hope of better times, which may give way to the
unburthering of the sufferers.

And so to your Objections, which I shall answer in their ord^r; and first to
the Excise, wherein I shall show you the mistake; since it seems you look only
at the present Impositions without minding their causes, which as the postures
of affairs now are, were necessitated and insorc't on the Parliament to levy
on the Nation; neither do you look back to those times wherein during the late
king and his Fathers reign, there was no cause or a piece of a reason to be
given why any Taxes should have been impressed on the people without their
consents in Parliament; yet for your better learning I shall assure you, that
the very same House in Broad-Street, wherein the Office of the Excise is
erected for the States use, was 20 Months at least before the late Parliaments
summons rented by Cottington, and purposely for that use designed by the King
himself, though protracted by reasons of the Scotch troubles: As to the
Customs, we all know to what a height they were grown in the late Kings time,
to the great regret of the Merchant; but that you may know what farther was
much about that time in agitation, there was a private Vide, That and other
Commissions in the Signet Office.
Commission issued out under the Great Seal, wherein twenty eight Lords and
Gentlemen were nominated and Authorized to raise on all the Commodities of the
Land, what new Customs and Impositions the Commissioners should think sit,
which was the highest strain of Arbitrary power, that ever was attempted by any
of our Kings.

As to Free Quarter, it is confessed to have bin a very g^ievous burden on the
people, not only to pay their Monthly Contributions, but to be for^'t to give
the Soldier free quarter wheresoever he marched; But to answer you in a word,
that grievance has been a good space since taken away, and the Soldier
wheresoever he now Quarters, pays both for horse and man's meat; moreover the
States have very much lessned their Forces, only retaining such numbers of
horse and foot as may keep in awe such as you Colonel of the Royal Party,
which if not secured, it may happily be more hurtful to the Nation, then the
not securing of our outworks against the ungrateful Dutch, on whom the
Malignant party (which are still rotten at the heart) looks upon with a
pleasing eye, in hopes so to order their designs, as at last to bring in the
Scotch Pretender, though to their own particular ruin, and the general
destruction of the poor innocent people; but in farther answer to your
Objections, suffer me to put you in remembrance, what long since, and before
the late War began, was projected by the late king, when he was in peace and
amity with all the Princes of Europe; you shall find it most true, that in so
great a calm of quietness diverse Regiments of Germane horse were designed to be
transpotted hither to keep all the Natives in awe and under the whip; and in
order to that, the Deputy Straford, in as calm a time of quietness as ever
Ireland enjoyed, had raised there an Army of near ten thousand Papists, which
for many Months and some years together were there both disciplined, quartered
and paid, for the most part at the charge of private men, and such as were
averse to his Tyranous courses; and in addition to those grievances on the
Irish, Scotch, and English, the imperious Deputy having taken to farm the
Customs of that Kingdom at an excessive under-value, he imposed on all the
Commodities of the Land, an incredible surplusage above the Rent he paid to the
King. Happily you may here ask the Question, to what end such an Army was there
raised and quartered on the Irish, and so great Taxes imp^sed on all the
Commodities of that kingdom? I answer, The Deputy himself tells you the reason,
as you may see it in the Vide. The Juncto.
Juncto; You have an Army (says he to the King) in Ireland to reduce this
Kingdom: If you put the Question farther, Why to reduce this kingdom being in
peace; I shall tell you, that Army of foot with the Germane horse were all to
be Garrisoned in England on free quarter, to amuse and keep the people in
subjection, whilst the king played his game for the reducing the Scots, and to
the Enslaving of all the three Nations; If again you demand, What the King
would have done with so vast a Treasure as he intended to raise on both
Kingdom; the Deputy could have yielded you a reason and president for this too,
viz. to erect Castles and Forts in both Kingdoms, Witness his great Structure
not far from Dublin.
Houses of pleasure, as capacious as Towns, Parks of as large an extent as
whole Parishes, Masks, Friscals, Comedies, Tragedies for the Saboth, Banquets,
Junkets, and suchlike petulancies, wherewith to please the Queen and the Court
Ladies, to gratify Madam Nurse, her Fiddlers and Dancing-Masters; for rest
assured, that the King meant not longer to depend on Parliamentary assistance
for defraying of the Court expenses, neither to be controld for any
irregularity he pleased to put in execution; and this (as tenacious as he was)
had often dropped from his own mouth; and Cottington could openly say at his own
Table 1638, when a Gentleman of honor told him, That the best way for the King
to fill his Coffers, would be by the ayds of Parliament; What needs that
(replies Cottington?) the King has other ways in hand to supply his wants
without Parliaments: And indeed gentlemen, as it seems, you know not what the
King had then in agitation; some what more I shall tell you, that there were
certain odd Dangerous Papers of the Duputies discovered.
Papers of the Deputies, which I find not were in question at his Arrainment;
for the Parliament had proof enough wherewith to charge him of his intention to
alter the Government; but those Papers intimate that the design was laid, that
no man was to stir above ten miles from his Habitation without leave and
showing his occasion, and that no man was to be master of his own Train Arms,
either for his Domestic use or the Public defense, but that every Particulars
man's Arms were to be deposited in one Magazin, and in one place, throughout all
the Countries of England and Wales; neither was any Houshoulder to be permitted
to have the use of so much as a Pitch-forke without special license; such a
strange change of Soverainty was not only in hatching, but in the high way of
execution, had it not been put by and obstructed (as already is declared) by
the refractory Scot, who marred all the Kings work, the Deputies, Archbishops,
and Cottingtons endeavors to have accomplished the whole design; but how
Almighty God i^ his Justice has disappointed and disposed of them all, I leave
to your second considerations. Now Doctor, if I have not given you a full
Answer to all your Objections, would my leisure permit my longer stay, I could
give you a little better satisfaction; but for the present I say no more, but
examine well the case, as the King (before the Wars began) was carrying on his
designs, and at a time when he had no cause at all to attempt as he did, and
then take into your more serious consideration the Parliaments case and
condition which enforced them for safeguard of themselves and those that
trusted them, to leavie men and money, and since of necessity to Impose
Contributions on the the people for support of the common Interest, and then
you will find a great difference between one and the others case; only for a
close of our Conference, and in farther proof of the premises, I beseech you
tell me, wherefore the King (at this last Expedition against the Sco^s 1640)
Commissioned Cottington Lord-Warden of the Tower, with injunction to see that
place well Fortified and manned, which in obedience to his Majesty in commands
was presently put Execution, but with such a refuse of Bankrupt Billingsly and
Suckling.
Colonels and Soldiers as could not be matched in all the Kingdom, and then to
mount near upon twenty great Guns on the White Tower, with their mussels turned
against the City; if you cannot tell the the reason, I Will tell it you; That it
was to awe the Citizens, out of fear and jealousy that some one or other
insurrection (which the Projectors own guilty consciences suggested to
themselves) might fall out during the Kings absence in the North, and to mar
the work he had then in design, before it came to maturity to be put in
execution.

Why then and at the very same time, the King should Commission the late Earl
of Worcester, a professed Papist (as Cottington was no better) as Lord President
of the Welch-Marches, commanding the Earl of Bridge-water a sound Protestant to
desert that government by Letters under his own hand, which on his examination
in Parliament wherefor he waved that command, he produced for his
justification, where the reason inserted was for his special service (a proper
service if you mark it) Now if you demand, What that service might be, I shall
instantly tell you to what purpose, as 'twas then spoken publico consensu;
neither ever since denied, viz. the same Earl being Owner of one of the
strongest Ragland.
Castles in those parts, seated amidst the greatest neast of Papists of any one
place in the Kingdom, had private Commmission from the King to raise 6000 of
them for his M^jesties service, and that service was to convoy the Irish Army
on their arival, and to join with them when the King pleased to transport them
for mastering all those Western parts, and to be farther employed as his
occasions should require; for of such kind of occasions (though never so
needless, unnecessary and destructive, through the whole course of his Reign,
(as a fate that followed him to the last) he would not be unfurnished.

Why then the late Earl of Arundel, another suspected Papist, was at the very
same time Commissioned for the North parts; you may safely aver, there was no
very good meaning in these exorbitant undertakings; or other reason to be given
for their constant pursuance, but that they all tended to enslave the three
Nations, and to subject them all under his Arbitrary Power; If any of you here
think otherwise, as many thousands there are which will not believe it, I say
no more, but that they want wit, but more wisdom to make a right judgment, not
of things doubtful and hidden, but of matters visible, and acted on the Theater
of the Kingdom: Therefore Gentlemen, be not still blind, neither wilfully
stupid, but lay your hands to your hearts, and bethink your selves wherefore
the Parliament be-took themselves to their defensive Arms, and the Scots on the
same grounds to side with them; can you imagine for any other reasons, then the
conservation of their joint interest, the freedoms and liberties of both
Nations, since all the world can witness, that they were not only first
invaded by the King, but designed together with the English to envassaladge;
and that on the same design, he first b^gan the quarrel with the late
Parliament, and therefore (as it is aforetold you) they could not in any reason
or with safety of the people trust a perfidious Prince any longer with the
Government, or admit of any more Kings: but in prevention of worse evils, which
in all probability would happen to the prejudice of the universal Nation, to
alter the Government, as now you see it established in peace, and in hopes that
in short time it may prove much better, safer, and less burthensom to the
people then the Regiment has been, which you may be sure o'nt would have been
much worse, had the Kings designs prospered and taken effect, whether we look
back on all the Motions of his Government before the Wars, or forward on that
which had he been Victor, would necessarily have befallen the Nation; as to
that, God knows, he came very near the accomplishment: But all of you may
evidently see throughout the pursuit, that Almighty God did not, neither could
he give a blessing to his bloody designs, and that a most fearful fare has
befallen the Prosecutor and his Fathers house, together with most of his
Assistants in that work of darkness for their bloody and ambitions affectations
in opposition to Gods Law, the Laws of the Land, and that of Natures
birthright; so that on a right understanding, you which are so much devoted
and besotted to magnify and adore a Tyrant, cut off as well by the hand of
Gods justice as man's, have rather cause with thankfulness to adore his infinite
Providence in taking him away, and likewise to magnify the Parliament as the
instrument ordained of God for the preservation of your liberty, and the
common interest of the Nations, much rather then to grutch and repine against
the present settlement, rail and storm against those Magistrates whom God in
his great mercy has set over us, under whom, he that will may live quietly and
contentedly; as to such as will not, I leave them to their fortune; and so
Gentlemen, for this time I take my leave.


Thra. I vow Patriotus, I never till now understood so much of the Kings
intentions; I could wish with all my heart, I had known his mind twelve years
since; Sure I am, he deceived me, and a thousand more of us, with as fair words
and plausible Protestations as ever could come from a Christian; but now I
perceive your infallible proofs, and many of them as I well remember of his own
handwriting, and of my own knowledge, that all is not gold that glisters; and
I protest on the reputatio of a Soldier, I now begin to have a better opinion
of the Parliaments cause then hitherto I have had.


Patri. Good Colonel, I have not the command of your opinion; I leave you to
your own election to believe and judge as you shall see cause; only as you
wish you had known the Kings mind sooner, I wish he had known himself rather;
for this nosce teipsum, the knowledge of our selves is the best piece of
Philosophy that any of us can possibly learn; and as to his fair and plausible
language, whereby to attract to himself friends and assistants, I shall tell
you somewhat, which I believe you took no notice of; for you were deceived in
the King who had such a faculty of his own, that heretofore you could not say
he was ever known to be over-cheap to any whom he found not fit and serviceable
for that purpose, to which he would employ him; but on the beginning of the
wars the case was altered; for then it stood him upon to be more then ordinarily
affable to all you of the Soldiery, since he was to make use of your service
for the accomplishment of his ends, which with all my heart I have often wished
that they had bin better biased; and so Gentlemen, we must have a time to
depart, sinace for these five hours or more, we have cost the ball from one to
the other, and yet at last how different soever in our opinions, I joy in this,
that we shall depart in love and friendship, not doubting but this meeting may
make way for another of more mirth and less distaste, wishing and praying to
the God of Peace, that in this universal disagreement of opinions in these
times, that odium and hatred which so unhappily has been contracted between
brethren of one and the self-same English blood upon the late fatal quarrel,
may yet at length be buried in that pleasing Sepulcher of a cordial
reconciliation, and that we may all submit, first to Gods good will and
pleasure, and next to that Government which by many visible manifestations he
has been pleased to establish, in the room of that which has been so
sanguinary, so displeasing to him, so dolorous and grievous to the poor
innocent people, so improsperous and detrimental to all parties; and it shall
be my continual suit unto him, who is the great King of the World, he that
makes and unmakes Kings and States at his only will and pleasure, to put a
period to our Calamities, which I fear cannot be permitted, as inconsistent
with his Justice, or appeased with bare moralities, but with the realtie of a
true and timely repentance, which is the only sacrifice and propitiation that
he loves, and the same for which we ought incessantly to pray, it may be given
unto us all of this sinful Nation.


Prel. Patriotus, I beseech you be not so hasty to depart before I have made an
acknowledgment that you have convinced me in sundry particulars, especially by
your two last Replies, which have given me more light, and better satisfaction
then ever I received from any man living; And truly Sir, I shall ruminate on
that which toward the conclusion of your last Reply you delivered, and so
shall detain you no longer, but only to give you hearty thanks with assurance
that I both love and honout you.


Patri. Doctor, in a word more, my Endeavors throughout all our conference have
been to make use of nothing but plain truth, neither to deliver any thing on
bare trust, or delude you with flams without due proofs; and for conclusion, I
wish you all to review, and take the particulars following into your second
consideration, viz. First, with whom the Parliament had to do, and into what
streights, difficulties, and Encumbrances they were intoy'ld and engaged, which
was only by the continued wiles and practices of the late unfortunate King;
next into what plunges and necessities they were driven for the preservation of
the common interest and safety of the Nation, their own persons and the people
by whom they were trusted together, with those necessitated and forcible
reasons, which induced them to cut off the late King, as the cause of so much
innocent blood spilt, with the exclusion of his Posterity, and change of the
Government. In the next place, take the reasons of the continuation of the
Contributions, for securing thereof, and staving off a second war, which the
Malignant Party endeavors by bringing in the Scoth Pretender, which should it
happen, in all probability may be more bloody and more intolerable for the
people to bear, then the former have been, which by many infallible Arguments
and demonstrations in our conference is made manifest. The premises duly
considered, cannot be denied; why then the several parties in this great
discrepancy of opinion, should not close in a cordial conjuncture, and
unanimous agreement for conservation of their mutual interests, seems to me one
of the great wonders of the world, but that some there are and not a few
throughout the Land, which are possessed with a spirit of error, and taken with
such an Egyptian blindness, that they cannot or will not see Gods high hand and
Providence in this Miraculous change of affairs, neither their own happiness
involved therein, but are led captive through their own wilfulness, supposing
to make their condition better by multiplying their own miseries; so fatally
besotted they are with their restless desires, by bringing in upon themselves
and the whole Nation, tyranny, ruin, and desolation: It shall therefore be my
hearty prayers to Almighty God, to open the eyes of their understanding, as I
hope Gentlemen, he will in good time, which would be a comfort to all good and
honest men, to be eyewitnesses of unity and concord between brethren of one
faith, one language, one lineage, and withal my heart I wish it, of one
unanimous spirit; then by Gods blessing we should be more secure at home, and
more formidable abroad; and so Gentlemen, once more I wish you a goodnight, but
with this engagement that you shall God-willing, shortly see on what sandy
foundations the King built his designs, and on what a rotten building your
selves framed your hopes, with the groundless reasons which induced you to take
part with a persidious King, and how you have been all deluded by him under the
specious pretense of Law and Loyalty, and that by the same way he came at last
to ruin himself and his Posterity.


Additionals to the former Discourse, for the better satisfaction of Royalists
and all others mistaken in their opinions concerning the late Kings Designs,
the legality of his Prerogatives, with their destructive consequences, should
he have obtained them by the Sword.
AFter so long a time, so often Disputes, and so much written of the
differences between the late King and Parliament, and after the determination
of the Controversy, and a new Government established, to repeat de novo what
was acted between both parties known to all of understanding, I know must incnr
the severe censure of the most intelligent, should they not look upon the
reasons, and take into their second considerations how at this time the present
postures of affairs of State are traduced, censured, and cried down, not only
by the old Royal party, but by numbers of other malicious distempered spirirs
newly started up, since the dissolution of the late Parliament, which deny and
call into question the verity of most passages acted on the open Theater of the
Nation. This has induced me to revive and repeat some things not vulgarly
known, though others, and most of that (which I crave leave now to recite) are
visibly known to all the World, and that the enemies to the present Government
are more now in number then eyer: I held my self bound (as a member of this
Commonwealth) to vindicate truth, and to satisfy such as still are diffident
of the truth of passages, as also to persuade others wavering in their belief,
to stand fast to their old principles as the b^st and most safe for themselves
in particular, and the common good of all the Nation in general: In pursuance
whereof having in former the Discourse answered some of the principal
objections of Royalists and others against the present Government, as they are
abruptively discust between the Inter-locutors variously and differently
affected: We now come to show not only how the King himself, but those of his
party, have been induced to believe the Sovereignty with those Lawless
Perogatives claimed by him as inseparables to the Crown, were of right, and by
the Laws of the Land, to be disposed at his only will and pleasure as king and
the supreme Governor of this Nation.

These being the grounds and basis of the late horrid War, and the reasons
wherefore he pretented to take up Arms to maintain them against the Parliament,
which, as Royalists still constantly aver, were invaded by them: It Is most
true, that the Parliament did and by their trust were bound to oppose him in
those irregular claims, as inconsistent with the nature and constitution of the
English Sovereignty, contradictory to the Laws, and prejudicial to the Rights
and Liberties of the people. Now, forasmuch as Royalists do still constantly
maintain, that their first engagements with the King were undertaken on just,
loyal, honorable, honest, and religious grounds, and that the king suffered as
an innocent Martyr in his own defense, under the specious pretexts of his
injustice and Tyranny, and that themselves are enforc'^ to live under Powers
utterly unlawful, usurpatious, and tyrannical; May they be pleased to give me
leave briefly to sum up the whole Controversy (intended for their own good,
the quieting of their distempered spirits, the settlement of the universal
people in the blessed harmony of peace and unanimity) their only distance and
refractory humor to that of the present establishment being the only cause
that the old Rupture cannot be sodred up and cemented, as it ought to be
between brethren of one stock and that the States (after their many miraculous
Achievements and Victories over so powerful enemies) are inforc'c to the great
charge and grievance of the Natives, to keep in pay so many Armies for the
prevention of such dangerous conspiracies as are daily hatched, and seen to flow
from the fountain of their malicious hearts, whereas their conformity with the
rest of the Natives, in obedience to the present powers, would be the speedy
remedy and abatement of those heavy and Monthly Contributions continued on
the people; wherein themselves would partake in the easement; the State and
Commonwealth in the happiness and comfort, that so many Proselytes should be
added to their number.

Now in as much as the nature of this subject (by way of advice) will
necessarily require some short repetition of the Kings proceedings in the late
prodigious War, wherein the grounds of their partaking with him are briefly
stated; I shall entreat the Reader (of what garb or party soever) not to
conceive that herein I take occasion to rake over the ashes of him who is at
rest, but only for the better manifestation of truth (never more opposed then
at present) and to let the universal Nation see and understand on what sandy
foundations, not only the King, but the Royalists themselves built the whole
fabric of his designs, how, and by whom they were promoted, to his own ruin,
his posterity, and most of the Royal party, to the irreparable loss of three
flourishing Kingdoms.

Briefly then, that the King at his first access to the Crown had it in design
(as an unhappy legacy left him by his Father King James) to advance the Regal
power to absoluteness, conformable to the French Model, is a truth so
perspicuous, as that diverse persons of honor (then in Court) both perceived
it, and feared the sad issues that would follow the Kings ambitious
affectations; True it is, the design a long time was carried on in the dark and
mystical traverses of Court and State; but 1638 and 39 the King by his active
Strafford, Canterbury, Cottington.
Agents, haing prepared all things in readiness, for the accomplishment both in
England and Ireland, the only rub that then lay in his way of completing an
universal invassaladge over the three Nations, and conforming the Church
Government of Scotland suitable to the Episcopal Discipline of England, was the
refractory Presbyterian Scot, whom he first tempted with the bait of a new
Liturgy, and whether they should perceive the meaning thereof or not, was
(amongst the first Projectors of this Innovation here in Court) not much
reckoned of; for that in case of the Scots refusal, they very well understood,
the King was resolved to compel them to submit by force of Arms; but the Scots
utterly rejecting the Liturgy (as an Innovation and Invasion on their National
Laws and Liberties) the King raised his first Army against them, and then the
second (after a Pacification given them;) passages so commonly known to both
Nations, that there needs no farther manifestation of their contrivances. But
most certain it is, that then the Kings grand design began more openly to
appear, and that those two Northern Expeditions having exhausted his Treasure,
with all that he could shift for, and the extremity of his want of money
succeeding, produced the first and the late Parliament: Where we may not omit
to show how the King at his first entry to the Crown, was after misled and most
grossly betrayed, and by persons (of his own choice) from the very beginning of
his reign to the last of his power, who had chiefest influence on his Councels,
which principally were the Bishops and his Court Chaplains, which more studied
his inclinations then Divinty; and then to comply with whatsoever they found
most agreeable to his natural appetite, which was the usual ladder wherewith
they climbed to preferment; these sycophants well perceiving the bent and
promptitude of his ambition to absolute Soveraingty, had learn'^ the faculty of
wresting of Scripture answerable to Arbitrary power, and made it their ordinary
Pulpit-stuff to instill into his apprehensions, that the Subject had no other
propriety in any thing he enjoyed but at the Kings good pleasure: And to these
there were another sort of Lawyers.
Gown-men that could stretch Law and Statutes to the tenter of the Kings
designs; neither were there wanting many about his person even from the first
to the last of his Power, that to gain his favor, had learned the art of
compliance; so that I am confident to affirm (as being often conversant in the
Court) that no Prince of his time and of his abilities, was ever so nursed up
(what between those Clergy Laquies, and his juggling Judges) in the principles
of Tyranny (leaving out those forragn Pedagogues, as well masculine as femine,
always in Court and most near his person) insomuch as at last he knew not, or
would not know the nature and constitution of the English Sovereignty, neither
what the nature of those Royal Prerogatives he claimed were, how entrusted and
invested in him, but took them for no other then his own proper inheritance, to
be used as his he should think most conducible to the advance of his absolute
power.

But to return to the late Parliaments first sitting down, and to relate what
in the first place they fell upon, as of highest concernment to be redrest,
most certain it is that they finding the many grievances of the people, with
the various innovations, disorders, and distempers of the State and Church, all
concentring in the Kings indigence, they took it into their serions
consultations first of all to call to an account such Participants of the Kings
Councels, as were well known to have been the principal Instruments for
promoting of Arbitrary power, and then to apply themselves to the redress of
the Public disorders, and rectifying of the obliquities both in the Church and
Commonwealth, crept in through the long dis-use of Parliaments. We shall only
touch on the most eminent passages during their first fifteen Months sitting,
viz. The Attaching and Arraignment of the Earl of Strafford, the Archbishop,
the flight of the Lord Keeper Finch, Secretary Windibank, Piercy, Jermine,
Suckling, all of them prime sticklers for the advance of the Kings designs,
etc. In the next place, the Kings continued practices to corrupt his own Army,
and that of the Scots, inviting them with great rewards and promises of
preferment, to march against the Parliament, which on any conditions he was
then resolved to destroy; his then succeding journey into Scotland, with the
breaking out of the Irish Rebellion during his residence there; his assault of
the House of Commons on his return; his then fortifying and manning of
White Hall with the Cavaleers; and when he found that by none of these
artifices he could break the Parliament, he leaves them and departs to York,
sends Eliot for the Great Seal, and procures as many as possibly he could of
both Houses to falsify their trust and adhere to him, so to divide and
destract them, and then raises an Army, causing the Lords there attending him,
to attest that he raised that Army only for a Guard to his Person, and not
against the Parliament, and immediately sends out his Commissions of Array, and
marches through several Counties to Nottingham, where he erected his Standard
of War, and after marches to Edgehill where he fought with the Parliaments
Army, notwithstanding that before from Nottingham he would have persuaded the
Parliament by an Express of his own, that he did not set up his Standard
against them; all which and much more of his prodigious Stratagems known to all
the World, makes it apparent, that his intent was to destroy the Parliament,
and consequently to alter the Government and the Laws as he listed; and yet
there are at present a new sprung-up number of perverse people amongst us
(besides the old Royal party) that impudently deny the premises, and take
occasion upon this late change and dissolution of the Parliament, and the
continuation of the Contributions, to asperse the present Parliament with most
opprobrious language. I wish they would look back to the cause; and how
diffident soever they are of the kings destructive intentions, yet may they
please to take a review of his after-actions, and what horrible cruelties and
oppressions were perpetrated throughout most parts of the Land, by his
Commanders, authorized under his own Commissions, after he began the War at
Edgehill, and made Oxford his Head quarters; then questionless they may take
the true dimensions of a most unfortunate and tyrannical King; neither would it
be amiss for them to take it into their remembrance, what the Parliament in so
perplexed times were constrained to put in execution, as well for their own
safeties as the preservation of the Laws and Liberties of the people.

Thus far in brief we have made a recital of the principal transactions before
that fatal battle at Edgehil, whence all Royalists and others diffident of the
Kings destructive intentions, may evidently see unto what plunges the
Parliament was put unto upon the Irish Rebellion, in relief of their poor
distressed brethren in Ireland, that affair by the King himself bring wholly
recommended to the Parliaments disposement, and 400000l. in Subsidies assented
by himself to be levied to that only use, and the Earl of Leycester by his own
approbation designed for that employment, whom he so long protracted, that the
term of his Commission was near expired before he went over; and as to his
proclaiming them Rebels, to which the Parliament often pressed him, he would not
in a long time suffer his Proclamations to come forth; and at last, permitted
no more then 40 Copies to be printed; notwithstanding these his impediments,
the Parliament with their best Expedition sent over diverse Regiments of foot,
some horse and clothes by the way of Minyard and Chester. The premises
considered by any indifferent man, with what honor then or justice could the
king countermand those Forces, and seize the clothes, horses and money sent to
the relief of the poor distressed Irish Protestants against his own Act and
Assent? and by what law or color of Reason could he in honor grant the
remainder of the third part of that Subsidy to his Lieutenant General of South
Wales, for raising of an Army there against the Parliament, diverting the use
thereof for the relief of Ireland? What answer can be made to this, other then
that which with impudence of the highest strain is commonly alleged by
Royalists? viz. That the king stood bound both in honor and reason of State to
support the Rebellious Irish, in what possibly he could, so to lessen the
Parliaments power by what means soever for advance of his own: If this be the
reason, surely then it is evident, that he not only favored the Irish, but
authorized their Insurrection, and that his intent was to incumber and cut out
as much work for the Parliament as possibly he could invent, and in that course
to protract the War in Ireland, and to pursue it in England, as it is most
manifest he did during full six years together; neither would he be induced by
the Parliaments many and most humble Petitions, really to apply himself to a
safe and well-grounded Peace for the Nation, though still pretending how
willing he was to embrace it, when as by the sequel he intended to have it no
other then as suited to his own will and pleasure; and yet all of the Royal
party as constantly defends him, as himself obstinately persisted (so long as
his power lasted) to embrew all the three Nations with blood, fire, and
devastation; and to his last Vide, The Kings Speech on the Scaffold.
hour stood stiffly in the affirmative, that the absolute command of the
Militia was his; and that the Parliament on that only ground, first began the
War, and not he, contrary to his own acknowledgement in the I Will of Wight and
elsewhere, viz. That he had been the cause of all the innocent blood spilt
throughout the Land; I wish he were not guilty of that in Ireland: the
presumptions being so pregnant, as that thousands of honest and knowing men
cannot be otherwise persuaded; sure enough, he was most notoriously guilty of
all the blood spilt in England and Scotland.

We now come to the kings Prerogatives as the basis on which all Royalists
ground the lawfulness of their partaking with him in the late War, as bound by
Oath, their Allegiance, and in conscience to support his Sovereign Rights; We
shall for their better satisfaction, present them in a Catalogue, and answer
them in their order; forasmuch as they still constantly maintain them to be the
kings, inseparably united to the Crown; and that full sore against his will, he
was enforced to uphold them as invaded by the Parliament; since then that (as
Royalists aver) the King only fought to uphold his inheritance and themselves
with him; let us briefly examine by what Law and right he claimed them,
together with the destrctive consequences, should he have obtained them by the
sword, and whether then he had not carved out his own work to the enslaving of
the Nation.

Of the Prerogatives Royal, which the late King claimed as inseparables of the
Crown.
1. OF the Royal Power, what it is. 2. His sole and absolute power over the
Militia. 3. His Negative voice in all Parliaments. 4. His power to Array the
people at will and pleasure. 5. His Prerogative to call and dissolve
Parliaments at pleasure. 6. His Prerogative to pardon Murderers and Fellons. 7.
His Prerogative to dispose of Wards, Madmen and Lunaticks, etc. 8. Lastly,
that Tyrannous assertion of his own and his Father King James, viz. That they
were not bound to give account of their actions to any but to God alone.
These Prerogatives claimed by the late King, as the Royalists say, were
invaded by the Parliament, and the grounds of the late destructive Wars;
happily after-Ages as well as the present, may be inquisitive to know whether
they were so legally in the Kings absolute power, that he stood bound to uphold
them by the sword to the ruin of the Kingdom? and whether the Parliament (by
their trust) stood not more obliged to withstand them as encroachments on the
common freedoms and liberties of the people? We shall therefore (for the
general satisfaction) briefly show the extent of them all, as they are either
defined by our ancient Lawyers, or confined and limited by our common Laws and
Statutes.

The Royal power, what it is.
FIrst then, that this Royal power of our Kings, has never been any other then
a limited and entrusted power to govern by Law, to which their Coronation
Oaths oblige them, which may very well satisfy any rational man, and save us
the labor farther to dispute this point. But we shall make it more plain, that
the highest of this Royal power was never more by the Law of the Land
(throughout all Ages) then in the executive power, Ius suum cuique tribuere, to
give to every subject his right; neither can the King otherwise dispense this
right or Law to the people, but in and by his Courts of Judicature, non per se
tantum, not by himself out of the law of his own breast; for that is plain
Tyranny; Stat pro ratione voluntas; and quod principi placuit, legis habet
vigorem (which are the common principles of all Tyrants) that, That shall be
the Law which the king wills, which is more then the Grand Signior claims or
exercises; neither can this Royal power (whatsoever of late times by
flattering Lawyers has been exposed to deceive the people) enable the king to
do that which the Law forbids. What kings as Tyrants will do, makes nothing to
the matter in question, but what they ought to do, and what by the Law, their
Oath, and duty of their Office, they are bound to do, is the true state of this
Question: Neither were any of our kings ever so absolute in power and
Supremacy, but that by the fundamental Laws of this Land, they had their
Superiors, and those which were above them, as one of the most eminent and
ancient of our Bracton.
Lawyers affirms, (often recited during the late Controversy) viz. Rex habet
superiorem, scilicet legem, per quam factus est Rex; alterum, scilicet curiam,
comites, and Barons; which is, The king has a superior, to wit, the Law by
which he is made king, another (though very much scorned by the late king) viz.
The Court of Parliament composed of the Earls, Barons and selected Gentry of
the Land; for this Court has in it the Legislative power or the Authority of
making Laws; and who knows not the old principle, Quod efficit tale, est magis
tale; that which makes the thing, is greater then the thing made? And another
of our eminent and learned Lawyers, Fortiscue Chancellor to Henry the Sixth.
fol. 40. cap. 18. positively delivers it as a fundamental Law, that the kings
power is no other then that which the Law gives him, and that cannot be farther
extended or made greater without the assent of the whole Realm; for should it
be otherwise, it follows that the king might then sell, or dispose of the
kingdom to whom he pleases, which by the Law he cannot do; neither (by the
ancient Laws of the Land) can the king sell, or alienate the Regalia and Jewels
of the Crown (though the late king took the liberty to sell them for Arms
against the Parliament) neither can the King by his own sole power, dispose of
the Cities, Towns, Forts, and Castles of the Kingdom, as the Scotch Lords 1639
told him in downright terms on his fortifying of the Castles of Edinburgh and
Dunbarton; and the reasons they gave, were valid both in Law and reason; for
that those Forts and Castles were built for defense, security and safety of the
people against Invadors, and not for their offense to be manned and fortified at
the Kings pleasure against themselves; And the reason of this Law is rendered by
a most learned and expert Novil. 85. princi. cap. 18.
Jurist, viz. Quod Magistratus sit nudus dispensator and defensor Iurium Regni,
constat ex eo quod non possit alienare Imperium, oppida, urbes, regionesve, vel
res subditorum, bonave Regni, quia Rex Regni non proprietarius: Which is, that
a King or Magistrate is no more then a bare dispensor of the Laws of h^s
Kingdom; and the reason is manifest, for that he cannot sell or alenate the
Kingdom, or the Cities, Towns and Provinces thereof, neither the Subjects
goods, or goods of the Kingdom, because the King is only the Director, not the
Owner and Propriator of the kingdom: But Royalists and some juggling Judge
Ienkins.
Lawyers and ignorant Divines, have both taught and written the contrary, and
made the late king believe that his power was absolute and without bounds,
which is fearful to imagine, and shameful in those which continue to possess
the people with such damnable untruths, as lamentable it is to see the
generality of the Nation to stand still unshaken in their belief that the kings
rights were invaded, and himself inforc'^ to make war for his own; the contrary
whereunto, that his power stood bounded and limited by the Laws of the Land,
has been so often alleged and pressed upon him by the Parliament, in their
Answers and Expresses, that the re enforcing of more Arguments on a subject so
much overworn would be nauseous to all ingenious Readers.

To period this particular, as it is the gound-work of all the kings other
Prerogative claims, I shall only put all Royalists in remembrance of that
which the Earl of Strafford aver'd to the king 1640. viz. Vide, The Iuncto.
loose and absolved from all the reins of Government; whether this assertion
(amongst other of the Deputies) tended not to place the kings power above the
known Laws of the Land, I appeal to the judgment of any rational man; for as a
late, a worthy Mr. John Pim, in his Speech to the Lords.
Member of Parliament observed at the Earls trial, that the Laws were the
boundaries and measures betwixt the Kings Prerogative, and the peoples Liberty:
But whether the king throughout the whole course of the late destructive War,
and ^ome years before, was not a prompt disciple in the Deputies doctrine, I
leave to Royalists to make their own judgment. And whether that which after
befell the king and his Fathers house, was not rather of the justice of heaven
then of men, I leave to the judgment of all the world. Sure we are, the best
Jurists maintain, Si Rex hostili animo arma contra populum gesserit, amittet
Regnum; which is, that if a King with an hostile intent shall raise Arms
against his people, he loses or forfeits his kingdom: Now, that the late king
assumed to himself such a Royal power as to raise Arms against the great
Council of the Land, I suppose no man in his right wits can deny Its most true,
a moderate Royal power to rule by the Laws, is doubtless of Gods Ordinance; but
a Tyrannical power to cut their throats, I am sure is of no Divine Institution,
and a Dominion fitter for beasts then men; yet this is that power which
Royalists would have fastened on the king; and too many there are which
constantly believe that the more injury was done him, that he had it not, as by
the Laws of the Land they erroneously conceive he ought to have had.

The Power of the Militia how the Kings.
BRiefly now to the Militia, and what kind of power our kings by the Laws of
England have had therein: It has been often told the late king (all along the
late Controversy) that the power of the Militia was in him no other then
fiduciary, and not at his absolute dispose, or that at his own will and
pleasure he might pervert the Arms and strength of the kingdom from their
proper use, and against the intent of the Law (as 'its visibly known he did
even to the highest breach of trust wherein a king could be entrusted:) Now for
proof, that this power was only fiduciary, and by Statute Law first conferred
on Anno 7. Edw. 1. apud Westminster.
Edw. 1. in trust, and not his by the Common Law, is most apparent, by the
Express words of the Statute it self, which (as they are commonly inserted)
were only for the the defense of the Land and safety of the people, (salus
populi) being that grand Law and end of all Laws; now such as are verst in our
History, know that this Prince was one of the most magnanimous kings that ever
swayd the English Scepter; and therefore it cannot be imaginable that he would
clip his own power, and so great a right belonging to him by the Common Law, in
accepting a less by Statute Law, to his own loss of power, or that ever he
would have assented thereunto, by an after Act of his own, as follows in haec
verba, viz. Whereas on sundry complaints made to us by the Lords and Commons in
this present Parliament, that diverse of the standing Bands have been removed
and taken out of their respective Counties by virtue of our Commissions, and
sent to us out of their Shires, into Scotland, Gascoyn and Gwoyn, and other
parts beyond the Seas contrary to the Laws of the Land, etc. Our Sovereign Lord
wills that it shall be done so no more. Agreeable to this we find, Anno 1.
Edw. 3d. viz. The King wills that no man henceforth be charged to arm
otherwise then he was wont in time of our Progenitors, the Kings of England,
and that no man be compelled to go out of his Shire, but where necessity
requires, and the sudden coming in of strange Enemies into the Realm.

And in the same kings time, there being a peace concluded between him and the
French king, wherein the Duke of Britain was included, whom the French king
shortly thereupon invaded, whereof complaint was made to king Edward, he
instantly summons a Parliament, and there moves the Lords and Commons, both for
their advice and assistance, whereupon it was concluded, that the king should
be expeditiously supplied in aid of the Britton; but the Act was made with such
provisoes and restrictions, as Royallists happily, and others of late years
would have deemed them too dishonorable and unbefitting the late kings
acceptance; howsoever this Act shows that the ordering of the Militia (of those
times) was not solely left to the kings disposure; but that which is of more
note, was, that both the Treasure then granted, was committed to certain
persons in trust to be issued to the only use for which it was given; as also
that no Treaty or any new peace or agreement with the French King should be
made without the consent and privity of the Parliament; By these instances all
Royalists may make a clear judgment, that the Militia of those times, and the
power of the Arms of the Kingdom were never so absolutely conferred on our
kings, as that their power therein extended to such a latitude as they might
use them as they pleased, and to turn that power (provided for the only
defense of the people) against themselves; and therefore wheresover we find
the Militia, by other Statutes conferred, and yielded to the disposal of our
kings, without any particular mention of the word (trust) which is necessarily
implied, or expressed in most of the Statutes or their preambles, viz. Note that
these words, viz. for the defense of the Realm, or common profit are before
inserted ^ither in the Stat. themselves, or in their preamb.
In these wotds, For the honor of God, the Church, common profit of the Realm,
or defense of our people; No man in common reason can conceive the Militia to
be such an inseparable flower of the Crown, as if it had been brought into the
world with the King, and chained unto him as his birthright, but only as a
permissive power recommended unto him by the people in their Representatives,
as the most eminent and illustrious person to be entrusted with such choice
weapons, in trust and confidence that he will use them no otherwise then to the
end for which-they were concredited unto him as the Sovereign of the people,
and for their only safety and defense which trusted him in honor of his
person and place; Many other Statutes there are (though some of them repealed)
which prove the Militia is only fiduciary, and not absolutely inherent to the
Crowns of our Kings.

Now for our conclusion of this senceless and illegal Prerogative (as to the
absolute power thereof) let us in a word take notice of the destructive
consequence; admitting this power should be left to the Kings absolute
disposure, it then follows that he may take all that the Subject has (for he
that has the power of the sword, on the same ground may command the purse,)
which the late King not only intended but practiced; witness the many great
sums of money, plate, jewels and other movables whatsoever taken either by his
command or permission in the late Wars; the instances whereof would amount to a
volumn; and as to his intentions, without injury to his memory, we may take
notice of his own expressions, in his Letters to the Queen; viz. That though he
wanted money, yet good swords and Pistols would fetch it in; Ex unque Leonis;
We may judge of the Lions strength by his paw, and of the kings intentions, had
he lighted on the fortune to have mastered the Parliament.

Of the Kings Negative Voice in Parliament.
WE now come to that so much asserted and inseparable Flower of the Crown (as
the king and Royalists would have it believed,) viz. his Negative voice in
Parliament; a claim so absurd and contrary to Law and Reason, that wise men may
laugh at it, and fools discern the distructive consequence thereof; for at one
blast or breath of the kings, it utterly frustrates the very Essence and Being
of all Parliaments, and obstructs all their Consultations; and whatsoever they
shall never so well advise and agree upon as a necessary Law, shall be made of
no effect with this one single word of the kings (Negatur) which is point blank
against his Corronation Oath, where he swears or ought to swear to Govern both
by the old Laws, and per istas bonas leges quas vulgus eligerit, (though it
pleased the Archbishop to emasculate that most essential part of the Oath, so
to leave the king at liberty) and by such good Laws as the Parliament shall
choose, so that the Legislative power has always resided in that Sovereign
Court to make and unmake Laws according to the vicissitude of times and change
of men's manners, and not at the kings choice, who has only the distributive
power, when Laws are made to see them duly executed; and the Law of the Land
also limits that power; for the king, (as before it is noted) cannot execute the
Laws at his own pleasure, but in and by his Courts of Justice. But strange it
is, what a ridiculous construction Royalists have made of the verb eligerit, to
be meant in the preterpersect Tense and not of the future, to make any new Laws
(though never so necessary) but that the people must stand to their old Laws
(though some of them never so fit to be abrogated) unless the king please to
give way to the establishing of new, or repealing of the old, which is a most
irrational and destructive assertion: Neither may we omit to show what
Royalists farther aver, that such is the necessity and force of the Kings
assent, that be the Law never so useful and beneficial for the people to be
established, yet without the Kings (fiat) it can never have the force and stamp
of a Law; which is the same as when the King chosen Generalissimo, and trusted
with the conduct of the Kingdoms Armies, will turn the mouth of the Canon from
the Enemy on his own Soldiers, and deny them to provide for their own
safeties: such absurdities have the late and present Licenciates of this time
ran into, as if men had been bewitch't to betray their own freedoms; It is not
denied, but that the Kings assent to a Law (thought fit by the Parliament to be
Enacted) is very necessary; yet it follows not that it must be of necessity;
for if the King out of a perverse humor will not (after some time of
consideration) assent to such a Law, which if not ratified by his (fiat) tends
to the inevitable destruction of the Commonwealth, shall the public safety be
neglected for the humoring of one man's obstinate will? and in such a case ought
not the States Assembled in Parliament provide against a common mischief, Enact
and Ordain for the public indemnity as former Presidents in such cases may
direct them, and when no other remedy can be had? The Lords in the time of king
Richard the Second, would not be so answered, when they sent him word that if
he would not come to the Parliament (according to his promise) and join his
helping hand to theirs in redress of the public grievances, they would choose
such a King that should.

The Array of the People.
WE now come to the principal and practical part of the kings power over the
Militia; for the Array of the people is the grand piece of that usurpatious
claim; viz. That at his own will and pleasure he may send forth his Commissions
to Array the people against themselves; and this power (under color of Law,
and of right belonging unto him) the universal Nation knows he forbore not to
put in execution against their Representative, summoned by his own Writs, a
president without president, neither for the legality known either in our
Histories or Law Books, otherwise then by consent of Parliament, and in cases
of immiment danger for opposing of an invading Enemy; but for a king trusted
with the defense of his people, in calms of peaceable times, and on no
necessity, to put in execution such a reasonless and unlimited power, as one of
his Royal Prerogatives, and to maintain it by the sword, was besides the breach
of his Royal trust; such a daring action, as none but a Tyrant in folio would
have attempted. It Is true, that heretofore, during that long continued feud
between the English and the Scots, diverse Gentlemen of the North parts and
others on the Welch-Borders of the kings Tenants, were by their Tenures bound
to rise, watch and wind Cornage Tenure.
horns, on all incursions of the Scots; and of these kind of Tenures, Littleton
treats in his chapter of petty Serjeanty; but I suppose none so very cowards
(though not bound by their Tenures) but would take up Arms in the common
defense, and contribute their best assistance for the expelling of an invading
Enemy, though in this very case (by the Law of the Land.) It Is very dangerous
for him, that shall raise Forces without special Commission from the King and
Parliament; and The Lords Cromwels Case.
Cromwell Earl of Essex in Henry the Eigth's Reign, (though at that time Lord
President of the North) dyed for no other cause then this, that he raised an
Army both for the suppression of an insurrection, and expulsion of the Scots;
so nice and provident our Ancestors have ever been of levying Armies in the
bowels of the Land on any pretense whatsoever; But for the king first to raise
an Army at York, assuring the Parliament that it was to no other end then for a
Guard to his Person, and therewith to cause so many half-witted Lords (then
attending him) to attest that for truth, which was false, as it manifestly
appeared by his immediate marching to Nottingham, where he set up his Standard
of War, as a summons of the people to his assistance against the Parliament,
when himself was both the first Assaulter and Invader: and yet at that very
instant of time, to reassure the Parliament, that he raised not his Standard
against them: and at the same conjuncture^ of time to send out his Commissions
of Array, was doubtless such a breach of Trust, and a Treachery of so deep a
die, as that in all our Histories we find it not parrallel'd amongst all our
kings, but only in that Tyrant of Tyrants king John, who indeed invaded the
Land, and ruined the Castles, and Houses of the Barons and Gentry that opposed
his Tyrany, and came not to his assistance at a call; and in this kind of
Tyranny, it cannot be gainsaid, the late king came not behind him, if not
exceeding that irregular king, as 'twas evident by this instance, that
immediately after the sending forth of his Commissions of Array, on the heels
of those, issued out his Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, to hang all those
which adhered to the Parliament. But in a little more to the illegality of the
kings Commissions of Array, both before and after the setting up of his
Standard; surely those Lawyers that waited on him first at York, and after at
Oxford, were doubtless those which mis^ed him, and with such artifices and
pains drew up his Answer to the Parliaments Declaration of the first of July
1642, against the legality of the Commissions of Array. He that will take the
pains to examine that Declaration compared with the kings Answer, may soon
perceive that the Contrivers and Penners thereof were not so honest as they
should have bin, neither as it seems so well read in the Laws, or so expert
workmen, as to avouch the Statute of the 4. and 5. of Hen. the 4. 150 times
over in that Answer, and notstanding all their endeavors, to entrust the King
with a legal power to send forth his Commissions for arraying of the people at
his own will and pleasure without consent of Parliament; yet those fine John's
for the king, have not, neither could they produce any scrap of Law or piece of
Statute that enables the king to Array the people against themselves, to engage
English against English, and to set so many as came into his assistance
together by the ears with those which adhered to the Parliament, and at a time
when there was not the least fear or expectation of an invading Enemy, more
then of those which the Parliament feared should be sent him out of France,
Lorrain, and Denmark; but to what other ends then to ruin the Parliament, let
any impartial Royalist make his own judgment; it is true, that in case of
Foreign invasions the king by Law has been evermore trusted as Generalissimo
to command the Force^ of the Kingdom, for defense and safety of the people, and
to no other end; and so was the Law expounded in Parliament, the thirteenth of
Queen Elizabeth, but never so wrested before by any of our Lawyers, as by those
that waited on the King, would have enforced thereby to empower him at
pleasure, to command the strength of the Kingdom against it self; and surely it
appears to me and thousands more, that forty Judges, Sergeants, and Lawyers,
then in both Houses of Parliament, should better understand and know more of
the Law, in the case of Commissions of Array, then those eight or ten
Littleton, Banks, Lane, Heath, the Attorney Herbert, Palmer, etc.
sycophant fellows that followed, and animated the King in such irregular
motions, only in hopes of preferment, and to form him into such a posture of
absolute power, that when he pleased he might destroy himself and the Kingdom,
as that to our grief we may remember they had taught him, and put him in the
highway of the accomplishment. I remember a pertinent passage related in our
Histories, how that the Earls of Warwick and Leycester being peremptorily
summoned to attend Edward the First into France, the Earls in plain English
told him, that by the Laws of the Land they were not bound to wait on him out
of the Land at his pleasure, but only within the Realm and for the defense
thereof, and that only on Invasions of Foreign Enemies; which agrees with
that before recited of his taking the Train-men out of their respective
Counties by his Commissions, to serve him in Gascoyn, Gwyn, and other places
beyond the Seas, contrary to the Laws of the Land, which grievance the King
then redrest; neither could I ever yet find any one express Law or Statute
that enables any of our Kings by their sole power without consent of Parliament
to Array the people, but only in the case of Foreign Invasions, and coming in
of strange Enemies; howsoever the Penners of the Kings Answer to the
Parliaments Declaration, have labored (though to no purpose) to prove it
otherwise; however it is worth the observation, what fruitless pains they have
taken in their frequent recitals of the Statutes of the 4. and 5. of Hen. 4th,
the 13. of Edw. the 1o. 1. Ed: 2d. 25. of Edw. the 3d. 9. of Edw. 2d. the 4.
and 5. of Phil. and Mary; 1o Iacobi, with diverse others, all of them
principally tending to the Assize of Arming the Subject secundum facultates,
according to his ability; those Assizes having been almost in every Reign
altered, and the Statutes according to the vicissitudes of times, change of
Arms, and invention of Guns, for the most part of them repealed, and new
Statutes made in their rooms with power of Commissions to be issued as the
exigency of affairs should require on Invasions from abroad, home defense on
Insurrections, etc. All which so often and so much pressed in the Kings Answer
made nothing to the matter in question, between him and the Parliament 1642.
The point in question, was not then concerning the old Commissions of assizing
Arms, or Commissions of Lieutenancies in every County; but the reasons of the
Parliaments Declaration, and the exceptions they took, were against that
exorbitant power the King assumed to himself under pretext of Law, to Array the
people one against the other, and against their Representative, as that sure
enough he failed not to put in practice, howsoever disguised under an elaborate
and ridiculous Answer, when (as we have noted before) there is not one Statute
or scrap of Law to be found in all our Law Books, that legally enables the King
to raise war against a Court of Parliament, and raise combuston in the bowels
of the Kingdom; which I trust may satisfy all Royalists, that the Parliament
had then good cause to complain, when in times of Peace he made them times of
war and desolation, by sending out those his illegal and destructive
Commissions, which whether they were so or not, doubtless the Parliament was
better able to judge and determine then the King or his Minions then attending
his Person.

Of the Kings Prerogative to call and dissolve Parliaments at his own will and
pleasure.
AS to the Kings power to call and dissolve Parliaments at his will and
pleasure, to summon a Parliament with one breath, and blow it away with another
blast of his mouth (as it is still frequently maintained by Royalists and others
newly started up, that by Law and presidents he was enabled to do) is an
assertion so irrational, as that I wonder not so much at their ignorance, as
their audacious language; since it is the known Law of the Land, and by two
Statutes of near 400 years standing, ordained, That Parliaments shall be called
once every year, and oftener as the emergency of affairs may give occasion; why
then it should rest in the kings only power to call them, and that his assent
to a Triennial Parliament should be such a boon bestowed on the people, surely
may increase the wonder, since by our old Laws and the usuages of former times,
they ought not to be dissolved, until all grievances be heard and redrest;
otherwise to what end or use were Parliaments Instituted? which as one calls
them, are the Beasoms that sweep clean all the nasty corners of the
Commonwealth. But observe the sad consequences of this absurdity; for suppose
the King would not call any Parliament in ten or twelve years together till his
necessities enforced him, how then should the public grievances be redrest,
and by whom shall the disorders and obliquities of the Church and Commonwealth
be rectified? Royalists Answer, by the king alone, or his Council of State, as
the suprem Magistrate within his own Dominions; A strange task surely for one
man to undergo, and more then that active Magistrate Moses was able to perform,
as we may see by Exo. 18.
Iethro's Counsel, who advised to take into his assistance, the Princes and
best of the people to aid him in the Administration of Justice to the
Israelites, and all that with the least in a populous Nation. Well then, let it
be considered how many grievous enormities and disorders (during that interval
of ten years discontinuance at least of Parliaments) were crept into the Church
and State (merely through their disuse) we have sorry cause to remember, when
through the pangs of the kings necessities, the ill managery of the public
affairs, the prodigality of the Court, the corruption of all Courts of Justice
and the Judicature, with the licentiousness of a dissolute Clergy, enforced him
at last to call the late Parliament; yet how soon he endeavored by his many
wiles and practices to annihilate it, nay, by all possible means he could
invent, hindered their endeavors, in reducing the Church and Commonwealth into
order, never ceasing to interrupt their consultations, purposly to disorder and
thrust all into a Chaos of confusion, insomuch as to this day, the Parliament
have had their hands full to find out the means how to reduce and settle
things in that order as at first they might have been, had not the public
affairs been obstructed, and all reformation hindered by his only means, so to
render them as odious to the future, and as contemptible to the people, as
heretofore they were boloved and desired of them; notwithstanding that at their
first sitting down he promised to contribute his own Authority to theirs, and
to leave the re-ordering of all things amiss to their only managery, an
overture so acceptable unto them, as that in retribution thereof, how willing
and intentively bent they were (in the midst and heat of their distractions) to
make him rich and glorious; and how indulgently ready to cover his faults in
the recovery of his honor at home, and his reputation abroad, none unless
blind men, or besotted, but may remember: But the truth was, he could not
brook any Rival with himself in the Government, pursuing to the last his design
of absoluteness so long, that in the end the Parliament was enforced not to
retain any longer such a Rival as a King amongst them, but rather chose to
estate the people in the same peaceable Government as we see it now
established, then to imagine themselves able to better it by retaining of
Kingship.

Of the Kings Prerogative in granting of Pardons to Murderers and Fellons.
WE now come to that Prerogative, or rather lawless usuage of our Kings in
granting their Charters of pardon to Murderers and Fellons condemned by the
Laws of the Land. It Is confessed, that it has been practiced by all or most of
our Kings, though as it may be supposed, rather permissively then by virtue of
any Law extant; but by what warrant in Justice they have assumed such a
Sovereign power to themselves, will be the question; for by Gods Law, it is
absolutely forbidden; Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a
murderer which is guilty of death, but he shall be surely put to death. Numb.
35. 31. and verse. 33. Ye shall not pollute the Land wherein ye dwell, for blood
defiles the land; and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed
therein, but by the blood of him that shed it. Thus much briefly may suffice as
to Gods Law; Now as to the Laws of England, the King cannot pardon a Murderer
or Fellon condemned by the Laws of the Land, without a plain breach of those
Laws and his Coronation Oath; for Anno 2d Edward the Third, it was by Act of
Parliament ordained, that Charters of pardon should not be granted but only
where the King may do it by his Oath. And further amongst this Kings often
breaches of the Laws, this very particular of his frequent granting of pardons
to Murderers was complained of in open Parliament; and the King by three
several 4. Edw. 3. I them 16.
Acts was restrained in those cases; but how faulty both the late Kings were in
pardoning both Murderers and Fellons condemned by the Laws, is too well known;
and how guilty and insensible the late King was of shedding of innocent blood,
three Kingdoms have lamentable cause to remember.

Of Wards, Idiots and Mad men.
AS to the Kings Prerogative in taking of Wards and their Marrages, it has
been granted him by Statute Law, as hereafter shall appear; and as to Idiots
incompos mentis, and madmen, or such as have by accident fallen into
destraction, for the king to assume to himself their estates, doubtless there
is no Law for it (as I can remember) extant, otherwise to dispose of their
estates, but an account to be given to the next Heir at Law; and this of late
years was resolved by Mr. Calthrop his own Aturney in the Court of Wards, in
the case of the Widow of whose husband being burnt with powder at a muster in
Moorfields dyed, and his wife for grief falling distracted, the King gave her
estate to one of his Mr. Ramsey.
servants a Scotch-man; but she having many children and good friends, they
petitioned the King therein, and in the end he was pleased to retract his grant
as to the whole of the estate, but with this proviso, that Ramsey should have
the use thereof during the Widows life, in case she continued incompos, giving
security for the repayment to the children; but the Gentlewomans friends found
it unsafe to trust so great an estate as 30000. l. in Ramseys hands, and
therefore with great difficulty they drew Ramsey to accept of 3000. l. ready
money to to be quit of him.

Of the Kings assertion, that he was not accomptable for his actions to any but
to God alone.
AS to that odious position or rather Tyrannical assertion, both of the Fathers
and the Sons, that they were not accomptable for their actions to any but to
God alone, doubtless it is an impious position, and in the next degree to
blasphemy, and cannot be (without repentance) forgiven of God, nor forgotten of
men, and those of their subjects which felt the effects thereof. Should we
longer insist on this Theme, and produce proofs that Kings for their
irregularities and Tyrannies, have in diverse Kingdoms been called to account,
they would amount to a Volumn. The Justice of Arragon, the Ephori amongst the
Lacedaemonians, the Senate of Rome, the Parliaments of England and Scotland,
will soon evince and put this question out of doubt; for Kings as well as
subjects, both by Gods Laws and man's, are under the Law; and in this kingdom
and many other well regulated Soveraignties, they have been often overruled,
withstood in their exorbitancies, sued at Law and evicted, and some deposed,
expeld and sentenced to death; and should it not be so, Subjects would be no
other then inanimate slaves; sure we are, Almighty God never empowered Kings
with such absolute Sovereignty that might enable them to trample on their
subjects without control. Saul made a rash vow (as a Law to the Isaelites)
that none should eat any food all the day until the evening but he should die;
Jonathan, being then absent and not knowing thereof, had dipped his rod in a
Honeycomb and tasted it; but being told of his Fathers Law, he answered the
people, My Father troubles Israel; and indeed such troublers there are amongst
kings; howsoever Jonathan was sentenced to death; but the people withstood the
king, and swore that a hair of his head should not fall, and they rescued him
in the face of the king; certainly should not there be some one other power in
a kingdom to curb and control the exorbitancies of irregular kings (for few
of them are Saints) no man should be exempted from their oppressions; and
therefore Bracton delivers it as the law of the Land, that in such cases the
Barons or Parliament ought not only to withstand oppressive kings, but to call
them to account for their misdemeanors, which may suffice to show how much the
two late kings were mistaken in this their Tyrannous assertion.

Now Gentleman Royalists, these Sovereign Rights (as you would have them) so
often treated on, utterly dissonant to the Laws of the Land, whereunto
particularly I have briefly made answer, are those goodly Prerogatives
wherewith you would have invested the late king as his indubitable birthrights,
and inseparables of his Crown, for which you still constantly aver he was
compeld to fight, and your selves with him to uphold them; where I must by the
way remember you of a time, when he shamed not to Vide, The Kings Coin at
Oxford.
divulge it to the whole Nation, that he fought for the Protestant Religion,
the Laws of the Land, and Privileges of Parliaament (for he was not to seek
wherein to please the people, and win them to his cause, though never so
unjust) when as in truth he fought against all those three, and so long as
until he could fight no more; but by what law or reason other then his own,
none may better know then your selves, which as well as infinite others that
opposed him, have felt the fruits of your unadvisedness, and the effects of his
obduracy, his cunning and crafty fetches to attract friends for backing of an
unlimited Sovereignty, to which had he attained, it would have been no other
then too heavy a burden for him to bear, a sting in his own conscience, and a
sore in yours, which you will all find, whenever it shall please God to open
the eyes of your understanding, and enable you to see how you have bin decoyed
in with Oaths, Protestations, and hopes of preferment, and made the
instruments of your own Invassalage. This if you believe not to have been the
design, yet you may find it legible, not only in the claims and pretenses he
made to those illegal and irrational Prerogatives before recited, but more
apparently figured in that bloody Rubric of a continued War, which he so long
waged to be absolute master of them, and consequenly over all the free people
of England. Thus have I showed you how invalid the grounds are whereon you
continue to insist in justifying the late king and your selves; how dissonant,
and contrary to the Laws, usuages, and Statutes of the land; such was the
wisdom and providence of our ancient Parliaments in all their enactings,
evermore to prefer the common interest before the kings, though they failed not
to gratify them (as they found them compliable, to the redress of the public
grievances) with many Royal immunities, as we may find them registered in the
Statutes at large, on the Title of Prerogative, some whereof I think fit here
to present to your view, that so you may judge whether Sir Walter Rawly was not
in the right, who avoucheth that few of our kings but have gotten ground and
improved their Soverainties merely by their Parliaments, and as I verily
believe none more then the late unfortunate King, had he been pleased, (in
imitation of Queen Elizabeth) to have complied with the late Parliament. But as
to his Prerogative of Wardships and Marriages, they were first conferred on our
Kings 17 of Edw. 2d, their primer session, 52. Hen. 3d, the tuition of Idiots
and distracted persons, 17. of Edw. 2d, 32. of Hen. 8th, but with several
proviso's of accounts to be made to the next Heirs of Idiots, and the children
of him that was incompos mentis. As to wracks of Sea, Whales etc. they were
given by Parliaament to Edward the Second the 17 of his Reign; Felons goods the
9 of Hen. 3. power to make Justices of peace; 27. of Hen. 8. the Legitimation
of the Kings children born beyond the Seas; 25. Edw. 3. Tonage and Pondage to
Edw. 4. pro tempore, yet granted to every of his Successors by the mere
indulgence of their Parliaments, though the late King challenged it as his own
right. I may not omit farther to inform you, that this Nation has not been so
much abused and deceived by any one proficient in our Laws, as by that false
and juggling Judge Ienkins, who in his Lex Lex Terrae, a most vile and
fraudulent piece.
Terrae, by his accumulation of several Statutes, insinuates and endeavors to
make the Kings power absolute, and consequently the people mee^ Slaves and
Vassals, alleging this and that to be the Law of the Land, which is not or
ever was, taking his Authorities and Authors by piece-meals, curtaling the
Statutes in their sense, without the explanation of their meanings and intents;
whereby (on my own knowledge) he has deceived and prevailed on the belief of
many in the Nation: But not longer to insist on this subject, I shall only
say, that the Soverainty of our kings has been ever of a mixed nature and not
absolute; and as Bellarmine affirms of Monarchies in his Chapter De Romano
Pontifiee, Monarchiam temperatam and mixtam inter Aristocratiam and
Democratiam, semper meliorem esse puts: That a Monarchy mixed and tempered
between an Aristocratical Government and a Democratical, is the best of all
Governments: so am I bold to avouch such has ever been the nature of our
English Soverainty; would the late King have so conceived of its constitution,
or given credit to the old learned Lawyers, viz. Bracton, Fleta, Fortiscue, and
many others; for the Kings of England have originally received their power from
the people; Potestatem a populo effluxam Rex habet, quo non licet ^^potestate
alia populo suo dominari, Fort. de leg. Aug. The King has his power from the
people, and ought not to govern them but by that Power and Law which he had
from them; though Royalists generally have otherwise conceived thereof,
supposing that the King cannot be a King, unless he be absolute in power and
command over the people: which was the error or rather wilfulness of the late
King, who knew not or would not know the extent of the English Sovereignty; but
what out of his own inclinations, and others infusions he was induced to
believe, that he could not rule otherwise then by a plenary power: which is
most dangerous to himself: for plenitudo potestatis, est plenitudo tempestatis,
and enables him to destroy himself at his own pleasure, though the late King
conceived otherwise, and that to be subject to the control of a Court of
Parliament, he could be no more then a mock-King, or a Duke of Venice; And
certainly the generality of the people thought no less; and that a king was
such a supernatural and Divine creature (not made up of sinful flesh and blood
like other men) as the poor woman conceived of Henry the Eighth, who riding in
progress through a Country Village, attended with a great train of Nobility,
the Woman cried out, Show me the king; which of these is the king? He (quoth a
footman) whom thou see with a Feather in his Cap and a blew Ribban about his
neck; Whoo! cries out the woman, will you make me believe the Moon is made of
Cheese; that is a very man, or else I never saw one in all my life; And the
silly soul was in the right; for kings in their humane nature, are no other
then mortal men, though in their other capacity (as they are kings the best of
men in Supremacy) yet the worst, if they neglect the duty of that great Office
wherewith they are invested (by Gods appointment) for the public good, more
then their own; but I have taken too much liberty in expatiating my self on a
subject so often treated of; though my design therein extends not beyond my
affection, which has lead me rather to persuade by the soft Argument of Law
and Reason, then in bitterness of language to exclaim against any mistaken in
their opinions; not doubting that either themselves or any other (on due
consideration) will tax me for impertinency; when as it is well known the whole
state of the old Controversy (since the dissolution of the late Parliament)
has been and is assidually revived by Royalists, and a new disconted sort of
malcontents, which forbear not to justify the late King in all his errors,
and condemn the Parliament for invading his just and rightful Prerogatives; so
that what and how many soever they are, they must not expect but that of
necessity there will new Answers be made (though upon the old matter) to new
objections, which may satisfy all such as out of the over-fineness and
sharpness of their wits, will censure whatsoever has been before said on a
subject long since determined, to be both needless and impertinent; But to
conclude;

It now only remains, that we proceed to the Law of God and by Scriptural
proof to facillitate a reconciliation betwixt Royalists and that party which
adheres to the present Government, wherein I shall briefly show first the
justness and lawfulness of their cordial submission to the powers in being;
secondly, the necessity of their union one with the other, with the profit
which thereby will redound to the mutual benefit of the whole Nation, not
doubting but that by this little which has been spoken as concerning the Royal
Prerogatives, they may receive some kind of satisfaction, that neither the
Kings Interests in them were sufficient grounds whereon to lay the foundation
of those bloody wars he so long waged against the great Judicature of the
Nation, or that they were so valid in Law as to warrant Royalists to assist him
to win them by the sword: That controversy being long since decided, and the
Power of Government in other hands; yet in a little let us now examine to whom
in conscience we all ought to yield our obedience: S. Paul to the Romans 13. on
this very subject of obedience to Authority, prescribes this as a general rule
to all men, viz. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers; The reason of
this Precept follows, viz. for there is no power but of God; And thereupon he
infers, Therefore ye must needs be subject not only for wrath but for
conscience sake; and to this he exhorts Timothy to pray for a blessing upon all
those in Authority: Now if Royalists make question, (as usually they do) of the
lawfulness of the present Authority, and say it is usurpatious and unlawful,
then they fall foul on Gods Oordinance, and they question S. Paul's Doctrine,
and contradict the very reason of obedience in the Text, viz. for the powers
that are, are the Ordinance of God: Now that this may more evidently appear,
upon what a rock Royalists fall, by calling into question the lawfulness of the
present powers, I shall entreat them to take it into their second
considerations, whether then the Apostle was not out of the way, when he
delivered this Doctrine of Obedience to Authority to his Countrymen the Jews,
which was in the raigns of Claudius Caesar and Nero, both which came to their
powers merely by usurpation and the sword; but these Emperors being in
possession, S. Paul takes no exception (as Royalists do) against their unlawful
coming into power, but enjoins obedience to be yielded to them; and can any of
them positively and of truth affirm, that the powers of this Commonwealth are
not devolved and conferred on the States here by the Ordinance of God? Bucer on
this very Text. Romans 13. says, That when the question is, whom we should obey,
we ought not to question, what he is that exercises the power, or in what
manner he dispenses it; but it only suffices those which live under it that
he has power; for if any man has obtained power, its then out of doubt, that
he received that power of God; and then without farther scruple, thou must
yield thy obedience to him and heartily obey him: And it is manifest, that when
Christ and John Baptist preached the Gospel, it was at that very time that the
Romans by plain Conquest and Usurpation had gotten the possession of all the
Territory of Judea; neither of them did then teach or dissuade the people from
their obedience to them, or that they should not yield submission to those that
had Tyrannically obtained their power by the sword; for it is plain, Mat. 22.
that Christ did teach that Tribute was due unto Caesar, and he himself paid it:
Again, Pet. 2. Be ye subject either to the King as Suprem, or unto Governors as
those which are sent of him. It would be superfluous longer to insist on this
subject, on which so much has been exposed to the public view; it may
therefore suffice without other Arguments then such as our blessed Savior and
his Apostels taught and practiced, to persuade obedience to powers in ^eing:
Only I shall close up this hearty ad^ress to all Royalists with a piece of a
Speech delivered by a Learned Gentleman Mr Thomas Warmistry in the Convocation,
1640.
; viz. The Law of God in Scripture and Reason, is the main and general root and
trunk; and all good Laws are banches that grow from thence; and whatsoever
humane Constitutions cannot either in a direct line or collateral derive
themselves from them, are bastard Issues and shameful to their Parents, and the
Lawmakers sins in framing of them; yet the difficulty of Government is to be
considered, and many things to be born with; for though they have no ground in
Gods Law for the injunction, but are merely frivolous, and perhaps burdensome;
yet if their Authority disables them to make it, and enjoins me to no Act
contrary to my allegiance to God, it is their sin, but my affliction, and must
be born as other calamities; for though that law has no good end, yet my
obedience has; Obedience it self is a good and laudable thing, and I may have
the end of maintaining order or preserving peace, and avoiding disturbance in
the Church and Commonwealth, of preventing scandal and the like, which are ends
prescribed by Gods Law to regulate and frame our actions by: All things are not
to be turned upside down upon every inconvenience that may be apprehended in a
Law, whether it be Ecclesiacal or civil; for besides that there are few that
are fit Judges of a Law: that may be unlawful for Governors to command, which
yet is not unlawful but expedient for me to obey being commanded; as it was
unlawful for Pharaoh to command the children of Israel to make Brick without
Straw (as being tyrannons) and so sinful in him, as it was unlawful: but rather
commendable in them to obey it as far as they could; and S. Paul will have
servants to be obedient unto their Masters, though they be froward and
perverse. Indeed, if they enjoin me to do any thing wherein I should offend
against Gods Laws in the least degree; no pretense of any, though never so many
or so great good ends, must make me withdraw my allegiance from him, and pay it
to humane powers; The authority of all men is limited, and so must our
obedience to them be also. The Supreme power of God is the foundation of all
Authority; and therefore our duty unto that must be preferred in the first
place, and without all leave or exception whatsoever: peace must be maintained
with the rules of piety and trust; and any scandal to my brother, must rather
be admitted then I should prevent it without Gods leave: The rule of Mr. Calvin
is good here, Sicut libertas charitati, ita charitas fidei subjicienda est; yet
in this case I am to disobey, as modestly and as inoffensively, and with as
much show of reverence to the Magistrate as may stand with our duty unto God;
yet resolutely too, not faintly or fearfully, as the three children unto
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3. 17, etc. And where we cannot yield obedience, we must
yield the third duty of subjection; especially where the Authority is absolute
and supreme under God, which may be variously stated according to the Laws and
Customs of several Countries and Dominions; then in case we cannot obey, we
ought not to resist but suffer, and yield a passive obedience where we may not
yield an active one, according to the rule of Gods Word, They that resist,
shall receive unto themselves damnation. Thus Royalists and all may see the
judgment of a Gentleman of temper and learning, concerning obedience to be
given to powers and Magistrates in being.

I come now to the necessity of Royalists obedience to the present Government,
with the profit and security that of course will acrew to themselves and the
whole Nation, by their cordial conjuncture and compliance with the present
powers; As to the necessity thereof I shall say no more, but that if they
continue obstinate and fixed to their erroneous principles, and look back with
Lots Wife, to him that claims as heir to the late unfortunate king, the
consequences and sad effects whereof are particularly laid down in the former
discourse, if they be not hardened and past understanding, they will make the
best of them to tremble to think upon the issues, whenever he comes in by
their assistance (though surely very improbable) and their posterity will
doubtless curse the time that ever they had such Fathers as were the unhappy
Authors of their invassaladge, and the betrayers of the common freedoms of the
English Nation; which of necessity must follow whensover the Scotch Pretender
comes in by the sword; so that the necessity of their compliance depends on
this hinge only, their present conjuncture with the present establishment,
since this state cannot be secure so long as such a numerous party of rotten
hearts remains, lurking in all corners of the Land, and lying at catch (on all
opportunities) to disturb the present settlement; for prevention whereof, it
has been the advice of none of the worst heads, on their next disturbance or
insurrection, to proscribe not only all such as shall be suspected, but to
take the course of Justice with those that shall be known actors in any such
attempt; neither let any of them think this course strange, since there is no
reason to be given to cherish the Viper too long in the bosom of the Nation,
least in the end he eats through the bowels thereof; and as a wise man says,
What wisdom or providence can it be for this State to suffer such to live
amongst them that will not cooperate, act, and join with the present powers?
And what sense is there, that after so bloody and rapacious a war ended, and
peace resettled, that if Royalists will, they may live quietly and peaceably,
yet cannot forebear to spit their venom against those which have rescued them
from invassalage; why then should others be seen in unlawful things for their
benefit, which refuse to do right to others and themselves?

Gentlemen Royalists, I have now done, and more I would be willing to do for
you, may it be to your advantage; but I know not a more ready way thereunto
then at least to advise you to sit quiet, or cordially to employ your selves in
the public service.

To conclude, I wish you all to call to mind, the late banishment of the
Moors, out of the Kingdom of Granado into Africa, for no other cause but that
the Philip the Second.
King could not convert them from their Mohammedan to the Roman Catholic
Religion; a punishment that at best will befall you, whenever you shall be
found contriving of any new disturbance. On this consideration I leave it to
your selves to make judgment whether there be not a necessity of your timely
compliance and conjuncture with the rest of the Nation, that stands firm and
faithful to the present Authority; under which we are all bound to give God the
glory and praise, that since the sheathing of that raging and bloody sword of
the late kings, we may if we list live quietly, enjoy the benefit of our old
Laws (if not better) and the peace of our own houses in security; blessings
which of late years we had not, neither can we ever have them by the way you
perserve to walk in, and wish for by re-introducing Regal Tyranny inseparably
united to the Scepters of most Kings, but undoubtedly to all those which are
brought in by the power of the sword: from such, that our good God will deliver
us, shall be the hearty prayers of

Yours, most devoted to serve you in all honest and just Endeavors. T. L. W.

FINIS.

