Now is the Time: Or, The Proposal of the LOAN-BANK Seasonable.
By T. W.
I. An Additional Proposal concerning Guineas.
THAT for every Guinea brought into the Loan-Bank before the -- day of -- be
delivered 10 s. of Current Silver Coin in hand, Mr. Blackwel's Essay toward
carrying on the present War, etc. p. 4.
and a Bill of 20 s. payable at the time appointed to repay the Banks their
Principal, or (as PARLIAMENT shall appoint. And that -- (after the expiration
of the time limited for receiving these Guineas) no Guinea shall pass for above
-- s.

By this means all the Inconveniences of the enhaunced rate of Guineas are not
only prevented, but turned to the great Advantage of the Nation: For, no person
can lose by Guineas, and every Guinea will be about double so much to the
Nation. The King being thus supplied with Guineas for his Foreign Occasions,
the new Milled Money will be kept at home; all the Conveniences of the
Loan-Banks, so unspeakably for the Good of the King and People, will be
effectually retrieved; the the Bottom broad enough to bear whatsoever Structure
is to be raised upon it; All the Advantages mentioned in my former Papers, and
many more, certainly Secured; and the Credit of these Banks forthwith
confirmed: For, the Owners of Guineas, that knew how to advance them so much
above their Real Value, cannot want Means of giving a Credit to the Loan-Bills
answerable to the true Value of them (Bills insured by an Act of Parliament, on
an indubitable Fund, every day improving on their hands, and never in danger of
sinking); nor can they want Motives to do it, their own Interest being so
deeply engaged. They that could advance a Guinea near one third above its real
Value (in danger of sinking, and not improvable by keeping) may much more
easily advance a Loan-Bill one Quarter's Interest, at least, above its present
value, when only lying by a little while will make it really worth so much.
And, if this should be the Case, then our Work is done, our Bank's Credit
secure, no danger of their sinking, their Bills Current, and the most Popular
Objections all removed at once: For,

Who would pay their Loan-Bills in Taxes, or return them to the Banks, and
receive their Principal, (unless Compelled thereunto by Parliament) when they
must Lose thereby? And, who would not prefer a Loan-Bill of 20 s. before 20 s.
in Coin, when the Bill will bring him more than 20 s.? Nor will there be any
danger of Want of Current Silver Coin to exchange these Bills, when the Gold,
being thus reduced, keeps our Silver at home. Nor is this only a distant
Probability; it is morally impossible, if this Proposal concerning Guineas be
accepted, it should be otherwise.

What made the Venice Bills, without Fund or Interest, advance 20 per Cent.?
Mr. Blackwel's Essay, etc. p. 18.
The Ease of counting, carriage, preventing damage to the Receiver by
Counterfeit, Clipped, and Base Coin; the Advantage that was to be made by the
Exchange, etc. Surely we may expect, where to all this is added the Best
Security and Highest Interest that the Land can afford, our Loan-Bills would
not be less valuable, but be counted good Purchase, and, like our Guineas, rise
upon us, till it may be necessary to put a Restraint upon them, lest they also
become extravagant, and less useful for Commerce. The same Heads are as likely
to do the one as the other; which they will not fail to attempt, their Interest
equally engaging them, and the danger of Loss not being so great. The Humor of
the Exchange might in One day, have sunk the Guineas on their hands, and left
them without Redress: These Bills, by their very lying by, will in time
increase up to their enhaunced price.

II. The Seasonableness of Establishing these Loan-Banks now.
Let but a Tax or Security be granted, sufficient to answer the Interest (with
a Surplusage to ensure the Interest) of the Sum allowed to be Continued or
Lent, allotting to every Loan-Bank its proportion, with provision that the Tax
or Security be continued, till the Principal be paid; and that That be made
payable before any other Debts not yet contracted: This is sufficient to give
the Banks a Bottom. Nor need we fear creating too much Credit to the People, or
taking in too much Money; there be ways enough to dispose of it, Debts to be
paid, etc. Nor can it do us any hurt to be beforehand. And it would be a lucky
Contrivance, if while we carry on a War we could be doing the Works of Peace,
clearing old Scores, advancing the Stock of the Nation, etc. And, for all this,

Now is the Time.
1. The Guineas (if the 'foremention'd Proposal takes) must come into these
Loan-Banks, unless you will suppose Men willing rather to lose near a third
part, than trust upon the best Interest and Security, and Men that will know
how to ^se their Bills a^ they did the Guineas, and must do it, or give over
the ^r^de.

2. This will support the Credit of the Exchequer under its present
Difficulties: for, that being thus supplied with Gold, will be better able to
issue forth Silver, answer the Demands made upon it, and circulate the Current
Coin.

3. The greatness of the Taxes will further the Design; the People will be less
afraid of parting with their Money for Bills, when they are sure that these
Bills will pay their Taxes: And so far, at least, they are better than Money.
Nor can the Exchequer be Sufferer by it, which had the Money before hand.

4. The Calling in of the Bad Money (of which more may be left than we imagine)
is another Help; the People must now either stand by the Loss of their Bad
Money, or pay it all at once in Taxes, or lend it to the King. Some have more
than enough to pay their Taxes, but not enough to make a Sum to lend the King;
these will gladly take the opportunity of throwing it into the Banks, by which
they shall rid their hands of it, receive Interest, and have their Bills ready
to pay Taxes. And many of them may have Foresight enough to make a trial what
Money they had best to part with when their Taxes come to be paid, Coin or Bills.

5. This is the Time, -- To prevent the Stop of Commerce; to relieve the
Necessities of the Poorer sort of People, and silence their Clamours, without
giving our Enemies Hopes of seeing any thing worse than Complaints, nor for the
future them; to prevent the Exportation of Bullion, occasioned by the
Extravagant Rate we set upon Gold, or (with some it may be) from worse Motives;
to draw forth the Broad and Milled Money, for the hoarding of which (Bad Money
being called in, Guineas reduced, and a Credit created) there will be no more
Temptation, and they that have kept it up out of any Mischievous Intentions,
will find their Ends disappointed.

In a word, to Cure all our present Maladies, and prevent future Dangers; to
make the Contrivances of our Enemies against us so many Advantages to our
selves, and turn their Hopes to Despair; unless our Enemies should be more
apprehensive than our Friends, and by their Arts and Misrepresentations so far
prevail, as to obstruct all Good Designs, which might prevent their Bad ones.

6. Lastly, This is the Time to let both our Friends and Foes abroad know, that
England has now a Parliament that will never fail their King, nor suffer him
to be outwinded; that not only readily and unanimously supplied his present
Occasions, but have resolved to continue so to do; and have therefore cut out
the Method by which neither He nor We shall ever want Money, or be weary of the
War; and be so far from being Beggared by it, that, let it hold as long as it
will, we shall leave off Gainers, and, by the Experiment now made upon France,
let all the World know what a dangerous thing it will be for the future to
provoke England.

POSTSCRIPT.
ONE Objection I have met with, against which I had not expressly made any
provision in my former Papers, which is this: If Loan-Bills be payable in all
(...), how shall these Taxes pay either Interest or Principal?

Ans. 1. Though all may, yet many cannot, and some will not lend even so much as
their Taxes; these must pay in Coin, this may be enough to answer the interest.
Or, suppose not. 2. If the Credit of these Bills prevail, so as to enhaunce the
Value of them, then no Bills will be paid in Taxes, and consequently there will
be Money enough; and we have reason to believe the Value of them will advance,
having much more in themselves to commend them, than the Bills of any other
Banks (which yet advance) can have, and Persons well versed in the Trade, by
their own Interest, engaged to make them as dear a Purchase as they can. 3. The
Credit thus advanced, the People will be so far from desiring their Principal,
that they will be afraid it should be forced upon them; and till they desire it,
what need is there of paying it, unless the Parliament find the continuation of
it at Interest a Grievance to the Nation? But that it will be far from being
so, see what I have said in my Loan-Office, Advant. IX, X. 4. But lastly, to
provide for the worst. As for Principal, That the Parliament may from time to
time gradually reduce as they please, either out of the Surplusage of the Tax
remaining after the Interest is paid, or by an After-Tax appropriated to that
purpose, to be paid in Money to the Bank, to sink the Principal; Although if you
suppose the Bills to be returned so quick, there will be no need of reducing
them; they will dissolve themselves.


And as for Interest, it will be no hard matter for the Parliament to find out
Appropriating Clauses to be paid only in Coin, if they think they need such
Precautions, or this Difficulty be too great for the Bank it self to provide
against.

London, Printed by T. M. for the Author, and are to be had at Mr. Carter's, in
Old Palace-yard near the Parliament House; as likewise The Loan-Office, and an
Advantageous METHOD, etc. 1691/6.


