Die Mercurii, 22 November. 1643.
It is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That the Assembly
of Divines be moved to write Letters unto some Divines or Churches of Zealand
and Holland, and to the Protestant Churches in France, Switzerland, and other
Reformed Churches, to inform them against the great Artifices and Disguises of
his Majesty's Agents in these parts, of the true state of our affairs, and of
the constant employment of Irish Popish Rebels, and other Papists to be
Governors, Commanders and Soldiers, the many evidences of their intentions to
introduce Popery, their endeavor to hinder the Reformation here intended, and
condemning other Protestant Churches, as unsound, because not Prelaticall. And
that the Scots Commissioners be desired to join therein: And likewise that the
Committees of the Lords and Commons, and of the Divines may advise with the
Scots Commissioners in the Premises.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Mercurii, 13 Martii, 1643.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That the Letter
from the Assembly of Divines to the Reformed Churches beyond Seas shall be
printed in Latin and English, with the several Inscriptions to the particular
several Churches, and that Mr. Seldom and Mr. Rous do acquaint the Assembly
with this Order.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

A LETTER From the ASSEMBLY of DIVINES IN ENGLAND, AND THE Commissioners of the
Church of SCOTLAND, Written, and Sent by Order of the honorable House of
Commons Assembled in Parliament, to the Belgic, French, Helvetian, and other
Reformed CHURCHES.

Translated into English, and now published with the several Inscriptions to
those Churches. By Order of the said House.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Ralph Smith, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the sign of the Bible in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange, 1644.

A Letter from the Assembly of Divines in England, and the Commissioners of the
Church of Scotland, to the Belgic, French, Helvetian, and other Reformed
Churches.
Right Reverend and dearly beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ,
WE the Assembly of Divines and others, called and conveened by the Authority
of both Houses of Parliament of England, with the Commissioners sent from the
General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, do heartily salute you in the
Lord. We doubt not but the sad reports of the miseries under which the Church
and Kingdom of England do bleed, and wherewith we are all ready to be
swallowed up, (the cup which the righteous Lord has given us to drink) is long
since come to your ears. And it is probable that the same instruments of Satan
and Antichrist, have indevoured by their emissaries to present us as black as
may be among your selves; who by falsehood and lies endeavor every where to
put fair glosses upon their own bloody designs, and to reproach our
strugglings after a more through Reformation of Religion in the Church of
England, according to the Word of God, and our just defense of our lives,
liberties, and Religion, against their cruel and unjust violences. And we
sometimes doubt whether we have not been wanting to our own innocence and your
satisfaction, in being thus long silent, from giving you a faithful, though
sorrowful, relation of the state wherein we stand. But pardon us dear
Brethren, if this Cup of trembling, wherewith our spirits have been filled to
amazement, and our wrestlings with extreme difficulties ever since our
meeting, have hindered us from that which we long since knew to be our duty.
And give us leave now a little to ease our grief, by pouring our hearts into
your bosoms, while we relate the desolation made by an Antichristian faction,
who amongst us have still been hindering the work of Reformation, and withal
introducing and cherishing of Popery; and are now arrived at that strength, and
have prevailed so far against us, that if the Lord, whose judgments are
unsearchable, and whose tender mercies are innumerable, do not speedily help
us, we shall even altogether be laid waste by them.

How great a hand this treacherous and bloody generation amongst us, have long
had in the miseries of other Reformed Churches, in the destruction of the
Palatinate; and in the betraying and, loss of Rochell, and how, by seeming
overtures of Ambassies and Treaties for their relief, they have fomented,
continued, and increased their calamities; are so fully known by you all, and
miserably felt by some of your selves, that we need not speak any thing of
them. And we suppose their inveterate hatred against you all, is sufficiently
manifested, in that multitudes of them have refused to acknowledge any of you
for Churches of Christ, because you are not Prelaticall, and thereby (as they
conceive) want a lawful Vocation of Ministers. Sure we are, that amongst our
selves in all these three Kingdoms, they have prevailed so far in advancing
Popery, and depressing Religion, that it would require a Volume, rather than a
Letter, to relate all the particulars. Scarce one thing can be thought upon,
which may be supposed to be an argument of any intent to set up Popery, and
even extirpate the true Reformed Religion, but we could give you abundant
instances, that they have not only attempted, but in great measure prevailed
for the putting thereof in execution. All the good and just Laws of this
Kingdom against Papists, (concerning their lives, liberties, and goods)
suspended; Judges prohibited to proceed against condemned Priests; and even
Jesuits set free: Houses of Superstition in Ireland and England set up, and
not discountenanced: (beside the seldom or never questioned transportation of
many young persons to Seminaries in foraine parts) Notorious Papists, contrary
to known Laws, permitted to come to Court, to reside there, and enjoy the
favor and preferment of it: Multitudes of them released from legal Penalties
for time past, and time to come; Prosecuters of them checked and
discountenanced; Agents sent from hence into Italy; Nuntioes and Agents from
Rome received and treated with; such as warped that way, cherished and
advanced; the most zealous Ministers and Professors of Religion bitterly
persecuted. And all these things so apparent, that abundance of Popishly
affected Prelates and Ministers adventured in every part of the Kingdom
publicly to preach and leaven their people with almost all points of Popery,
(except the Supremacy) and to introduce abundance of corrupt innovations in the
worship of God, compelling the people to yield conformity to them, with
persecuting such as would not. Insomuch as many who looked at Religion only
for outward advantage, found it best for their gain and safety to turn
Papists: And many godly Ministers, who would not publish a book purposely set
forth to allow such sports on the Lords day, which the Reformed Churches think
unlawful at any time; or who would not conform themselves to their other
superstitions; have had their mouths stopped, and many thousands of their
people with them compelled to seek for refuge amongst your selves, or in
remote parts of the world.

Yea so far they had advanced in their presumption, as to impose upon the
whole Kingdom of Scotland a new Popish book of Service, Rites, and Ceremonies;
and a book of Canons: To which when the piety and zeal of that Nation would
not submit, they prevailed (alas) with his Majesty to proclaim them Rebels and
Traitors, and to raise a formidable army against them; to which all the
Papists, and popishly affected did professedly contribute their best
assistance. And certainly had not the Lord by his blessing upon the Scottish
Army, by the manifestation and acknowledgement of the wrongs done them, by the
calling of this Parliament, and their godly care to clear the Innocence of
their Brethren, and by the Treaty of Peace concluded betwixt the two Kingdoms,
prevented it, the two Nations long since through the treachery and rage of
these brutish men, had been embrewing their hands in each others blood.

But though, through the goodness of God and his blessing upon the public
Counsels and proceedings of both Nations of England and Scotland, they were
more closely and mutually conjoined; and the Lord had raised up such a spirit
throughout this whole Kingdom to mourn after the Lord, to lament our
backslidings, and to desire a perfect Reformation; and had so inclined the
hearts of the Honorable Senators convened in Parliament, to repair the house
of the Lord among us, that we verily hoped our winter to be past, and the time
of our refreshing and healing to be come: Yet alas we find it to be clean
otherwise: Our God who before was a moth and rottenness, is now turned unto a
Lion to us. We know our sins have deserved all; and if we all dye and
perish, yet the Lord is righteous, to his hand we submit, and to him alone we
desire to look for healing: Howbeit the Instruments of these new miseries are
the same Antichristian faction, Who have been so far from being discouraged,
or giving over their former design by their want of success in Scotland, or
in beholding the fixed resolution of the Parliament here for Reformation, that
their rage and diligence therein is more increased since the beginning of the
Parliament, then at any time before. And indeed have more prevailed; both by
stirring up a bloody Rebellion in Ireland, wherein (as the Papists themselves
boast) they have destroyed above a hundred thousand Protestants in one
Province, within a few months: And in England, by alienating the heart of his
Majesty from his Parliament, which had begun to call many of them to account
for their former mischiefs. And (after an attempt to surprise some Members of
both Houses in an hostile manner) prevailing with his Majesty to withdraw
himself from the Parliament, and to raise an Army, which at first, pretended
only to be made up of Protestants; but the Papists knew their intents, who
both here and beyond the Seas, had frequent prayers for the good success of
this great work intended in England, for the advancing of the Catholic Cause;
And spared not in England to boast, that they were not to appear until many
Protestants were engaged so far, that they might not start back, and then
they were to own it, which accordingly is come to pass. For when once many
seeming Protestants were engaged upon pretense of the Kings Prerogative, and
Privileges of Parliament, and Protestant Religion, (which Protestants yet for
the most part were the same who before the beginning of these stirs had been
by the public Judicatory of the Kingdom, impeached of Treason, Oppression, and
other high crimes and misdemeanors; and others who knew themselves guilty
thereof; and other corrupt parties of the Clergy and their adherents) presently
the Papists (who before were spared from all plunder and violence where ever
the Kings Forces came, though many Protestants, who even held not for the
Parliament, were rifled) were armed by Commission from the King, and promise of
repayment for their arms, if they were lost; Many great Papists being put into
places of Command in several parts of the Kingdom; and the body of all the
Papists joining with all their might, and professing and exercising their
Religion even by public Masses in diverse parts of the Realm: And thus
assisted with ammunition, Men, and Money, from other parts (deluded by their
fair glosses and pretenses) they go up and down, plunder, and murder, and
spoil all such as adhere to the Parliament and cause of Religion.

And although, when the Parliament saw that these wicked instruments prevailed
with the King, to raise force to be protected from the justice of the Laws
(which the Parliament went about to inflict upon them for their former Treasons
and other high crimes) and to accomplish their former designs, they endeavored
to secure the Forts and Navy and provide means for the defense of themselves,
and of Laws, Liberties, and Religion (all which these men indevoured to
destroy;) Yet such has been their cunning, by false glosses to hide their own
intention, and to seduce others, Or rather, such is the righteous judgment of
our now angry God, for our abuse of our long peace that we have not yet been
able by Supplications, Petitions, and Remonstrances, to recover his Majesty out
of their hands; or to bring these men to deserved punishments; but the sword
rages almost in every corner of this woeful land.

And, to make up our misery to the full, they have now at last prevailed with
his Majesty so far to own the bloody Rebels in Ireland, as not only to call
them his Roman Catholic Subjects now in Arms, etc. but even to grant them a
Cessation for a year, (when they were brought into great extremity) and to
hold what they have gotten, liberty to strengthen themselves, with Men, Money,
Arms, Ammunition from any place, freedom to send or come to his Majesty; and
thereby be not only enabled to destroy the remnant of the Protestants there,
but to come over hither, (as many of them are already) to act the same
butcheries upon us, as they have hitherto exercised upon our miserable and
distressed Brethren among themselves.

In these deplorable calamities are we involved: and in the midst of these
troublesome times, have the honorable Houses of Parliament, called this
Assembly, to give them our best Counsel for the Reformation of the Church, for
the purging and preserving of Religion: and require us to make Gods Word only
our Rule, and to endeavor the nearest conformity to the best Reformed Churches,
and uniformity in all the Churches of the three Kingdoms. And in this work we
are now exercised, though the enemy has stirred up the heart of our dear and
dread Sovereign against us also: Yet through the good hand of God upon us, we
have made some comfortable beginnings: The work is his, who commands us not to
despise the day of small things.

Thus (Reverend and Dear Brethren) we have given you the face, or rather the
shadow, (for what words are able to express the face?) of our miserable
condition in England: Our civil Liberties in danger to be lost, our goods
spoiled, our houses plundered, our blood poured out in every corner: (things
though otherwise very precious to us we omit to mention.) If our God will lay
our bodies as the ground, and as the dust under their feet; the will of the
Lord be done: Might our blood be a Sacrifice to ransom the rest of the
Saints of Christ from antichristian fury, most gladly would we offer it upon
this service. But that which breaks our hearts is, the danger we behold the
Protestant Religion, and all the Reformed Churches in at this time. We know
their rage is insatiable, and will not be quenched with our blood: their fury
is kindled against us, not as we are sinful men, but as men engaged in the
defense of the true Religion, and panting after a right Reformation: And if
once the Lord deliver us as a prey into their teeth, Oh the darkness and
horror, the bondage, slavery and persecution, which all who will not receive
the mark of the beast, are like to be wrapped in, in these three woeful
Kingdoms! And not here only, but they are like to attempt the same in all the
Reformed Churches in Europe. Your own thoughts can easily suggest unto you,
with what rage the beast which came out of the bottomless pit, the Woman who
has thus long drunk the blood of the Saints is filled now before her utter
destruction, against that Virgin Company that follow the Lamb.

The Church and Kingdom of Scotland, have been willing and ready by all good
means to quench this unnatural fire. They have sent their humble
Supplications, Remonstrances, and Declarations to his Majesty: And at last made
offer of their humble Mediation, and National intercession, for a
Pacification. All which being refused and rejected, they have entered into a
mutual League and Covenant with the Church and Kingdom of England; and have
resolved to join in Arms with their Brethren for their assistance and
deliverance, for the preservation of their own Religion, and of themselves from
the merciless cruelty of the common enemy, and (so far as in them lies) for
the safety of their Native King, and his Kingdoms from destruction and
desolation, (as is more largely expressed in their public Declaration, and in
the Solemn League and Covenant of the three Kingdoms, which will give full
satisfaction to all the wise and well-affected concerning their intentions.)
They have also, according to the desire of the Honorable Houses of Parliament,
sent us their Commissioners hither, for uniformity of Religion in the Churches
of both Kingdoms. And we (their Commissioners) do exceedingly rejoice to
behold the Foundation of the House of God, not only in Doctrine, but
Church Government, laid before our eyes in a reverend Assembly of so wise,
learned, and godly Divines. And find our selves bound in all Christian duty,
but especially by the late Solemn League and Covenant of both Kingdoms,
wherein we are so deeply interessed and engaged, to join in representing to
the Reformed Churches abroad, the true condition of affairs here, against all
mis-informations and mistakings.

And now (dear Brethren) in this extreme danger threatening us all, what are
the things we can beg of you? But that first you would judge aright of our
afflicted condition, of our innocence and integrity in this our just defense.
If our Enemies every where calumniate us, that we be risen up in Rebellion
against our Sovereign to deprive him of his just power and greatness, and
endeavor to bring Anarchy and confusion into the Church of Christ; from these
foul and false aspersions, our intentions fully and clearly set forth in our
solemn League and Covenant (the copy whereof we here withal humbly present
you) we doubt not will sufficiently clear us. But if these children of
Beliall have unjustly stirred up our Sovereign against us, and by abusing his
Majesty's name and Authority, are laboring to keep themselves from deserved
punishment of their former crimes, which the supreme Judicatories of the
Kingdom went about to inflict upon them, and to deprive us of our lives,
Liberties, Privileges, and especially of our Religion; And that our defensive
Arms are by us used and intended only to preserve our selves from their unjust
violence: (which has often been the condition of many of your selves) Let the
righteous Lord judge between us and them; whom we implore to help us no
further then we can plead these things in sincerity before him: And let our
dear Brethren to whom these letters are addressed, acquit our Innocence in
their hearts, and make their Apology for us in all their Churches.

Secondly, that ye will sympathize with us as Brethren, who suffer in, and for
the same cause, wherein your selves have been oppressed, which will be no
little refreshing to our mourning spirits, when we shall know that our God who
smites us, yet inclines the hearts of his beloved Churches to look upon us
with compassionate bowels, as judging us to be the servants of their own God,
and Savior Jesus Christ, and as remembering themselves to be in the body.

Thirdly and lastly, That as all the Antichristian faction ownes the cause of
our Adversaries as their own, and contributes what lies in their power every
way to their help, and our ruin: So that you would embrace our condition, as
your own common cause, wherein if we be once swallowed up, your selves are not
like long to escape; the quarrel of the enemy being not so much against the
persons of men, as against the power of Godliness, and Purity of Gods word
wherever it is professed. The way and manner of your owning us, we leave wholly
to your selves: Except this one particular, which we must importunately crave,
even your fervent prayers both public and private. That God who hears
prayer, now he has humbled us and broken all our Arms of Flesh (whereon alas
we have been too prone to lean) would himself bring salvation to us, that
the blessings of truth and peace might rest upon us, that these three Nations
may be joined as one stick in the hand of the Lord, and that we our selves,
contemptible builders, called to repair the House of God in a troublesome
time, being ashamed of our former pollutions, may see the pattern of this
House, and commend such a platform to our Zorobabells, as may be most agreeing
to his own sacred word, nearest conformity to the best Reformed Churches, and
greatest uniformity amongst our selves, that all mountains may become plains
before them and us, that then all who now see the plummet in our hands, may
also behold the Top stone set upon the head of the Lords house amongst us, and
may help us with shouting to cry, Grace, Grace unto it.

And thus much we have been willed to Inform you of, Reverend Brethren, (and
by you all faithful Christians under your Charges,) by the Honorable House of
Commons: In whose name and in our own we bid you heartily farewell in the Lord.

Your most affectionately devoted Brethren in Christ, Commissioners of the
Church of Scotland. Jo. Maitland, A. Jhonston, Alex. Henderson, Sam.
Rutherfurd, Rob. Bailyie. Geo. Gillespie.
William Twisse, Prolocutor, Cornel. Burges, Assessor, Jo. White, Assessor,
Henry Robrough, Scribe, Adoniram Byfield, Scribe.


THE Several Inscriptions to THE REFORMED CHVRCHES.
Zealand. TO the Reverend and Learned Pastors and Elders of the Classes and
Churches of the Province of Zealand, our much Honored Brethren. Holland. To
the Reverend and learned Pastors and Elders of the Classes, and Churches of the
Province of Holland, our much Honored Brethren. East-Holland. To the Reverend
and learned Pastors and Elders of the Classes and Churches of East-Holland, our
much Honored Brethren. Gelderland. To the Reverend and learned Pastors and
Elders of the Classes and Churches of the Province of Gelderland, our much
honored Brethren. Over Ysell. To the Reverend and learned Pastors and Elders
of the Classes and Churches of the Province of Over Ysell, our much honored
Brethren. Utrecht. To the Reverend and learned Pastors and Elders of the
Classes and Churches of the Province of Utrecht, our much Honored Brethren.
Frizeland. To the Reverend and learned Pastors and Elders of the Classes and
Churches of the Province of Frizeland, our much honored Brethren. Groningen.
To the Reverend and learned Pastors and Elders of the Classes and Churches of
the Province and City of Grohingen, our much honored Brethren. Geneva. To the
Reverend and learned Pastors and Elders of the Church in the City and Republic
of Geneva, our much honored Brethren. Berne. To the Reverend and learned
Pastors and Elders of the Churches of Berne, our much honored Brethren.
Zurich. To the Reverend and learned Pastors and Elders of the Churches of
Zurich, our much honored Brethren. Bazell. To the Reverend and learned Pastors
and Elders of the Churches of Bazell, our much honored Brethren. Schafhausen.
To the Reverend and learned Pastors and Elders of the Churches of Schafhausen,
our much honored Brethren. Paris. To the Reverend and learned Pastors and
Elders of the Church which is at Paris, our much honored Brethren. Hessen. To
the Reverend and learned Pastors and Elders of the Classes and Churches of
Hessen, our much honored Brethren. Anhalt. To the Reverend and learned Pastors
and Elders of the Classes and Churches of Anhalt, our much honored Brethren.
Hanaw. To the Reverend and learned Pastors and Elders of the Churches of Hanaw,
our much honored Brethren.
FINIS.

