THOMAS Lord WHARTON, Baron of Wharton in the County of Westmorland, Warden,
Chief Justice, and Justice in Air of all His MAJESTY's Forests, Chases, Parks,
and Warrens, on the South side of Trent.
To the Wardens, Lieutenants, Verderers, Regarders, Master-Foresters, Rangers,
Keepers, Under-Keepers, and to all and singular other the Ministers and
Officers of His Majesty's Forests, Chases, Parks, and Warrens aforesaid, and
every of them; and to all others whom these Presents may concern: Sends
Greeting, etc.
WHEREAS there has been great Destruction of His Majesty's Red and Fallow
Deer, and of the Beasts, Fowl, Fish, and Game of the Forests, and also of the
Timber Trees, Coppices, and Vert, in most of the said Places, as well in Breach
and Contempt of the Laws of the Forest, as of several Statute-Laws in such
Cases made and provided: Which, as I am credibly informed, has happened not
only by the Trespasses and unlawful Acts of many disorderly and idle Persons
living in the said Forests, Chases, Parks, and Places adjacent without the
least Pretense or Color of Authority, and of others under Pretenses of
Licenses and Warrants which are determined or void; but also by the Negligence
of many of the said Officers, who have connived thereat, and suffered the same
to remain without due Prosecutions, unpunished; and likewise by means of other
Officers, who under Color or Pretense of their Offices, have greatly
transgressed, and assumed to themselves Authorities to which they have no Right
in Law, contrary to their Duties, and in direct breach of the Trust in them
reposed, whereby they have not only forfeited their said Offices, but also
subjected themselves to the other Penalties of the Law for such their
Misdemeanors: And His Majesty having signified to Me His Royal Pleasure, That a
due Reprehension be had of the said Misbehaviours for the time past, as
likewise that for the future all possible Care be taken for Preservation of His
Majesty's Game, Vert, and Venison, and for that purpose to see the Laws
relating thereto duly executed.

NOW for Remedy thereof, and that Right may be done in the Premises, and for
and toward the more effectual Execution of the said Laws, and for Prevention
of the like Mischiefs in time to come, and in Obedience to His Majesty's said
Commands, I do therefore hereby Order, and strictly Charge and Command all and
every the said Officers, of what Degree or Quality soever, That they and every
of them be diligent and faithful in their several and respective Stations, and
in the Discharge and Execution of their several and respective Duties and
Offices, as they tender His Majesty's Service, or will answer the same at their
Perils: And that they, as far as in them lies, take all possible Care for the
discovering, finding, apprehending, presenting, prosecuting, and punishing of
the said Offenders, either by the Rules and Methods of the Laws of the Forest,
or of the said Acts of Parliament; and that they see the same from time to time
duly executed. And that they, or any of them, do not usurp or assume to
themselves, or exercise any Authority or Power over or concerning His Majesty's
said Timber Trees, Coppices, Red or Fallow-Deer, or other Beasts of the Forest,
Fowl, Fish, or other His Majesty's Game, which by Law they ought not to do. And
that they do not take upon them to make any Grants, or give any Warrants or
Directions for or toward the cutting of the said Woods, or killing, taking, or
destroying of the said Beasts, Fowl, or Fish.

And I do further and more particularly will and require all and every the said
Officers in their several and respective Places, that they do not permit or
suffer any Person or Persons, of what Quality soever, to Hunt, Hawk, Course
shoot, take, kill or destroy any Deer, Pheasants, Partridges, Hares, Fowl,
Fish, or other Game within the said Forests, Chases, Parks, Warrens, or the
Purlieus or Precincts thereof, excepting only Peers of the Realm, in their
coming to, and returning from the Parliament, to hunt in a Forest, according to
the Statute in that Case, and under the Restrictions therein expressed, and
such other Persons as have Right so to do by the Laws of the Forest, or
particular Grants of the same; and excepting such Persons to whom I have
already granted, or shall hereafter grant Licenses of Pleasure; for the better
certainty whereof I do declare, That no Licenses to be by me granted shall be
of any effect in any Forest, unless the same be entered at the Court to be held
for that Forest next after the date thereof: And that no Licenses by me already
granted shall be of any Effect, unless the same be entered at the Court to be
next held after publication hereof.

And I do further will and require all and every the said Officers to seize,
and kill, or cause to be seized and killed, all such Hounds, Spaniels,
Greyhounds, and other Dogs; and seize and take, or cause to be sised and taken,
all such Guns, Toils and other Engines as shall be kept or used within the
Forests or Places aforesaid, by any Person or Persons not sufficiently
Authorized or qualified by Law to have or use the same.

And further also, That no Deer be killed but by good and sufficient Warrant in
Writing; and that an Account of the said Warrants, and number of Deer killed be
yearly at Hollyrood Day delivered, or sent to me by the Chief Officer or
Officers of the said Forests, Chases or Parks respectively, and by whose
Warrants the same were killed; as also an Account of the Stock of the Deer
remaining therein. And what Timber or Coppices have been lately Cut, and by
whose Authority.

And to prevent any of the said Officers from being imposed upon, I do hereby
publish and declare, That the granting of Licenses and Warrants for Hunting,
Hawking, or other Licenses of Pleasure, or to be Game-keepers within any of the
Forests or Places aforesaid, does appertain and belong to the Chief Justice in
Air for the time being, and that all the former Licenses, for the purposes
aforesaid, granted by any former Chief Justice in Air are determined. And I do
therefore prohibit all manner of persons from Hunting, Hawking, Fishing or
Fowling by Virtue or Color thereof.

And I do strictly command and require the Verderers, and other Officers of the
Forests, to whom it does belong, That the Swanimote and other Courts of the
Forests respectively be duly kept and held in their proper times, the omission
whereof has been one of the causes of the said Mischiefs, and that due
Presentment of the said Offenders be made thereat, and particularly of Persons
who keep disorderly Alehouses, encourage and harbor Deer-stealers, Straglers
and Poachers, and Destroyers of the Game.

And if any Person or Persons shall presume on any pretense to act contrary to
this my Prohibition, I do require the said Officers to whom it does belong,
respectively to present and prosecute the said Offenders, and to give me
immediate notice of their respective Names, Habitations, and the nature of
their Offenses, that they and every of them may be brought to condign
punishment according to Law.

And that no Person may pretend ignorance herein; I do hereby will and require
the Beadles, and other proper Officers of every of the said Forests, Chases,
and Parks, to cause due notice hereof to be given to all Persons concerned, to
the end that they may conform themselves accordingly, as they will answer the
same at their perils.

Given under my Hand, and the Seal of my Office, this 19th day of August, in
the Ninth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord William the Third, by the
Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, ^fender of the Faith,
etc. Annoque Dom. 1697.

