A Thankful REMEMBRANCE OF GODS MERCY To several Persons at Quabaug or
BROOKFIELD:

Partly in a Collection of Providence about them, and Gracious Appearances for
them: And partly in a Sermon Preached By Mr. EDWARD BVLKLEY, Pastor of the
Church of Christ at Concord, upon a day of Thanksgiving, kept by diverse for
their Wonderful Deliverance there.

Published by Capt. THOMAS WHEELER.

Psalm. 107.8. Oh that men would Praise the Lord for his Goodness, and his
Wonderful Works to the Children of men.

Psalm. 111.2. The Works of the LORD are great, sought out of all those that
Love him.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed and Sold by Samuel Green 1676.

The Preface.
Christian Reader.
I Purposing to Publish this ensuing Narrative of Gods Providence toward Capt.
Hutchinson and my felfe and others, and the Sermon preached on the occasion
hereafter expressed: do Judge it expdient to give you a little further Account
of matrers, occasioning the going of Captain Hutchinson and my fels to Quabaug:
and also of the Motives inducing me to the Publication of both to the world:

Philip the Sachem of the Wampanogs, lying about Mount-hope, having done some
Acts of Hostility against Plymouth Colony by murdering men, burning Houses and
killing Cattle: the said Colony was necessitated to wart with him in their own
defense: The Massachusetts and Connecticot Colonies being Confederate with them,
and discerning the Justness of the War on their part: diverse were sent forth
of each Colony both Troopers and foot Soldiers to help our Brethren of that
Colony against the said Sachem. The Honored Council of the Massachusetts did
also send Captain Hutchinson with a Guard to the Narroganset Suchems and
Sagamores; who were not far from the said Philip: to see whether they intended
to continue their peace with us, or to join with the Wampanogs against us:
They promised to continue their peace with us, which they gave further hopes
that they would do by sending over more of their Sachems to our Council where
they also promised to remain Faithful Friends to us. Our much Honored
Governor and Council, being desirous as far as it might be to prevent
shedding of blood, and the strengthening of the Enemy by others joining with
them, did also send Ephraim Curtis of Sudbury and others to several other
Sachems in and about the Nipmuck Country to the same purpose, they also
promised Faithful Friendship to the English, (though they afterward proved
wretchedly perfidious) and set a time wherein they would come to Boston further
to engage themselves for the Councils satisfaction, but they came not at the
time appointed: The Council sent the said Ephraim Curtis again to know the
Reason thereof. They again promised to come, but did not. The Honored Council
being willing to use all means to prevent a Wart with them if it might be, and
their Assistance of Philip, and the rest then in Arms against us: sent Captain
Hutchinson thither also to Treat with them in order to the Preservation of
peace between us and them, they also appointed my self to Assist him with part
of my Troop, which accordingly I did attend: We discerned by the Indians
deserting the places of their Abode that they were afraid of us: and therefore
the better to effect our business in a peaceable way, and prevent Hostility on
either side before we marched all to them, we sent three English men, and oue
Indian (all four, being men Familiarly acquainted with many of the Indians) to
let them understand that we only desired a Treaty in Reference to the
Preservation of Peace with them, and that we inrcnded no hurt at all to them:
but the Issue thereof was as in the Narrative is expressed. Wherein the
Providence of God toward us in his wares about us were so Remarkable, in our
sore Exercises and gracious Deliverances that they ought never to be forgotten
by us, but kept in Remembrance all our days: the Lord has made his wonderful
works to be remembered, says the Psalmist, and he would have his People to tell
them to their Children, that they might also declare them to their Children,
And therefore for the help of our memories and the preventing of mistakes in
Reports, and the Advantage of our own Relations and others better Acquaintance
with the manner of Gods dealings with us, I have endeavored the drawing up of
this Following Declaration of what befell us in our March to, and at
Brookfield, and our Return homewards: I not at first intending that it should
by my means be brought to public view: but several persons having seen it,
(though not altogether so large as now it is) they persuaded me, and urged it
as a Duty Incumbent on me, (the Lord having taken away Captain Hutchinson, who
might have performed it in a better manner) to put it forth in print, that many
may thereby be provoked to give God the glory of his great works in our
Salvation, and that others may make use of his dealings with us to learn to
trust and Rely upon him in the sorest straits, and may be encouraged to wait
patiently for Deliverance in the greatest danger that may befall them: for
greater danger of Loss of Life cannot well be with an Escape, then that of
ours. For from Monday about Ten of the Clock in the morning till nine on
Wednesday night, all hope that we should be saved (as Acts 27.20) was in the
Eye of Reason taken away, and we were in continual Expectation of Death, but
yet even then we were not without some hopes in the Lord our God to whom the
Issues of Death-belong: who was pleased to know our Souls in Adversity, to hear
our Cries, and to save us for his mercy sake, as in the Narrative more fully
appears, which goodness of God that it may be the better remembered by us, and
others incited the more to magnify God with us, (as David calls upon others to
do for Gods mercy to him, Psalm 34.3.) and also quickened to put their trust on
God all their days: I have Adventured to publish this Narration, entreating
your Candid Acceptance thereof, and over looking all the defects and weaknesses
therein: As for the Sermon added thereto, the occasion thereof was this. When
the Lord of his free and abundant mercy had sent Deliverance to us by Honored
Majors Willards coming to us, and our Enemies departing thereupon, and we had
rest from them, I in the morning called together my Company both the wounded
and the Rest who were weary with their hard Service, and much watching, and
propounded this to them; whether though God had taken away diverse from us, and
others of us were sore wounded, yet in regard so many of us had our Lives given
us for a Prey, and also that God had made us Instrumental to save so many Souls
alive of the Town dwellers, (who would probably have been all or most of them
destroyed, had not God carried us thither:) whether I say God did not Call for
a Solemn day of Thanksgiving from us, when we should have Opportunity: They
Rejoicing at the motion very readily Assented to it, and promised that those of
us whom God should be pleased to Carry home would attend it in due Season: and
when some others with my self and Son, were in some good measure recovered of
our wounds: I Requested Mr. Bulkely to help us in the work of the day intended
to be kept by us. He being of a ready Spirit to the utmost of his strength to
forward any good duty that God calls for, he also Judging it to be of very
great Concernment, althoughte he Country was in very great distress, our
Deliverance being so Remarkable, he did join with us therein on October 21.75.
and then preached what is here published, which we finding so seasonable to the
occasion and beneficial to our selves. I further Requested him that for the
help of our memories, and our better Improvement of what was then delivered to
us, also for the benefit and Edification of others, he would give me a Copy of
it, and suffer me to publish it: which though for a time he delayed to do, yet
has at length given given me a Copy with power to do as I shall think best,
therein permitting it to be added to the aforesaid Narrative. I hope it may be
profitable to many of Gods people, to whose view it may come, and I know that
there be many in this Country at this day for whom it may be very seasonable,
who having with our selves received great mercies in Preservations and
Deliverances in these Evil and Troublesome Times, in the Naragansit Expedition,
and at other times, and in other places where they have been in very great
danger, and in hazard of the loss of Life, and all they had, as also having
been healed of sore and dangerous wounds: been brought home safely to their
dear Relations, or have had their Relations Returned to them, whom they feared
they should not have seen again, and have had their Habitations and Estates
preserved when near to Ruin; and others not far from them were consumed: All
whom, with all others whom God has vouchsaved any special mercy to in Recovery
out of great sicknesses, or otherwise, it Concerns to do as we were then
Exhorted to do, even seriously to observe what God has done about them, and
for them and Carefully to Return that Praise, Love and Obedience which he
expects from them: I Crave your Prayers for the blessing of God to accompany
both his Works and his Word tous for our Everlasting good.

Tho. Wheeler.

A TRVE NARRATIVE
Of the Lords Providence in various dispensations toward Captain Edward
Hutchinson of Boston and my self, and those that went with us into the Nipmuck
Country, and also to Quabaug, alias Brookfield: The said Captain Hutchinson
having a Commission from the Honored Council of this Colony to Treat with
several Sachems in those parts in order to the public peace, and my self being
also ordered by the said Council to accompany him with part of my Troop for
Security from any danger that might be from the Indians: and to Assist him in
the Transaction of matters committed to him.

THe said Captain Hutchinson, and my self with about twenty men or more marched
from Cambridge to Sudbury, July 28.75. and from thence into the Nipmuck
Country, and finding that the Indians had deserted their Towns, and we having
gone until we came within twenty miles of New Norwitch, on July 31. (only we
saw two Indians having an Horse with them, whom we would have spoke with, but
they fled from us and left their Horse, which we took) we then thought it not
expedient to march any further that way, but set our march for Brookfield,
whither we came on the Lords day about Noon. From thence the same day (being
August 1.) we understanding that the Indians were about Ten Miles Northwest
from us, we sent out four men to acquaint the Indians that we were not come to
harm them, but our business was only to deliver a Message from our Honored
Governor and Council to them, and to receive their Answer, we desiring to come
to a Treaty of Peace with them, (though they had for several days fled from
us) they having before professed Friendship, and promised Fidelity to the
English. When the Messengers came to them; they made an Alarm, and gathered
together about an hundred and Fifty fighting men as near as they could judge;
The young men amongst them were stout in their Speeches, and surly in their
Carriage; But at length three of the chief Sachems promised to meet us on the
next morning about eight of the Clock upon a plain within three miles of
Brookfield, with which Answer the Messengers returned to us. Whereupon though
their Speeches and Carriage did much discourage diverse of our Company, yet we
conceived that we had a clear Call to go to meet them at the place whither they
had promised to come. Accordingly we with our men accompanied with three of the
Principal Inhabitants of that Town marched to the plain appointed; but the
Treacherous Heathen intending mischief (if they could have opportunity) came
not to the said place, and so failed our hopes of speaking with them there.
Whereupon the said Captain Hutchinson and my self with the rest of our Company
Considered what was best to be done, whether we should go any further toward
them, or Return, diverse of us apprehending much danger in Case we did proceed,
because the Indians kept not promise there with us: But the three men who
belonged to Brookfield were so strongly persuaded of their Freedom from any
ill Intentions toward us, (as upon other grounds, so especially because the
greatest part of those Indians belonged to David one of their chief Sachems,
who was taken to be a great Friend to the English:) That the said Captain
Hutchinson (who was principally Entrusted with the matter of Treaty with them)
was thereby encouraged to proceed and march forward toward a Swampe where the
Indians then were. When we came near the said Swampe, the way was so very bad
that we could march only in a fingle File, there being a very Rocky Hill on the
right hand, and a thick Swampe on the left. In which there were many of those
cruel blood-thirsty Heathen, who there waylaid us, waiting an opportunity to
cut us off; there being also much brush on the side of the said Hill, where
they lay in Ambush to surprise us. When we had marched there about sixty or
seventy Rods, the said perfidious Indians sent out their shot upon us as a
shower of hail, they being (as was supposed) about two hundred men or more. We
seeing our selves so beset, and not having room to fight, Endeavored to fly
for the safety of our lives. In which Flight we were in no small danger to be
all Cut off, there being a very miry Swamp before us into which we could not
enter with our horses to go forwards, and there being no safety in retreating
the way we came, because many of our Enemies, who lay behind the Bushes, and
had let us pass by them quietly; when others had shot, they came out, and stopped
our way back: so that we were forced as we could to get up the steep and Rocky
Hill: But the greater our danger was, the greater was Gods mercy in the
preservation of so many of us from sudden destruction. My self being gone up
part of the Hill without any hurt, and perceiving some of my men to be fallen
by the Enemies shot: I wheeled about upon the Indians, not calling on my men
who were left to Accompany me, which they in all probability would have done
had they known of my Return upon the Enemy. They firing violently out of the
Swamp, and from behind the bushes on the Hill side wounded me sorely, and shot
my Horse under me, so that he faultring and Falling, I was forced to leave him,
diverse of the Indians being then but a few Rods distant from me, My Son Thomas
Wheeler flying with the rest of the Company missed me amongst them, and fearing
that I was either slain, or much endangered returned toward the Swampe again,
though he had then received a dangerous wound in the Reins; where he saw me in
the danger aforesaid: Whereupon he endeavored to Rescue me, showing himself
therein a loving and dutiful Son, he adventuring himself into great peril of
his Life to help me in that distress, there being many of the Enemies about
him. My Son set me on his own horse, and so escaped a while on Foot himself,
until he Caught an Horse whose Rider was slain, on which he mounted, and so
through Gods great mercy we both escaped: But in this Attempt for my
deliverance he received another dangerous wound by their shot in his left Arm.
There were then slain to out great grief eight men viz. Zechariah Philips of
Boston, Timothy Farlow of Billericay, Edward Coleborn of Chelmsford, Samuel
Smedly of Concord, Sydrach Hopgood of Sudbury, Sergeant Eyres, Sergeant
Prichard, and Corporal Coy the Inhabitants of Brookfield aforesaid; It being
the good pleasure of God, that they should all there fall by their hands, of
whose good Intentions they were so Confident, and whom they so little
mistrusted. There were also then five persons wounded, viz. Captain Hutchinson,
my self, and my Son Thomas as aforesaid, Corporal French of Billericay, who
having killed an Indian was (as he was taking up his gun) shot, and part of one
of his Thumbs taken off; and also dangerously wounded through the Body near the
Shoulder, the fifth was John Waldoe of Chelmsford, who was not so dangerously
wounded as the rest; They also then killed five of our horses, and wounded some
more, which soon died after they came to Brookfield Upon this sudden and
unexpected blow given us (wherein we desire to look higher then man the
Instrument) we returned to the Town as fast as the badness of the way, and the
weakness of our wounded men would permit, we being then Ten Miles from it. All
the while we were going we durst not stay to stanch the bleeding of our wounded
men, for fear the Enemy should have surprised us again, which they attempted to
do, and had in probability done, but that we perceiving which way they went,
wheeled off to the other hand, and so by Gods good Providence toward us, they
missed us, and we all came readily upon, and safely to the Town, though none of
us knew the way to it, those of the place being slain as aforesaid, and we
avoiding any thick woods and riding in open places to prevent danger by them.
Being got to the Town we speedily betook our selves to one of the largest and
strongest houses therein, where we fortified our selves in the best manner we
could in such straits of Time, and there resolved to keep Garrison, though we
were but few, and meanly fitted to make Resistance against so many Enemies. The
News of the Indians Treacherous dealing with us, and the loss of so many of our
Company thereby, did so amaze the Inhabitants of the Town, that they being
informed thereof by us presently left their houses, diverse of them carrying
very little away with them, they being afraid of the Indians sudden coming upon
them: and so came to the house we were entered into, very meanly provided of
Clothing, or furnished with Provisions.

I perceiving my self to be disenabled for the discharge of the duties of my
place by reason of the wound I had received, and apprehending that the Euemy
would soon come to spoil the Town, and Assault us in the house, I appointed
Simon Davis of Concord, James Richardson, and John Fiske of Chelmsford to
manage Affairs for our Safety with those few men whom God has left us, and
were fit for any Service, and the Inhabitants of the said Town; who did well
and Commendably perform the duties of the Trust committed to them with much
Courage and Resolution through the Assistance of our gracious God who did not
leave us in out low and distressed state, but did mercifully appear for us in
our greatest need, as in the Sequel will clearly be manifested. Within two
hours after our coming to the said house, or less, the said Captain Hutchinson
and my self posted away Ephraim Curtis of Sudbury, and Henry Young of Concord
to go to the Honored Council at Boston to give them an Account of the Lords
dealings with us, and our present Condition. When they came to the further end
of the Town they saw the Enemy Rifling of houses which the Inhabitants had
forsaken. The Post fired upon them, and immediately returned to us again, they
discerning no safety in going forward, and being desirous to inform us of the
Enemies Actings, that we might the more prepare for a sudden Assault by them.
Which indeed presently followed, for as soon as the said Post was come back to
us, the Barbarous Heathen pressed upon us in the house with great violence,
sending in their Shot amongst us like hail through the walls, and shouting as
if they would have swallowed us up alive; but our good God wrought wonderfully
for us, so that there was but one man wounded within the house, viz the said
Henry Young who looking out at a garret window that Evening was mortally
wounded by a Shot, of which wound he died within two days after. There was the
same day another man slain, but not in the house, a Son of Sergeant Prichards
adventuring out of the house wherein we were, to his Fathers house not far from
it, to fetch more goods out of it, was Caught by those Cruel Enemies as they
were coming toward us, who cut off his head, kicking it about like a
Football, and then putting it upon a Pole, they set it up before the door of
his Fathers house in our sight.

The night following the said blow, they did roar against us like so many wild
Bulls, sending in their Shot amongst us till toward the Moon rising, which was
about three of the Clock; at which time they Attempted to fire our house by Hay
and other Combustible matter which they brought to one Corner of the house, and
set it on fire. Whereupon some of our Company were necessitated to expose
themselves to very great danger to put it out: Simon Davis one of the three
appointed by my self as Captain, to supply my place by Reason of my wounds as
aforesaid, he being of a lively Spirit encouraged the Soldiers within the
house to fire upon the Indians; and also those that Adventured out to put out
the Fire (which began to rage and kindle upon the house side) with these and
the like words, That God is with us, and fights for us, and will deliver us out
of the hands of these Heathen; which Expressions of his the Indians hearing,
they shouted and scoffed saying: now sce how your God delivers you, or will
deliver you, sending in many shots whilst our men were putting out the Fire.
But the Lord of Hosts wrought very graciously for us, in preserving our Bodies
both within and without the house from their shot, and our house from being
consumed by Fire, we had but two men wounded in that Attempt of theirs, but we
apprehended that we killed diverse of our Enemies. I being desirous to hasten
Intelligence to the Honored Council of our present great distress, we being so
remote from any succor, (It being between sixty and seventy miles from us to
Boston, where the Council uses to sit) and fearing our Ammunition would not
last long to withstand them, if they continued so to Assault us, I spak: to
Ephraim Curtis to adventure forth again on that Service, and to Attempt it on
Foot, as the way wherein there was most hope of getting away undiscovered; He
readily Assented, and accordingly went out, but there were so many Indians
every where thereabouts, that he could not pass, without apparent hazard of
Life, so he came back again, yet toward morning the said Ephraim adventured
forth the third time, and was fain to creep on his hands and knees for some
space of ground, that he might not be discerned by the Enemy, who waited to
prevent our sending if they could have hindered it. But through Gods mercy he
escaped their hands, and got safely to Marlborough, though very much spent, and
ready to saint by Reason of want of sleep before he went from us, and his sore
travel night and day in that hot Season till he got thither, from whence he
went to Boston. yet before the said Ephraim got to Marlborough, there was
Intelligence brought thither of the burning of some houses, and killing some
Cattle at Quahaug by some who were going to Connecticut, but they seeing what
was done at the End of the Town, and hearing several guns shot off further
within the Town, they durst proceed no further, but Immediately returned to
Marlborough, though they then know not what had befallen Captain Hutchinson and
my self, and Company, nor of our being there, but that timely Intelligence they
gave before Ephraim Curtis his coming to Marlborough, occasioned the Honored
Major Willards turning his March toward Quahaug for our Relief, who were in no
small danger every hour of being destroyed; the said Major being when he had
that Intelligence upon his March another way as he was Ordered by the Honored
Council, as is afterward more fully expressed.

The next day being August 3d. they continued shooting and shouting, and
proceeded in their former wickedness blaspheming the Name of the Lord, and
reproaching us his Afflicted Servants, scoffing at out prayers as they were
sending in their shot upon all quarters of the house And many of them went to
the Towns meeting house (which was within twenty Rods of the house in which we
were) who mocked saying, Come and pray, and sing Pfalms, and in Contempt made
an hideous noise somewhat resembling singing. But we to our power did endeavor
our own defense, sending our shot amongst them the Lord giving us Courage to
resist them, and preserving us from the destruction they sought to bring upon
us. On the Evening following we saw our Enemies Carrying several of their dead
or wounded men on their Backs, who proceeded that night to send in their shot
as they had done the night before, and also still shouted as if the day had
been certainly theirs, and they should without fail, have prevailed against us
which they might have the more hopes of in regard that we discerned the coming
of new Companies to them to Assist and strengthen them, and the unlikelihood of
any coming to our help. They also used several Stratagems to Fire us, namely by
wild fire in Cotton and Linen Rags with Brimstone in them, which Rags they
tied to the Piles of their Arrows sharp for the purpose, and shot them to the
Roof of our house, after they had set them on Fire, which would have much
endangered the burning thereof, had we not used means by cutting holes through
the Roof, and otherwise, to beat the said Arrows down, and God being pleased to
prosper our Endeavors therein. They carried more Combustible matter as Flax
and Hay to the sides of the house, and set it on fire, and then flocked apace
toward the door of the house, either to prevent our going forth to quench the
Fire, as we had done before, or to kill our men in their Attempt to go forth;
or else to break into the house by the door; whereupon we were forced to break
down the wall of the house against the Fire to put it out: They also shot a
Ball of wild Fire into the garret of the house which fell amongst a great heap
of Flax or Tow therein; which one of our Soldiers through Gods good Providence
soon espied, and having water ready presently quenched it; and so we were
preserved by the keeper of Israel, both our Bodies from their shot, which they
sent thick against us, and the house from being consumed to Ashes, although we
were but weak to defend our selves, we being not above twenty and six men with
those of that small Town, who were able for any Service, and our Enemies as I
Judged them about (if not above) three hundred, I speak of the least, for many
there present did guess them to be four or five hundred. It is the more to be
observed that so little hurt should be done by the Enemies shot, it commonly
piercing the walls of the house, and flying amongst the People, and there being
in the house fifty women and Children besides the men before mentioned. But
abroad in the yard one Thomas Wilson of that Town being sent to setch water for
our help in further need, (that which we had being spent in putting out the
Fire) was shot by the Enemy in the upper Jaw, and in the neck, the anguish of
which wound was such at the first that he cried out with a great noise, by
Reason whereof the Indians hearing him rejoiced and triumphed at it; But his
wound was healed in a short time, praised be God.

On Wednesday August the 4th. the Indians Fortifyed themselves at the meeting
house, and the Barn belonging to our house, which they Fortified both at the
great doors, and at both Ends with Posts, Rails, Boards, and Hay to save
themselves from our shot. They also devised other Stratagems to fire our house
on the night following, namely, they took a Cart, and filled it with Flax, Hay
and Candlewood, and other Combustible matter, and set up Planks fastened to the
Cart to save themselves from the danger of our shot. Another Invention they had
to make the more sure work in burning the house. They got many Poles of a
Considerable length and bigness, and spliced them together at the Ends one of
another, and made a Carriage of them about fourteen Rods long, setting the
Poles in two Rows with peils laid cross over them at the Front End, and
dividing them said Poles about three foot asunder, and in the said Front of
this their Carriage they set a Barrel, having made an hole through both Heads,
and put an Axle. Tree through them, to which they fastened the said Poles, and
under every joint of the Poles where they were spliced, they set up a a pair of
Truckle wheels to bear up the said Carriages, and they loaded the Front or
fore-end thereof with matter fit for firing, as Hay, and Flax, and Chips, etc.
Two of these Instruments they prepared, that they might Convey Fire to the
house, with the more safety to themselves, they standing at such a distance
from our shot, whilst they wheeled them to the house: great store of Arrows
they had also prepared to shoot fire upon the house that night; which we found
after they were gone, they having left them there. But the Lord who is a
present help in Times of trouble, and is pleased to make his peoples Extremity
his opportunity, did graciously prevent them of Effecting what they hoped they
should have done by the aforesaid devices, partly by sending a shower of Rain
in season, whereby the matter prepared being wett would not so easily take Fire
as it otherwise would have done, and partly by Aid coming to our help. For our
danger would have been very great that night, had not the only wise God
(blessed for ever) been pleased to send to us about an hour within night the
Worshipful Major Willard with Captain Parker of Groaton, and Forty six men more
with five Indians to relieve us in the Low Estate into which we were brought;
our Eyes were unto him the holy one of Israel; In him we desired to place our
Trust, hoping that he would in the time of our great need appear for our
deliverance, and Confound all their plots by which they thought themselves most
sure to prevail against us; And God who comfort the Afflicted, as he
comforted the holy Apostle Paul by the coming of Titus to him, so he greatly
comforted us his distressed Servants both Soldiers and Town Inhabitants by the
coming of the said Honored Major, and those with him. In whose so soon coming
to us the good Providence of God did marveilously appear; For the help that
came to us by the Honored Councils order (after the tidings they received by
our Post sent to them) came not to us till Saturday August 7. in the afternoon,
nor sooner could it well come in regard of their distance from us, i. e. if we
had not had help before that time, we see not how we could have held out, the
number of the Indians so increasing, and they making so many Assaults upon us,
that our Ammunition before that time would have been spent, and our selves
disenabled for any Resistance, we being but sew, and always fain to stand upon
our defense; that we had little time for Refreshment of our selves either by
Food or Sleep; The said Honored Majors coming to us so soon was thus
occasioned; He had a Commission from the Honored Council (of which himself was
one) to look after some Indians to the Westward of Lancaster and Groaton,
(where he himself lived) and to secure them, and was upon his march toward
them on the foresaid wednesday in the morning, August 4th. When Tidings coming
to Marlborough by those that returned thither as they were going to
Connecticot, concerning what they saw at Brookfield as aforesaid, some of
Marlborough knowing of the said Majors march from Lancaster that morning
presently sent a Post to acquaint him with the Information they had received;
The Major was gone before the Post came to Lancaster; but there was one
speedily sent after him, who overtook him about five or six miles from the said
Town; He being acquainted, that it was feared, that Brookfield (a small Town of
about fifteen or sixteen Families) was either destroyed, or in great danger
thereof, and conceiving it to require more speed to succont them (if they were
not past help) then to proceed at present, as he before intended, and being
also very desirous (if it were possible) to afford Relief to them, (he being
then not above Thirty Miles from them) he Immediately altered his Course and
marched with his Company toward us: and came to us about an hour after it was
dark as abovesaid; though he knew not then, neither of our being there, nor of
what had befallen us at the Swampe and in the house those two days before.

The merciful Providence of God also appeared in preventing the danger that the
Honored Major and his Company might have been in, when they came near to us,
for those Beastly men our Enemies Skilful to destroy, Endeavored to prevent
any help from coming to our Relief, and therefore sent down Sentinels, (some
nearer and some further off) the furthest about two miles from us, who if they
saw any coming from the Bay they might give notice by an Alarm. And there were
about an hundred of them who for the most part kept at an house some little
distance from us, by which if any help came from the said Bay, they must pass,
and so they intended (as we conceive) having notice by their Sentinels of their
approach to way-lay them, and if they could, to cut them off before they came
to the house where we kept.

But as we propably guess, they were so intent and buisy in preparing their
Instruments (as abovesaid) for our destruction by Fire, that they were not at
the house where they used to keep for the purpose aforesaid, and that they
heard not their Sentinels when they shot; and so the Majors way was clear from
danger till he came to our house. And that it was their purpose so to have
fallen upon him, or any other coming to us at that house, is the more propable
in that (as we have since had Intelligence from some of the Indians themselves)
there were a party of them at another place who let him past by them without
the least hurt or Opposition, waiting for a blow to be given him at the said
house, and then they themselves to fall upon them in the Rear, as they
intended to have done with us at the Swamp, in Case we had fled back as is
before expressed, The Major and Company were no sooner come to the house, and
understood (though at first they knew not they were English who were in the
house, but thought that they might be Indians, and therefore were ready to have
shot at us, till we discerning they were English by the Majors speaking, I
caused the Trumpet to be sounded) that the said Captain Hutchinson, my self,
and Company with the Towns Inhabitants were there, but the Indians also
discerned that there were some come to cur Assistance, whereupon they spared
not their shot, but poured it out on them; but through the Lords goodness,
though they stood not far asunder one from another, they killed not one man,
wounded only two of his Company; and killed the Majors Sons horse; after that
we within the house perceived the Indians shooting so at them, we hastened the
Major and all his Company into the house as fast as we could, and their horses
into a little yard before the house, where they wounded five other horses that
night; After they were come into the house to us, the Enemies continued their
shooting some Considerable time, so that we may well say, had not the Lord been
on our side when these Cruel Heathens rose up against us, they had then
swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. But wherein
they dealt proudly, the Lord was above them.

When they saw their diverse designs unsuccessful, and their hopes therein
disappointed, they then fired the houss and barn (wherein they had before kept
to lie in wait to surprise any coming to us) that by the Light thereof they
might the better direct their shot at us, but no hurt was done thereby praised
be the Lord. And not long after they burnt the Meeting house wherein their
Fortifications were, as also the Barn which belonged to our house, and so
perceiving more strength come to our Assistance: they did as we suppose,
despair of effecting any more mischief against us. And therefore the greatest
part of them toward the breaking of the day August the fifth went away and
left us, and we were quiet from any further molestations by them; and on that
morning we went forth of the house without danger, and so daily afterward, only
one man was wounded about two days after, as he went out to look after horses
by some few of them sculking thereabouts. We cannot tell how many of them we
killed in all that time, but one that afteewards was taken confessed that there
were killed and wounded about eighty men or more: Blessed be the Lord God of
our Salvation who kept us from being all a prey to their Teeth. But before they
went away they burnt all the Town except the house we kept in, and another that
was not then finished. They also made great spoil of the Cattle belonging to
the Inhabitants; and after our Entrance into the house, and during the time of
our Confinement there, they either killed or drove away almost all the horses
of our Company.

We Continued there both well and wounded toward a Fortnight, and August the
thirteenth Captain Hutchinson and my self with the most of those that had
escaped without hurt, and also some of the wounded came from thence; my Son
Thomas and some other wounded men came not from thence, being not then able to
endure Travel so far as we were from the next Town, till about a Fortnight
after. We came to Marlborough on August the Fourteenth, where Captain
Hutchinson being not recovered of his wound before his coming from Brookfield,
and overtyred with his long Journey by Reason of his weakness quickly after grew
worse, and more dangerously ill, and on the nineteenth day of the said month
dyed, and was there the day after buried, the Lord being pleased to deny him a
return to his own habitation, and his near Relations at Boston, though he was
come the greatest part of his Journey thitherward. The Inhabitants of the Town
also not long after, men, women, and Children, removed safely with what they
had left to several places, either where they had lived before their planting
or sitting down there; or where they had Relations to receive and entertain
them. The Honored Major Willard stayed at Brookfield some weeks after our
coming away, there being several Companies of Soldiers sent up thither and to
Hadly and the Towns thereabouts, which are about Thirty Miles from Brookfield,
whither also the Major went for a time upon the Service of the Country in the
present war, and from whence there being need of his presence for the ordering
of matters concerning his own Regiment and the safety of the Towns belonging to
it, he through Gods goodness and mercy returned in safety and health to his
house, and dear Relations at Groaton.

Thus I have Endeavored to set down and declare both what the Lord did against
us in the Loss of several persons Life's, and the wounding of others, some of
which wounds were very painful in dressing, and long ere they were healed,
besides many dangers that we were in, and fears that we were exercised with;
and also what great things he was pleased to do for us in frustrating their
many Attempts, and vouchsafing such a Deliverance to us. The Lord avenge the
Blood that has been shed by these Heathen who hate us without a Cause, though
he be most Righteous in all that has befallen there, and in all other parts of
the Country; He help us to humble our selves before him, and with our whole
hearts to return to him, and also to improve all his mercies which we still
enjoy, that so his anger may cease toward us and he may be pleased either to
make our Enemies at peace with us, or more, destroy them before us I tarried at
Marlborough with Captain Hutchinson until his death, and came home to Concord
August the 21. (though not thoroughly recovered of my wound) and so did others
that went with me. But since I am Reasonable well, though I have not the use of
my hand and Arm as before: My Son Thomas though in great hazard of Life for
some time after his return to Concord, yet is now very well Cured, and his
strength well restored.! Oh that we could praise the Lord for his great
goodness toward us. Praised be his Name, that though he took away some of us,
yet was pleased to spare so many of us, and add unto our days; He help us
whose Souls he has delivered from Death, and Eyes from Tears, and Feet from
falling to walk before him in the Land of the Living till our great Change
come, and to sanctify his Name in all his ways about us, that both our
Afflictions, and our mercies may quicken us to live more to his glory all our
days.

THE SERNON
Psalm. 116.12. What shall I Render unto the Lord for all his Benefits toward
me.


THere is no Condition of men here below so good, but there is need of duty;
There is none so bad, as to be past duty. In all Estates we must be doing: no
Providence exempts from duty; yet several Conditions require several duties;
The Christian Conversation is like a wheel every Spoke takes its Turn; God
has planted in man Affections for every Condition; grace for every Affection,
and a duty for the Exercise of every grace, and a Season for every duty; in
which it is most beautiful; In the day of Trouble and Affliction, the duty then
is Prayer and Petition; In the time of Deliverance and Prosperity Thanksgiving;
giving praise to the God of our Salvation; and it is wisdom to perform what is
most seasonable, Jam. 5.13. Is any Afflicted, let him pray? Ask mercy and
deliverance from the evils at Gods hand. Is any merry by Reason of mercy
received, let him sing Psalms of praise? exalting the Lord for his free
goodness and bounty therein.

Accordingly the holy Prophet (very probably David) in this Psalm sets before
us the Exercise of his grace in various Conditions which befell him: He tells us
what he did in the time of great Affliction and Distress; he prayed, He called
upon the Name of the Lord: ver. 3, 4. and being delivered and helped what he
did, and was resolved to do: He loved the Lord, and would walk before him in
the Land of the Living; He was thankful, and would express his gratitude in his
Conversation; yea, is Inquisitive, what further to do therein; as in the Text,
what shall I Render, etc.

The Psalm then is Eucharistical; or Gratulatory, wherein the Psalmist gives
praise to God for his favor and mercy in a great Deliverance from a deadly
danger and distress; and so suitable to the present occasion of our meeting at
this time; If David were the Penman thereof, the Deliverance may be that
mentioned, Psalm. 18. Title: His preservation from Saul's furious and malicious
Persecution, and the rage and violence of all his Adherents, and all others
that sought his Ruin.

The words read contein a Pathetical Exclamation and Enquiry; what shall I
render, etc. as if he should say; The Lord has bestowed mercies, yea, many and
great mercies upon me; He has heard my prayer when the sorrows of death
encompassed me, helped me when I was brought very low; something is to be
returned to him, that even Reason suggests, yea, much is to be done; but what
that is I am (as it were) at a Loss, I would do any thing to please and honor
him, who has done so much for me.

In the words there are two parts.
1. An Inquisition; wherein we may Consider: 1. The Subject or matter enquired
after: what shall I render: 2dly. The Object or person concerning whom the
Enquiry is made, and to whom the Return is to be made, and that is Jehovah; Not
man but the Lord.

2dly, The Reason of the Inquisition, and that is the Consideration of all his
Benefits; There was just occasion to be so sollicitous; Gods Benefits, set out,
1. By an Amplification All, All his Benefits.

2dly, By an Application, toward me; All his Benefits toward me.

In this verse we have the Question, In the verses following we have the
Resolution; He will take the Cup of Salvation, etc. and He will pay the Vows
which he had made in his Trouble and Distress.

For Explication of the Terms [Render] The word Imports a kind of Requital; It
is attributed both to God and man, and that in Relation to a good thing done,
and signifies to reward, and to an Evil, and signifies to Revenge: Here it is
Attributed to man in Relation to God, but not as importing any possibility and
satisfaction, but only a readiness and forwardness to do any thing that might
be acceptable to him.

[Benefits] The word in the Original is derived of that Verb which in the
seventh verse is Translated [dealt bountifully] Gods Bounties: And these the
Prophet styles His Benefits, acknowledging all the good he received to come
from him.

The Verse then is a Description of the frame of heart of a faithful
Thanksgiver.

1. In his Observation of Gods dispensation toward him, in the Benefits
bestowed on him.

2dly, In his Sollicitousness what to do by way of Retribution, and his
willingness to do whatsoever he knows may be acceptable to him and approved by
him.

Hence this Doctrine may be raised.
Doct. A person or people in a right thankful frame upon the Observation of
Gods Benifits, and Bountiful favors toward them, are very Sollicitous what to
return to God for them. Or such as are after Gods heart upon their Observation
of mercies and deliverances bestowed on them are Sollicitous what Returns to
make to God for them:

There be two parts in the Doctrine. 1. That a gracious Heart observes and
takes notice of Gods goodness toward him. 2dly, He is thereupon Inquisitive
what to Return to God.

1. The Prophet takes notice of Gods goodness; His Inquisition what to return,
for it argues his Observation of it; If he enquires what to Render, It argues
his taking notice of the Benefits; yea, of the variety and multitude of them,
in what God had been doing for him. So David tells us Psalm. 139.14. marveilous
are thy works and that my Soul knows right well. So also in Psalm. 103.1, to
the sixth verse, Neh. 9.7, to 27th verse: They take notice of the great and
manifold mercies which God had bestowed upon his people Israel in former as
well as latter times. The Reasons hereof are.

Reason 1. From the worth of every one of Gods mercies. There is not one of All
of Gods Benefits, and the blessings which we enjoy but it is worthy of notice,
for it is the Lords work; the Operation of his hands, every mercy is Gods gift,
and therefore to be Eyed and observed, Psalm. 111.2. The works of the Lord are
great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein. As your deliverance
from the great danger you were in at the Swampe, and afterward in the House:
It Is worthy observing and remembering: how much more, All our mercies at all
time and in all places. All comes from God, Jam. 1.17. Every good and perfect
gift comes, etc.

Reason 2. From the Thankfulness we owe to God for every mercy being unworthy
of the least of them; as Genesis 32 10. Jacob humbly acknowledges. Now, how shall
we be Thankful for them if we do not observe them. Hence the Prophet to Induce
men to Thankfulness, and to bless God for his goodness and mercy advises men
to take notice of his kindness toward them: Psalm. 100.3, 4. And when the Lord
upbraids his people for their great Ingratitude toward him, he gives this as
one Cause of it, and so expresses it, they did not know nor Consider, Isai.
1.3. and Hos: 2.8. she did not know that I gave, etc that is, she did not
seriously Consider of it, that thereby she might have been stirred up to
Thankfolness in obedience.

Reason 3. From the great difficulty of raising up our dull and sluggish hearts
to that great duty of praise and Thankfulness, especially, in a lively and
spiritual frame; and therefore there is great need to observe not only some,
but All his Benefits: Though one mercy should raise our Hearts to Heaven; yet
the more to quicken and enlarge them, we should take notice of All; the variety
of them; as praise is a difficult duty, so it is difficult raising our hearts
to the duty. We are dull and Listless to all duty, but especially to
Thankfulness; We are slow to go to God for mercy in our Troubles and
Distresses, but more slow to Return praise after Deliverances vouchsafed. Hence
that Expression in Psalm. 107. Psalm. 8.15 21, 31. Oh that men would praise the
Lord; as if he should say: It Is rather to be wished then expected, Luke 17.17,
18. There were Ten cried Lord have mercy upon us, but only one Returned to give
Thanks to Jesus Christ when cured.

The second part of the Doctrine. Gracious and Humble Hearts observing Gods
goodness toward them, are studious and Sollicitous what to Return to him. So
the Prophet here, what shall I Render to the Lord, etc. so 2 Samuel 7.1. when God
had brought him to Rest in his Kingdom after so many wanderings; he was
studying how to advance the honor of God, who had done so great things for
him; had so delivered him, so advanced him to honor and Renown, 1 These. 3.9.
what Thanks (says the Apostle) can we Render. etc.

The Reasons hereof are,
Reason 1. From the Consideration of the Nature of the Benefits, Gods people
enjoy; The Prophet here may well say, what shall I Render, etc. and so may
every Child of God say; All that are in Covenant with him; what shall we Render
for the Benefits we have received from our God.

1. They are great mercies; even very great; as the promises of good to be
given are great Promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. so the good promised and bestowed. They
are great favors, especially in spiritual blessings. He gives great
Deliverances; as Psalm. 18.50. he does great Things for his, as Psalm. 71.19. and
86.13.

2dly, They are very many; There is an All of them, as in the Text; an All that
is beyond Expression, Psalm. 139.14. more in number then the sand. There is a
multitude of them: This was an Aggravation of Isreal's sin, that they remembered
not the multitude of Gods mercies, Psalm. 106.7.

3dly, They are Everlasting mercies, Psalm. 136. In every verse thy mercy
endures for ever; Gods people see and acknowledge Everlasting mercy, even in
outward and temporal blessings; much more in spiritual and Eternal: Because
though the mercies themselves do not Endure for ever, yet the Foundation of all
to Gods people is Everlasting grace and mercy; And besides even these do in
some degree tend to further their Everlasting blessedness; helping them on in
their way to their Fathers house in heaven; therefore there is Reason to study
and be Sollicitous what to render to God for them.

Reason 2. From the Consideration of the person from whom the Blessings and
Deliverances come, and to whom the Return is to be made, and that is, the Lord,
what shall I Render to the Lord for His Benefits.

1. All the good we enjoy is from the Lord: we are the Receivers, He the giver.
They are his Benefits: yea, the gifts of the Lord of Lords and King of Kings,
the great and mighty God, who Inhabits the Throne of glory. Oh that the God of
glory should have any respect to us dust and Ashes, that he should do so great
things for us worthless ones; Psalm. 113.5, 6, 7. who is like unto the Lord our
God who dwells on High; who humbles himself, etc. He raises the poor out of
the Dust, etc. A good look from a Prince or some other great and honorable
person, is more then a greater thing from a meaner person.

2dly, Our Returns are to be made to the Lord, and therefore we had need be
Careful what we present to him: This Reason God himself gives why he Curses
the deceiver who has a male in his Flock, and offers to God a corrupt thing;
because he is a great King: Mal. 1.14. and therefore he sharply reproves them
for offering the halt and blind. verse. 8. Persons are usually Careful how they
carry themselves toward a great man in returning Thanks to him for favors
received from him; much more here ought there to be Care; The Return is to be
made to God.

Solomon gives this Reason of the magnificence of the house he was to Build, It
was for the Lord who is a great and glorious one: 2 Chr. 2.5. Any manner of
house would not serve the turn, the best Timber and stone must be provided, and
it must be wrought in the best manner, and by the most Skilful persons that
could be procured. This was Abels Commendation, that he brought of the
Firstlings of his Flock and of the fat thereof, Genesis 4.4. and to him God had
Respect and to his Offering.

Reason 3. From the Consideration of the person that is to make the Return to
God; what shall I Return; I that am so unworthy of the least mercy: I that have
had so many mercies, so great Deliverances, I that am notable to Render any
thing beseeming his Majesty; I that am under so many Bonds and Obligations; I
that am so privileged by God; what shall I Render, etc.

Hence that Expression, 2 Samuel 17, 18, 19, 20. What can David say, etc. David
the youngest of all my Fathers Sons, and yet was preferred before them; David
that was a Shepard, and now advanced to Regal dignity; David that was so
persecuted by potent and cruel Enemies, and has been so graciously and
wonderfully preserved. This makes a thankful heart studious, especially,
Considering these three things therewith.

1. All that we can Return is but little to his mercies; but mites for Talents;
words for wonders; All is as nothing.

2dly, What we Return to God is (and by Reason of sin indwelling will be) mixed
with many Imperfections; our best Services are but as torn Rags, menstruous
Clothes, Isai. 64.6. Even our Robes, our best Services need washing in the
Blood of the Lord, Revel. 7.14.

3dly, All that we can give to God is His own; and is but little of his own;
and therefore the Saints are sensible of their own Inability to make any meet
Requital to God. Mark holy David's Expressions after his and the Princes
offering toward the Building of the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29.10, to 15. verse. a
full place to prove all these three particulars before mentioned.

Use I. By way of Instruction or Information.

Instruct. 1. A Soul in a thankful frame, in a Tune of Thanksgiving can never
be sufficiently satisfied in thinking and speaking of Gods mercies and favors
toward him. The Prophet had before in this Psalm spoken of Gods goodness
toward him; acknowledged his Bounty, what God had done for him; yea, again and
again, repeated it: and yet he is here still at the same work in the Text: What
shall I Render, etc. yea, again, Psalm. 16.17. How great has Gods goodness been
in hearing prayer, rescuing me from deadly dangers, helping me when I was in a
low Estate, delivering mine Eyes from Tears, etc. bestowing so many Benefits,
loosing my bonds, Ps. 136. In every verse, Thy mercy endures for ever. Oh
praise, give thank for his mercy: and when he was concluding, he was ready to
begin again: Oh give Thanks, ver. 26. Oh give Thanks to the God of Heaven, for,
etc. A thankeful heart in a lively frame takes delight to speak of the goodness
of God toward him, Is not soon tired nor weary thereof. All Repetitions are
not babbling: and therefore let us beware of so judging them; sometimes out of
the Abundance of the Heart Christians go over and over the same thing in
petition of good from God and in Thanksgiving for good received at his hands.

Instruct. 2. The Lord so dispenses mercy to his people, as thereby he leads
them unto special and solemn seasons of Thanksgiving: Though he do afflict
them, visit them with Rods, yet in the midst of those Exercises, he so
dispenses favors that they have Cause and just occasion, not only of
ordinary, but also Extraordinary praises. Their mercies come in a more then
ordinary way, and so call for morethen ordinary praises.

Sometimes God gives them mercies through many difficulties, as water out of
the Rock: Deuteronomy. 32.13. which together with their necessity made the water as
bony and Oil: God could give them another way, he goes that way, that thereby
he might provoke them to Thanksgiving: Diverse Instances we have in Psalm. 107.
some he casts into Exile, and delivers them: others into Bonds and
Imprisonment, and releaseth them, others he makes sick and heals them, that
they may praise him.

He brings them into great dangers, and Distresses at Sea and Land, that they
may Render Praise in their Redemption, Thus has been Gods dispensations
toward you here met: you were in great distress, i.e. and he has not left you
without signal Providence, gracious discoveries of mercy: and so given you
occasion of Solemn Thanksgiving. He brought you Low, and has raised you, that
you might praise him.

Instruct. 3. A Thankeful Spirit is a Resolute and Inquisitive Spirit,
Inquisitive to know, and Resolute to do what it knows may please the Lord.

1. It is Inquisitive to know what it may, what it should do: This is the
property of gratefulness either to God or man, as in David respecting the
Posterity of his dear Jonathan. Is there any of the house of Saul, etc. 2 Samuel
9.1. so also in Elisha respecting the Shunamite, who had showed him so much
kindness, 2 Kings 4.13.14. What is to be done for her? Grateful Children and
Friends will desire to know what may please their Parents, Friends. And so it
is with the Children and Friends of God: They desire to know the mind and will
of God what he requires of them: and what may be an acceptable Sacrifice to
him. Hence they pray for knowledge and understanding as David, Psalm, 119.33, 34
Hence also they will search the word of God, that they may understand his will,
and understanding it, do it, Romans 12.2.

2dly. It is a Resolute Spirit resolved to do what ever may express the
Thankfulness of his heart to God, according to his will. As he purposes in his
heart not to sin by doing the Least Evil, Dan. 1.8 so he purposes and
resolves to do, (though not in his own strength) what is pleasing to God,
Psalm. 119.8. I will keep thy Precepts, and in the Text, what shall I Render,
etc. I will stick at nothing, will do any thing; as when Joseph supplied the
Egyptians with Come, they yield to any Terms; Let us find grace in the sight of
my Lord, and we will be Pharoahs Servants, Gen 47 25. And as David was ready to
do what ever Barzilla should request of him, 2 Samuel 19.38. In testimony of his
Thankfulness for his Loyalty and Bounty at such a time; so a gracious Soul much
more toward God; It is resolved to do any thing, to suffer any thing whereby
God may be honored. As Paul, Acts 21.14. How ungrateful then are they that
will not do what they know to be pleasing to God, though it be clearly set
before them, and strongly urged on them? young men are called upon to turn to
God quickly; elder and younger ones to seek after him in all his holy
Ordinances; to forsake their Lusts and vain Company; but they will not; they
hold fast deceit and refuse to Return.

They know what is good, but will not do it. Many know their duties in their
Relations toward Superiors and Inferiors, but will not yield to them. And
though some for Carnal sinister Respects do many things; as Jebu, Herod, etc.
yet at something they stick; some Dalilah they will keep, some Lust they will
not part withal, some duty they will not perform. Especially how far are such
from Thankfulness that resolve not to do, what God sets before them: as they,
Jer. 44.16, 17; The word that thou have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord we
will not do. Such are most Ungrateful ones for all the mercies they receive
from him.

Instruct. 4th. To be truly thankful to God is an high, and avery Spiritual
Service; It is a Rendering and making Returns to God: what shall I Render to
God, etc. For man to be sit to receive from God is a great matter, but it is
much higher for us to Render to God, that man dust and Ashes should make a
Requital to the great and glorious God. Therefore David so magnifies God that
they should offer so liberally to him: 1 Chronicles. 29.10, etc. It is a great
matter to be admired, that God should honor us, therefore says the Prophet,
what is man that thou art mindful of him, etc, Thou have Crowned him with glory
and honor; but for us to honor God is greater; It is an high duty for the
Sons of men, which are but worms to rise so high as to honor God: praising of
God is an extolling or Exalting God, Exodus 15.2. He is higher then to be
exalted by us, yet this we are said to do, in an Acknowledgement of his hand,
giving him the glory of his wisdom, power, goodness, Faithfulness and mercy in
the operations of his hand about us. Think it not an easy thing to praise the
Lord; It is not only a lip labor, an easy Service; It is a Rendering to God. To
play on Music is pleasant, but it is hard to set the Instrument in Tune to
play well; It is hard to get the heart in Tune, in a Spiritual lively, humble
frame; Hence David so stirs up himself to it, Psalm. 103.1, 2, and Deborab calls
upon her self to awake, Judge. 5.12.

Instruct. 5th. Gods doings are the matter of the Saints Acknowledgements in
their Thanksgivings and praises of him. The word Translated Praise signifies
Confession and so often Rendered by Mr. Ainsworth. Confess the Lord, etc.

Now the Lords doings are the matter of their Confessions: [his Benefits] what
he has done for me, and others of his people, the works of his hands for mine
and others deliverance and Salvation. When we praise the Lord, we do but sing
over what he has done, He acts it, and we acknowledge it; As in this Salvation
vouchsafed to you from the Enemy, from their Attempts by Assaults, Fire, etc.

An Echo is little else but a Reflecting Repetition of the first sound; so our
praises are Repetitions, reflecting the work on God; He heard, he helped, he
delivered and saved; This is the Lords doings. There is an Amen in
Thanksgiving; our Amen to the Truth of Gods dispensations; we say Amen to them;
so they are, and we acknowledge it. To give Thanks is to give God a Tribute in
the Confession of his goodness; It is Retribution: This is to Crown the Lord,
we own him the Author of all our manifold Comforts, Deliverances, supplies in
one kind or other. There is a distinction made between glory and glorification;
glory is an Essential Attribute, though there were no Angel or man; but
glorification is the acknowledgement of his power, goodness, mercy in his works
by the Rational Creature.

What are you then to acknowledge this day? Even the Lords doings in your
marpeilous preservation: If you would glorify him this day then say: the Lord
has done great things for us. This is the Lords doing, and it is wonderful in
our Eyes!

Instruct. 6th. One special particular mercy received from God, ought to raise
up our Hearts to a Consideration of all other mercies formerly bestowed on us:
And so it should be with you meet to praise the Lords glorious Name for that
great Deliverance at the Swampe, and in the Garrison. The Prophet adds that
general Particle All, to show that from that present Benefit which God had
Conferred on him in that great Deliverance mentioned verse. 2.3. his heart was
extended to a Consideration of other favors which the Lord from time to time
had showed him.

Thus it will be with a grateful Heart: Not that we can think on every benefit,
so as to leave out none, they being so Innumerable: but it is to be taken of
the several kinds: as general, particular, public, private, temporal and
Spiritual, and of as many several and distinct branches of these as we can,
Psalm. 103.2. Forget not all, nor any of his Benefits, and Psalm 105 2 Talk you
of all his wondrous works. This is the means to enlarge the heart, and Inflame
it with holy Zeal, in praising God, as more Fuel brought to the fire makes it
greater. Here is a good help to this great duty this day, and at other times,
observe all kinds of mercies, and call to mind what God has done for you
formerly, for your persons, Families, Relations, for the Churches to which you
belong, for the Country.

Instruct. 7. The Consideration of mercies bestowed on our selves, and our
Interest in the mercies bestowed on others is a great means to provoke to
Thankfulness: so the Prophet here. For all his Benesits toward me. so Psalm.
103.1, to 6. verse. Bless the Lord O my Soul, etc. who forgives all thine
iniquities, and beals all thy Diseases, etc.

We are most sensible of kindness done to our selves, the sweet whereof our own
Souls taste, and according to the Sense and taste of any kindness, is the heart
quickened and stirred up to Thankfulness. Oh take special notice of such
mercies, as in particular concern thy self: For in the Case and buisiness of
your present meeting: one may say, I was spared and not touched, when others
were dangeroufly wounded: Another may say, I was only wounded, when others were
killed: I am recovered, when others wounds proved mortal: God has given me my
Life, when others are taken away by Death: I am returned to my Relations, or my
Relations are come home in safety, when others have not enjoyed such a mercy.

Consider withal, how you are Interested in the mercies of others, either
particular persons, or in the Common and public mercies of the Town and
Country. You have an Interest in the mercies of your Yoke Fellow, Children. In
the mercies of the Town, Church state: If the Town be spared (when others are
consumed) It is mercy to evety particular: If husband be returned home safe, It
is a Benefit to me, may the wife say: If the Father be returned, It is a
Benefit to me, may the Child say: so may the Father say in the Child's Return:
The mercies in Magistracy, and Ministry are our mercies, They are Gods Benefits
to us. self Interests are affecting Interests. Consider how thou art Interested
in any mercy, Deliverance, Immediately or mediately, and this will further our
Thankfulness for it. As this is a way to affect the Heart with the Churches
affliction, to Consider our Interest therein as members of the same Body, so
also to affect our Hearts with Gods goodness to others, to Consider how we are
concerned therein.

It may be some may say, I have more Cause to Fast and Pray in regard of Gods
hand on me and mine rather then to Rejoice and Feast: Do but Consider thy many
personal mercies, thy Family mercies, and thy Interest in Commonwealth, and
Church mercies, and thou may see abundant Cause of Thankfulness. It is a
Certain Truth, that a Child of God when he is in the worst Case he can be in
here upon earth, has more Cause of Gratulation then of Petition. His mercies
are greater then his miseries: His Enjoyments more then his wants, besides his
hopes of all good at last in an Unchangeable Estate.

Instruct. 8th. If Temporal mercies be carefully to be observed, and Return
made to God for them, how much more for Spiritual and Eternal mercies If
Deliverance from a temporal Death, how much more Deliverance from Everlasting
Death.

Spiritual mercies are the great mercies. They are the Fathers gifts to his
Children: other mercies he gives to them that are hated and abhorred by him.
They have some Relation to God as his Creatures, Servants in his great Family:
and therefore they shall have somewhat here, a portion they shall have in these
common favors, vile and ungodly men often escape deadly dangers as well as
precious Saints, nay, they may be preserved, when others better then they are
taken a way suddenly, and by a violent death. These Temporal Benefits will not
evidence Gods special favor in Christ.

What Cause have you to whom God has given those great benefits, of
Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, and hopes of glory in Heaven, for to
say with the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ who has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in Heavenly
places in Christ Jesus. And with the Prophet in the Text: what shall I Render
to the Lord, who has done so great things for, to deliver my Soul from the
Nethermost-Hell, and to call me to Eternal glory by Jesus Christ: say therefore
with the Apostle Peter, To him be glory and Dominion for ever and ever, 1 Pet.
5.10, 11.

Use II. For Humiliation, Hence we have a ground of humbling and abasing our
selves, in the Consideration of our great neglect of serious observation of
Gods favors toward us, and also of our short returns we have made to him for
them; may not the Lord complain of us as of Israel; Do you thus requite the
Lord, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.6. It may seem unsuitable and unseasonable to urge this at
such a time, and on such a day, when met to praise the Lord for his great
mercies; But they may well Consist; An heart sensible of its own Ingratitude,
and scant Returns to God, with a bewailing of the same, and an heart desirous
to praise him, and breaking forth in thankful Acknowledgements of his manifold
Benefits, may stand together. The Confideration of our former unthankfulness,
and the greatness of our Evil therein, and Humiliation for it, may help forward
our Thankfulness for present and future times.

Use III. By way of Exhorration. 1. To imitate this holy Prophet of God in
taking notice of Gods mercies, and in special of mercies to our selves; Take
notice of all.

Consider the times when mercies have been given out to you. All times. Mercies
in your mothers womb, mercies in Childhood, mercies in single and married
Condition; Common days mercies, Sabbath days mercies; view the places where
you have received mercies; In Old-England, on the Sea; In this Country; In one
Town, Family and other, ship mercies and Shore mercies, mercies at home, and
mercies abroad, mercy at the Swamp, mercy in the house or Garrison.

Consider the kinds of mercy, spiritual, temporal, preventing, sparing
supplying, affording succors in a time of great need; as in your late danger,
healing wounds, restoring health and strength, forbearing, and giving further
space and time of Repentance, those that have been taken away, if they were not
prepared for their Change, have no time any more to work in for Eternity.

Consider the Interest in others mercies public or more private; Every one of
you may say, It was mercy to me, that the rest of the Company were then spared
besides my self: If several others had been cut off besides those that fell,
had not those that escaped been much more endangered, what unlikelihood of your
preservation afterward. It is mercy that God made you Instrumental for the
preservation of so many persons as were then in that place, men, women, and
little ones. Consider that it is the Lords doing that you are Returned, and
hitherto preserved in your habitations. Behold the work of God, as in what he
did against you, so in what he has wrought for you.

Mot. 1. Consider it is a great Evil not to ponder on, and to Consider of the
operation of his hands whether in afflictions, or in mercies, in Salvations,
Psalm. 28.4, 5.

2dly. If we be not observing Christians to discern and mark all Gods ways
about us, we cannot sanctify Gods Name therein, as it is our duty to do, 1
Pet. 3.15. All Gods works are a part of his Name, he makes himself known in his
wisdom, power, love, goodness and mercy therein. If we sanctify not his Name,
he will be sanctified upon us. Therefore, Behold and see, take notice of all
his Providence

3dly. If we do not observe them our selves, how shall we declare them to
others? This is a duty incumbent on us, Numb. 22.31. Psalm. 22.31. and Psalm.
66.18. How can we tell to others what God has done for us, if we take not good
notice of it our selves?

2dly. Be studiously sollicitous what to Return to the God of your Salvation;
as the Prophet here was, what shall I Render, etc.

I. There is something that God would not have returned to him; there is a
return that in stead of finding acceptance with him is a provocation to him. It
provokes him to wrath and Indignation.

1. God would not have sin returned to him; yet thus did many in Israel, Deuteronomy.
32.6. Israel Gods peculiar people, in Covenant with him, after great things
done for them, did wretchedly and ungratefully deal with him; they turned away
from God, and walked after the imagination of their own evil hearts, they
forsook the fountain of living waters, and changed their glory, for that which
could not profit. To receive good from God and return sin to God is vile and
abominable. It is a very foolish thing to give way to sin against God, when we
have received mercies, even many and great mercies from him; and therefore it
is called folly: Psalm 85.8. that they return not again to folly. This God
complains of in Israel, in Isai. 1.2, 3. I have brought up Children and they
have rebelled against me.

Beware every one of you here this day that you give not the Lord Cause so to
complain of you; I have brought up these persons, I have blessed them in
themselves, and in their Relations, I have preserved them in such deadly
dangers, I have rebuked the destroyer, I have given them their lives for a
prey, I have brought them in safety to their habitations and Relations, I have
healed their wounds, restored them to health and strength, and Behold they
still rebel against me, they follow their Lusts, their revelling and vain
Company still, they spend my Sabbaths loosly still, they are still unsavory in
their Commnnication; still proud, froward: The Lord takes special notice how
persons carry it after signal mercies, Isai. 26.10.

In special take heed of wantonness of Spirit, and kicking against God in the
enjoyment of his mercies, kicking against his word; against Reproofs, against
his Ordinances in Magistracy and Ministry; against his Institutions in his
house; as too many do in these days, Deuteronomy. 32.15. Jesurun waxed fat and
kicked; Israel should have been Jesurun. i. e. righteous or upright before God,
but were nothing less, when filled and fatted, then they kicked, like some
young, when they have sucked, kick the Damms dugs. Though Parents be liberal to
their Children, yet they would not have them wanton, and trample good meat
under their feet, and yet such a Spirit there is in us; we are ready to turn
the very grace of God revealed in the Gospel into Lasciviousness as they did,
Jude 4. and many now do. When Gods mercies make us wanton, this God takes ill;
Take heed of sniffing and trampling mercies under feet: Be not wanton, secure,
proud, scornful, after such a deliverance as this, say as Ezra. 9.13, 14. shall
we after such a deliverance again break thy Commandments, etc. Let not sin the
only object of Gods batred be the Return you make to God for his sparing,
preserving mercy, etc.

Consider 1. This will be a great aggravation of all your other and former
Evils, to sin after such mercies; as Isreal's murmurings and Rebellions in the
wilderness after their deliverance at the red Sea, and mercies vouchsafed,
Nehem. 9.10. with 16.17. verses.

2. This will bring worse and greater Evils, in one kind or other, John 5.14.
sin no more, (says Christ) least a worse thing come. You that escaped without
the least hurt may come to be dangerously wounded; the Bullet may hit you as
the Arrow did Ahab; you that were then only hurt, when others were slain: take
heed that God cut you not down ere long for such evil requitals of him for his
great goodness. Your late preservation may be but a reservation to soarer
Judgments.

2dly. Return not a lame and halt Requital; a body without a Soul, the lip
without the Heart, a verbal without a real Sacrifice; external duties without
the Spirit, Mal. 1.13, 14. you have brought the torn, etc. but cursed be the
deceiver who has a male in his flock, etc. 1 Chronicles. 29.14. David and the
Princes not only offer liberally toward the Temples building; but he blesses
God that they should offer so willingly, so heartily, This is that he
principally wondereth at, It is a greater mercy from God to give a man a
willing heart to offer what he does, then to give him that which he may offer
to him.

2dly. Affirmatively, Render to God that which he calls for at our hands.

1. In general; Render to God that which is Gods, Math. 22.21. As that which is
Caesar's must be rendered to Caesar; so that which is Gods must be rendered to
God: give God that which is his Own: give God his due, as Psalm. 29.1. give to
the Lord the glory due to his Name. As that which we offer to God must be his
own; of his own Appointment and according to his own mind, so what is his own
should be rendered to him.

2dly. More particularly. 1. Render your selves to God: so the Apostle exhorts
us, Romans 12.1. that we give up our bodies as a living, and holy, and acceptable
Sacrifice, etc. what ever we are or have, it is from the Lord: you are the
Lords by right of Creation, (...) by right of preservation, in the great perils
you were lately in, etc. The Lord has the most right to you. But many will not
give God his right; They are and will be their own, Their Tongues are their
own, as Psalm. 12 4. Their Estates their own to dispose of as they see good, as
Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.11. My Bread and my Flesh, etc. Their time is their own to
spend as they please, they will not be ruled by God, nor by those whom God sets
over them in Family, Church or Commen-wealth: Oh give up your selves Souls and
bodies to be for God, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. glorify God in your Souls, etc. Thus
did Paul Acts 27.23. whose I am, and whom I serve. He was Gods, and he gave
himself to the Service of God in the work he set him about. As all that comes
from God does not satisfy a gracious heart without the Lord himself; no more
is the Lord pleased with what comes from us without our selves.

2dly. Return love to God, Psalm. 116.1. I love the Lord because he has heard,
etc. This is a good Return. Have not we that have prayed to God in any
distresses formerly or lately, or know what prayer means Cause to say, The Lord
has heard the voice of our Supplications; Oh love the Lord greatly, entirely
with all our hearts. Have you been in great streights, and you have prayed, and
God has supplied you? Have you been in doubts, and God has resolved you? Have
you been in Terrors of Conscience, affliction of Spirit, full of fears of Gods
Everlasting wrath, and you sought God and he answered you, scattered your
fears, and caused the Sun of Righteousness to rise and shine upon you, and
given you peace? Have you been in deadly dangers by sickness, by Enemies that
have risen up against you, by wounds, and you have prayed for healing and
delivering mercy? oh then Render Love to God for his goodness, mercy, and
salvation.

Mot. 1. Consider, gratitude requires it at our hands. All our good temporal
and spiritual is from him; And all is freely bestowed; yea, his mercies
bestowed on us are more then the hairs of our Head: His preventing, sparing,
delivering, supplying mercies. He is therefore worthy of our Love not only in
respect of his Excellency in himself, but also of his benignity and grace
toward us, especially his rich mercy in Christ Jesus.

2dly. Love is the ground of all duties acceptably performed to God. All is
nothing without Love to God and man, 1 Cor. 13^^, 2. All the Commandments are
comprised under it, Luke 10.27. It is the fulsilling of the Law; Love to God is
the fulfilling of the first Table, and love to man the fulfilling of the
second; where Love abounds there will be much cheerfulness, willingness and
readiness to do any thing to please him that is loved.

3dly. No love shall be lost that is cast upon the Lord; he knows who loves him
in sincerity, and he approves them, and will love them again, and manifest his
Love to them, and from his love to them do wonderful things for them. Their
labor of Love shall not be in vain, Exodus 20.7. Deuteronomy. 7.9,13. John. 14.21, 23.
Oh love the Lord who has redeemed you out of your distresses, and given you
cause to rejoice in his great goodness in Answer of your prayers; And let your
Love to God appear in these things.

1. In hearing the voice of his Commands, and inclining your Ear to what he
calls for from you; This is Equitable. If God hear us, let us hear him: shall
Gods Ear be open to our Requests, and our Ears shut to his Command, yea,
Entreaties and beseechings, when he beseeches us to give up our selves more to
him, to follow him and cleave more to him? may not the Lord say when we are
dull, and slow to hear and hearken to his voice; Is this your love and
kindness, do you thus requite me for answering your prayers in the day of your
trouble?

2. In shunning all that may separate from God, and separate between God and
you; and that for this very cause, because they do cause a separation: And that
is sin, Esai. 59.2. wants, persecutions cannot separate, but it is only sin,
The true Love of God is a Love of Union, and therefore there must be a shunning
that which causes separation; Let us therefore hate all Evil in our selves and
others, and manisest our hatred in seeking the Extirpation and destruction of
it, Psalm. 97.10. Romans 12.9. Abhor that which is Evil, thereby we depart from
God, Heb. 3.12. The Servant that loved his master would not depart from him.

3. Show your Love in Carefulness to please him in all things; Children that
love their Parents will seek to please them; so it is with Gods Children,
Christ loving his Father sought to please him in all things, John 8.29. Walk as
before the face of God, Psalm. 116.9. And where there is a Care to please him,
there will be a readiness to yield willing obedience to any Command given even
in the most difficult duties and Services, John 15.10. 1 John 5.3. unless love
prevail in the Soul, some Command of God or other will be grievous. Love makes
them easy, as to David, Psalm. 119.97.127. All will say they love God, but
little Care appears in many men and women to please God. Some will please
themselves whither God be pleased or no.

4. Manifest your Love to God in your Love to the Church of God, Psalm. 122.6.

1. In loving Church Assemblies, Psalm. 42.1, 2. and 26.8. and the Fellowship of
all Saints, Psalm. 16.3. 2. In grieving in the Churches affliction, and
rejoicing in its prosperity as Ietbro, Exodus 18.9. and Neh. 1.4. 3. In seeking
and promoting the Churches welsare in our measure and according to our power
and opportunity, so David promised, Psalm. 122.7, 8. so did Mordecai, Esther
10.3. so Paul, 2 Cor. 11.28. 4. Manifest a sincere love of God in minding the
things of God, whereby he may be honored, his Name advanced, his Truths
propagated from generation to generation.
Love will stick at nothing whereby it may honor God, It is a Bountiful
affection. Gods love to man did make him part with his only begotten Son, he
spared not him but gave him to dye, etc. John 3.16. Abraham will part with his
Isaac at Gods Command: nay, Love never knows when it has done enough; It
knows no such thing as too much, or too soon; The Soul thinks it cannot be too
quick, too forward in any Service of God. It cannot have too much holiness,
etc. nay, when one has done his best, yet he is ashamed he has done so
little; and though he takes comfort in what he has been enabled to do, yet he
looks at all as nothing, as Paul, 2 Cor. 12.11. and prays for sparing mercy,
as Nehem. 13.22.

Thus return love to God: This is a good Return, whereby the Soul takes more
Content in God, more delight in Fellowship with him, which is the nature of
Love, Deuteronomy. 10.12. That mercy is made an affliction to us, that does not engage
our hearts to love God more; they should not take off our hearts from the love
of God, but quicken us to abound in more love, Psalm: 31.23. And therefore you
that have been delivered Consider, It is now some time since you were in that
distress, and had such a remarkable deliverance, Is your love to God Increased
by it, Care to please him, and to walk in obedience to his holy Commandments,
know it, this return God expects from you; and therefore see that you sail not
his Expectation.

5. Return worship to God. so David promises to do upon the receipt of mercy
from God, Psalm. 5.7. In thy fear will I worship, etc. This we are exhorted to,
1 Chronicles. 16.29. worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness. Worship him in all
his holy Institutions in his house. Let such of you as have neglected some
Ordinances of his worship and preparation of your selves for them, take heed of
neglecting still; God is a Jealous God, he accounts them haters of him that do
not worship him in his own Institutions, when they have liberty and opportunity
to enjoy them, Exodus 20.5. you that are not in full Church Communion, either
you are prepared or unprepared with respect to your present state; If still
unprepared, yet in a Carnal state, what would have become of you, if you had
dyed at the Swampe, or in the Garrison, if you had then been taken away? If you
be prepared having a true faith in Jesus Christ, and you neglect his Ordinances
God may cut you down by some temporal Judgment, though you, be not damned for
it: Consider that place, Numb 9.13. The man that is clean, and for bears to
keep the Passover, the same Soul shall be cut off from his people, because he
brought not the offering of the Lord in his appointed season, that man shall
bear his sin As for you that do enjoy all Ordinances in Gods house be you
exhorted to worship God in the participation thereof, more spiritually and
cheerfully, serve him with more joy and delight, with more Reverence and
Fervency of Spirit.

In special, Return prayer to God; which is such a principal part of worship,
that it is sometimes put for the whole worship of God. Romans 10.13.

Be much with God in prayer: Thus the prophet here, Psalm. 116 2. and 13.
verses, God having answered his prayer and given him so great a deliverance, he
shall therefore call upon God as long as he lives. This will be one thing that
he will Render to God so mercy received, he will be still calling upon God. Let
us improve all the Answers we have received from God to encourage us to for
there prayer to him.

Mot. 1. Consider, we cannot weary the Lord with often going to him; It is
sometimes an Argument of Encouragement in requesting help or kindness from men:
He is an old friend, a tried friend, he has helped me when I was in a great
straight, and therefore I will go to him again: much more here; But, though men
may be weary of our often coming to them, yet God will not; he takes it as a
good return, when we are much, yea, more in prayer with him.

Mot. 2. When we have prevailed with God for any special mercy, deliverance or
help in a day of trouble, there is yet great need of prayer and Continuance
thereof.

1. For a thankful heart to the giver of every good and perfect gift; the God
of our Salvations.

2. For the Continuance of the mercy, that it may not be taken away from us;
that the Evil removed may not again return.

3. For the Sanctification of the mercy and blessing to us, need to pray for an
heart to use it in a right manner to the honor of Gods Name and others good.

That it may not be an occasion of sin to us, that it may not be abused by us;
That when God is good to us, we may not be the worse in our ways toward him.
There is great need of prayer to God in a time of prosperity, that we may
improve it to glorify him in our particular places wherein we are set by him.

4. we shall be yet needing more and renewed mercies daily, whilst we are here
in this world, and therefore we must be Beggars till we get to Heaven: we need
more grace, wisdom for our work and business in our stations; more
mortification of our Corruptions, more power against our great Adversary Satan,
etc. And therefore have we prayed, and obtained what you asked; pray still that
you may receive still from the same bountiful hand gracious Answers of your
Requests. As we are to go to the Throne rf grace in our wants; so also in our
Receipts of mercies, that they may be Continued and Sanctified to us, and also
improved by us according to his will.

4. Render to God the Vows that you have made to him in the time of your
Trouble, in the day of your great distress; pay your Vows to the most high God;
Thus the Prophet in this Psalm, 14.15. vers-whether your Vows have been more
solemn, or only a bare Resolution of your Heart. Have you vowed to forsake any
sin, to leave any evil Custom; to walk more exactly with God, to be more
Careful in Relative duties, to seek more after God in all his ways, to be more
Reverent in attending to Gods worship; Oh now be Careful to discharge what you
have promised and resolved; now pay what you vowed, Ps. 56.12. There says
David, thy Vows are upon me O God; the Vows which he had made to God in his
danger, lay upon him, as a Bond which he must look to free himself from; he had
fast bound himself to God, but he will loose himself by paying them.

Mot. 1. It is folly to Vow and not to pay; and God takes no pleasure in
Fools, Eccles 5.45, 6.

It is hateful folly; Better not have vowed, then vow and not pay.

2. It is a great Aggravation of sin, when it is against solemn Vows; and
therefrre take heed to your ways: If you did not vow in that time of danger,
yet you have vowed in your. Baptism; that you would be the Lords Servants, and
keep his Commandment; But I doubt not, but that you had serious thoughts then
on those two or three days while your Trouble chieflyl asted, that if God
would return you in peace and Safety to your Habitations, to the Enjoyment of
your Relations, you would walk more to the praise of his Name, and the honor
of the Gospel: That if the Lord would preserve you from violent and ungodly men
that sought your Ruin, you would be more faithful Servants to him: Oh take
heed to your selves, that you forget not the promises wherein you have bound
your Souls: After deliverance had from God, Return not to folly, Psalm. 85.8.

3. Consider, God has the Bond, and it will be called for. Though we may
forget and little regard our Vows and and the payment of them, yet God
remembers all our Vows and Engagements; one time or other, we shall be put in
mind of them. God put Jacob in mind of his Vow, when he went from his Fathers
house, etc. Genesis 35.1. etc. God had told him of it once before, Chap. 31, 13.
It may be, God was displeased with him for his slackness to go to Bethel and
pay it; and therefore though he did not chide him, he being then in heaviness,
yet takes the opportunity, and gently minds him what was his duty, and would be
for his safety, when so full of fears of the Countries rising against him; by
Reason of that act of his Sons against the Sechemites.

Did you then Vow, when in so great danger; It was a seasonable time of vowing;
Take also the fittest season for payment. And that is Now, the present time,
Psalm. 116.14, 18. Now in the prasence of his people: Defer not.

5. Return fear to God; That the Lord expects, that the more he discovers his
grace and goodness, his mercy and Salvation to us, we should fear him the more,
Psalm. 130.4. There is for giveness with thee, that thou may be feared; This
is also foretold of Israel; that at their Return out of Captivity, they shall
fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days, Hos. 3. ult, The more good
you receive from God, the more do you abound in the fear of God; so shall it be
with Gods ancient people when the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and shall turn
ungodliness from Jacob, the fear of the Lord shall prevail mightily in their
Hearts, more then ever, The greater Gods goodness, the more shall the fear of
God be upon their hearts. All their joy in God and his goodness shall be mixed
with a Reverential fear of God; They shall serve the Lord in fear and rejoyes
with trembling, as Psalm. 2.11. so let it be with you, Heb. 12.28. Serve the
Lord with Reverence and godly fear; fear to offend so good a God who has had
such mercy on you, wrought such deliverances for you. And in all your
rejoycings and praisings of God for his goodness, see that there be a mixture
of fear; work out your Salvation with fear and Trembling, Phil. 2.12.

And manifest the fear of God in your hearts by your Care to depart from all
Evil, Prove. 16.6. And by your using the very Name and Attributes of God with
great Reverence; by Reverencing Gods Sanctuary, by endeavoring to walk with a
good Conscience toward all men: not oppressing any, Levit. 25.17. not avenging
our selves though injured, Genesis 42.18. Being faithful in all Trusts committed
to us, Neh. 7.2.

Be not high minded, but fear: not with a slavish fear, to fear him only for
his wrath and Judgments, but also for his Compassion and goodness. And
therefore let our fear of God be joined with a love of God, to fear him in
Love, and Love him in fear: Let not our fear drive us from God, as Cains did,
but cause us to cleave closet to God, as God promises in Jer. 32.40.

6. Render true Sanctity to God. Be perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2
Cor. 7.1. Math. 22.21. Render to God the things that are Gods: Thus Christ
spoke upon their showing him the penny that had Caesar's Image on it, that man
might know that God requires of man his own Image in man himself, in which he
at first Created him, and with which he at first adorned and beautified him,
and which was man's chief Excelleney and glory Caesar would have his Image upon
his Coin: The Lord would see his Image in us: The Image of his grace and
holiness. Let it be more shining: And let it more appear, and be manifested in
our doing justly, loving mercy, and walking humbly with the Lord our God. Be
you holy, for the Lord your God is holy: yea, in all manner of Conversation, 1
Pet. 1.15 16 Be you merciful as your Father is merciful, Luke 6.36. As God is
an universal good, doing good to all, so let us every one labor to be a
public good, doing good to as many as we have opportunity, Psalm. 16.2, 3. my
goodness extends not to thee, (says David) but to the Saints, etc. Gal. 6.10
As we have opportunity let us do good to all, espcially to those that are of
the Household of Faith. Let us now labor to be like him in holiness, goodness,
Righteousness, and we shall be like him hereafter in glory and Blessedness. Let
us more and more approve our selves the Children of God in resembling him,
following of him, walking after him, Ephesians. 5.1.

7. Render to God the fruit that he calls for under his Husbandry, and the
ways he takes with us, that we might be fruitful in well doing. This he calls
for and expects from a people for whom he has done as for us in this
wilderness: to whom he gives the Gospel of the Kingdom, who have Sanctuary
Enjoyments, to whom he vouchsafes protection from their Enemies, Math. 21.43.
The Kingdom should be taken from the unfruitful Jews, and given to them which
should bring forth fruit, render it in the season, Isai. 5.2.3, 5, 7. verse. God
tells us again and again what he looked for; He looked for sweet grapes, good
fruits.

These fruits are the good works required of us in our Conversation in duties
of godliness Righteousness, Lovs, goodness and mercy, which God has ordained,
that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10. This was the Apostles prayer for the
Philippians, Chap. 1.11. that they might be filled with the fruits of
Righteousness, etc. and for the Colossians, Chap. 1.10. that fruitful in every
good work. The Lord takes great pains with us in his house: He is pruning of us
by the Affictions he brings upon us, that we might be more fruitful, Ioh. 15.2

Bring forth the fruit of Ordinances, and Providence: the fruit of your
dangers, troubles, fears, and also of your Deliverances and Experiences of Gods
help in the time of distress; Live more to God, less to your selves, less to
the world. Labor to abound in the work of God, doing good in all places to all
with whom you. Converse. Do good in your Communication, Col. 4.6. by your
Example; as the Thessolonians did, 1 These 1 7. and the Corinthians, 2 Cor 9 2.
Their Zeal provoked very many. Be fruitful Trees in Gods Vineyard, both in word
and deed, doing good to all as you have occasion ministered to you, provoking
them to love and good works by beholding your forwardness in the ways of
Christ Jesus.

Mot. 1. Consider, it is an honor to the glorious and blessed God, when those
that are his people are fruitful; when the Trees that he has planted are laden
with good fruit: when a vine is full of goodly Clusters. It is a Credit to the
Vine dresser, when ground yields great Increase. It is not only the profit, but
the honor of the Husbandman, when Ewes bear Twins, It is the Shepards honor;
and so when Christians are fruitful; It is the honor and glory of God who is
the Husbandman, John 15.1. their Shepard, Psalm. 23.1. The Lord accounts himself
honored, John. 15.8. Herein is my Father honored, etc. Hereby others are
stirred up to praise God, Math. 5.16: 2 Cor. 9.12. Phil. 1.11. They are by
Jesus Christ to the praise and glory of God. Let this quicken us to
Fruitfulness; For this is the great End of our Lives to bring glory to God, the
God of our Life. This ought to be our highest End in all, 1 Cor. 10.31.

2. Fruitful Christians are the Lords delight: They are Hephzibab, his delight
is in them; They walk worthy of the Lord to all well pleasing, Col. 1.10. The
Lord promises to be as the Dew unto Israel; and then his beauty should be as
the Olive Tree, and his smell as Lebanon, Hos. 14.5, 6. The beauty of the Olive
Tree is to be full of Olives; such Christians are beautiful in Gods Eyes;
Lebanon was full of sweet Trees and fragrant Flowers, and filled all the parts
thereabouts with a sweet smell; and so should Israel be a sweet savor to God;
when they brought forth good fruit to him. The Philippians fruitfulness in well
doing communicating to Paul was an odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice
acceptable and well pleasing to God, Phil. 4.18.

3. Fruitless Professors are near unto a Curse, and in danger of being plucked
up or cut down, Math, 21 19. Heb. 6.8. If we bring not forth fruits of mercies,
deliverances, Ordinances, Afflictions, if barren under all, the Curse may come,
and God say never fruit grow on you more; yea, God may cut us down by the Axe
of his Judgments which he has brought upon us, Math. 3.10. Now God is laying
the Axe, if not to the Root, yet he is lopping off many branches: and therefore
the more need to take heed of unfruitfulness. The Jews were a fruitless Vine
Christ laid the Axe to the Root of the Tree, etc. Luke 13.7. Cut it down, etc.
would we not be cut down and cast into the Fire, let us be fruitful and that in
due season.

4. The End of Fruitfulness in Gods ways is Everlasting Life and Blessedness,
Romans 6, 32. The good we do in Family, Town, Church, being done in uprightness
will turn to good Account in the great day of Christ's appearance, Phil. 4.17.
All good fruit which we here bring forth is as Seed sown, 2 Cor. 9.6. Prove.
11.30. It will yield great increase, 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. 2 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18. you
would willingly have the Reward, then do the work; If you would have a good
Crop in the Harvest day, now be sowing and that not sparingly; serve the Lord
faithfully and diligently in duties of holiness, Right. ousness, Love,
kindness, Bounty and all goodness, 1 Cor. 15.8. knowing your labor is not in
vain in the Lord. Labor to be more and more fruitful, that your works may be
more at the laft, then at the first; as Christ speaks of them, Rev. 2.19. yea,
be fruitful in Age, honoring God, and adorning the Gospel in all things, Psalm.
92.14.

8. Make this Return to God for all his Benefits, and the great deliverances
received, to make him your Trust and Confidence all your days. Trust upon the
Lord, and live in dependence upon him for further mercy and Salvation. In
Experience of what you have received from God, rest upon him, we need daily
from God, and the Lord gives out daily unto us, let us act Faith daily upon
God. Make this use of Gods gracious appearance for you, never to distrust him
what ever your dangers and streights, or distresses may be, so it was with holy
Paul, 2 Cor. 1.10. who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver, in
whom we trust that he will yet deliver us. Be not overmuch Careful or fearful
in these evil and troublesomedayes. Be not sollicitous what you shall eat, or
what you shall drink, or whire with you shall be clothed, or how you shall be
preserved; Trust on the Lord Jehovah in whom is Everlasting strength, Isai.
26.4. the Lord provided for his people daily in the wilderness, though they had
no bread left in the Evening: yet they had it near their doors in in the
morning: he was a shadow in the day time from the heat, etc. Isai. 4.5, 6. This
was David's Resolution having had such wonderful deliverances from all his
Enemies, he would still trust in God, Psalm. 18.2. And therefore in his greatest
fears there shall be his Considence, that he will not fear what man can do to
him, Psalm. 56.3, 4. He is, and will be a Buckler to all those that trust in
him, Psalm. 18.30. It is a very ill Requital not to trust him by resting on his
promises: not to rely upon his wisdom, power, faithfulness when we have had
much Experience of his Care, Love, Compassion and wonderful works for our good.
It is high Ingratitude. Hence the Lord was so angry with Asa for sending to
Benhadad for his help, (though there were other evils in it) that he relied not
on God, when God had given him such a glorious victory over that mighty Host of
the Ethiopians, 2 Chronicles. 16: 8, 9: Thereby he provoked God from that time to
afflict him with Wars. Learn to trust in God in the most deadly dangers: Let
him be your Refuge in all Storms: He is able to keep that which is committed to
him. To him belong the Issues from death, Psalm 68.26:

9. Make this Return to God for all his Bounty and mercy to you, to make God
your exceeding joy, as David did, Psalm: 43: 4: and to rejoice in him the God of
your Salvation: yea, the God of all Salvations Temporal, Spiritual, and
Eternal: You cannot praise the Lord aright, nor walk worthy of him, except you
rejoice in him, Psalm, 33.1. Rejoice in the Lord you Righteous, for praise is
comely for the upright. This duty is urged upon the Saints, Phil. 3.1. and 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say Rejoice. We should not only
rejoice before the Lord in his blessings that he vouchsafes us; as Life,
health, Corn, etc. Deuteronomy. 12.12.18. That God allows, yea, enjoyneth his
people, but, Rejoice in the Lord; Let not our joy be Carnal in our preservation
from death, in the Life's of our Relations, in Crops, houses, Lands, Children;
but let our joy be Spiritual. Let not our chief joy be in Church Privileges,
and Ordinances; but on Christ Jesus. Such are the true Circumcision, who
rejoice in Christ Josus, and put no Confidence in the Flesh, Phil. 3.3. Psalm.
97 12. Rejoice not in sin, that is an ill Requital; the pleasures of sin are
but for a Season, and that joy will End in sorrow: but Rejoice in the Lord, and
that joy can no man take from you. And that we may the more rejoice in him; Let
us endeavor to be more clearing up our Interest in him, as our God in Christ
Jesus. That we may be able to say, as Psalm. 48.14. This God of Salvation is our
God; well may they rejoice in God that have him for their God, for then he will
be their guide unto death, their God for ever and ever.

10. and Lastly: Render to God praise and Thanksgiving, so the Prophet
promises in verse after the Text; I will take the Cup of Salvation; wherein he
alludes to their solemn feasts, wherein they had Cups, and in the use of them
they returned praise to God for the blessing they had received from him.
Commemorate Gods mercies to our selves and others, and praise his great, his
holy, and Reverend Name, this we are frequently exhorted to, Psalm. 22.25. And
61.8 And 107:13, 14, 15: you were as prisoners shut up for a time, but God has
brought you out into a large place: Oh give Thanks to the Lord for he is good,
for his mercy endures for Ever.

Moi: 1. God has given you your desires, and Answered your prayers, therefore
do you Answer his Expectation, what Cause have you to bless the Name of the
Lord, Psalm. 66:19, 20: so David, verily God has heard me, he has been
Attentive to the voice of my prayer: Blessed be God which has not turned away
my prayer nor his mercy from me, as Hannah said to Eli, 1 Samuel 1:27. For this
Child I prayed, etc: so may we say, for this mercy I prayed for this
deliverance, for this Return to our Habitations, and Relations, for this days
liberty we sought the Lord, and he has given us, our hearts desire; he might
have made more breaches, continued our distresses longer, let therefore the
Redeemed of the Lord say; The Lord is good and gracious for his mercy endures
for ever.

2. This is the way to keep and hold Gods blessings still with us. It is via
Conservandi; God will not take away his mercies from us, from the Country, if
we Return praise to him; They giving God his Rent, the Tribute he expects, he
will not turn them out of doors, not strip us of his Benefits, By giving praise
we glorify him, Psalm. 50.23. He that offers or sacrifices praise glorifies
me. He acknowledges his glorious Attributes, as in going to God by Petition,
so in the Sacrifice of praise and gratulation.

1. In praising him we give him the glory of his goodness in the Communication
of good to us, Psalm. 119.68. Thou art good and do good, etc. Bonum est sui
diffusivum: It is the nature of goodness to be Communicative.

2. The glory of his mercy, in pitying us in our miscry, doing so much for us,
who had plunged our selves into a Sea of misery. Confessing our own Indignity,
we acknowledge all to be from mercy, Lam. 3.22. as the Church then, so may we
say now; It is the Lords mercy we are not consumed.

3. The glory of his wisdom, in ordering all Events for his peoples good, and
ruling all the world for his Churches benefit: All is theirs, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22.

4. The glory of his power, in Effecting all those things for us, which we our
selves could not do, we cannot help our selves with any mercy; not make the Sun
to rise, a drop of Rain to fall, nor Cause the Earth to bring forth, etc. All
is the work of God, 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12. Isai. 26.12.

5. The glory of his Truth in his Word; making good the same to us, and to his
Church, Rev. 15.3. so in that Song after their Victory over the Beast; Just and
true are thy ways.

Mot. 3. This will open Gods heart and hand to give more; and so it is medium
impretandi, a means to prevail for more mercies, 2 Chronicles. 20.22. And when they
began to sing and to praise, the Lord set Ambushments against the Children of
Ammon, etc. a man puts in but a Bucket full of water into a Pump, but it
returns more: The more praise we return, the more good shall we receive. A
thankful Christian is a blessed Christian; would you have future mercies be
thankful for present mercies, say not: If I had such a mercy I could be
thankful, and praise the Name of the Lord; praise him for what thou have
received, and thou may have more; God will shower down his blessings of grace
and goodness upon thee

4thly. These praises of God rightly performed are very acceptable to God; They
are delitiae Caeli, God delights in them, Heb. 13.15. Psalm. 69.30, 31. And that
should make us more delight in this duty, because it is so pleasing to God,
Psalm. 22.3. He Inhabits the praises of Israel; He loves to sit by them, and to
hear them when their hearts are in Tune, when they sound forth his high praises.

5thly. It is a sign that the good things which we enjoy are given as
blessings from the hand of a Fathers love, when they work this in us, to carry
up our Affections to be much in blessing him for them; A man may abound in good
things which are in themselves blessings, and yet be no blessing to him that
has them; but be turned into Curses: How may I know (will some say) that this
and that gift, these deliverances are blessings to us? even hereby, when they
work this disposition in us to bless and praise the Lord who has so blessed us.

6thly. It is a most Heavenly duty, the very work of the Saints in Heaven; When
all other work Cease, this shall not Cease to all Eternity. The more you are
in the Exercise of this Spiritual Service, the more there is of the Life of
Heaven upon Earth.

This day you meet together to praise the Name of the Lord, who were together
in such a danger, that you almost despaired of Life; as the Apostle says, 2
Cor. 1.8. Look that your praises be such that God may be well pleased with
them; and with you in the performance of this Service.

1. Let them be Cordial, with the heart, yea, with the whole heart, Psalm. 9.1.

1. See that your hearts be taken up with an Admiration of Gods favor and
Bounty toward you, as David, Psalm. 139.14. Admire the Lords sparing,
delivering, and restoring mercy.

2. All our Service and worship of God must be with the heart and from the
heart; God calls for the Heart in all, Prove. 23.26. He would have the Heart in
prayer, praise, hearing the word, and all other performances; the Lord is n
Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, John 4.24.

2. Let them be Verbal, Psalm. 34.1. and 51.15. Hos. 14.2. We will Render the
Calves of our lips.

1. In singing Psalms, a duty in Gospel times: Col 3.16. And then most
seasonable when God gives Cause of Rejoicing in his mercies, James 5.13. If any
be merry let him sing Psalms, Psalm. 126.1, 2. when the Lord turned the
Captivity of Zion, etc. our mouth was filled with Laughter and our Tongues with
singing.

2. In declaring Gods goodness unto others; Extolling his Name, speaking of his
loving kindness, Psalm. 66.18. Come hither (says the Prophet) all you that fear
God, and I will tell what he has done for my Soul. What Deliverances I have
received, and Victories I have obtained, what Answers of prayer I have had. So
Psalm. 145.21. my mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord, etc. In Luke 8.38,
39. Christ Commands the man out of whom he had cast the Devils to show how
great things God has done for him.

3. Let them be real praises; praise him not only in our words, but in all our
ways; living to the honor of his Name, which is called upon us, and of the
Gospel professed by us, Phil. 1.27. Only let your Conversation be at becomes
the Gospel of Christ; That is a main thing to be attended to, Psalm. 50.23. He
that will offer praise aright, must also order his Conversation aright;
Confession and Conversation must go together in a thankful man, Psalm. 116.8, 9.
I will walk before God in the Land of the living; Inward Affection must be
manifested in our outward Conversation. Therefore look well to your ways,
Elder and younger; walk holily and Righteously; live soberly, Righteously and
godly in this present world, else all your praises are vain; The Lord will not
accept them.

Let our praises be Continual, Psalm. 34.1. and Psalm. 63.4. I will bless thee
while I live; Rest not in the work of a day, but remember Gods mercies all your
days; Be not like the Israelites, Psalm. 106.12. They sang his praises, but
soon forgot his works.

You that are young remember the Lord in your best days, and let us all both
Elder and younger remember him all our days. Remember him, to Love him, serve,
honor and glorify him. Remember your Promises and Engagements to him. If we
remember not his mercies to praise him, he will remember our Ingratitude
against him therein, by Cutting us short of his blessings, and plaguing us with
his Judgments.

5. Let all our Sacrifices of praise be offered up to God in the Name of Jesus
Christ, that so they may be a sweet savor before him. God smelled a sweet
savor in Noah's Sacrifice, after that wonderful preservation from the Flood of
waters, Genesis 8.20. Noah looked to Christ, Heb. 13.15. Col. 3.17. In him God
will be well pleased with you. And that Testimony you shall have one day from
him, that you pleased him in your returns to him: Let us thus now Render to God
whiles we are here on Earth, and we shall Reap the Fruit of all in the great
day of Christ's appearance, when God will Render to every one according to their
works, Romans 2.6, 7. Then those that have carefully observed all Gods
dispensations about them, and been follicitous what to Render to him; giving up
themselves to him. Loving, fearing, and obeying him, walking in holy Fellowship
with him in his own Appointments, they shall be received by him into his
Everlasting Kingdom, there to be with him, singing praises to him that sits on
the Throne, and to the Lamb for Evermore.

FINIS.

