A MESSAGE AND DECLARATION SENT FROM Colonel Whaley, to the Right Honorable
WILLIAM LENTHAL Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons, CONCERNING The Kings
Majesty's Royal Person, and Engagement. Together with his Demonstration and
Proposals, touching His Gracious Majesty, and Mr. John Ashburnham [now
attending His Royal Person in the Isle of Wight.]

THis Message and Declaration is appointed to be forthwith printed and
published, by Order and Command of the said Colonel Whaley.

DECEMBER, 7. 1647.

Imprinted at London for George Whittington, at the Blew Anchor in Cornhill
necre the Royal Exchange, 1647.



A Letter from Colonel Whaley to William Lenthal, Speaker of the honorable
House of Commons.
SIR,
I Am bold to affirm to you, that my engagements for the Parliament have bin
with faithfulness and truth undertaken, and though I have always set a high
price of the Houses favor* endeavoring to answer it by discharging the duty
of my place and trust; yet I ever abhorred sinister and unlawful ways,
especially such abominable ones, as to ing a iate my self with them, by
untruths, it is not God and my own Conscience alone, that will justify me in
this, but with confidence I may presume, all the Godly in the Army that knows
me, so far as man can judge, will testify the same: Therefore, being now
accused by M. Ashburnham in a letter to you, for the not declaring his
Majesty's disingaging himself by him [as he says he did] to me, the
tenderness of my reputation, both with you and all honest men in the kingdom
puts me upon it, to write something in answer to his Letter, that this gross
failing, I should speak another language, did not I think his memory failed
him, may appear both to you himself, and the kingdom.

Mr. Ashburnham in the beginning of his Letter says he was the occasion, that
drew on his Majesty's Engagement how this should be I cannot imagine, for the
King made his Engagement to me at New market, which I made known to the
General and Officers, when Mr. Ashburnham was in France. I confess as I did
declare, the King voluntarily renewed his Engagement at Wooburn, but that M.
Ashburnham had so much as a hand in that, it is more then ever I heard.

Mr. Ashburnham further says, that soon after ^ee came to wait on his
Majesty at W^oburn, Col. Wh^ley came to me, as he said by command from the
Army, to desire I would give my word, that his Majesty would not depa^t from
them without their consent, etc. I hat I spoke to Mr. Ashburnham to ^ngage
himself for the Kings safe abiding with me. I will not deny, I have affirmed as
much, but I am exceeding confident, I did it not in the name of the Army, for
I had no such Commission and it has ever been my ear to keep to my Commands.

That Mr. Ashburnham found me walking b^ the River side, and there did
disingage himself from his former Engagement, I have already declared, but that
I should say, then the King does so too, and he should tell me, you are to
understand it so, it is as true as the reason he backs it with: For he says,
to show you, that Colon II Whaley rightly apprehended what I meant, he soon
after went to the Head Quarters, where he declared unto them (as I am credibly
informed) that the King and my self had withdrawn our words, etc.

As to this, the General and all the Council of War then met, are my
witnesses, I told them no such thing, I acquainted them indeed M. Ashburnham
had taken off his Engagement but when they asked me, whether the King has done
it, I answered, as I ^id you in the House upon the same Question, which is in
my Narrative, and left it to them to judge; and therefore I must return this
upon Mr. Ashburnham, and use it as an Argument against him, That if the King
did command him to take off his Engagement, he did not discharge his Trust for
had he^, I should sooner have acquainted the General and Officers that the
King had discharged himself, it being of greater weight then that Mr.
Ashburnham had.

I should like wise have made known so much to his Excellency in my Letter,
when I writ to him, that Mr. Ashburnham had dissingaged himself.

And since he goes about to prove his ass^rtion, by circumstances ^ed ^ll
further make is ^pp^ar, how little they make for him, had Mr. Ashburnham taken
off the King from his Engagement, he would have acquainted the Lieutenant
General and Commiss^nry General with it, as well as with his own disingagment,
but they affirm to me the contrary, for about the same time, that Mr.
Ashburnham disingaged himself, when he pretends he took off the Kings also, he
went to putney to speak with the Lieutenant General, and Commissary General,
they refusing to speak with him, he sent them word, he would stand engaged for
the King no longer, and gave this for his reason, There was so much Scotch
spoken at the Court, but not one word of disobliging the King.

I shall likewise appeal to all that knows me, whether they conceive me to be
so simple, and of so poor a spirit, that when the King had personally engaged
himself to me, J should remain satisfied, that Mr. Ashburnham should tell me
the King withdrew his Engagement, certainly I should have known the Kings
pleasure in it, J was never at such a distance from the King, neither wanted so
much boldness, to ask him a question of such concernment.

Mr. Speaker,

I think J have sufficiently demonstrated, to you, and J doubt not, but it will
satisfy all indifferent men, that if the King did command Mr. Ashburnham, as
it seemed to him he did, to take off his Engagement, he has not discharged
his-trust; and this for the clearing my own integrity J have done,

And the Righteous GOD that shall judge us all, knows J have related the
truth; and whatever men believe, J matter not, it is not the praise of men J
seek, my witness is with God, J remain

SIR, Your very humble and faithful Servant,
For the Right Honorable WILLIAM Lenthal Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable
House of Commons.
FINIS.

