FOR THE King and both Houses OF PARLIAMENT.
THey that are right honorable will hear, and the truly noble and gentle will
bow down unto his appearance, that we know, who according to his Faithfulness,
has fulfilled his Promises; and as the Scriptures declare, even in ^hese last
days has powered forth of his Spirit upon his Sons and upon his Daughters, and
we with many thousands, that have received thereof, cannot but bear witness
thereto, That the Lord is come that searches the Hearts and tries the Reins,
to take up his dwelling in men and women, who are obedient to his Spirit and
Requirings find Peace therein, and we dare not do contrary thereunto; though
for it we have been dealt hardly with by men, as at this day, in Spoiling of
our Goods, and Imprisoning of our Bodies, and the shedding of our Blood in the
Streets, though it could never be proved that we, or any of us, have in any
kind done, or invented to do: any evil to King or People, or allow thereof; for
we are full of Love and Goodwill unto all, and our Enemies could never find any
advantage against us, but in the matters of our God; so our Sufferings have
been for our believing in, and obeying the Spirit of Truth, in which we have
and do worship God every where, and we have not, nor dare we be disobedient
thereto, whatever it cost us; for by this we are sealed to an Inheritance
invisible and everlasting: And we have a Liberty at this time to lay before
you* the Innocence and Harmlesness of all us that are brought to the Obedience
of this Spirit, that the King, and all in the Nation, may fear and bow before
him, whose Servants we are: O judge in Righteousness you Rulers in the Earth,
whether we should obey God or man in this matter; for we are bold in the Spirit
and Power to declare unto you. That he that has required Worship in Spirit and
in Truth every where is our Leader, and with us of a Truth; and they that are
against us, he has, and will rebuke.

O Remember, it is but a little while since this City and Nation was visited
with Plague, Fire, and Sword; And was it not when you oppressed the Worshippers
in the Spirit? And when you ceased your strife against them, then the Lord gave
you liberty to repair your Losses: And so full of Good Will are we unto the
Land of our Nativity, that we must call unto you, that you might mind what the
great God of Heaven and Earth has made known unto us, that he has appeared,
and does appear in this Nation and Kingdom, more then in any Nation in the
Earth, that it might be cleansed and delivered from the Destruction threatened
by the Lord, because of the great and raining Iniquities therein; and none
cries louder, nor ever did sooner bring down vengeance on a People or Nation,
then the resistance of the Spirit and Light of God, w^^^ewith the Lord has
visited this Nation at this day; so we cannot but beseech you to come to this
Spirit and Light in your selves, that reconciles to God; and we know it from
all other spirits, for it is Holy and Harmless, and none it is can oppress or
resist the Appearance of it in any other: And we cannot but mind you, as bound
in duty thereto, that the resistance of this Spirit overthrew and drowned the
old World, and as Stephen told the Priests and Rulers of Jerusalem, that had
killed and put to death the Prince of Life, That it was because they resisted
the Holy Ghost, as their Fathers did; and though they believed him not, and
stoned him to death, yet all their wisdom and strength could not defend them
from his Displeasure, whom they had grieved; and how soon Destruction came on
them and on their Nation you know, and it is good to remember; for it is the
same God we serve, and his Arm is not shortened, and there is amongst you a poor
and afflicted People, to whom he has regard; for they dare not go contrary to
his Commands, nor any just Command of man; but there was a Law by which some
said the Son of God was to be put to death; and there has been Laws in this
Nation, by which the best Christians in the Land have been Martyred; and there
are yet Laws, which to yield obedience to, were to disobey God, and in so doing
we should hasten destruction on our selves and the Nation, as the many Examples
in the Scriptures and elsewhere makes manifest, and for us are they written,
upon whom the Ends of the World are come; therefore we have been moved and
constrained in the Love of our God, to call unto you, even to all, from him
that sits on the Throne, to the meanest in Authority in this Nation. O that you
would hear! O that you would grant Liberty of Conscience, for every one to
Worship God, as of the Spirit they come to receive Understanding, according to
that Royal Law, In doing as you would be done by; and by this you would
overcome your Enemies, and strengthen your Friends, and deter Judgment, and
lengthen your Tranquillity; but if you will not hear, nor be entreated, but go
on to oppress those that worship in Spirit, you will be found Fighters against
God, and he is mighty, and will plead the cause of the Innocent. This from us
that would have you all to so act, and do, that you might render your account
before God with joy, in the day of his righteous Judgment, that hastens, and is
near unto every one of you. And we cannot but mind you of the many that lie in
the several Goals and Prisons of this Nation, some four, five, six, or seven
years time, being found in no other offense, when committed to Prison, but
their meeting to worship God: O that you into whose hands the Lord has given
power to show mercy, and set free the Oppressed, would ^ear and deliver, for
their groanings the Lord hears and takes notice of.

We, called Quakers, whose Names underwritten are some of the many Thousands
of our mind with us, that cry day and night, that Liberty of Conscience may be
given, that we may serve the Lord in Righteousness and Holiness all the days
of our Lives, and we know the Lord hears.

Anne Whitehead, Rebecca Travers, Mary Ellson, Susanna Yokeley, Priscilla
Eccleston, Ruth Brown, Hanah Talor, Rebecca Osgood, Anne Travers, Sarah Brush,
Helena Claypoole, Mary Forster, Prudence Wa^shatt, Elizabeth Middilton,
Elizabeh Bowman, Patience Camfeld, Grace Giner, Anne Raper, Agnes Pool, Mary
Lawrence, Anne Briges, Grissel Tolderly, Jude Shipton, Ellin Daper, Elizabeth
Haddock, Elizabeth Perkins, Grace Hubbert, Martha Fisher, Elizabeth Molborn,
Elizabeth Wadley, Jane More, Anne Stodard, Lidia Odes, Christian Clarke, Anne
Warner, Charity Corn,



