Die Veneris 20. Martii. 1645.
WHereas it is thought fit, that six weeks Pay be made to Colonel Massey,
Commander in Chief of all the Forces for the Western Association, and the
Forces under his Command. And whereas the Committee of Lords and Commons for
the Western Association have reported, That twenty thousand pounds is (as they
conceive) a fit proportion for that service; Be it Ordained by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament Assembled, That the sum of twenty thousand pounds, for
the Pay of the said Forces, together with interest after the rate of eight
pounds per cent. for the same, at the end of every six months, until full
payment thereof be made, shall be paid in course, out of the Receipts of the
Grand Excise, unto such person or persons, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, who shall lend or advance any sum or sums of money for the use
aforesaid; they paying in the money by them so advanced or lent, to Nathan
Wright, and Francis Lenthall, appointed Treasurers to receive and disburse the
same; which said Nathan Wright, and Francis Lenthall, shall disburse the same
Moneys so lent by Warrant of the Committee of the West, whose Warrant for
disbursing of the same, shall be a sufficient discharge to the said Nathan
Wright, and Francis Lenthall, their Executors and Assigns. And it is Ordained,
That the acquittance or Note of Receipt of the said Nathan Wright, and Francis
Lenthall, to the person or persons so lending or advancing any sum of money,
testifying the Loan or advance of the said Moneys, entered with the
Commissioners and Comptroler of Excise, for the time being, within six days
after the Date of the said Notes, shall be a sufficient Warrant to the said
Person or Persons lending the said Moneys, their Executors and Assigns, to
demand the said Moneys so lent or advanced, with interest after the rate
aforesaid, from the Commissioners of Excize for the time being. And it is
Ordained, That any person or persons who shall advance any sum of money by way
of Loan, upon this Ordinance, or to whom any shall be assigned, his and their
Executors, and Assigns, shall have power to Assign the Money to them due, or
any part thereof; And such Assignee his Executors or Assigns, shall be thereby
entitled and enabled to demand, receive, and give discharge for so much as is
to him or them assigned: And the Commissioners of Excize shall make payment
thereof accordingly. Provided that such Assignment be made in writing, and
entry thereof made with the Commissioners and Comptroller of the Excise, for
the time being, who shall at the request of any person or persons, make such
entry: and before such entry made, such Assignement to be of no force.

Jo. Brown. Cler. Parliamentorum.
H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.


