FRIENDS,
YOu that are of the Parliament, hear the Word of the Lord as it came unto me
concerning (...) and by the Eternal God am I moved to lay these things before
you, how that your downfall is near, and this is the word of the Lord God of
Hosts unto you all that are now sitting in Parliament, the Lord will overturn
you all by his Powerful Arm, for the decree of God and his purpose is, and his
determination is to throw down and to break up Parliaments, and there shall not
any man bear rule that is out of the Law of God, but God himself will Rule and
bear rule in the hearts of men, and such as know God to rule, and to guide them
by his own spirit, such shall rule for God that are led by his spirit into all
truth, for God will throw down and overturn, root up and consume both root and
branch of all your Parliaments, until he has brought in the Royal Heir, the
Prince of peace, the Everlasting King of Righteousness, whose right it is to
reign, and he will reign in the destruction of his enemies, for the God of
Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob has determined, and he will surely accomplish
his word, and Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but the Word of our God shall
not pass until it is fulfilled, for prophecy shall go out from the Mouth of
the Lord, and shall not turn again unfulfilled, for the Lord God has raised up
a Prophet like unto Moses, and he shall prophecy of things to come, and it
shall come to pass and be fulfilled; and this is the Prophet that the Lord God
has commanded that all should hear him and obey him, and this is the light of
the World, and does enlighten every man that comes into the World, and God
has chosen him to bear rule, and he is exalting him, and he shall reign, and
he shall tread down his enemies under him, although they now rule over him, yet
this be known that God who is powerful and unresistable, and unlimited, will
break in upon his enemies like a flood, and like an armed man will he sweep
them all away by the besome of destruction, for the Lord God will make the
Earth to quake, and he will shake the high Mountains, until they become a plain
for the Lord to pass over, for he will utter forth his Lightnings, his Thunders
and his earthquakes in the earth, until he has brought down the lofty from
their seat, until he has thrown down proud Hamon, and raised up poor Mordecay
which is kept under the proud high Nature which God will destroy, and therefore
the Proud, and the High, and the Lofty, and the Honorable honored by men, God
will bring down into dishonor, shame and contempt, for God is coming to stain
the glory of all flesh, both of Princes and Rulers, both of Lords and Nobles,
and all shall bow and bend unto him that is the Light of the World, the Way to
God, to Life and to perfect joy; And all you who are yet in rebellion against
the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, I say unto you, be warned in your life time
to repent from dead works, and come down from your High Thrones you exalted
proud ones, the Lord God will abase you and bring you low, by his own arm will
he scatter you, and with plagues will he recompense you with eternal vengeance,
with woe and desolation will he reward you that are out of his fear, for the
indignation of the Lord God is kindled against you, and the sword of the Lord
God is drawn to cut you down, and the fire of his jealousy is kindled against
your unrighteous actions, and plagues, and desolation and utter destruction
from the hand of the Lord God must you all receive if you repent not speedily,
for the day of terrible judgment is hastening and coming on you from the hand
of the Lord God; Therefore be you warned and fly for your lives out of Sodom
and Egypt, spiritually so called, for in the streets of spiritual Sodom and
Egypt is the Lamb of God slain, and the Earth whereon his blood lies cries
for vengeance to the Lord God, for the seed of Jacob is oppressed, and have
long groaned under bondage to the Lord for deliverance, and for his seed and
Elects sake he is coming to take vengeance on the oppressor that oppresses the
just, that has grieved the Spirit of God in themselves and also in others,
like Judas who betrayed the just into the hands of finners, so have many of you
done, when the just principle of God have risen in you at any time, and have
showed you that you should have done the thing that pleased God that was
Righteous in the sight of God, but you fled from this the good Spirit of God
that should have guided you over deceit, but you like Judas have fled from
Christ, and have been offended in him.

But woe, woe from the Lord God unto you that have so done, a bitter cup is
prepared for you, and you shall as surely drink it as the Lord God is True, for
as a bird is taken in the snare, so shall you be taken that slight the day of
your visitation which is passing away, and then shall you be taken with all the
unprofitable servants that has spended their portion with the Harlot, with the
beast and the false prophet; this will the Lord God say unto such, Go ye Cursed
into everlasting torment prepared for the Devil and his angels; For Gods
indignation is gone forth against the Heads and Rulers in this Nation, and he
will overturn them all, and this is the cause that the Lords Righteous Soul is
vexed with them, and plagues will be bring on them speedily, because they hold
up that that the Lords purpose is to throw down, the kingdom of antichrist, the
beast and false prophet with them shall fall together, and both they and their
upholders shall drink of one cup; and woe unto the false prophets that are
upheld by the powers of darkness, the Devil that has ensnared men to teach
lies, and then they go to the same power to be upholded, and to have
maintenance; but woe unto their upholders and to their maintainers, those are
seen to be deceivers; and this is the day of the Lord, wherein the Lord is
opening the eyes of all people that have been long blinded by them, and they
that have heard them long now are made to cry out woe against them; for the Lord
God has a terrible cup for them to drink, and woe unto their upholders, they
that uphold Tithes for them, who constrains people to pay Tithes to them
whether they will or no; away with this Ministry, it is not of God but of
Antichrist, and upholded by the power of antichrist, the Devil that rules in
the hearts of men; therefore away with Tithes, put it down, for else the
plagues of God will fall on you that are the upholders of it, and the
indignation of the Lord shall surely come upon you, unless you join unto the
Lord against his enemies, otherwise the hand of the Lord will be against you,
and you shall never prosper till you act for the Lord and not to please men,
for you that are men-pleasers is out of the Covenant of God; and therefore put
down Tithes, for God never commanded you to pay Tithes nor to uphold them for
his Ministers, neither do they seek to you for any support, but God he
maintains his Ministers and supporteth them by his power, and they come not
to you, for they that have received the gift of God gives it freely, as freely
as they have received; and therefore come and buy wine and milk without money
and without price, as Christ said unto his Disciples, Behold I send you forth
as Lambs amongst Wolves, without bag or scrip, freely give, for freely you have
received; So they that are Christ's Disciples, they are his Ministers, and they
he sends forth and commands them to give freely as they have received him,
so they preach him, and this is the godly Ministry, and these God will uphold,
and not by any strength of man.

But all your man-made Ministers, made by the will of man, such as have learned
lying inventions in the corrupt Nature, and so mix them with the Pure Scripture
which was given forth by the Pure Spirit of the Pure God by his Servants and
Messengers, but these whom you call your Ministers have not the Spirit of God,
but they are separated from God sensual having not the Spirit, so those are the
clouds without rain carried about with the tempest, but of them beware, for
they have craftily crept into houses, calling them Churches, but God has a
Church of living stones, Elect and precious, and this Church is God a building
in this our day, a Spiritual House built upon that Rock that never shall be
shaken, the Rock that is Gods Elect, upon whom all the righteous builds, and
behold all that are not builded upon this Rock, the storms now arises apace
that will shake them, when the Wilderness shall be shaken, and the World shall
be in amazement, and sadness of heart shall smite the rebellious with the
Hypocrite, and whether will you fly that are out of the fear of God, for the
Tribes of the Earth shall mourn, and I tell you, such Tribulation and anguish
of Soul shall come as has not been known since the beginning, although
darkness has long covered the Earth, yet now has the Lord God commanded light
to shine out of dakness, and now people does begin to see where they have been
in the alienation, even strangers from their Maker; now the senses of people
coming to be awakened after this long night of thick darkness wherewith they
have been clouded, so that the face of the Lord has been hid from his
Creatures; but now it shall be so no more, but all that do believe in the
light, and that shall yet come to believe, all such shall see the Glory of the
Lord, and all flesh shall behold the beauty of the Lord, for now God is coming
in Power and in great Glory, and excellent brightness is a breaking forth, as
the lightening comes out of the East and shines unto the West, even so is the
coming of the Son of man, and they that have seen his coming in them, may so
declare of him, and such may Prophecy of his coming, for the powers of Heaven
shall move, then shall you see the Son of man coming in the clouds of Heaven
with power and with great Glory, and this is the day of his coming, and such as
know him come may declare of him, they may give their testimony for him that
they have seen his coming in them; and such as have not seen his coming in
them, they are lying dreamers that dreameth a lie, and the world wondreth after
them.

These are the lying Beasts and the false Prophets that deceives all the world
with their lying wonders, these are they that God will destroy and utterly
consume by the breath of his mouth; therefore let Tithes go down lest you
partake with them in their plagues, for Gods vengeance and his plagues and woes
is against them and against their upholders, for the Lords unresistable power
and his unlimited spirit causes us to cry against them and against their
upholders, foreseeing their desolation and their destruction coming on them and
their upholders, and therefore fly from the wrath to come, I warn you by the
spirit of the Lord God, whose Consciences is not wholly seared, whilst there is
any tenderness left, beware of the deceivers, neither hearken unto them,
neither lend an ear to the wicked one, nor to his temptation, but turn to the
light of the Lord God in your own heart, and lend your ear there, and hear the
voice of wisdom which calls you to return and hearken to the Counsel of God
which is known within, for whatsoever is to be known of God is manifest in man;
behold this is the day of the Lords everlasting love and kindness wherein he is
revealing himself unto the sons of men, and an everlasting power is he a
breaking through the Earth, and he is rending down the Mountains that has been
high, and exalted above all that is called God, and he is searching and trying
the hearts of all men high and low; great, and mighty, and powerful is the Lord
God of Abraham, and he will throw down both Kings and Rulers that are Ruling
and Governing in the Earth, and they themselves are not governed by the Spirit
of the Lord God, which is Truth in the inward parts, and leads into the path
of Justice, Truth, and Righteousness, to Rule for the Lord God, and not for
men; and that is required of you by the Lord God, that are Ruling and Governing
in this Nation, that you Act for the Lord God, and that you may no longer
uphold that which the hand of the Lord God is against you for, and against them
that you uphold; and this is the day of the Lord wherein he is coming to break
in pieces the potsheards of the Earth that by force and cruelty oppress the
just and grieve the righteous spirit of the Lord God who will not always
strive with you, but whilst he does strive by his unlimited power, harden not
your hearts lest the Lord destroy you as he did hard-hearted Pharaoh, and as he
did Sodom and Gomorah, who Repented not although he warned them by his
Messengers, whom they believed not; for God is not mocked, but he will reward a
just recompense into the bosom of the rebellious, hard-hearted and
stiff-necked, who are out of the Covenant of God, and enemies to the Cross of
Christ, and so are found idlers out of the Vineyard of God without in the
world, where the sins of Sodom does abound, idleness and fullness of bread, and
so forgetting the Lord that created them, and such the Lord God will plead with
in the day of his appearance, which is already come; and yet they do not see it
because they are blinded by the God of this world, and by the deceivers that
has deceived the hearts of all men that are in the world; but now Antichrist
and his kingdom will the Lord God speedily throw down and utterly confound, and
this work is the Lord already doing, and he will go through with it although men
cannot see it whose eyes are blinded; yet many whose eyes are opened do see the
work of the Lord, and glory be to his name, he is laying low all the dark
Powers of the Earth that has upholden the false Prophet, and great Babel which
has been builded so high, yet now will the Lord God throw her to the bottom,
and great shall be the fall of her and of her upholders, for the Lords
indignation and wrath is to be poured forth upon the Whore, and the Beast, and
the false Prophet, and they are to be turned alive into the lake of endless
torment, for the unresistable God will utter forth everlasting Plagues upon the
Deceivers of this Nation, who have called themselves Ministers of Christ, and
are upheld by men; but such as uphold them, the unlimitted power of God will
break them in pieces and dash in sunder, for the Decree of God is already
sealed to break in pieces the dark power that upholdeth them that he has
purposed in his heart to throw down, for this is God about to do, even to
destroy all the false Prophets, and Antichrist, and there shall not one of them
escape the powerful hand of the Lord God, for God never sent them yet they run,
they say The Lord says, when he never spoke unto them; And these are man-made
Ministers, and these are the greatest enemies that the Lord God has upon the
face of the whole Earth, and both they and their upholders shall perish
together.

Therefore in the fear of the Lord consider, you that are upholding them whilst
they are deceiving you, try your deeds by the light of Christ, and see whether
or no your works be wrought in God, and see with the single eye which is the
light as in the presence of the Lord God, try your deeds, words, and actions in
the fear of the Lord; I lay it upon you as I received it from the pure, eternal
and invisible God whose works are wrought in the light, and whose counsel is
known in the light to such as fear him and walk in his light; for he that
reveals the Father is the Son, and the Son is the light of the world, and he
that is out of the light is out of the counsel of God; and marvel not at these
things as Nicodemas did, although he was a Ruler in Israel, he knew not the
things of God; and this I say unto you, unless you come to the light of Christ,
the gift of God, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; and this is the
Truth of God, and he that climbeth up another way he is a thief and a robber,
and such enters not by the door, Christ; this is to you given forth by the
spirit of the Lord God for you to read in the fear of the Lord, and his Message
who is the Lord of Heaven and Earth, that you may be warned to repent and to
leave these things that the hand of the Lord is against you for, that you may
escape the terrors of the Almighty which are ready to break in upon you, and
this in pure obedience to the spirit of the Lord was I moved to give forth unto
you, whose spirit is unresistable; the wind blows where it lists, and no
man can stop it; even so is the spirit of the Lord God unlimitted and without
bounds: Therefore hear and consider, and quench it not; and this is dear love
to warn you, and its the large love of God that reaches unto his own in every
man: And this is Truth given forth,

By Dorothy White.

THE END.

