THE CAUSE and PREVENTION OF Great Calamities National and Personal:
demonstrated, And Rcommended to the Consciences of all Concerned; Especially
Keepers of Taverns, Inns, and other Houses of Entertainment, to Read and
Consider in the fear of the All-seeing God.
YOu who keep Taverns and other public Houses of Entertainment in the fear of
God the Righteous Judge of all, seriously consider how you discharge and answer
a good Conscience toward God and Men in your places. Do not Covet an evil
Covetousness unto your Houses, for woe is to them that do so Covet, Hab. 2. 9.
Do not live upon the Sins of the People; let not your Profits or Gain arise
from thence, for that will not-prosper: Have a care that you never let any Man
or Woman have more Wine or other strong Liquors then what is Necessary for
their Refreshment and Health, in that they may praise God, that whether they
eat or drink, etc. they may do all to his Praise and Glory; every Creature of
God is good, and ought to be received in Moderation with Thanks giving, and
none of his Mercies abused or misspent in Excess or Extravagancy. Pray consider
the sad effects of Excess, Drunkenness, Extravagant and Intemperate Living,
whence they proceed, what they are, and what they tend to. They proceed from
the Wicked one and men's Insatiable Lusts, they are Sins against God and Men's
Souls, and tend to these Evils, Miseries and Calamities following, Viz.

Ily, To bring the woe, wrath, and Judgments of God upon them that are Guilty
thereof, Abet, or Encourage the same -- Prove. 23. 29. Isa. 3. 11. Hab. 2. 15.
Isa. 24. 45.

IIly, To Impare and destroy persons in their Healths and Estates, to Ruin
their Children and Families, by bringing them to Poverty and Misery, Prove. 23.
20, 21.

IIIly, To stir up vain Mirth, Music, Gaming, Plays and Sports, Ranting,
Singing, and Koreing, whereby their minds are elivated and hurried from all
Sobriety, Seriousness, and Fear of God, 1 Cor. 10. 7. Exodus 32. 6. Eccles. 7.
5. Isa. 24. 9.

IVly, To nurse up Lewdness, Debauchery and whoredom, which is a great Cause of
the Land mourning, Hosea 4. 2, 3, 11.

Vly, To Oaths, Swearing, Execrations, Cursing and also Profaning, and
Blaspheming the holy Name of Almighty God, the frequent Evils and Effects of
Drunkenness, and Excess of Kiot, which also cause the Land to mourn, Jer. 22.
10. Hosea 4. 2, 3.

VIly, Excessive Drinking, Tippling and Drunkenness, tend to Unman Men, to make
them Inhumane, Brutish, Sottish and Contemptible in the Eyes of God, and all
sober good men, being contrary to the Law of God and Nature, below such brute
Creatures (as Horses, Oxen and other Cattle) that will not be compelled to
drink more then they have need.

VIIly, To Threatening, Railing, Quarrelling, Fighting, Bloodshedding, and
abusing one another, sometimes to the Loss of Lives, Killing and destroying one
another; and sometimes also Killing and Murdering other people who do them no
harm, as Who has Woe? Who has Sorrow? Who has Contentions? Who has Wounds
without Cause? Who has Redness of Eyes? -- They that tarry long at the Wine:
they that go to seek mixed Wine. -- At the last it biteth like a Serpent, and
stingeth like an Adder. See Prove. 23. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.
they are walking or traveling quietly along the Streets or Highways, too
often the fruits of Drunkenness, Excess, and Inflammation of Blood by Wine or
strong Liquors, which also is the Cause of a Land mourning, Hosea 4. 2, 3.

VIIIly, How many do shorten and end their days by Exeess and Intemperance;
besides, No Drunkard, whoremenger, Railer or Extortioner shall inherit God's
Kingdom, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. But are utterly excluded, unless
they come to timely and unfeigned Repentance and Amendment of Life through
God's free Grace and Mercy to them.

Oh the Lamentable consequences of Excess and Drunkenness, wasting and abusing
God's Creatures and Mercies, and may he not therefore in Judgment withold
them, and bring want and distress upon many? Is it not just that such as abuse
God's Mercies by EXCESS, should come to want them for Relief? Pray consider,
and read Joel 1. 5.

IXly, And how many are brought under the Condign punishment of Death, for
Killing and Murdering others in their drunken Fits?

Xly, What Cheating, Stealing. Robbing, Killing and murdering for Money, to
maintain Excess, Drunkenness, Lewdness and Debauchery? How apparent is it? and
how many sad Instances thereof, that we see scarce a Sessions in London, or
Assizes in one County or other without a Relation of some such like sad
accident, as Bloodshed, Loss of Life or Lives? And where did they begin but often
times at such a Tavern or Public house, or Merry drinking bout (as they call
it?) They were inflamed with high drinking, and so the heats and feuds did
first arise which produced those Lamentable Effects.

XIly, And because some are more strong and mighty to drink Wine and strong
Drink, and can bear it more then others, through Custom and Habit thereof, so
as not to be so apparently drunk, this will not excuse them in their excssive
and intemperate course of Living, devouring or wasting the Creatures of God to
satisfy their inordinate Desires and Lusts, nor rescue them from the woe
denounced by the holy Prophet against such; see Isa. 5. 11, 12, 22. And every
one that Swears shall be cut off, etc. Zach. 5. 3. By Swearing, and Lying,
and Killing, and Stealing, and committing Adultery, they break out, and Blood
touches Blood, Therefore shall the Land mourn, etc. Hosea 4. 2, 3. if the
Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Wicked and Ungodly appear? 1 Pet.
4. 18.


XIIly, These sad and lamentable Consequences of Drunkenness and Excess
seriously considered; you that are Vintners, and others that keep public
Houses, and all others concerned, avoid and shun these Evils, and minister no
occasion, nor Encouragement to them, nor connive at them for ungodly Gain; let
not Covetousness blind your Eyes, have no fellowship with the unfruitful works
of Darkness but rather in God's fear reprove them; manifest your Love and Care
to and for your Customers Welfare, Health and Preservation as for your own, to
the best of your understanding; and as you see cause by advising them in love
and tenderness to forbear Excess, and that which is for their own hurt, and not
to drink to their own prejudice, that they may not only reap the Comfort and
Benefit of their Moderation and Temperateness, but you and your Families be
blessed and prospered in your Christianlike Care therein.

But if any of you prove false to God and to your own Consciences, See also
De^^. 29. 18, 19, 20. Whose heart turns away this day from the Lord our God
-- to add Drunkenness unto Thirst -- the Lord will not spare him, but the Anger
of the Lord and his Jealousy shall smoke against that Man -- and the Lord
shall blot out his Name from under Heaven.
and also to People that come to your Houses, (by your not discharging your
selves toward them as you ought to do, in Truth and Righteousness, according
to his Light and Truth in you,) and will connive at, give way or contribute
unto inordinate Drinking, Gaming, music, Dancing, Singing, Debauchery or
Lewdness in your Houses, to the dishonor of God, and the Name of Christ Jesus,
tending to their own and Families Ruin who are concerned therein; Then are you
Accessory and Guilty in the sight of God of their Evils, which will tend to the
drawing down a Curse, and Judgments of God upon you, your Houses and Families.

Therefore partake not with any of the wicked in their-Sins, nor give any way
or encouragement to them therein, that you may not partake with them of their
Plagues, Rev. 18. 4. Ephesians. 5. 6, 7.

Whoever persist in those Sins of Excess, Pride and Drunkenness, etc. do incur
the woe denounced against both; see Isa. 28. 1.

G. W.

In King Charles II. his Proclamation against Vicious, Debauched and Profane
Persons, etc. dated May the 30th, 1660. in the Twelfth Year of his Reign, are
these Remarkable Passages following.
THere is a sort of Men of whom we are sufficiently ashamed, who spend their
time in Taverns, Tippleing-Houses and Debauches, giving no other Evidence of
their affection to us, but in Drinking our Pealth, and inveighing against all
others who are not of their own dissolute temper, and who (...) have more,
discredited our Cause, by the license of their Manners and Lives, then they
could ever advance it by their Affection and Courage -- We reasonably hope
these men will cordially renounce all that Licensciousness Profaneness and
Impiety with which they have been corrupted, and endeavored to corrupt others;
and that they will hereafter become Examples of Sobriety and Virtue. -- We will
not exercise just severity against any Male factors, sooner then against Men of
Dissolute, Debauched and Profane Lives, with what parts soever they may be
otherwise qualified and endowed. -- And we hope all Persons of Honor, or in
Place and Authority, will so far assist Us in discountenancing such Men, that
their Discretion and Shame will persw de them to reform what their Consciences
would not. -- Which may by the Example and Severity of Virtuous Men be easily
discountenanced, and by degrees suppressed.

However for the more effectual reforming these Men, who are a discredit to the
Nation, and unto any Cause they pretend to favor and wish well to. We require
all Mayors* and Sheriffs, and Justices of the Peace, to be very vigilant and
strict in the discovery and prosecution of all Dissolute and Profane Swearing
and Cursing.



THis was Reinforced by a second Proclamation of the King, the 13th of August
1660. charging all Ministers to read it once each Month, for six Months
ensuing, and stir up their Auditors to observe the said Duties, and avoid the
said Vices.

Printed, and Sold by T. Soul at the Crooked-Billet in Holywell-Lane, in
Shoreditch, 1692.


