CAIN'S GENERATION DISCOVERED. IN ANSWER TO An epistle directed to the Reader,
in a BOOK TITLED, A Short and Full vindication of that svveet and comfortable
Ordinance, OF Singing of PSALMS.

Put forth by one Jonathan Clapham, who calls himself M. A. and Minister of
CHRIST in VVramplingham in Norffolk; Wherein he is found in envy, in Cain's
way, in his false accusations and fierce despising and envious railing against
the innocent, which is answered by me whose name in the flesh is George
Whitehead, who am one of them who are called QUAKERS, who are despised and
hated of that Generation of Priests who go in Cain's way and Balaam's way: And
we having answered before six of his chief Arguments for singing Psalms, which
are answered in that Book called, David's Enemies discovered, which this Priest
CLAPHAM durst not answer nor reply to; therefore he makes excuse to the Reader,
that we left out some of his Arguments, for the which cause I am moved further
to answer to some of his Arguments concerning singing, that all that have eyes
to see, may see his folly laid open, and his torment increased: Also several
Quaeries to them that profess the Scriptures to be their rule to walk by, and
some to them that profess the Scripture to be their Rule, and the Saints Rule
to try the SPIRITS by.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread Eagle near the West end
of Paul's. 1655.

CAINS GENERATION DISCOVERED, etc.
Jonathan Clapham, thou having given forth a Book, which thou have Titled, A
short and full Vindication of that sweet and comfortable Ordinance of singing of
Psalms, Together with some profitable Rules to direct weak Christians how to
sing to edification: Thou say wherein thou desires the Reader to take notice
that this short Vindication of singing of Psalms, was not intended by thee for
the Press, but was transcribed for the private satisfaction of thy neighbor
Capt. I. L. which thou say, thy relation to him, engaged thee to endeavor:
to this I answer.

Answer. That the Reader may see thy deceit and folly manifested; that he may
take notice of thy deceit, how thou would have hidden it in corners, and not
suffered it to be published, lest then it should have been known, and thy shame
discovered, showing thy self to be out of the truth, which seeks no corners,
although thou calls them profitable Rules, yet they were but transcribed for
the private satisfaction of Capt. I. L. here let the Reader see how thou art a
respector of persons, and out of the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, which does
not respect persons, but here thou art found to be one of them which Jude
speaks of, who has men's persons in admiration because of advantage: Jude 16.

Priest. And thou say thy papers were given to some of those persons
commonly called quakers, and part of them were printed without thy knowledge or
consent, the other part left out, and an Answer framed thereto by two of them,
viz. Chr. Atkinson, and George VVhitchead, which thou say thou thinks no
rational man could have taken for an Answer to thy Arguments, if we had not so
called it in our papers.

Answer. Let the Reader take notice that these six Arguments wherein thou art
going about to prove singing of David's conditions a custom, and an Ordinance
of Christ, and a common duty to all men: as also, thou have declared the same
over in these Arguments, which thou say are left out; the which six
Arguments are plainly answered in our Book, which is tituled David's Enemies
discovered: and the rest which thou say are left out, with them
comprehended, where the Reader may see thy lies, and wresting of Scripture laid
open; and there he may see that in this thy paper thou have given no
satisfaction to the scrupulous Reader, as thou say; and if the Reader
scruple at it, by thinking he cannot be satisfied: but he may see thee to be a
Back-biter, and a fierce despiser, who have given forth such an Epistle to him;
and to satisfy the scrupulous Reader, now declares thy thinking, who art found
in thy wickedness, in thy rage, and vain Imaginations against the righteous,
who are called by thee (and thy generation,) QVAKERS, who are witnesses of
David, and the Saints conditions; who quaked and trembled: and therefore we
deny all such Back-biters as thou art, who makes a Trade of their conditions,
and a custom of singing his conditions, which now (they that witness them) are
become a proverb, and a byword, to thee and thy generation, and the Song of
Drunckards as David was.

Priest. And thou tells the Reader, it is not thy desire to have any contest
with this generation of men, and calls us such as the Apostle speaks of, in 2 Thessalonians. 3.2 calls us absurd, and unerasonable meat, such as are not worthy to
have place among men, being more like bruits than men; and says the word the
Apostle there uses, signifies men of no settled abode, Vagabond persons, absurd
fellows, compact of mere incongruities, and leaves it to the Readers
discerning, and requests the Christian Readers Prayers to be delivered out of
the hands of such absurd and unreasonable men.

Answer. The Christian Reader may see thy deceit here laid open, and thy envy
and rage, how it appears here, who art going in Cains way, and in Cains nature
art found, who art afraid to meddle with us, or to bring thy deeds to the
Light, least it should reprove them, and therefore art found in the works of
Darkness, in thy Backbiting and false Accusations, esteeming us Vagabonds,
because we are sent to declare against the deceit which thou and thy generation
lives in, which if the Apostle Paul were here now, who had no certain dwelling
place, who did declare against such proud men and contentious men as thou art,
thou would call him a vagabond who now art foun^d wresting his words to thy own
destruction, who speaks no such word as absurd fellows; hats one of thy great
sweling words which Peter cried against who called them natural bruit-beasts,
who went in Balaams way, and Cains way, in covetousness and envy, as thou do,
2 Pet. 2, 3.12, 18, and Jude 10, 11. and there thou art found to be the
vagabond who art out of the doctrine of Christ, and a transgressor of the
command of God; in envy, as Cain, who was a vagabond, Genesis 4.14. and Cain was
an unreasonable man, who was envious; and such the Apostle bad the
Thessalonians pray that he might be delivered out of the hands of; and Paul who
had no certain dwelling place was counted the offscouring of all things, and a
fool not worthy to have place among men, and not worthy to live, and these who
charge Paul was the Vagabonds as thou art now, who art found in envy against us
who are partakers of Paul's sufferings, and thou bidding the Reader pray that
thou may be delivered out of our hands: here thou would accuse use to be
persecutors: here I charge thee to be a false accuser and a slanderer, for
violent hands on any man we deny to lay; but it is thy generation that upholds
such as thou art, who are persecutors, who hail out of your Synagogues, and do
imprison, and hail before Magistrates, and to before Judgment seats, which the
Saints never practiced who were done so with, Mat. 10.^8. John 16.2. so the
Reader may see here plainly what to pray for, and thy malice and envy against
the innocent, who are redeemed out of Cains way, and Baalams way, which now
thou art in.

Priest. And whereas thou say thou judges it not wisdom to meddle with such
irrational men from whom a man can expect no reasons but railings; no answers
but accusations, and that one had as good deal with those mad men of Bedlam.

Answer. Here the Reader may see how thou have vomited thy venom, and who it
is that are railers and false accusers, and fierce despisers, and thou now who
art found a railer and a raging wave, which Jude speaks off, who art foaming
out thy own shame, calls us railers, because we declare against thee and thy
generation, who are found in their steps, the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles
cried against, who seek for your gain from your quarter, and are hirelings,
which Isajah, and Jeremiah, and Micah cried against, who were no railers nor
mad men of Bedlam: and you that are called of men Masters, stands praying in
the Synagogues, and have the chiefest places in the assemblies, and the
greetings in markets, are found in their steps which Christ cried woe against,
Mat. 23. and such as go in Cains way to envy, and in Balaams way to
covetousness, as thou do, such did Peter and Jude cry woe against, and the
Apostle Paul, who was counted a mad man and a deceiver, did declare against
covetous men, and proud men, and false accusers, and incontinent and fierce
despisers, such as thou art, 2 Timothy 3. and these were no deluders, nor mad men
of Bedlam, though they were accounted deceivers and mad men, by that Generation
which thou art now found in, filling up the measure of their iniquity, who
reviled and persecuted the Saints

Priest. And thou say the first time when we came to that Town, thou came to
oppose us, judging it thy duty, but when thou sound us, such absurd and
unreasonable men thou say, thou presently turned thy back upon us.

Answer. Being at the meeting, and sitting in silence, a little while after I
sat down, three of you Priests came, and thou like a busie-body began to
oppose me before I spoke a word, and out of the Apostles Doctrine and life thou
was found, for the Apostle says; be swift to hear, and slow to speak, but thy
tongue was unruly, not bridled, showing thy religion to be vain; and the
beginning of thy discourse was about the heathenish Customs which the world
lives in, as bowing, and being called Master, and such like, and for an example
thou did instance the Aegytians bowing, and confessed they were in Darkness,
and Blindness, and yet pleaded for their Customs, and showed me how to bow the
Body, as many who were there can witness, and such vain traditions for Doctrine
thou would have taught, but thy folly that day, to the understanding of the
simple was laid open, and when thy deceit was laid open, thou came and showed
me one of our friends books, and read a few words, and left out other words
which struck at thy deceit, so I asking thee a question, thou presently got
away in thy rage, which thou have now uttered forth that of the Scripture might
be fulfilled where Christ says, the hireling Heeth because he is an hireling,
John 10.13. and here the Reader may see thy oppressing of us, how it could not
stand the trial.

Priest. And thou say, that since that time being reviled in the public
assembly, and cursed, thou say thou departed with silence, not replying as
men use to depart from angry Dogs, and say that it is our trade to rail and
revile, and calls us bawling creatures.

Answer. It is thou that art the reviler, and the cursed speaker, who art here
found uttering so many lies, and slanders, and false accusations, but it is
that thou might be made manifest and thy folly laid open: so I do charge thee
to declare who they were that cursed thee and reviled thee, and what the words
were they spoke, wherein they cursed, or else stop thy mouth and never profess
thy self to be a Minister of Christ, and be ashamed of these thy false
Accusations in comparing us to angry Dogs, in which nature thou thy self art
found, who art in Cains way, in envy, and in Balaams way in thy covetousness,
who seeks for thy gain from thy quarter, one of the blind Watchmen, which the
Prophet Isajah called greedy dumb dogs that can never have enough, as thou may
read Isa. 56.10, 11. so let all that reads this, read thee to be among the dogs
and wild Beasts, which the Apostle speaks of.

Priest. And thou say that it would be but a scandal for thee to deal with
us.

Answer. Let shame cover thy face thou Back-biter, who dare not come again to
the trial face to face, thou being already tried and thy folly laid open, nor
dare thou reply to our answers to thy six Arguments, and therefore thou calls
them absurd, nonsense, and vain repititions, and foolish impertinences, which
thou can not prove nor make manifest, that any of our Answers are contrary to
Scripture: but as the Reader may see in that book Entitled, David's Enemies,
etc. how thou art disapproved in thy adding to Scripture, and wresting of
Scripture to thy own destruction, and now art found speaking evil of that
which thou know not, and what satisfaction thou have given to the scrupulous
Reader, let all that have eyes to see judge, who can not answer our Answers,
nor prove any thing contrary to Scripture in them, and yet was not ashamed to
put forth thy Arguments, wherein thou have uttered forth thy folly, who here in
this Epistle to the Reader also have added so many more of thy lies and railing
accusations, and whereas thou say to the Reader, that it is the will of God
to make this discourse public, and that thou shall pray that his blessing may
be with it to make it profitable: here let the Reader see thy confusion, who
before said that it was not intended by thee for the Press, and that they were
printed without thy knowledge and consent; here the Reader may see that thy
purpose and intent was not to consent unto the will of God, and that thou would
have covered thy deceit which thou prays for a blessing upon; but we being
moved to bring it to the Light, and lay thee and thy deceit open, this causes
thee to rage, and thy torment to increase thy rage and vain imaginations being
so uttered forth, which thou have imagined against the innocent; and there thou
art seen to be without the knowledge of God, amongst the heathens that know not
God, who rage and imagine vain things against the Lord and his Anointed,
Psalm. 2. so here the Reader may see what thou have written from thy study, and
how thou have been studying lies and divinations of thy own brain, and teaches
for Doctrine thy own traditions, and thy own Precepts, and art one of them who
seeks deep to hide their Counsel from the Lord, who art in Cains way, and
afraid as Cain was, who would not have had thy deceit brought to the light but
art found in the works of Darkness, and one who hates the Light, and there thy
prayers are abomination unto God, who art wicked and in thy deceit and
confusion, and prays for a blessing upon it which is cursed, and thy sacrifice
is but Cains, who in his steps are found, whose sacrifice God does not accept;
and amongst them which Christ cried woe against, who stood praying in the
Synagogues, who were called of men Masters, and with a pretense did make long
prayers to be heard of men, as now thou do, and the same woe is to thee now,
who art found in these steps; therefore let the Reader see that I have not
railed nor falsely accused thee, nor back-bited thee, but plainly unto thee I
speak Scripture Language, which the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles did
declare against such blind guides and dumb shepherds as thou art, who have
here foamed out thy own shame, so to thee this is truth which respects no man's
person, nor has any man's person in admiration because of advantage, neither
come I with any great swelling words unto thee, but in plainness of speech, so
therefore take heed that thou call it not cursing nor reviling, least thou
blaspheme against the Truth, and be found a slanderer of them that spoke forth
the Scriptures, who in plainness of speech did declare against and cry woe
against such as went in Cains way to envy, and in Balaams way to covetousness;
therefore put it not from thee, for from the guilt of these things thou cannot
clear thy self: So thou Priest Clapham having said to the Reader, that we would
not print the later part of thy vindication, lest (thou says) peradventure our
simple cavills being removed, we should have had nothing to have stumbled the
weakest Reader; and so (thou say) our folly should be made manifest to all.
I answer, We having answered the chief of thy matter, wherein so much confusion
thou have uttered and repeated over and over also in the later part of thy
Book, nany of the same things which were answered, and had plainly laid open
thy singing, which is both without the Spirit, and without understanding;
therefore to remove ehy vain excuse, whereby thou would cloak thy deceit to
the Reader, I am moved to answer more of thy confusion, which is laid down in
the later part of thy book, that the Reader may not at all stumble nor doubt,
but plainly see thy shame and folly manifested, so that if the Reader be never
so weak, if he be not altogether blind, he may see thee taken in thy own snare
and out of thy own mouth judged, and thy torment increased, which are answered
as follows, etc.

Io. Clapham, Whereas thou say in thy third page, that it is exceeding
probable, that the Psalms sung by Christ and the Apostles were David's Psalms;
and that they did imitate the Jewish custom in singing; To this I answer, Here
thou would make Christ and his appostles like thy self, to live in imitations
and customs, which thou have no Scripture for, but says, that those who were
skilled in their customs, wrote that the Jews did so; and there is all thy
worship without the knowledge of God, and worships thou knows not what, as the
Jews did, John 4. who worshipped at the Temple where singing was once used,
which was to cease with its worship, ver. 21 Amos 8.3.10. and here thou would
make Christ a liar like thy self, who comes to declare against imitations and
shadows, and thou who lived in them, and said the true worshippers worship in
Spirit and Truth, and here thou have showed thy self and thy worship to be
false, without the Spirit and without understanding, to worship thou knows not
what, as they did: and thou say in Ephesians. 5. and Col. 3. where thou says he
commands singing of Psalms, does clearly point us at David's Psalms: I answer,
there thou ads to Scripture, and speaks that which thou can not prove,
therefore for shame stop thy mouth, for the Apostle never bad them go forth, to
sing other men's conditions as thou do, and here thou would make the Apostle
like thy self, who makes Rimes and customs of other men's conditions: but he
bids them let the word of Christ dwell in them richly, and be filled with the
Spirit, and therein they worshipped, and not in the oldness of the Letter, as
thou and thy generation do, and this that Paul wrote unto the Ephesians and
Collossians, was not to thee nor thy generation generation as thou say, you
are commanded to sing Psalms; here thou lie, for thou never had a command for
it, but acts it in thy own imaginations, and imagines that Christ and his
Apostles did imitate as thou do, and here thou have no command from God, nor
from any of the Apostles nor the Saints which Paul wrote unto; but teaches
divinations of thy own brain, and not from the mouth of the Lord, as the false
Prophets did, who said, thus says the Lord, when he never spoke to them, and
there thou art seen and tried to be sensual, having not the Spirit, and the
word of Christ does not dwell in thy heart as it did in the Saints, who did not
imagine imitation of others, neither did ever the Apostle bid proud men and
covetous men sing, as thou art, but does declare against all such, and says,
no such has any inheritance in the Kindom of Christ, as thou may read Ephesians.
5.5. And therefore how can thou sing with the Spirit, who art' without the
Spirit, who art found in their steps who had not the Spirit, such as Jude
speaks of, who go in the way of Cain to envy, and run greedily after the error
of Balaam, for gifts and rewards, as thou may read, Jude 11.13.19. And whereas
in thy arguments to prove the lawfulness of singing in a mixed congregation,
thou art going about to justify the wicked and profane persons singing, and
asks why it should not be lawful for them to join with you in singing: I
answer, with the wicked and profane thou art joined, who art going about to
justify them in thy carnal imaginations, and there amongst the wicked thou
art found, in whose mouth praises are not comely, says David: therefore for
the wickeds singing and praying, thou art pleading, whose prayers are
abomination unto God: and thou ask if God has not enjoined it by the very
dictate of nature: I answer, here thou art going about to make God like thy
self, and his teachings natural like thine, who art found in their steps, who
knew nothing but what they knew naturally; and in these things corrupted
themselves, as thou do, Jude 10, 11. and there thy singing is without God,
and without his teaching, and thou say that singing is a duty common to all
men, but thou say that the Sacraments hold forth visible communion, and thou
brings that Scripture, 1 Cor. 10.16. and 17. I answer, there is no such word
there is visible communion, or Sacrament: O let shame cover thy face! and never
profess the Scripture to be thy rule, and thy self to be a Minister, of
CHRIST, who art found so adding to SCRIPTURE, and acting those things which
thou have no SCRIPTVRE for, and art found adding, so many LIES to it, as
telling people that SINGING is a common duty to all MEN, and of a SACRAMENT,
which thou have no Scripture for, and so out of the SAINTS worship, and the
SAINS COMMUNION thou art, and without the SPIRIT and without the BODY of Christ
wherein their COMMUNION was, and do not discern the Lords Body, where the
communion is in that which is invisible, and therefore thou art in the visible
Communion which is after the flesh, which is not the Saints Communion, 2 Cor.
5.16. and there thy worships visible, and thy singing is visible, and thy rule
is visible, and thy word is visible, and thy Baptism is visible, and therein
thy Ordinances, Customs, and Traditions; thou art found among wicked, and out
of the Apostles life and Doctrine thou art, who said, why as though living in
the world are ye subject to Ordinances, and bad them neither touch, nor taste,
nor handle, which all are to perish with the using after the Commandments and
Doctrine of men: Col. 2.14.21, 22. and thou say, why should any fear that
mixture of wicked men in singing, who are bound to sing Gods praises as well as
to pray, though they sin in both? Here Priest Clapham, out of thy own mouth
thou art judged to cause the people to err, who have confessed that the wicked
both sin in singing and praying, and yet art preaching for it; here thou have
made it manifest, that thou art one of them who eat up the sin of the people,
and art striving to justify them in their sins, and art proved to be a
transgressor of the Law, and a teacher of others so to do: And whereas thou
say that Moses and the Children of Israel joined together in singing, and
that with many of them God was not well pleased: I answer, neither is he well
pleased with thee and thy generation, who are found in their steps with whom
God was not well pleased, 1 Cor. 10.5, 6. who art found in Lust and
Idolatrousness, which they were found in, you that are covetous are they that
lust, and are Idolaters, Ephesians. 5.5. Col. 3.5. with whom God is not well
pleased; and to justify the wicked singing, thou say that David calls on
all Creatures to sing praises unto God, and thou brings Psalm. 148. I answer,
thou adds to David's words, he does not bid them sing, but praise, for he in
that Scripture bids the fruitful trees, and the flying-fowle praise God, but
he never bad such fruitless trees as thou sing, who cumbers the ground, neither
did he ever bid the wicked sing, as thou do, who are out of the Covenant, but
the fruitful trees, and the fowls of the Air, and the lillies of the field
keep their Covenant wherein they were created: but thou who seeks for thy gain
from thy quarter, and live in pride and covetousness, and takes Tithes, and
Gifts, and rewards, and Teaches for filthy Lucre thy own Traditions, who art
caring for thy maintenance and liveliehood, thou art not come so far as the
Ravens and the Lillies, for they witness against thee, for they take no care,
and them thou do not consider: and there let the Ravens, and the Lillies, and
fruitful trees, and every thing which keeps its Covenant, which do praise God,
judge thee and condemn thee, to be out of the Covenant and out of the Saints
life, among the wicked and fruitless trees, in whose mouths praises are not
comely: and whereas thou brings that Scripture, Psalm. 1 50. in that Scripture
he says, praise him with the sound of the Trumpet, with Psaltery, and Harp,
and Cimball, and Stringed-Instruments, and Organs, and loud Cimballs, and
Sounding Cimballs, here let all that reads this, see thy nakedness and
blindness, and what confusion thou art in, how thou art wandering in thy
imaginations thou knows not whither, here thou have shown thy self to be both
without the old Covenant and the new; thou that art going about to uphold Types
and Shadows, and singing of David's conditions, and that which he declared to
continue among the wicked, to sing in Rhyme and Meeter; and whether have thou
all these Instruments which David speaks of, upon which in that time he praised
the Lord, but thou art yet in the death, uncome to the Types which figured
forth the life, and the Dead cannot praise God: Oh! for shame give over
professing thy self to be a Minister of Christ, who art both out of the
Scripture rule, and the life which spoke it forth, pleading for Rimes,
Customs, and Traditions to be set up and practiced by vain wanton light, Ayry,
Filthy, earthly minds, in pretense of the worship of God, but abomination thou
and all such worships and worshippers are to the pure living God, and thee we
do deny and thy worship, which stands in tradition, and trample upon it to be
shut out from God and all his Children, and in these thou calls thy general
rules, directing weak Christians how to sing, thou have uttered forth thy great
swelling words, as laudatory, supplicatory, and impricatory, and
encharisticall, and such like, here thou art found to be one of them which the
Apostle declares against, who art in the great swelling words, 2 Pet. 2.18.
therefore all them that are Christians, do deny thee and thy directions, who
thy self art found to be out of the Christians life and practices: and in the
end of thy Book thou say indeed it were an excellent and profitable work, if
some able pen would (according to these general rules) give some directions
upon every Psalm, to help weak Christians in singing: I answer, Thou Io.
Clapham did call thy paper A short and full vindication of singing, so if it
were full, what need thou tell of an able pen to give directions unto weak
Christians? and what is the end of thy directions? now let all that reads this
see the end of thy Arguments, and thy singing, and confusion, which thou have
here uttered, that all that have a desire to know the christians life, may see
and witness against that life and these practices which thou art in, and see
here how thou have foamed out thy own shame, and laid open thy folly, so here
in plainness (without partiallity) from the Spirit of the Living God, I have
laid open so much of thy confusion, as may be a shame unto thee, and all blind
guides that are in thy steps, and may uncover thy nakedness to all men.

Answered by me, who am a witness of the Truth against all blind guides and
deceivers who are in their own imitations and inventions, Cain like, and in
Cains way, and Balaams way are now sound: my name according to the flesh is,
George Whitehead.

CERTAIN QUERIES TO You Teachers of the world, who profess the Scriptures to be
your Rule to walk by.
Oxford and Cambridge, and there to learn so many years Arts and Sciences, and
rudiments of the world, and so to have your Commission from man, seeing the
Ministers of Christ were not made Ministers by the will of man, neither had
they their Commission from man, and the Apostle declares against the rudiments
of the world, Gal. 1.1.12. Col. 2.8.

Isajah declares against such as seek for their gain from their quarter: and
Jeremiah and the Lord declares against such as bear rule by their means: and
Paul declared his entrance unto the Thessalonians, how he labored night and
day that he might not be chargeable, and that he did use no cloak for
covetousness, and to them whom Christ sent out, he said, freely ye have
received, freely give, the workman is worthy of his meat; and they that did
take oversight of the flock of God, did not do it by constraint nor for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind and Peter and Jude declared against such as go in
Balaams way, for gifts and rewards: and the Apostle denies such as takes
tithes, and says, that Priesthood and that law is changed, Isa. 56. Ier. 5.30.
Mic. 3.11. 1 Thessalonians. 2.5.9. Mat. 10.8. 1 Pet. 5. 2 Pet. 2. and Jude 11. and Heb.
7.2.12.

Mat. 6.5.7. and Mat. 23.



Paul was not a Minister of the Letter, but of the Spirit; and he came not with
enticing words which man's wisdom teaches, but in the power and demonstration
of the Spirit, Ier. 23.30. 2 Cor. 3.6. and Chap. 10.16. 1 Cor. 2.4.

Pet. 1.20.

Paul wrote not to the world, but to the Saints called in Jesus Christ, and to
give your meanings, and consequences, and expositions upon them, seeing that
Paul said, I charge you by the Lord that this Epistle be read unto all the holy
Brethren, Romans 1.6. 1 Cor. 1.2. 1 These. 5.27.

Peter calls but a figure, and Paul said he was not sent to baptize, but to
preach, and calls baptism dead works, and says that the baptism is but one;
with one Spirit into one body, 1 Pet. 3.21. 1 Cor. 1.17. Heb. 6.1, 2. Ephesians.
^.5.

Paul says; the cup of the blessing which we blessed, is it not the Communion
of the Blood of Christ, and the bread which we break, is it not the communion
of the body of Christ, and Christ said to his Disciples, take, eat, this is my
body, and drink, this is my blood, and which of you dare say that a little
bread and wine is the body and blood of Christ; and the Apostle says, blotting
out the handwriting Ordinances that was against us, and why, as though living
in the world are ye subject to Ordinances, touch not, taste not, handle not
which are all to perish with the using after the COMMANDMENTS and DOCTRINES of
men, 1 Cor. 10.16. Mat. 26.26. Col. 2.14.20, 21.

David's Prayers, Praises, Prophecies, Cries, Complaints, Lamentations,
Roarings, Wastings, quakings, and Tremblings, to sing in Rhyme and Meeter, and
when you read them, hats you keep on, and when you sing them, hats you keep
off? And whether is this singing with the Spirit, and with understanding, yea,
or nay? Now all you professed Ministers that dare own your selves to be
Ministers of Christ and yet upholds these things before propounded to you,
answer these by plain Scripture, without your meanings and consequences, and
see how you can excuse your selves in them, or else be ashamed and never
profess Scripture to be your rule, and your selves to be Ministers of Christ.

CERTAIN QUERIES TO You that say the SCRIPTVRE is your RULE, and the SAINTS
RULE to try the SPIRITS by.
Spirit of God bring man to know the Scriptures, or the Scriptures bring man to
know the Spirit, and if the Scriptures bring man to know the Spirit, then what
is it that opens the Scriptures, for to them that are without the Parables Mat.
13. Mark 11.

Scriptures be the Saints Rule to try the Spirits, and to know the voices by,
then how did Moses know the voice of God before the Scriptures was written.

Scriptures be the Saints Rule to try who are deceivers, then how did Isajah
know who was deceivers before he spoke those words forth.

Scriptures be the Saints Rule to know the voices how did Jeremiah know the
false Prophets who spoke Scripture Language, who said thus says the Lord, and
yet Jeremiah knew that God never spoke to them, but said the Lord is against
them, Ier. 23.31. Deuteronomy. 18.20.

Isajah, and Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Hosea, and Micah, and the rest of the
Prophets declare, when they declared against the dumb shepherds and hirelings,
and false Prophets, and from whence had they that which they spoke? and from
what Scripture did they learn what to speak, it the Scriptures was their Rule
to try who was Deceivers by.

Peter and John to follow Christ by, and what Scripture did they know him by,
seeing they were unlearned men, Acts 4.13.





Ioh. 16.13. Heb. 3.10.

John wrote unto, seeing he says, These things have I written unto you
concerning them that seduce you; but the anointing which you have received of
him abides in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same
anointing teaches you of all things: and wherefore did John write unto them,
seeing he says, I have written unto you (not because ye know not the truth)
but because ye know the truth and that no liars of the truth, 1 Ioh. 2.20.26,
27. Now answer these by plain Scripture, you that profess your selves to be
Ministers of Christ, and gifted men, Pastors of Churches, that do profess the
Scriptures your rule and the Saints rule to try the spirits by, or else be
silent from your teaching, and never profess your selves to be Ministers of
Christ, that you may appear in your own likeness to be natural men and
hypocrites, who are forbidden to judge, who cannot discern the things of the
Spirit of God, Mat. 7.1.6. 1 Cor. 2.14, 15.

GEORGE WHITEHEAD.

FINIS.

