The VOICE of the Lord, says, CRY.
ANd what shall I Cry, Oh! the day of the Lord God hasteneth, and is coming
upon all proud Flesh, upon the Lofty and the High-minded, upon all the tall
Cedars; and the Sword of the Lord God is drawn to cut down all fruitless Trees:
And this is the Cry of the Lord God of Heaven, which is gone forth against you
unjust Justices, with all the false Judges, with whom we are to contend for the
Truth and Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is come again with Power and
great Glory; against whom, the Rulers and the Judges of the Earth take Counsel,
who are combinding together against the Lord of Glory, and his holy Anointed,
who are blessed for ever: And this is the day of the Lord God, wherein we warn
you, again and again, to repent of your evil Deeds, your Works of Darkness,
which you are working in the Night which is over you.

Behold thick Darkness has covered you, and the Clouds of the Night has
infolded you, and your Eyes are yet blinded, that you cannot see the Signs of
the Times, nor yet discern the Coming of the Son of Man; surely, if you did but
see the glimerings of the day of God, you would not thus make War against his
glorious appearance: A Lamentation could I take up for you, as the Lord Jesus
did over Jerusalem of old, who killed the Prophets, who stoned them that were
sent to Preach Repentance, over whom he wept and said, Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem!
that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that were sent unto thee; do you
not do the same, who are Halling and Persecuting, and Imprisoning the innocent
People, who fear the Lord God, and for no other thing do Suffer for, but for
Truth, and for Righteousness sake; a woeful Day is coming upon you all from the
righteous God of Heaven, who has determined to bring it, and it is even at
your doors, although you will not believe it, although it be declared unto you;
you Despisers and Wonderers, you shall surely perish if you Repent not; and as
sure as the Lord lives, he will plead with you, by the Sword of his Eternal
Vengeance; and woe unto you who are decreeing unrighteous Decrees, who are
seeking by all subtilty to ensnare the Just; but away with your Abominations,
we see the subtilty of the Devil, whose Servants ye are, and so we may call
you, as Christ did your Forefathers, who said, they were of the Seed of
Abraham their Father, but they were of their Father the Devil, whose Works they
did.

The same you do now, and the Vengeance of God must come upon you, then shall
you see the King of Glory appear in Flames of consuming Fire, rewarding you,
the Workers of Iniquity; then shall the witness of God be awakned in every one
of your Consciences, although it be now as it were asleep, although the Son of
God is slain in the Streets of Sodom, when the Blood of the Covenant is
trampled under by you the uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, who cannot endure
the Truth when it is spoken; but there is a witness of God in every Conscience
of you; this you shall know awakned in the Day that is coming, and this shall
arise to your Condemnation, and then your Consciences condemning you, God is
greater, and will condemn you also; and then whither will you fly? I tell you
the Mountains shall not cover you, neither shall the Rocks hide you from the
Flames of his Wrath, when he appears to Judgment: Therefore you Judges on
Earth come forth, arise you Dead to the Judgment of the great day of the Lord
God, who is arising to Judge you according to your Works; therefore I say in
the Power of the living God, and by his holy Spirit, you shall be unthroned,
and thrown down, the mouth of the Lord of Host has spoken it; and your Kingdom
shall be laid waste, and your dwelling Places made desolate without
Inhabitants; your Habitation is a habitation of unclean Spirits, the Devil
keeps your House, by whose Power you Rule; but woe unto the Earth, and to the
Sea, for the Devil is come down, having great Rage, because his Kingdom is to
be destroyed; and woe unto the Rulers of this present Age, who are Vessels of
Wrath, who are fitted for Destruction, in whom the Prince of this World
lodges, and by his Power you think to make the Sons of God bow; nay, the
Authority of the heavenly Power in which we stand, shall bind you all, you
Kings and Princes of the Earth; the Dominion of our God reigns over Hell and
Death, and above you, in the King of Heavens Authority, and you shall bow and
bend unto the Power in which we dwell; and the Lord God has put it into my
Heart to expostulate this matter, and to contend for the Faith and Truth of the
Lord Jesus, against whom you Rulers of the Earth are taking Counsel, and making
War against; but your Counselor God will confound, and your Counsels shall be
dashed in pieces, and your unrighteous Decrees shall be confounded, and you
shall never be able to make an end of the Work which you have begun, it will be
too pondrous for you; and this Testimony we have to bear for the living God,
against you the Oppressors of his Truth; and Truth and Righteousness shall be
again established in the Earth, although it is become a Sting and a Torment,
yet the Truth, the living Stone shall dash you to pieces, and grind you to
powder; therefore tremble, dread and fear the God of Host, who will terribly
shake the Foundations and Pillars of the Earth, before whom you shall Quake and
Tremble; then shall you know that the God of the Quakers is a consuming Fire,
which will render Vengeance upon you all, whose day you shall not escape.

Therefore I say tremble, Oh Earth, ye Judges and Rulers stand in awe of the
dreadful God, who is coming with thousands of his Angels to Judge the World,
and you shall all know his power to your Everlasting Destruction, if you submit
not to his Government, which is Righteous, Holy and True, and is upon his
shoulders; and because of Injustice the Land mourns, and because of false
Judgment great is the Oppression; and instead of Justice behold Oppression is
found amongst you, who are looking for Bribes, and Rewards, and Gifts, which
has blinded your Eyes: And so by the deceitfulness of Sin, you are led into
Captivity by the Prince of this World, who Rules in the Earthly minded, who
covets after Earthly things, whose Hearts are filled with unclean Lusts; these
are not the Temples of God, but these are Vessels filled with uncleanness and
abomination, against whom the Cry of the Lord is gone forth, who will meet them
with sudden Destruction; and the day hastens, that was never the like, nor ever
the like shall be after it, the great and notable Day, the mighty and terrible
Day, which is near to be revealed; I say the like was never, nor shall be the
like after it, so dreadful, so terrible, shall be the day of God upon his
Enemies, that no Flesh shall be saved that lives in Corruption; and woe unto
the World for they shall mourn and weep bitterly, and men's Hearts shall fail
them for fear, and they shall run up and down as men amazed, and looking for
those things which shall come upon the Earth; for the Tribes of the earth shall
mourn, and great Sorrow and Desolation shall come on all that are found out of
the Covenant of the Lord God; and no other hidingplace shall be found, but the
holy Ark of God, into which the Righteous shall enter, but the Wicked and
Rebellious shall be destroyed by Fire and by Sword.

So this was upon my Spirit from God to declare and publish, as a faithful
Testimony and Warning; published by me,

Dorothy White.
Dated from the White-Lyon Prison in Southwark, this 17th of the 8th Month,
1662.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.


