THE Contentious Apostate RE-CHARGED. Also an Answer to the Vicar of
Milden-Hall's Challenge.
Out of thy own Mouth will I judge thee, Luke 19.22.
WHereas Francis Bugg, both before and since his Conformity to the Church of
England, has busied himself greatly in scribbling and writing diverse scurrillous
and scandalous, railing and malicious Books and Pamphlets against the Ministers
and People called Quakers, who having hitherto justly defended themselves
against his Invectives; It is therefore now thought fit to Re-charge him with
his own wicked, disingenuous and perverse dealing.

Charge I. That he the said F. B. evidently appears to be a Backslider and an
Apostate from the Truth professed by him for many years among the said People,
and since by him confessed unto; Consequently that he is a Self-condemned
person.
This Charge is evident by his own Confession; To the Principle, Foundation,
Doctrine, Ministry, Faith, Love, Unity, Spiritual Testimony of the said People,
as in the Beginning, as being that Church whereof Christ Jesus was the Head and
Lawgiver, etc. Consequently, That the said People, called Quakers, were once a
true Church, the People of God, in the true Faith, and bore a true Testimony,
according to F. B's Ample and Solemn Confession, in the second part of his
Book, Entit. De Christiana Liberate, chap. 1. page 24, 25, 26, 27, etc.
printed in the year 1682. before his conformity. Which said solemn Confession
in behalf of the said People called Quakers, is largely seconded and confirmed
by the said F. B. himself, even in his Pamphlet, styled, The Quakers detected,
printed in the year 1686. about two years after his Conforming, or Going to the
Public, as he calls it, p. 6. wherein also he largely confesses, To the Truth
of the said People's Principle, (as in the beginning) Doctrine, Ministry,
Dispensation, Christian Love and Society for many years, and that God blessed
their Meetings with the comfortable Enjoyment of his Presence, as may be seen
more at large in his whole third Page of his said Pamphlet, Quaker's Detected.

Now observe, That contrary to the Testimony, Doctrine and Ministry of the
People, called Quakers, (which from the beginning was for Dissenting) and to F.
B's. own Confession thereunto, he is turned to the Priests and Church of
England, and so conformed, and consequently is a Self-condemned person, and
therein acts and sins against his own Conviction and Confession; who also,
though he calls Conformity The Monstrous Womb, de Chr. lib. p. 81. and
confesses That Conformity is a Monster, conceived by the Great Whore
Mystery-Babylon, p. 83. Yet in Self-contradiction he himself is since
Conformed, and consequently joined to a Monster; if Conformity be it. But he,
and his Author, might have better distinguished Conformity, than render it all
monstrous without exception. He has not only disdainfully writ against
Conformity, Outward Prescriptions, Forms, Orders, Decrees of Men, Canons,
Rules, Laws, Outward Directories, Impositions, etc. ( i. e. in
Church Government and Discipline) in his several Books, as in his Q. Detect. B.
Rams, One Blow, etc. but has charged us with Apostasy therein; and turned from
us on that pretense; yet in contradiction to himself is conformed to a Church
and Ministry which have all these ( i. e. Outward Prescription, Forms, Orders,
Decrees of Men, Canons, Rules, etc.) in their Church Government and Discipline,
whilst he can prove No unjust or unwarrantable Canons, Rules, Laws or Methods
in our Church, either in Government or Discipline.

Charge II. That F. B. is a false Accuser of the blessed Martyrs in charging
that to be their Doctrine, which is none of theirs, but a gross Perversion,
Forgery and Abuse of his own, both against them and us called Quakers.
The Instance I return him for proof is this; In the second part of his said
Book, de Chr. Lib. p. 123. l. 6, 7, 8. viz. These, with all outward Works, be
things indifferent, and may be used, and also left. These F. Bugg has cited for
Dr. Rob. Barnes his very words, who was a Martyr in K. Henry the Eighth's time;
and because I was conscientiously dissatisfied with these words, as cited by F.
B. so generally rendering All outward Works so indifferent, etc. as having a
tendency to Practical Ran^ (...) being so construed in my* Book Judgment Fixed,
p. 259, 260. Hereupon F.B. exhibits several high Charges against me, both
notoriously false and reproachful; As, 1. That G. W. calls the Doctrine of Dr.
Rob. Barnes (who suffered Martyrdom for the Cause of Christ) corrupt Doctrine
tending to practical Ranterism. 2. Insinuating by way of Question, That it is a
sign that G. W. is popishly affected. 3. That herein he appears like his
Brother deceased, viz. bloody Bonner. 4. That they resemble each other as if
they were Twins, B. Rams, p. 21. Q. 5. And in the Margent, affirms them to be
the words of Dr. Barnes ( viz. as cited by F. B. and opposed by G. W.) bidding
the Reader see the 298. page in Dr. Barnes his Book, Entitled, Men's
Constitutions not grounded upon Scripture, bind not Conscience, etc. Verbatim.

Which Book of Dr. Barnes I have since seen, and over and over viewed the page
and place pretended to be quoted by F. B. and find he has shamefully wronged
Dr. Barnes, and grossly and falsely defamed me, as I Will show presently: Only hear
his further Charge against me on the same Subject, viz. That he (i. e. G. W.)
is a false Accuser of the blessed Martyrs, charging their Doctrine to be
corrupt, tending to practical Ranterism, and thereby siding with the Papists
against the Protestants. One Blow more, p. 2.

What a sad and fearful Charge is this! It Is the Lowdest, the Grimmest, and
Fiercest in all the Parcels of his slanderous and black Defamations. If I were
not assured in my own Conscience of my own Innocence and Clearness, from these
Infamies and Scandals, and of God's special Providence and Protection; I might
fear or suspect, that thereby the rude Multitude might be insensed against me
to fall upon me, as an Enemy to the blessed Martyrs and Protestants, and
Confederate with the Papists against them. But the notorious Falsehood (as well
as deadly Malice) of both, and my Innocence will appear upon a just and strict
Enquiry. 1. If I did not accuse the blessed Martyrs. 2. Nor so charge their
Doctrine, nor the Doctrine of any of them that is against Popery; as I am sure I
did not, nor ever intended it, but only the corrupt Doctrine, Forgery and
Perversion of Fra. Bugg, (as I believed it was, and so it proves) Then I am
clear from his abusive Charge, and consequently it is false, malicious, wicked
and grossly scandellous. But I am innocent and clear in this matter, etc. Come
F. B. to the Original Occasion; Art thou sure thou have not misrepresented or
mis-cited the said Martyr Robert Barnes in the words before? Shall I take it as
Thy Answer, That they are his words Verbatim, as thou have Cited them, as
before, thus, viz. That These with all outward Works, be things indifferent,
and may be used, and also left? I am sure, as thus cited in General rendering,
All outward Works so indifferent, as that they may be used, and also left;
without any distinguishing Word or Particle after the word All or Works, they
are not coherent either with the Title or precedent Passages of the said Martyr
in his Book, and place aforesaid, wherein he prefers the Holy Scripture, the
Law of God, his Word, his Precepts and Judgments (as binding, to be kept and
walked in) before men's Constitutions and Traditions, either not Grounded
thereupon, or Contrary thereunto (therefore not binding). Whence it clearly
follows, and that according to the said Martyr's sense, That All such outward
Works, as God's Word and Law requires, or forbids, be not things Indifferent
that may be used, and also left. But the said Martyr Robert Barnes, treating of
such things as are Indifferent in their own Nature, gives these Instances for
distinction, viz. As to eat Flesh or Fish, this or that Day is indifferent and
free; Note, That all these Lines beginning at the words [Also to go] and ending
with the words [Beard or not] are left out in F.B. 's. Citation, and also that
material distinguishing word [Such] before [Outward Works] in the Sentence in
Controversy, which also is not noted in his Book with Comma's at the Line's
ends as other parts of his Citation is. If it be said F. B 's leaving out the
Particle [Such] is but a small Omission. It Is such an Omission as greatly
corrupts and alters the sense of the whole Sentence. So [Some] and [All,] [is]
and [Not,] are but small Particles, yet vastly differ, and relative to contrary
matters, as put in conjunction with them. Nor can be excause his perversion in
leaving out [Such] as an Omission or Mistake in himself, or the Printer,
because he has since grounded a severe Charge against me (upon his false
Citation) both in Print, Words and Writing, and it is not noted in his Errata as
the Printer's Fault.
Also to go in this Raiment of this Color, or that Color; To shave our Heads,
or not; a Priest to wear a long Gown, or a short; a Gray Friar to wear a Gray
Coat, or a Russet; a White Friar to wear a White, or a Black; a Priest to
Marry, or not to Marry; an Hermit to have a Beard, or not; These with all Such
outward Works be things indifferent, and may be used, and also left.

Thus far I have truly cited the said Martyr, Dr. R. Barnes, verbatim, in the
very Book and page of his beforementioned, in that part, Entit. Men's
Constitutions, etc. f. 298. quoted by F. Bugg, but unjustly and falsely cited by
him in his leaving out the very word [Such] before [outward works] which F. B's
so leaving Such out, quite corrupts the matter, alters and varies from the
sense of Dr. Barnes his words, as coherently and rationally writ by him
expressly relative to those his foregoing words about Works merely indifferent,
and not binding one way or another, which he treated of in apposition to Popery
and Superstition thereof.

Now Ingenuous Reader, pray please to observe from the Premises, That I, G.W.
(the person unjustly charged and maliciously reproached by F. B.) 1. have not
accused (much less falsely accused) the blessed Martyrs. 2. That I have not
charged their Doctrine to be corrupt. 3. Much less tending to Practical
Ranterism. 4. That I have not sided with the Papists, nor do I side with them
against the Protestants. 5. Neither have I at any time called the Doctrine of
the said Martyr corrupt Doctrine, or tending to any Ranterism; but F. B's
corrupt Doctrine and gross Perversion in his foul abuse of the said Martyr's
words. 6. Neither am I popishly affected, my Conscience bears me Record in the
sight of God. 7. Nor ever was bloody Bonner my Brother. 8. Nor is there any
Similitude or Resemblance between us. As F. B. has charged and insinuated these
gross things (being taken in the Affirmative) against me, they amount to so
many gross Lies, Defamations and Slanders, most unjustly to criminate and
render me odious.

Charge III. That the said F. B. is neither Conscientious, Religious, nor
Ingenuous in Writing and Divulging Books and Pamphlets against the Quakers (so
called) For that he makes no Conscience of writing scurrillous malicious Lies,
notorious odious Forgeries and Slanders, to Reproach, Vilify, Criminate and
Defame others, namely Us, whom he Envies most.
For particular Instances to Evince this Charge, (his malicious Lies and
Slanders being very numerous) I shall give a Catalogue of some of them truly
Collected out of his own Pamphlets and Words (writ since his Conformity) as
follows.

In his Battering Ramms against New Rome, He says, viz.
1. Their Zeal for their unwritten Traditions above the Scriptures,
Introduction p. 1.

2. The National (i. e. Preachers) taking Tithes and other Dues as a settled
Maintenance, etc. -- is not so burdensome, as you are to many of your hearers,
p. 11. three last lines.

3. All this while value your selves upon your free preaching, etc. -- You know
it is common for all these Church Officers among you to take money. -- Some
Fifty pounds per Annum, p. 12. l. 5, 6, 7, 10.

4. And George Fox himself -- had no less than Twelve or Thirteen hundred
pounds, p. 12. l. 15, 16, 17.

5. Your way is, when your Cash grows low, to Issue out a General Epistle for
-- your own service -- for money -- it is a great Encouragement to your
Preachers and Parasites, p. 12. l. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.

6. When this Collection is made -- G. F. and a few of his party dispose of it
as they see meet, and no doubt but much, if not most of it is given to such as
are for carrying on your designs, but No account returned to the donors of this
money, p. 12. l. 35, 36, 37, 38.

7. Your Grand Hypocrisy stands chiefly in this, That you take Money, Gifts and
Rewards for Preaching, Teaching, etc. and at the same time pretend to do all
these freely, etc. p. 12. last four lines.

8. Thomas Ellwood makes an Apollogy for his Brethrens taking money for
preaching, p. 13. l. 6. I have to mention Thomas Ellwood's Apology for his
Brethren-Hirelings taking money for preaching, by which we may know what Herd
he belongs to, p. 13. l. 37, 38, 39. This conceited Scribe and proud Pharisee,
Thomas Ellwood, to rescue the decaying Reputation of G.F. and G. W. -- in Verse
makes an Apology for his Brethren's taking money for preaching, p. 14. l. 1, 2,
3, 4.

9. I mean Guilty, in that they always pretend to preach, teach, write, suffer,
etc. -- freely, but yet contrary to All these their pretensions, have All along
taken money for the same, p. 14. l. 7, 8, 9. [This gross Lie against Us, F. B.
has contradicted himself, to his own Condemnation, in his One Blow more, p. 5.
Artic. 3. where he confesseth] That in the beginning G. Whitehead and many
others came through the Country in plain Habit, walking on foot, content with
mean Accommodation, apt to Teach, not given to filthy Lucre, often visiting the
sick, the poor as well as the rich, working often on their Trades that they
might not be chargeable.

10. It Is you, who pretend to take no money for preaching, that take it
privately, yea even so privately, that the very Donors do not know that you
take money for preaching. Thus Iesuite-like -- have you blinded your people, p.
14. (d) Margent.

11. -- You supply them with money to proceed, but it is to whom and when G.F.
G. W. etc. think it fit and expedient, p. 14. Margent (e).

12. Your decrying All Learning, p. 15. Ninth Instance.

13. As George Whitehead did (i. e. Rail) of the Doctrine of Dr. Robert Barnes,
who called It corrupt Doctrine, tending to Ranterism, p 23. 1. 8, 9. Margent.

Here follows some of F. B's defaming and abusive Treatment, Railery, unjust
Comparisons and Characters, cast upon Us in his said Pamphlet, B. Rams, viz.
14. New Rome. Grand Hypocrisy, Title page. -- Such Legerdemain as few
Conjurers have the face to venture upon, p. 4. Ye gross Dissemblers -- Your
Doctrine of Non-assistance, p. 5. Perfideous and Treacherous, p. 9. The
Teachers and Leaders of the Quakers resembling their Elder Brethren the
Papists, p. 10. O gross Dissemblers, yea Imposters, such a Generation of
Self-conceited Pharisees, as no Age ever before this Produced. -- Arrant Cheats
indeed -- Deceitful and Treacherous, Your Tyranny, p. 14. As great a Juggle,
Trick and Sham as ever was used by Mahomet, or among the Papists -- Holy Cheat,
p. 23. Popery. New Rome. Cunning and Crafty. New Church Government. Imposing.
Errors, Innovations and Grand Hypocrisies as ever, p. 28.

Here follow some of his notorious Lies in his One Blow more.
1. One Sober woman, whom they commonly thrust out, and sometimes keeps her
prisoner, p. 2.

2. That he (G. W.) was ashamed of his partner S.C. p. 2.

3. He refused to own, either in part, or the whole (i. e. the Book Judgment
Fixed) p. 2.

4. Our new sort of Popery, p. 3. l. 11.

5. That W. G. was Timorous and Cowardly, p. 3. l. 17.

6. They write what they are ashamed to own -- these Deluders, etc. p. 3. l.
27, 28.

7. Now they teach contrary (i. e. to what in the beginning they taught) p. 4.
Artic. 1.

8. But now they can take 50 l. per Annum -- I say -- their Ministers take
money for preaching, p. 6. Art. 4.

9. Or he (G. W.) would never Excuse or Justify such manifest Idolatry and
Blasphemy (implying he does) p. 7. l. 40.

10. Your cunning Evasions, Quibbles and Jesuitical Reserves -- Dens and
Lurking places, where you lie skulking to deceive the simple, p. 8. l. 1, 4, 5.

11. Their Answer to Battering Rams. G. W. will not own it, p. 10. l. 17, 19.

12. That S. Fisher said, viz. he believed or expected, That the People called
Quakers, would be Instrumental by force (with others) to turn out, or overturn
the then Government. And that this he spoke to Mr. Osgood, etc. p. 10. Margent.

13. Their valuing their own Unwrit Traditions above the Scriptures, p. 12. l.
39.

These we return back, and lay at F. B's door, as being some of his notorious
and malicious Lies and Forgeries, with utter detestation against them, and that
false and treacherous Spirit from whence they came; not doubting but the
Righteous Judge of All (to whom we appeal against them and it) will plead with
him, and rebuke his Envy against his Truth and Servants, in whose behalf and
vindication I have been, and a constrained to appear.

London, the 12th of the 8th Month, 1691. G. WHITEHEAD.

POSTSCRIPT.
REader,
please to take notice, That the chief (or greatest part) of the foregoing foul
Defamations, Slanders, etc. now Recharged upon the Author of them, are Detected
and Refuted in our Answers to him; The one Entitled, Innocence against Envy.
And the other, The Contentious Apostate and his Blow Refelled: And in this
brief Addition, wherein he is Recharged. Some may wonder why I do bestow so
much Labor to Answer such a disingenuous scornful Person, that makes no more
Conscience of what he writes and publishes to defame others, and will not see
when he is Answered and Refuted, nor acknowledged his apparent Errors, and
reproachful Falsehoods, but instead thereof still add more, and evade Matters of
Argument that pinch him, where he is not able to give a Rational Reply. I
confess my Endeavors seem fruitless as to himself; and if it were not that the
Truth is concerned, he might Mock on, Rail on, Lie and Forge on against me, and
I could easily pass it by with Silence and Patience, till the Lord arise to
plead my Cause, as I doubt not but he will do for his Name's sake.

And Reader, observe in the said Contentious Apostate and his Blow Refelled,
page 3. l. 11. to read [ And he into the Gallery] the word He being omitted,
varies from the Sense intended, though in some it was corrected after printed,
but in others omitted.

To the Vicar of Milden Hall's Challenge, which F. Bugg boasts of, To show him
a president for women's distinct meetings ^^art from the men. I answer, 1. That
there were Deaconesses in the primitive times, he grants. 2. He neither argues
nor brings any president to prove it unlawful for such Deaconesses to meet
distinct. 3. There were such godly Elder-women and Widows in the Primitive
Church, as were given to Prayer and Supplication, and concerned in a Gospel
Ministry, as Teachers of good things, to Instruct the younger women, and such
Deaconesses Romans 16.1 Tim. 5. Titus 2 and
as did also Minister to the Saints, and took care of (and attended) the Sick
and Impotent H. Clapham 's Brief of the Bible's History, f. 171. Printed in
1608.
, and who in their old Age were (to a considerable number) taken special care
by the Church; Therefore 'twas lawful for them, and such sometims to meet
together apart from the men, in order to discharge such their Christian Duties.
4. And for a President for Women's distinct Meetings, There was a certain
Meeting of Women in the City of Blois, who met together to comfort and edify
one another, and to pray one with and for another, to the number of Nine, or
thereabouts, with their Daughters, without a Minister (or Priest) to preach to
them. And these Religious Women suffered Martyrdom. This is a plain President,
as may be seen more at large in the third Volt me of Martyrs, f. 891. c. 2. new
Impression.


