A TRUE RELATION OF THE Conversion and Baptism OF ISUF THE Turkish Chaous,
NAMED Richard Christophilus. In the presence of a full Congregation, Jan. 30.
1658. in Covent Garden. where Mr. Manton is Minister.

Imprimatur,

EDM. CALAMY.



LONDON, Printed by S. Griffin, and are to be sold by John Rothwel at the
Fountain in Cheap side, and Thomas Underhill at the Bible in Paul's Churchyard.
1658.

ERRATA.
PAge 12. lin. 17. for surely, read sincerely. P. 14. l. 15. f. sicerity, r.
sincerity. P. 22. l. 16. f. is be, r. is to be. P. 30. l. 15. after
inclusively, add and cumulatively. P. 41. l. 4. f. the, r. he. P. 46. l. 22. f.
(...), r. (...). P. 48. l. 22. f. heed, r. need. P. 58. l. 6. f. 29th. r. 30th.
P. 82. l. 3. f. sollice, r. solicit. P. 83. l. 11. f. Hid, r. did.
To the Christian Reader, A PREFACE.
CHristian and Ingenuous Reader (for to such I would only make this address)
thou will find in this Relation a rare Example of Christianity and Ingenuity,
which I wish it may affect thee, as it has done me at several times; for I
must confess, that by the zeal and ingenuity of this Proselyte in the
profession of Christianity, I have been oft-times awakened to many affections
and paroxysms of love toward Jesus Christ, and been reproved and ashamed
within my self, that he should in his first beginning of acquaintance with the
Lord Jesus, outstrip me in many things, who have had so long acquaintance with
him, and manifold experiences of his goodness and providence toward me: But
as this on the one hand has convinced me of my failing; so on the other hand
it has moved me to a loving admiration and adoration of the free grace and
work of the Spirit of God, who blows where he lists, and shows mercy on
whom he will have mercy, Romans 9. 15.
and has compassion on whom he will have compassion. For here we have a clear
example of this way of Gods dealing, in causing one who lived in the greatness
and splendour of the world, to renounce all for the love of Jesus Christ, to
come amongst Christians to live unto him in obedience to his will; and being
come amongst those first, who under the name of Christianity were found by him
to be Idolaters, although they used all ways of industry and allurements to
invite him to live amongst them, yet he rather chose to forsake all the
enjoyments which he might have had amongst them, to embrace the Society of poor
Prostants, where he could have no hopes of preferment, than to be deprived of
the means of being perfectly joined unto the Lord, by saving knowledge, and
the conversation of those that are truly Godly: wherein we may observe another
act of special grace, that he was taught by the Spirit to discern the falsehood
of the by way, before he was fully instructed in the Truth; and now since he is
come to the knowledge of the Truth, I find his great grievance and trouble to
be this, that he can meet with very few who are sincere in their walking
answerable to the Rule; for of this he does with much passion sometimes
complain, that it is a wonder to him, and a cause of much affliction, that such
as have the knowledge of the great love of Jesus Christ toward their souls,
and have received from him so rich promises, and so perfect a Law, should have
no more respect unto him and his ways; so that oft-times when he has fallen
upon these complaints, with some passionate expressions, as if his heart were
ready to break, he has brought into my mind, with more life than ever I
formerly could represent unto my self the passions which the Psalmist in the
119. Psalm says he was in by reason of the wicked who transgressed the Law of
God; As when he says, v. 53. ror has taken hold upon me, because of the
wicked that forsake thy Law. And again, v. 158. I beheld the transgressors, and
was grieved, because they kept not thy word. I say that I never understood the
nature of this grief and horror so lively within my self, as I have perceived
it in him; by which evidence of grace in him, I confess, to the glory of God,
that I have been much edified, and many times have had cause to condemn mine
own soul, for the sluggish disposition under which I am found, when I have
perceived so much life, and vigorous zeal and sincerity in a new Convert; who
has quit all, and does count every thing but dung to win Christ, and to find
the life of his Holiness amongst Christians: For the truth is, that in all his
Converse with others, this is his business, to discern who has this life of
love to Christ; who it is that walks without worldly interests, and is
unbyassed in the profession: And because he does meet with so few in whom he
can perceive the sincerity and ingenuity of the Spirit of Christ, therefore he
is oft-times troubled and offended; and I am made partaker of his grief, and
made more sensible of it than at any time heretofore, when I have had no such
object to converse withal; but chiefly I find him in the extremit of passion
with anger and grief, when he perceives (and truly he is very discerning) that
under any pretense of Religion or of Righteousness men drive on some
self-interest; when he perceives this, he knows not almost with what words of
indignation to detest that hypocrisy: So that to conclude, I must truly say,
to the glory of God, that which is upon my heart, that whiles I have been
employed to instruct and comfort him, I have profited more by his conversation,
than by any that I have been acquainted withal in England; and if this man
should not prove sincere and upright in the way of Godliness, I shall confess
that I know no evidence to discern the uprightness of any man henceforth in
this world.

And if thou that art ingenuous and sincere in thy love to Christ, wilt
converse with him, I make no doubt but thou will find this to be a Truth, which
in simplicity of heart, to encourage thee to look to thy ways, as in the
presence of God, is freely attested by

Thy servant in Christ, JOHN DURIE.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
HAving had several conferences with this Noble Convert, and being desired to
give some short account thereof, I thought good to add this to the subsequent
Narrative, being several passages of private conference between him and my
self, whereof an account could not so well be given by the Author. Some of them
are these, viz. I asked him, among other Questions, what he thought to be the
meaning of these words, If thy right eye offend thee, pull it out, and cast it
from thee; and if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off? His Answer was (as
near as I can remember) thus, That our Lord Jesus Christ did not intend us any
harm, but that we should lay aside the malign and sinful use of these parts. I
asked him what he thought of the Turkish Alcoran, now he had read the
Scriptures? Sir (says he) why should we go about to compare the word of God
with a Comedy? Having some occasion to speak of wicked men, he said, that God
is far from them; but recalling himself, he said, they rather were far from
God, secretly (as I took it) intimating, that we rather depart from God, than
God from us. I understanding that he was much offended at the wicked lives of
Christians, did much endeavor to Antidote him against that poison, telling
him, that the small number of true Christians was so far from giving just cause
of offense, that it did establish the truth of the Gospel, since Christ plainly
tells us, that there are few that shall be saved; and that many are called, and
few are chosen; but that withal I doubted not but hereafter he should meet
with, and be acquainted with abundance who truly feared God, and lived suitable
to the doctrine of Christ, whose acquaintance would as much rejoice him, as the
others did scandalize him. His Answer was with much gravity thus. Sir, I judge
not of the Word of God by men, but of men by the Word of God. And that there
was but one Lot in Sodom; but that it was true that he was much offended, and
it yet troubled him to see the wicked lives of those that call themselves
Christians. I thought to try him with something a more intricate question. I
asked him how it came to pass, that he reading of such high points, as of the
Trinity, etc. in the Bible, he should not rather judge that Book not to be Gods
Word, that spoke of things so much above reason, rather than to judge these
things to be true, because he found them written in the Bible? To this purpose
he answered, That he was much satisfied of the Truth of Christian Religion
before he came out of his own Country; and finding that all Christians did
agree that their Religion was set down in that Book, he had a reverend esteem
of it, and said, the spiritual love of God in the heart, prepares it to the
understanding of spiritual truths. I asking him what reasons moved him to
embrace Christianity? he used this expression: As a man at a feast takes one
bit here, and another there, till at last he is so satisfied that he can eat no
more; So there were several reasons that from time to time affected him, that
at last he could stand out no longer. He told me moreover, that he went several
times on Pilgrimage to Mahomets Tomb, and the last time was resolved to see
what was in it. The Priest at first was very unwilling to show it, saying, that
there were diverse there, and such a thing was not to be publicly seen. Upon
which, he told him he would stay till they were gone; and so did. Then he being
a man of power and authority, the Priest durst not deny him, but opened the
Tomb, where he saw nothing but a few scattered black bones, which much incensed
him against Mahomet; insomuch (says he) that had I spoke what I then thought,
I had not gone alive out of that place. I having read in the Turkish History a
Relation much conducing to the advantage of Christian Religion, and knowing
that it was in his remembrance, enquired of him of the truth of it. He told me
that it was very true, and related some other passages which are not set down
in the printed story, which he said, with other things, did much affect him,
but that the Grand Signior charged that upon pain of death none should speak of
it. The Story was this.

About the year 1620. upon the 10th. of September. There came News to
Constantinople of a strange Apparition or Vision, which was seen at Medina
Talnabi in Arabia, whereas Mahomet their great Prophet was buried: to visit
whose Tomb the Turks use to go in Pilgrimage, but they must first go to Mecha,
which is some few days journey off, and there they take a ticket from the
Grand Seigniors Beglerbeg, else they are not allowed to go to Medina. This
Vision continued three weeks together, which terrified the whole Country, for
that no man could discover the truth thereof. About the 20th. of September,
there fell so great a tempest, and so fearful thunder about midnight, as the
Heavens were darkened, and those that were awake almost distracted; but the
vapors being dispersed, and the element clear, the people might read in
Arabian Characters these words in the Firmament, O why will ye believe in lies!
Between two and three in the morning, there was seen a woman in white,
compassed about with the Sun, having a cheerful countenance, and holding in her
hand a Book: coming from the North-west, opposite against her were armies of
Turks, Persians, Arabians, and other Mahometans, ranged in order of battle, and
ready to charge her; but she kept her standing, and only opened the Book, at
the sight whereof those Armies fled: and presently all the lamps about Mahomets
Tomb went out; for as soon as ever the Vision vanished (which was commonly an
hour before Sunrising) a murmuring wind was heard, whereunto they imputed the
extinguishing of the lamps. The ancient Pilgrims of Mahomets race, who after
they have visited this place never use to cut their hair, were much amazed, for
that they could not conceive the meaning of this Vision: only one of the
Dervices (which is a strict religious Order among the Turks, like unto the
Capuchins among the Papists, and live in contemplation) stepped up very boldly,
and made a Speech unto the company, which incensed them much against him, so as
this poor Priest for his plain dealing lost his life, as you shall hear.

The sum of his speech was this: That the World had never but three true
Religions, every one of which had a Prophet; first God chose the Jews, and did
wonders for them in Egypt, and brought them forth by their Prophet Moses, who
prescribed them a Law, wherein he would have maintained them, if they had not
been obstinate and rebellious, and fallen to Idolatry: whereupon he gave them
over, and scattered them upon the face of the earth. Then presently after he
raised a new Prophet, who taught the Christian Religion. This good man the
Jews condemned and crucified for a Seducer of the people, not moved with the
piety of his life, his great Miracles, nor his Doctrine. Yet after his death,
the preaching of a few fishermen did so move the hearts of men, as the greatest
Monarchs of the world bowed to his very Title, and yielded to the command of
his Ministers. But it seems they grew as corrupt as the Jews, their Church
being dismembered with the distinction of the East and West, committing Idolatry
again by setting up of Images, with many other idle ceremonies, besides the
corruption of their lives, so as God was weary of them too, and not only sent
divisions among them, but forsook them, dispossessing them of their chiefest
Cities, Jerusalem and Constantinople? yet God is still the Governor of the
World, and provides himself of another Prophet and people, raising our Great
Mahomet, and giving way to our Nation, so as no doubt we shall be happy for
ever, if we can serve this God aright, and take example by the fall of others.
But alas! I tremble to speak it, we have erred in every point, and wilfully
broken our first institutions, so as God has manifested his wrath by evident
signs and tokens, keeping our Prophet from us, who prefixed a time to return
with all happiness to his people, so as there are now forty years past by our
account: Wherefore this strange and fearful Vision is a prediction of some
great troubles and alterations. For either the opening of this Book in the
woman's hand, does foretell our falling away from the first intent of our Law,
whereat these armed men departed as confounded with the guilt of their own
consciences; or else it signifies some other book wherein we have not yet read,
and against which no power shall prevail: so as I fear our Religion will be
proved corrupt, and our Prophet an Impostor, and then this Christ whom they
talk of shall shine like the Sun, and set up his name everlastingly.

Hitherto the company were silent; but hearing him speak so boldly, they
charged him with blasphemy; and knowing their Law, which makes all blasphemy
capital, they presently condemned him and having the Beglerbegs consent and
warrant, they put him to death.

I have observed his carriage to be very grave and serious; he speaks of Christ
with much affection and reverence, always calling him the Lord Jesus Christ.
Both his pronuciation and his gestures show his high esteem of Christ. When I
was with him he was very temperate in his diet; his civilities such as show him
to be a man of no ordinary breeding and education. This brings to remembrance a
story he told me of certain Quakers, who came to him with their hands in their
pockets, and using those rude carriages which they are known to use to all,
though of never so great quality: withal telling him that we should not use any
titles of honor or civilities to any. He told me he was much offended at their
demeanor, and said unto them, that for his part he thought that Worship was
due to God, and Courtesy to man. I bless God for many spiritual advantages
that I have gained by those things I have heard of him and from him.

Doubtless, this providence is not to be gazed on, but to be improved: we must
not be like Athenians, that love novelties; though the thing be never so
serious, when it ceases to be novell'd, it ceases to affect them; and if it be
new, though they account him a mere babbler that tells it, they long to hear it.
I fear Religion suffers upon this account: And whereas the longer we are
acquainted with the truths of God, the more we should admire and love them; yet
it is too evident, that novelty is as prevalent in matters of Religion, as of
the things of this world. The Uses that we are to make of this Narrative, I
conceive to be these. First, that if we account it (as we may justly do) so
great a mercy, that God has snatched this Convert as a firebrand out of the
fire, ought not we to esteem the mercy less that we have enjoyed it so long? In
some sense we may say, that with a great sum of money he has purchac'd this
freedom; for he has been fain to leave a great estate and his Country: But we
are born free; had we been born where the name of Christ had not been spoke of,
or blasphemed, we could not without a miraculous providence have been saved.
Now without a stupendous wickedness, obstinacy and infidelty, we cannot be
damned; blessed be God for our birth-priviledges; and the Lord grant that we
may not so abuse them, that we shall be afraid to meet them at the day of
Judgment. I think further, that if it be such a just cause of rejoicing, that
one Turk is Baptized and become a Christian, how should we pray and endeavor
as much as in us lies, that not only they, but other poor Heathen Nations may
be brought in? If there were as great care and wisdom used for the spreading
of the Gospel, as there is for the vending of our Staple-commodities in other
Countries, how wonderful would God bless our endeavors? But in stead of
propagating the Gospel abroad, we despise and destroy it at home. I fear diverse
Merchants and Travelers leave the scandal that their sins cause behind them,
and ^^ing the infection and vices of Foreign Nations home with them. Diverse
Travelers go abroad with a little Religion, and return with none.

The next Use that I could wish were made, should be, that all Christians might
so live, that all should have cause to say as Alexander Severus did of Origin,
when perceiving some to wonder at the learning of Origin, whereby they were
induced to embrace the Christian Profession: Truly (says he) the humility and
charity of Christian people, which I have heard of, and do daily behold, does
much more persuade me to believe that Christ is God, than all Origens
Arguments. Surely if Christians lived like Christians, it were enough to make
Heathens Christians; but generally the lives of Christians are such, that it is
enough to make any but true Christians to say, sit anima mea cum Philosophis.

I will give you a short Narrative of some things that I have heard from this
Noble Convert and others, of the charity and fidelity of Turks. He told me that
once a year all the great men of Turkey, Bashaws and others, had their whole
estates valued and cast up by their Stewards, and they give the tenth part
yearly to charitable uses. I could wish that this example were followed,
especially by persons of great estates: Those that have many thousands a year,
that might better spare the third part of their revenue, than one of a small
estate can the twentieth part of his; yet how do they look upon it as a work of
supererogation, if they give but four or five times a year but twenty pound at
a time? nay I wish there were not some who have vast estates, and not a child
to leave it to, and yet never make an end of increasing. The Apostle says, If
any man be covetous, as well as if any man be a drunkard, with such a man do
not eat. For my part, if after admonition such a one as I have spoke of did not
reform, I should vote him to be covetous, and upon that excommunicate him.
There is a story also that I think worth relating, because of the good use that
may be made of it. Two Turks there were that had made a Christian drunk, and
then put a turban on his head, and next day accused him to the Musty that he
had promised to be, and had took upon him the habit of a Turk, and that
therefore he ought to be circumcised; and if he turned Christian, to be burnt.
Some of this Christians friends desired this Noble Turk, who was in great
Authority, to deliver him out of that snare. He went to the Mufty, and took no
notice of the business until the Mufty spoke to him of it; which he presently
did, for the business was then before him; He desired to have the hearing of
it. He enquired of the first witness whether he drunk wine with this
Christian? he could not deny it; he presently commanded that he should receive
so many bastinadoes for transgressing the law of Mahomet, and after execution
done, they brought him again; he then commanded him to repeat the commandemants
of Mahomet, which he not being able to do, he rejected him, as not being a
competent witness: The other witness being searched, was found not to be a Turk,
he commanded him to be circumcised, since he professed himself to be a Turk; and
so the witnesses being taken off, delivered the Christian. That use that I
could wish were made of this story, I could wish were this, That we might at
least give as much honor to Christ, as Turks do to Mahomet; viz. That as no
one amongst them is a competent witness except he can repeat the commandments
of Mahomet; so none amongst us might be received as a witness, except they
could say the ten commandments. As for their justice and fidelity, I have
heard and read much. It is related of one of our Merchants, who had sold a
great quantity of cloth to one of the Turks, who, the next year, when the
Merchant came again, told him, that he was mistaken in the measure of his
cloth, and that there was so much over measure as came to fifteen pound more,
and that he had put it in a bag that it might be ready for him against he came.
The Merchant told him, that he had got enough by him, and said, much good may
it do you. The Turk answered and said, Sir, take it, or else I will otherwise
dispose of it, for it is none of mine. It is related also, that a Merchant of
ours coming to one of their shops, the Turk told him that he had sold enough
that day, saying, I pray Sir go to such a neighbor of mine, you shall have as
good there, and and as cheap as I have, and he has had little custom to day.
If these stories be true, as I judge them to be, have we not all much reason to
wish that most of us might be converted to be Turks, as to our conversation,
that we might be better Christians? If these stories be false, yet since we and
our consciences judge them to be good, do not we condemn our selves, if we do
not follow their examples? For as the Apostle says; Thou art inexcusable O
man, whosoever thou art that judge; for wherein thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self; thou that judge, do the same thing. So I may say, thou
art inexcusable O man, whosoever thou art, that commendest another, and do
not the same thing.

Another thing that I conceive remarkable, and considerable, and of great use
unto us, is to consider, how that those that are converted at man's estate to
Christian Religion, with what relish and high admirings they read the
Scripture. Doubtless they understand diverse Scriptures much otherwise and
better than we do, having not been corrupted with those Glosses and
Interpretations that too generally are given of them, especially in the matter
of riches; it may be said of the Scripture, as the Scripture says of man, God
made man upright, but he has found out many inventions; so it may be said that
God made the Scripture upright, right, but men have found out many Expositions;
and being unwilling to bring their lives to the Scriptures, have thereby
brought the Scriptures to their lives. Me thinks such a Convert, one that is a
prudent, and by his conversion made a pious man, and never heard any thing of
the Gospel before, is like Adam when he was created and brought into Paradise,
he being of such wonderful acuteness of sense and understanding, Seeing the
glorious Sun, and the rich spacious heavens, and the earth in all her bravery,
hearing the melody of the birds, and never seeing any such thing before, and
being able to discern the wisdom of God in their frame and creation, as well
as the goodness of God in their use, one would think it a wonder how it were
possible for him to be tempted, or at least so soon; but for us, we being born
infants, and being used to these sights by degrees, take little notice, either
of the wisdom or goodness of God in the works of Creation, which lose the
strangeness and novelty, before we come to know them. So it is also with us in
matters of Religion: we ate taught in our infancy the Doctrine of the Gospel,
and it is well we are; but generally Parents teach their children so carelessly,
irreverently, overly, and formally, that the Doctrine of Christianity takes
little or no impression on them, and they are brought up in a formality of
Religion, and form of godliness, which brings them generally to a senslesness
in the matters of God, so that by that time they be come to years of
understanding, they deal with Religion as we do with the Sun, make use of its
light to direct us in our worldly business, but seldom admire the glory of it.
So people use the profession of their Religion to carry on their designs, but
seldom are affected with the beauty of it. It is pity we should love God less,
because we have loved him so long, and because he has been so long merciful
unto us; nay doubtless true love does not grow weaker by age. One thing more I
shall advise, and conclude: viz. That as the Angels in Heaven rejoice at such a
ones Conversion, so should we, and do something more than the Angels do, that
is, we should pray for him, that God, whom we hope has begun a good work in
this Convert, would perfect and finish it, and would preserve and keep him by
his mighty power through faith to salvation, as also for

Thine to serve and please thee in all things to Edification, THO. WHITE.
Lecturer at St. Andrews Holborn.

A RELATION OF THE Conversion of ISVF the Turkish Chaous.
TO THE Profession of Christianity.
Together with The manner of his Solemn Baptism in the Church of Covent Garden,
and the Confession of his Faith.
I Suf, a Chaous of the Grand Signor, born at Constantinople, whose Father
being Governor of the Archipelago, had three and thirty Galleys under his
command, whereof three did belong to himself, and thirty to the Grand Signor,
having been employed in three Embassies, once into Venice, once into Muscovie,
to the great Duke, and once to the Emperor of Germany, where he resided at
Vienna 18. months; was by one of his Fathers slaves who attended ordinarily
upon him, much importuned to believe that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, the
only true Prophet, greater than Mahomet: And although for a long time he would
not hearken to the speeches of the Slave, but reproved him for speaking to him
of that matter; and when the slave would not be silent, he did beat him, and
kick him, and caused him to be bastonadeed for his importunity, which the slave
endured with much patience, and declared, that although he should kill him he
would not be silent concerning that matter; yet at last, by some special
Providence (whereof a particular account may be given hereafter) he was moved
to believe that in very deed Jesus Christ whom the Jews put to death at
Jerusalem, was the Son of God, and now alive in Heaven, having all power in
heaven and earth: Whereupon he took a secret resolution within himself to
retire from among the Turks his Countrymen, and live among Chistians, to learn
the Laws of Jesus Christ, and make profession of his name, for the saving of
his soul, being fully convinced, that all the enjoyments and pleasures of this
world (whereof he had no want) could not make a man happy in this life, nor
deliver him from death, nor bring him to the assurance of obtaining glory in
the world to come; but that the owning of the name of Jesus Christ by Faith and
Obedience, would procure all this, And after that he was convinced of these
Truths, and fully resolved to come among Christians, he was two whole years
before he could contrive the way how to depart from his own Kindred and Nation
with safety; because the danger for a Turk to turn Christian, or to renounce
the Mohammedan Religion, is by their Law to be burnt alive: Therefore being
wary, lest he should be discovered, and having attempted some ways to
transport himself which proved ineffectual; at last, by the address of some
whom God stirred up to be serviceable unto him, he transported himself from
Constantinople to Smyrna, where other providence did guide him to find a way of
being transported unto Ligorn. Having past the Quarantana, he was honorably
received by one of the Duke of Florence his Cousins, and there they would have
Baptized him; but because he was recommended to the Archbishop of Paris, and
was to be conducted thither by some who went from Smyrna with him, he would not
receive their favor. So from Ligorn he went to Marselles, and from Marselles
he was conducted to Paris. At Paris he was received with respect, as being
conceived to be a Person of quality, and lodged in St. Lazaro, a place
appointed for the instructing and entertaining of Proselytes, for which
charitable use it is largely endowed. There the Priests who were appointad to
instruct him, and fit him to be Baptized according to their Profession, and he
could not agree, concerning several things which they would persuade him to
believe and practice as Essentials to their Religion viz. That Christ was in
the Hostie; that the Agnus Dei had Divine virtue; that the Crucifix is to be
worshipped; that the Pope is a Saint, and Christ's Vicar; that Images and Saints
are to be respected in the worship of God. Upon all which, and some other
points, he did so argue with them, that they found no way to convince him, but
were forced to let him alone: And he was much troubled to find himself yoked
with men of such a belief; so that he could have found in his heart to have
returned again to Constantinople, if the way had been open for him.

Whiles he was in this perplexity, Providence did direct two Arabians who were
become Protestants to see him: By their means he did get notice that there were
besides the Papists amongst whom he was, other Christians in Paris, whose faith
and worship was free from Superstition; whereupon he resolved to be brought
unto the Protestants of Paris, and contrived a way with these Arabians how he
might come to be acquainted with them, which took effect: For under a pretense
of walking abroad to take the air, he shifted himself of the company which
attended him from St. Lazaro, and went with the Arabians to a Protestant house,
and became acquainted with the Ministers of Paris, who took special care of him
for the space of 43. days; in which time they did instruct him carefully in the
Truth, which he heartily did embrace. But great search being made for him to
find him out, and they not being able to protect him from the power of those
that would have taken him out of their hands, they consulted with the chief of
their Friends what to do with him, that he might be in safety: The Result of
which Consultation was, that he should be sent away into England, where he
arrived in March last; and being recommended to his Highness of blessed memory,
he was received with much kindness by him, and after some time a livelihood was
appointed unto him; and about the same time Mr. Secretary Thurloe did recommend
him to the care of Mr. Durie, that he should consider him, and advise what
should be done with him further.

Mr. Durie having conversed familiarly with him, and finding him a man of
parts, and for the main, well principled in point of knowledge, both in the
grounds of Faith, and in the practice of Christianity, he made enquiry of his
life and conversation amongst all those with whom he had dwelt, and with whom
he had been acquainted since he was come into England; and finding that they
all gave him a very good testimony, he made a Report to Mr. Secretary; whereof
the chief Substance was as follows.

By all that I have been able to observe in this Turkish Chaous, I cannot judge
otherwise but that he is a sincere Convert to the name of Jesus Christ,
believing in him for the salvation of his soul, and post-posing all other
things for the attainment thereof: For although his notional knowledge is weak,
and does not much exceed the common Articles of the Creed (so far as yet I do
discover) yet I judge it saving in him, because I find his faith sincere, and
his love to God in Jesus Christ fervent and well grounded.

I discern the sincerity of his Faith, not only by the profession of his love
to Christ upon the account of that which Christ has done for us, but by the
sense which he has of Gods Truth and Faithfulness in his promises to those
that trust in him, which by pretty familiar comparisons he has expressed upon
several occasions much to my comfort, wherein he shows a generosity of spirit
to give up himself unto Christ without reserve.

The sincerity and fervency of his love to Christ, I perceive by his desire to
know his will, that he may obey his Commandments; for in this he has appeared
unto me earnest and singlehearted, declaring that he finds himself obliged in
thankfulness to God for Christ, to become his servant, and to obey him in all
conditions, because (says he) God has bestowed upon me the true Faith, by
which I find an inward rejoicing in my soul to come to God, and to call upon
him with confidence; and therefore I must serve and love him.

And I judge lastly, that both his Faith and Love is well grounded, because I
find him really patient, meek, and humble, with cheerfulness bearing this
condition on whereinto God has cast him, which in it self outwardly is not at
all comfortable, but rather hard; and because he makes often a reflection upon
the great mercy and love of God toward poor sinners, of which number he does
feelingly confess himself to be one: And I judge that he does it feelingly,
because he shows a hatred to his former sinful life, and a joy to have found a
way of deliverance from it.

The consideration of these Characters of Grace in this Turk, who has so
little Notional knowledge (of which so many of us Christians abound so much,
and for which there is so much stir and strife, and so many rents among us)
does make me see more evidently and distinctly than I have formerly been able
to do, how little speculative knowledge is needful to save a soul, when the
Spirit of Grace by true Faith and Love does dwell in it; which does make me
fear, that many of our great leading and pretending professors some in forms,
and some without forms, exalting themselves in their ways one above another,
will be found in the way of true Christianity far behind this Turck, when they
shall be tried as he is; Surely Religion does not consist in the things which
most men strive about, but in the life and power of Godliness which is
forgotten when men make their profession to become a matter of Interest, and do
not own Christ surely for his own sake, as he is the Son of God and our
Savior; which I find this honest Tvrck does in simplicity, for he is a Sober
man in words and behavior, for so far as I have conversed with him, I have
found nothing indiscreetly done or said by him, for he spakes seldom except he
be put to it, and when he speaks of himself he does it sparingly chiefly
concerning his outward former state, and at present he desires nothing so much
(if a man may believe his expressions) as being supplied with a necessary
livelihood to apply himself to the study and life of Christianity, to which
effect he desires to be taught our Language to speak, read and write it, that
he may learn the Law of Christ in the Scripture, and I believe by the former
Characters of his Faith and Love to Christ, that this is his true intention and
desire.

Having delivered my opinion of his sincerity upon the ground of mine own
conversation with him: I shall farther relate what I have found concerning him
upon an inquiry from others; for being desirous to know how he spent his time
daily, he told me that he went abroad from morning till evening, and that his
acquaintance was with some Turkey Merchants, and with some French Men, and with
Mr. Powel, who lives near the Temple. I have spoken with the Governor and
Secretary of the Turkey Company, and with some of the Merchants, amongst whom
Mr. Muddiford is the Chief of his acquaintance, and with the french Men, with
whom he has had his diet since he came hither; they all give him a very good
report concerning his life and conversation, and make no doubt of his sicerity;
Mr. Muddiford in a special manner told me, that by the circumstances of things
which he relates concerning his Father, he believes him to be the Son of one
who commanded a Squadron of Galleys and was killed in a fight at Negropont.

If then upon the whole matter, I should give my advice, touching that which I
think fit should be done with him, take it thus.

First some competent provision being made for his livelihood, and so settled
that it may come duyly to his hands, he might be boarded and lodged with some
understanding honest Christian, who should at a reasonable rate provide one to
teach him to read, write, and speak English at certain hours of the day.

Secondly he should be made acquainted with Mr. Calandrine the Dutch Minister,
who speaks Italian, and with the Minister of the Italian Church, who should
with Mr. Despagne and my self, be obliged to take some turns to converse with
him till we judge it fit that he should be publicly baptized.

Thirdly when he shall be sufficiently instructed to make a public profession
of his faith and promise of his obedience unto Christ, the time, place, and
manner of his public Baptism may be determined.

Fourthly when afterward he shall be able to speak English it may be
considered, whether yea or no, and what employment he may be put to. For he
professes a willingness to do any service which he shall be judged capable to
perform.

This was the substance of that report and advice which Mr. Dury gave of him to
Mr. Secretatry about the latter end of May 1658.

And this advice was followed; for being recommended to the Ministers
forenamed, they gave him admittance, and soon found him fit to be Baptized, but
the Solemnity of his Baptism was delayed, partly by reason of his sickness,
partly by reason of a journey which Mr. Durie made into the Country, and partly
by reason of some other lets and trials which did befall him, till at last Mr.
Durie thought it expedient to put him upon a way of manifesting his capacity of
Baptism, that all who should doubt of the sufficiency of his knowledge in
Christianity, might receive satisfaction thereby, and to this effect he made a
Note of certain heads of matters, to the number of seventeen, naming only the
bare Titles (as concerning God, concerning the Trinity, concerning the Creation
of the World, concerning Adam and his Sin, etc.) and gave them to him that his
boy should read them to him in order (for he can neither read nor write
himself) and that he should dictate unto his Boy that which he did know and
believe concerning each of those Heads. This Note Mr. Durie gave unto him about
nine of the Clock in the Mornng, and left him to his thoughts when he had
promised that he would go about it that very day; and the same day about nine
of the Clock at night, his Boy brought Mr. Durie the Confession hereafter
adjoined, pretty well written in French; which when Mr. Durie had read, finding
it so full and satisfactory, that he did wonder at it, he resolved to translate
it into English, keeping as near as the sense would bear it, the very words
which he used; and having done this, he caused some Copies to be transcribed in
his French, and some in English, and imparted the French to some of his
Highness Council, and the English to the Commissioners who meet at White Hall
for approving of Ministers; who all hearing of his holy and zealous way of
conversation, judged him very fit to be Baptized without delay; and the
performance of that duty toward him was recommended to Mr. Durie, who having
consulted with Mr. Manton concerning the manner of doing it in the place where
his Cong regation meets at Covent Garden; and a great Font being set up near
the Pulpit, on the Lords day January the 30th. in the Afternoon Mr. Durie did
Preach a Sermon concerning the Nature and Institution of Baptism: And having
applied the Doctrine to the Action which was intended, he proceeded to Baptize
him.

The Substance of matters delivered in the Sermon was this.
The Text was taken out of Acts 10. 47. Can any man forbid water, that these
should not be Baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we?
THe Entry The Estry:
to the matter was by showing a Parallel between the occasion which Peter had
to utter these words, and the motive which did lead to choose them for a Text at
this time.

Cornelius was an Alien from the Church of God; So was the Turk to be Baptized.
Cornelius was by a special Providence directed to Peter to be received into the
Church and Communion of Saints; So was the Turk by a special Providence
directed hither without his own contrivance, to be received into the Church,
and owned as a member of Christ. Cornelius having heard the Doctrine of Christ,
believed; So the Turk has been taught, and does believe the Truth. Cornelius
having believed, did receive the Graces of the Spirit, which God according to
the dispensation of that time did bestow: So the Turk has received the Graces
of the same Spirit, which answer the dispensation of these times. And as Peter
intending to baptize Cornelius and his company, did use this Preface to show
the warrantableness of his action; So now this Text is chosen to show the
warrantableness of this action.

The words contain an Argument to prove that Cornelius and his company ought to
be Baptized, thus. They who have received the Graces of the Holy Ghost as well
as we, ought to be Baptized as well as we: But Cornelius and his company have
received these Graces as well as we: Ergo they ought to be Baptized as well as
we. Can any man forbid? The Interrogation is a strong negation; that is, no man
can forbid; and the Negation presupposes a duty to be performed, which no man
ought to forbid. As if he had said, Baptism is due to these, and there can be
no impediment alleged why it should not be conferred upon them. Two things are
in the words, which answer the two main Questions which concern Baptism. 1. How
Baptism is to be administered. 2. To whom it ought to be administered. The first
part of the text speaks of the manner how Baptism is to be administered. Can any
man forbid water, that these should not be Baptized? The Second speaks of the
persons to whom Baptism ought to be administered, viz. to such who have received
the Holy Ghost as well as we.

Of the first Question.
If the Question be, How Baptism is be administered? The Answer from the Text
is, by making use of water, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, to wash the outward man. This is clear from the Text, and from
the Institution of Baptism, and from the Reason of the use of water in the
Institution. The Text makes the forbidding of water, and not Baptizing to be
co-incidents or consequents: Forbid water (says the Apostle) that they should
not be Baptized? Therefore by the Rule of Contraries it follows, the not
forbidding, but administering water, is Baptism. Hence we see that in the verse
following, when it is said He commanded them to be Baptized in the name of the
Lord, he commanded water to be administered unto them, that they should be
washed according to the Lords appointment: For so I takehere the word name to
be the authority of the Lords command: So the sense is, he commanded in the
name of the Lord that they should be Baptized; or to be Baptized by virtue of
the Lords appointment: which sense, makes the former Interrogation, Can any man
forbid? to be so much the stronger negation, as opposed to a command given by
the appointment of the Lord. Thus Water Baptism is clear in this Text, and
undeniably the practice in the Apostles times, as is evident also by the
Eunuch, and Philips baptizing of him, Acts 8. 36, 37, 38, 39.

The Institution of Baptism, and Christ's own practice, shows that he appointed
water to be made use of in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Go (says Christ, (...)) make disciples all
Nations. How are they to be made disciples? Baptizing them in the name, etc.
and Teaching them, etc. To make a disciple, is to enroll and admit of one to be
under Discipline, that is, to be ranked amongst those who are to be taught;
which enrolment and admission is done by the use of water, and the word of the
institution. And it is clear, that to make a disciple, and to Baptize, is one
thing, from Christ's own practice, Joh. 4. 1. Jesus made and baptized more
disciples them John. Here making disciples and Baptizing are concomitant or
co-incident things: He that is made a disciple, is made by being Baptized; and
he that is Baptized, is eo ipso made a disciple. Thus Christ's Institution was
to have a mark put upon his disciples, which should signify and seal unto them
both a relation and qualification bestowed upon them by being his disciples.
And from hence is to be considered the Reason of the Institution, which has
two grounds. First Christ would confirm and perfect that which was Typical
under the Law, pointing at himself. Secondly, he would manifest by the outward
properties of water, that which is inwardly wrought in a believing soul, and
that state wherein a believer is set by being his disciple.

In the Law, all the Purifications, whether they were by blood or water, they
all pointed at him; therefore to confirm and fulfill the mystery of them in the
Gospel-administration, he did retain the substance thereof; namely, that
wherein the Harmony and the Analogy does appear. And in the Legal washing there
are two Types, which did prefigure the Truth which is fulfilled in Baptism. The
one is of Aaron and his Sons, Exodus 29. 4. who were to be washed before they
were initiated into their Office; the other is of the Lepers, who were to be
washed before they were admitted into the Camp, and again washed before they
were admitted into their Tent, Levit. 14. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Both these
washings are completed in Baptism; for by it we are initiated as Priests to
serve God; and by it our leprosy is cleansed, and we are received both into
the common Camp, and then also into the peculiar Tent and station belonging to
us in the Congregation of Israel; and all this Initiation was typified by that
washing, but now it is fulfilled in true believers by this washing. For Christ
did retain the Element of water in this Ordinance, by reason of the natural
properties which it has most fit for his ends in the Institution: The natural
property of water is cleansing, and flowing out or over, as it is applied. In
respect of the cleansing property which water has, Baptism is instituted, to
signify and seal the virtue of Christ's blood, which purges from the guilt of
sin, for the justifying of believers; and the virtue of the Holy Ghost to purge
away the spots thereof, for the sanctifying of believers: So the virtue both of
Christ's Death, and of his Resurrection, is exhibited to the believer by Baptism
in the Institution, and in this sense we are said to be dead with Christ in
Baptism, and to be raised with him again, Romans 6. 3. till 12. Item it is a
washing of Regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5, 6. and we
put on Christ, Gal. 3. 27. that is, we are clothed with his death and life, and
put in a condition like unto him; as the waters of life, that is, the graces of
the Spirit flow from him, so by him they flow from believers, Joh. 7. 38, 39.
And as great and deep waters, that is, afflictions, did overwhelm him in the
days of his flesh, Psalm. 42. 7. with Heb. 2. 10. and 5. 8. So we are to be
partakers of the same sufferings, and to be mortified with him, Romans 8. 17. and
to drink of his cup, and to be Baptized with his Baptism, Mat. 20. 22, 23.

The Use.
From this Doctrine a threefold use is to be made. For Instruction, for
Comfort, for Admonition.

For Instruction against a threefold error concerning Water Baptism, 1. Of
those that would make it wholly void, 2. Of those that make dipping essential
to it, 3. Of those that make it absolutely necessary for Salvation.

They who would make it void, do it upon several accounts.

Some would make it void because Johus Baptism was only with water, and he
says of Christ's Baptism that it should be with the Holy Ghost and fire,
Matthew. 3. 11, from hence they would infer, that Christ commanded his Disciples,
Matthew. 28. 19, 20. not to baptize with water, but only with the Holy Ghost in
the nature and property of fire.

The Answer to this is, that they 1. Mistake Christ's meaning, in the
Commission given to the Apostles; for if Christ had not meant that they should
have baptized with water, they would not have done it, as we see clearly they
did: therefore their practice being undoubtedly according to their Commission;
it is the best interpretation of his meaning. 2. Christ's making Disciples by
Water Baptism, Joh. 4. 1. does clearly contradict their interpretation of John
the Baptist's words, as if Christ would make no use of Water Baptism; therefore
the words of John must be understood not Exclusively of Water Baptism, but
Inclusively, that is, that over and above the outward Baptism with water, he
would baptize also with the holy Ghost and fire inwardly.

Others would make Water Baptism void upon the account of the spiritual
perfection whereunto they pretend to have attained; as thinking it useless when
they are baptized with the Spirit; and upon this account they reject not only
Baptism, but all other ordinances. But to these none other answer is to be
given but the words of this Text, where the Apostle argues directly contrary to
that which they allege: for they allege that such as are Baptized with the
Spirit ought not to use Water Baptism; and the Apostle argues directly contrary
saying, because they are Baptized with the Spirit, therefore they ought to have
Water Baptism administered unto them. And then by Christ's own action this error
is refuted, for he had the Spirit without measure before he was Baptized, and
yet he received John's Baptism with water, and says, that it did become him to
do so, to fulfill all righteousness, Matthew. 3. 15. whereby he does declare,
that no spiritual perfection does exempt any, but rather obliges them to
observe outward ordinances.

A third sort confess that Water Baptism was used by the Apostles, but they
deny that it was appointed to last after their Age, understanding the
Commission to baptize all Nations to be given to them only, in their own
Persons. But the Answer to this is that the promise annexed to their
Commission, she was that Christ would accompany with his presence the making of
Disciples by Baptizing and teaching till the end of the World, Matthew. 28. 20.
now the Disciples were not to live till the end of the World, but the
Ministerial function will last till then, and therefore the promise is made to
it. Moreover the reason of the institution of Baptism lasting, the
administration of it must last; but the reason of the Institution is to make
Disciples and to obliege them to be taught; and this being to last till the end
of the World, the Ordinances by which Disciples are made must also last.

There be some that think the circumstance of Dipping so essential to
Water Baptism that without it the Baptism is invalid, and their argument is
taken from the sense of the word (...) as if it signified nothing else but
dipping. But first they are not rightly informed concerning the Word, for it
signifies also washing and dying; and so it is used, not only among profane
authors for washing, but also in Mar. 7. 3, 4. Secondly they are mistaken in
that which they call essential in Baptism, for in the outward application of
water there is nothing essential but the cleansing virtue which. it has; for
therein consists the Analogy of the Sign and Seal to assure us of that which
is exhibited: now the property of cleansing is applied not only by dipping,
but by sprinkling, and washing, and pouring out of water* God promises to his
people that by sprinkling clean water upon them they should be clean from all
their filthiness. Ezech. 36. 25. The Apostle tells us, that we are washed in
Christ his blood, Rev. 1. 5. and that our Conscience is thereby purged from
dead works, more effectually than the unclean under the Law were by the
sprinkling of the blood of an Heifer sanctified to the purifying of the flesh,
Heb. 9. 13 14. and we are saved by the washing of Regeneration, or the Laver
which is shed on us, Tit. 3. 5, 6. Sprinkling then, and washing and shedding
out of water to cleanse, is equivalent to dipping, for the essence of Baptism
is not in the manner of applying water, but in the cleansing faculty which is
sanctified to signify and seal the inward cleansing which Christ's blood and
spirit does exhibit to a believer in the word of the Institution.

The third error is concerning the absolute necessity of outward Baptism to be
saved. This is grounded upon Christ's words, Except you be born of the Spirit
and Water, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 5. But the answer
is, that Christ's words are misunderstood, they signify no more than that which
John says, Math. 3. 11. the Holy Ghost and fire, that is, the Holy Ghost
working in the nature of fire, so the Spirit and water, is the Spirit working
in the nature of water. It is a figure of speech called (...) that is, one
thing by two expressions. Fire and Water are purging Elements, their operation
is in one spirit, and the Prophet Isai. joyneth them together in one effect,
Cap. 4. 4. When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the Daughters of
Sion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by
the spirit of judgment and the spirit of Burning, here the Spirit does wash
and burn to purge away sin. This then is a gross mistake of the phrase, but as
to the thing it self, that salvation does not depend upon the use of outward
Water, is clear from, 1 Pet. 3. 21. where the Apostle telling us that Baptism
does save us, does immediately to prevent a mistake explain himself; and says,
that he means not the putting away the filth of the Flesh, (viz. by outward
water) but the answer of a good Conscience toward God by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ; that is the Baptism which saves the Soul, and therefore Christ,
Mar. 16. 16. says, he that believes and is Baptized shall be saved, but he
that believes not shall be damned, he says not, he that is not Baptized shall
be damned, intimating that there is no such necessity of Water Baptism that
without it a Soul cannot be saved, for the promise is to faith alone, whosoever
believes in him shall not perish but have life everlasting, Joh. 3. 16. and
the Apostle, Gal. 5. 6. assures us, that in Jesus Christ, neither Circumcision
nor uncircumcision avails any thing, but Faith which works by Love. The
saving virtue is in the washing of Regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost.
Tit. 3. 5. which words are a clear exposition of Christ's words, except ye be
born of the Spirit and water, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.
5. for the washing of Regeneration by the renewing of the Holy Ghost which is
shed on us, is to be born of the Spirit and Water; and without this none is
saved, that is none, enters into Gods Kingdom.

Yet although the saving of Souls does not depend upon the outward washing,
nevertheless we say there is some necessity for the use of Baptism, namely, the
necessitas praecepti, that is a necessity to obey Gods command; for as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7. 19. of Circumcision, that neither it nor
uncircumcision is any thing, but the obeying of Gods Commandment; so we say,
that to be baptized is nothing, and to want Baptism is nothing, but the keeping
of the Commandments of God; the meaning is, that the outward work, or the opus
operatum, whether you have it or want it, is not to be regarded; but the
keeping of Gods commandment is that which is necessary: therefore we say,
that Christ's Command to administer Baptism is necessary to be observed in his
Church, according to his end for which he did appoint it; which is, not to make
Salvation to depend upon material Water, but to Characterize and separate
Disciples from the rest of the World, and to conveigh as an outward testimony
the manifestation of the inward work of Grace exhibited in the word of the
institution, and to these ends it is a means appointed by God, and by reason of
his appointment it is necessary to be used as a means to show forth the
Relation which is between Christ and his members, it is a means necessary to
signify and seal their ingraffing into one body by one Spirit with him as
their head, 1 Cor. 12. 13. So far then as God will have a public visibility of
the profession to be owned, and our Relation to Christ in the Covenant to be
held forth, so far is public Baptism necessary: now this is not otherwise
necessary than as circumstances will permit it to be done Regularly; that is,
by a Lawful Minister, in Christ's way: for the Baptism of Women is not Lawful,
nor of any other, who has not a Call to administer the Ordinance. Nor is it
the want but the contempt or wilful neglect of Baptism that brings guilt.
Saint Ambrose says of Valentinian the Emperor, that though he dyed without
Water Baptism, yet he had the Grace of Baptism, because he earnestly did desire
it.

Hitherto the use of Instruction.

The use of Comfort is twofold.

1. That God does condescend to our weakness to give us a visible and sensible
Word, to make us feel in the outward man, that which he does in the inward;
this is a great support of our faith, and a real ground of Comfort, which God
makes use of to conveigh by the word of promise the increase of Grace unto our
Souls.

2. That God does mark us outunto himself, and by a visible token of his
Covenant in our outward Man, will seal a Relation between him and us (as Genesis
17. 11, 13.) This is a special Confirmation of his free Grace and Love: and
that he by this means will separate us from the World as a peculiar people, and
a chosen generation, 1 Pet. 2. 9. It is a ground of Confidence to us, that he
will have a special care of us in evil times, for the causes bind up the
Testimony and Seal the Law among his Disciples, Isa. 8. 16. His Church which is
made up of these Disciples are his Vineyard which he does keep and water every
moment lest any thing hurt it, Isa. 27. 2, 3. It is his Garden enclosed, a
Spring shut up and a Fountain sealed, Cant. 4. 12. This gives us a ground in
time of trouble and temptation to fly unto him, and to mind him of his Covenant
with us in Baptism, and to tell him as David does, Psalm. 22. 10. I was cast
upon thee from the womb, thou art my God from my Mothers belly, be not far from
me, for trouble is near.

The use of Admonition and exhortation is

1. That we should mind our Covenant with God in Baptism, what the tenor of it
is; what our Relation is to him; what it is to be his Disciple; how we should
be under his Discipline; how separate from the world, the Devil, and the Flesh;
how careful, as good Soldiers, to war faithfully under his Banner? the
Ancients called it Sacramentum, to be mindful of the oath which Soldiers took
to be faithful unto their General, and Tessera Militaris, a token of their
Warfar, to war against the lusts of the Flesh, 1 Pet. 2. 11.

2. To remember that we are redeemed by Christ, and Adopted, and regenerated,
and made a peculiar people, to live to him, and to be zealous of good works.
Tit. 3. 14. and to walk worthy of his Kingdom and Glory, 1 These. 2. 12.

3. To consider that by Baptism we are both dead and made alive again with
Christ, Romans 6. 3, 4. and that consequently the old Man being crucified with
him, the newness of Life is to be entertained, and that we are bound to present
our members as servants to Righteousness, as the Apostle exhorts, Romans 6. 6.
till 20.

4. To own the profession of Religon, the strict Rules of Conscience, and all
the Ordinance* of the Gospel openly and freely, that we may not seem ashamed of
Christ before men, lest he be ashamed of us before his Father in heaven, Matthew.
10. 32, 33.

Concerning the Second Question.
If the Question be, to whom Baptism is to be administered, the Answer from the
Text will be this, That it is to be administered to such as have received the
gift of the Holy Ghost; that is, to such as God does own to belong to him. For
the Apostles argument to prove that Cornelius and his company ought to be
baptized, is grounded upon this maxim; whomsoever God does own as his, they
ought to be set apart, as his. But these God has owned as his by the visible
gift of the Spirit, Ergo. Now the visible way of owning Cornelius and his
company, was peculiar to the dispensation of those times; and the force of his
argumeut to conclude that they ought to be baptized, does not stand in it
further, than as it does evidence that God did own them to belong to himself.
For the Major Proposition, which is an universal truth, and the ground of the
whole inference, is tacitly presupposed and included in the words, received the
Holy Ghost as well as we; as if he had said, God owns them as he did us,
therefore they must be baptized, as we are. For whomsoever he does own, to them
belongs the token of his owning of them.

From this ground of the Apostles Argument we infer two things. First,
wherefore the Infants of believing Parents ought to be baptized. Secondly, what
the qualification of Aged people is to whom Baptism is to be administered.

First, concerning Infants, we take the Apostles Argument thus, and say; If God
does own the Infants of believing Parents as his, then they ought to receive
the token of his owning of them. But God does own these Infants as his: Ergo,
they ought to receive the token of his owning of them, which is Baptism.

The Minor Proposition, that God does own the Infants of believers as his, is
manifest from 1 Cor. 7. 14. where the Apostle declares, that although but one
of the Parents is a believer, yet the Infants are holy* that is, owned by God
as his, by virtue of the Covenant made with Abraham, which is, that he would be
the God of him, and of his seed. This is a Gospel Covenant, and made with
Abraham as a believer; therefore with all believers as well as with him: For
the promise (says the Apostle) is to you and to your children, and to all that
are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. The promise that God
will be their God, is made not only to believing Jews and their children, but
to all believing Gentiles also, whom God does call to the faith of Abraham.
Hence it is, that Christ declares that the Kingdom of God belongs unto them,
and commands the Disciples to suffer them to come unto him, and was very angry
with grief ((...)) that they did forbid them to come, Matthew. 19. 13, 14. This
is recorded, not as a mere History of the time, but as Christ is yesterday, to
day, and for ever the same, so this command, Let little children come to me* is
in force still: If then children should be brought unto Christ, they must be
brought to the Ordinance where he is to be found, and which they are only
capable of, which is the token of the Covenant: For they being owned by him by
the promise of the Covenant, and by the command to suffer them to come to him,
the Apostles Argument does stand firm for them, that they ought to be baptized;
that is, receive the sign of his owning of them. The promise is, that all the
families of the earth should be blessed in Abraham, Genesis 12. 3. and 22. 18.
Children are a chief part of a family; and when God made his Covenant with
Abraham, he received all his family him with, Genesis 17: 12, 13. And the Apostles
did baptize whole families, Acts 16. 15. and 1 Cor. 1. 16. For the Head of a
family being owned, God would have all that belonged unto it to be owned; and
hereupon at Philippi, Paul does promise to the Jailer of the prison, that if he
believed in Christ, he should be saved and his house, Acts 16. 31. Now the
Apostle could have no warrant to promise this unto him, if he had not looked
upon the promise made to Abraham, Genesis 12. 3. and known Gods Counsel, that he
would propagate his Church, not by single persons, but by families. But if it
be (as it is commonly) objected, why is there no command for the Baptizing of
Infants, as well as circumcising them under the Law?

Answ. 1. The general command includes children, and therefore no need of any
particular mentioning of them. 2. The Promise is as express to children as to
Parents, Acts 2. 39. and therefore no need of an express command. 3, It had
been absurd to give a new command for children, seeing they were in possession
of the privilege to be owned as belonging to the Covenant; they had been owned
ever since Abraham's time, and were in actual possession of their right,
therefore to give a command concerning them again to be owned, had been not
only superfluous, but absurd; as if their title to the privilege had been
doubtful. Therefore I conceive that there is no command given, nor any example
mentioned, but in the general of a household; because their interest was
presupposed to be known by all, and the practice was undoubtedly universal to
Baptize whole Families.

And thus much concerning the right of Infants unto Baptism. As for Aged
persons, if the Question be who amongst them should be baptized. The Answer
will be, such as are so qualified, that it does appear that God does own them
as his. Now God does own as his, not only such as received the gifts of
Prophesying, and speaking with strange Tongues, as Cornelius and his company
did, but all that professed Faith, and did repent, were engaged by Faith and
Repentance to walk answerable to their profession. And upon this account the
Eunuch was baptized by Philip, Acts 8. For having been taught the knowledge of
Christ, v. 30. till 36. and then having made confession of his Faith in Christ,
v. 36, 37, 38. he was baptized, although he had not received any such gift of
the Holy Ghost as Cornelius and his company. Nay it is so far from this, that
the extraordinary gift which Cornelius received, was pre-requisite as a
qualification for Baptism, that the Apostle Peter does promise to these, who
should repent and be baptized, that the Holy Ghost should be bestowed upon
them, Acts 2. 38, 39. Repent (says he) and be baptized every one of you in the
name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift
of the Holy Ghost; for the promise is to you and to your children, and to all
that are afar off even as many as the Lord our God shall call. So that we see
Repentance and Faith fits men for Baptism, and to these the gift of the Holy
Ghost is a consequent in the ordinary dispensation, although in this case of
Cornelius the gift of the Holy Ghost was dispensed before Baptism.

The Uses.
1. To encourage Parents to present their children to God, and to testify
their interest in his Covenant on their behalf: If they desire God to be the
God of their children, they should present them to him, and accept of the
privilege which belongs unto them, to put them in possession of it. Marc.
10. 14. it is said that when Christ had reproved his Disciples for hindering
the children to come to him, he took them up in his arms, laid his hands upon
them, and blessed them. When they are brought to the Ordinance, and receive the
seal of the Covenant, he takes them in his arms, lays his hands upon them, and
blesses them.

2. To oblige Parents to teach their children the Tenor of the Covenant, and
upon what account they have been owned by God, and what their duty is to live
unto him. If under the Law Parents were obliged to teach their children, Deuteronomy.
6. 7. Certainly under the Gospel this ought not to be rejected, where there is
a Covenant under better promises.

3. To teach us to observe the Qualities requisite in those who are to be
baptized; that the Ordinance may not be administered, either too scrupulously or
too negligently.

It may be administered too scrupulously, when such a distinct knowledge of all
the heads of faith and duties is stood upon, which may become one who is a
large proficient in Christianity. It is to be understood, that if they have the
knowledge of the main object of our Faith and Hope, with a desire to be saved
by Christ, although they know no particular controversal matters, yet they
ought, when they repent, to be admitted to Baptism; for they are baptized to be
made disciples, and being such, to be taught and directed in the ways of God,
according to Christ's commandment in the Institution of Baptism, Matthew. 28. 19,
20. make Disciples, Baptize, Teach. Again, it will be administered too
scrupulously, if Baptism should be suspended upon the account that he to whom
it is administered, should be embodied into some particular Congregation; for
Baptism is not instituted to make a man a member of any particular Society, but
to make him a disciple, and to own him as a member of the Catholic Church
visible: For all particular Congregations make but one body, unto which, all
particular believers belong, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. and 1 Cor. 12. 12. till 21.

It may be administered too carelessly, if no respect be had to their knowledge,
whether it be of the fundamental truths, that Christ is the Son of God, the
only Savior, and that whosoever does repent, and believe in him for the
mission of sins, shall be saved; and if no respect be had to the seriousness
of their intention, whether they desire Baptism, yea or no, for the true end,
to have a relation to Christ as his disciple in the Covenant, to be taught and
guided by him; or whether they desire it only for some worldly by-ends, as
many hypocrites have done.

And now to make the Application of this to the person in hand, and the present
action; we can testify of the Qualification of the person, that he has more
than a competent measure of knowledge in Christianity, both in matters of Faith
and of Duties; and that his life is answerable thereunto, as having renounced
all for Christ's sake to come to live amongst Christians, in a penitent, humble,
sober, and mortified state, seeking only to be found in Jesus Christ, for the
obtaining of the remission of sins, and righteousness through him. This being
known to us to be his aim and his profession; and having earnestly desired upon
these ground, and upon the Confession of Faith which he made in one day, to be
baptized, we may warantably and cheerfully proceed to administer the holy
Ordinance unto him, and say with the Apostle Peter in my Text, Can any man
forbid water, that this man should not be baptized, who has received the
Graces of the Holy Ghost as well as we? For by his Confession of Faith, it will
appear that he is largely enlightened and taught in the Truth by the Holy Ghost;
for not being able either to read or write, and dictating this Confession
according to certain heads which were given him, and doing it readily in one
day, it is evident that he has received a large measure of Grace, which fits
him for Baptism. Here the Confession was read as it was Translated out of the
French Copy, which his Boy wrote from his mouth; and it is as follows.

The Confession of Faith made by ISUF the Turkish Chaous, Who was Baptized in
Mr. Mantons Church in Covent Garden the 29th. of January, 1658.
His name was Richard Christophilus.
I Believe that there is one God only, 1. Of God.
who being Eternal of himself, above and in all, the Author of all life and
being, is a Spirit, only good, only wise, almighty, all just, every where
present, and infinite in all perfection.

I believe that this Divine Nature does subsist in three Persons, 2. Of the
Holy Trinity.
to wit, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are the
same God.

I believe that the world, 3. Of the Creation of the world.
and all that is therein, visible and invisible, have been made in the
beginning by the Word of God in six days; and believe also that every man was
made after the Image of God, faithful and holy, and with authority to rule the
creatures of this world by God, who did breath an immortal Soul in a Body of
dust, and made the woman of one of his ribs, and placed them in Paradise.

I believe that Man being made of God Faithful, 4. Of Adam, and his falling
from God.
was obliged to do his will, which if he did, he should have lived joyfully in
Paradise; but if he did it not, that he should dye according to the promise
which he made unto him: But man was tempted by the Devil, to transgress the
Commandment of God, to the end that he should obey Gods Commandment no more,
but do his own will; So the sin of Adam falling away from God, became not only
the sin of Adam, but all his full Posterity is guilty of Condemnation; for they
are by nature children of wrath, who do nothing at all good, but always evil.
All men born naturally of Adam, do sin against the Law of God, not only against
that which is in their hearts, but also against that which is revealed in the
Word; so that all are actually transgressors before God, and guilty of death.
Moreover, man being fallen into sin and misery, could not deliver himself, nor
could any Creature find or procure a way for deliverance, but God found a good
Remedy for man.

I believe that Man was restored from his fall and misery, 5. Of the
Restoration of man by Christ.
by the Mediation of Jesus Christ, who has undertaken to save Mankind from the
Curse of God, and to reconcile God to Men, and Men to God, to destroy all the
works of the Devil, and all the Enemies of the Salvation of mankind, to unite
men to God by one Spirit: God was moved to appoint and accept this way of
Mediation for Mankind, only by his free love toward the world, and by his
Eternal and affectionate compassion toward his Elect in Jesus Christ, to the
end his grace should be manifested by us. The work of Reconciliation between
God and Man was effected by the Son of God, the second Person of the Holy
Trinity, who being God from all Eternity, took the nature of man in the fullness
of time, being born, by the power of the Holy Ghost, of a Virgin, and under the
Law, and so he became Emanuel, God with us in one Person.

I believe that God said with his own mouth, 6. Of the ten Commandments.
I am the Lord thy God, who have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and out
of the house of bondage, Thou shall have no other Gods before my face, etc.

I believe that the way by which he did bring to pass that admirable work, 7.
Of Christ's office of Mediation between God and Man.
was by the Administration of his three Offices, Prophet, Priest, and King, who
in the state of his humiliation and exaltation became Wisdom to all Believers,
and also Righteousness and Redemption, to make the work of Redemption and
Reconciliation effectual and profitable in us; he that did undertake it, Jesus
Christ, is offered unto us with all his benefits in the covenant of grace, and
to all those to whom the Gospel is Preached, this Covenant is published
throughout the world, by the public Administration of the Word, and of all the
Doctrines of Repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, and they are
obliged every one to take an example by the grace of God, which brings
Salvation to receive it, and to make use of it: And the Doctrine of Repentance
is applied unto them that are transgressors of the Law, to show them to
renounce wicked works, which are first Atheism, Idolatry, false and
Superstitious ways of worshipping the true God, all irreverence and abuse of
his Name, and all profanation of the Lords Day, and neglect of his Solemn
Worship, and secondly, to teach them to renounce all worldly lusts, that is to
say, all disobedience to Superiors, Murder and Malice, Adultery and Villainy,
False witness-bearing, and all Concupiscence, desiring things that pertain to
his Neighbor.

I believe that the Doctrine of Faith is to be made use of toward those that
have the use of reason, 8. Of the Doctrine of Faith.
to teach them that God is, and that he is the Savior of those that seek him
diligently, that they may know him, and fear him, and put their confidence in
God the Father, who has made all things, and in Jesus Christ his only begotten
Son, who having redeemed us, is gone up into Heaven, and is sitting at the
right hand of God, where he makes Intercession for us, and from thence he shall
come back in glory to give unto Believers their blessed hopes, and in the Holy
Ghost, by whom the Church of Saints is gathered, sanctified, and governed in
this world, to be exalted in glory in the world to come.

I believe that God does require good works, 9. Of good works.
that thereby he may be glorified amongst men, and we must do them, that we may
show our love to him, and to his glory, and our thankfulness to his mercy,
that we may have assurance in our prayers, and that we may build up our
neighbor in the good way: Moreover, the Organ by which the Believers do good
works is the life of the Spirit of Christ in them, which makes the children of
grace free from the dominion of sin, and leads them in all truth, that they may
answer the Tenor of the Covenant to observe it; also those that are faithful
unto God in the Covenant of grace, makes use of their graces toward Christ to
remain in him, and in his word and in his love, and to follow him in their
affection, and actions, that in all things they may be conformable to his Image.

I believe in God the Father Almighty, 10. The Creed.
maker of Heaven and Earth, and in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son, our
Lord, who was conceived of the Holy Ghost born of the Virgin Mary, did suffer
under Potius Pilat, was crucified, dead and buried, and descended into Hell;
the third day he rose from the dead, he is gone up to Heaand sits at the right
hand of God, from thence he shall come to judge the living and the dead. I
believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Universal Church, the Communion of Saints,
the forgiveness of sins, the Resurrection of the Body and life everlasting.

Our Father which art in Heaven, 11. The Lords Prayer.
hallowed be thy Name; thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on Earth as it is in
Heaven; Give us this day our daily bread, and pardon us our trespasses as we
pardon them that trespass against us, and lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from the evil one, for thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the
Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

I believe the Ordinances of Baptism and of the supper of the Lord are Organs
to such as are Disciples to increase the Communion of Saints, 12. Of the
Sacraments.
to seal the promises and to confirm the graces of the Covenant to believers
and to their offspring, and to distinguish them from the World.

I believe that the Lord Jesus Christ having eaten the Passover with his
Disciples, 13. Of the Lords Supper
in the night in which he was betrayed, did institute the use of the holy
Supper, that it should be celebrated afterward to remember his death, and to
show it forth till he come again. In the institution he took bread, and having
given thanks he break it and said, Take, eat, this is my Body which is broken
for you, do this in remembrance of me, in like manner after Supper he took the
Cup, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood, do this as often as ye
drink thereof in remembrance of me; he did make use of bread and Wine, to let
us know that even as the Body is nourished with meat and drink, so also the
Soul does receive its spiritual nourishment from him in respect of his Body and
blood given to us.

I believe that Jesus Christ did institute the Baptism after his Resurrection,
15. Of Baptism.
and before his ascension into heaven, as an effect and a Testimony that he
has received all power in Heaven and Earth, and the Disciples are commanded to
administer the same, to make it appear that all the Nations of the Earth are
made subject unto him as to their Savior, and that being subject to his
commands, they ought to render obedience of Faith unto him, and to believe in
the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost according to the
scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles upon which the Believers are built,
Jesus Christ being the chief Corner stone, the scriptures are the word inspired
by God to make men wise unto salvation by the Faith which is in Jesus Christ,
to make them perfectly instructed unto every good work, for Doctrine Correction
and instruction in Righteousness. Moreover I believe that Baptism ought to be
administered in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, to
show forth that the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost are the only true God in
whom we ought to believe and whom we should obey. I believe also that all
believers are baptized by the holy Ghost into one Body, and that every one of
them being members of this Body in his place, become members one of another;
The washing which is instituted in Baptism does signify the washing of
Regeneration by the renewing of the holy Ghost, which is shed abroad by Jesus
Christ upon believers. I believe also that this washing is a sign of the new
Covenant established in the blood of Jesus Christ into which we are received by
the Testimony of a good Conscience toward God, in giving our selves wholly
over unto him, according to the tenor of his Covenant, to be taught and
governed by him in all things as his Disciples; in this washing which is common
to all believers to be received, all they who are joined to Jesus Christ as to
their Master, or head, to become his members, are baptized by him into one
Spirit, to become one Body, and to behave themselves the one toward the other
as his members in the Communion of Saints. I believe that the Spiritual and
inward Baptism of the Souls which does purify the Conscience from dead works,
makes believers careful to keep all the Commandments of God, and gives them
access to call upon the name of the Lord at the throne of grace, to be helped
in due time. I believe that that the Commandments which ought to be observed
are given by Moses and confirmed by Christ, and the prayer by which we should
make our requests known to the Father, is taught by the Lord, Matthew. 6. 9, 10,
11, 12, 13.

14. Of the Church and Ordinances,
I believe that the Church of God is made use of in this world to hold forth
the word of life and the Ordinances of Truth which are appointed to the things
which beget and increase grace, and to reform vices and scandales. I believe
that the Ordinances of the public administration of the Word and Prayer (for
those that are Ministers or Pastors whose office is to prophecy and pray in
the Church) are the Organes by which God does beget faith in men, and to make
them complete in all other graces, as Saints for the building up of the body of
Christ. I believe that the Ordinances of the Church and Government of
Discipline ought to be administered by the office of Elders, and are Organs to
prevent and reme- the spiritual adultery and evil which is incident unto the
society of Saints, by an equal administration of Charity for the comforting of
the weak, and supply of the necessities of the poor as also for order and
decency to proceed in all public concernments, and for the correction of a
Brother, and of those that are in any disorderly way.

I believe that the Government of God and the Administration of his Providence
in the World to come is universal toward all and particular toward the Elect:
16. Of the last Judgment.
By his universal Providence he will raise up the dead at the last day both
great and small and shall call the quick and the dead, as well Men as Angels
unto Judgment, this sentence shall last eternally wherein the Angels shall be
judged by the Saints: and by his particular Providence over the Reprobates,
they shall be destroyed from the presence of the Lord with everlasting torments
in Hell with the Devil and his Angels; but the Elect shall be received into
everlasting glory with Christ, being made heirs of all things in the presence
of God for ever. 17. Of the Holy scripture,.


I believe that the Scriptures of the old and New Testament are the true Word
of God, containing evidently, infallibly and perfectly his revealed Will and
Truth, to be a rule of our Faith and obedience, a Judge of our lives, a
touchstone of all Doctrines, and an Organ to make all believers perfect unto
Salvation.

My Spiritual Father. This evening I have made a general confession before my
Lord Jesus Christ of my Faith as his slave with a good heart: as yet it seems
to me that I have great need of Baptism, which our Lord Jesus Christ has
ordained for those that believe in him with a good heart, Sir, I pray you for
the love of God to sollice it that I may be baptized; for you know that we are
subject to die, and if I should dye without Baptism I shall not dye having my
heart contented.

I am inclined to pray my Lord Jesus Christ for all faithful Christians who
bear love unto him.

Isuf Chaous the Slave of my Lord Jesus Christ.
The Confession being read, and the fullness of it being taken notice of, the
Minister went out of the Pulpit down to the Font, at which he sat, and
standing by him, asked him three Questions. First, whether he did not renounce
before God and this Congregation the Mohammedan Sect? whereunto he answered,
yea, he hid renounce it utterly.

Secondly, whether he did not desire to make profession of the Christian Faith,
and to be Baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, as a disciple of Christ? whereunto he answered, yea, it was his earnest
desire.

Thirdly, whether he was not resolved in the future course of his life to
submit himself to all the Ordinances of Christ, and to walk unblameably under
Christian Discipline? whereunto he answered, yea, it was his sincere Resolution.

These Questions and his Answers were made in the Italian tongue, and
interpreted afterward unto the Congregation in English.

Then a Prayer was made for a blessing upon the Ordinance to be administed unto
him, desiring the Lord to be present with his Spirit, to seal and exhibit the
thing signified thereby, that being made partaker of the Promises of the
Covenant, his walking may be answerable thereunto, and he may be delivered from
all the Temptations of the evil one henceforth, to be filled with joy and
comfort by the Holy Ghost, and other requests to this effect. Which being done,
the Minister dipped his head into the water of a large Font, and poured water
upon it, saying, Richard Christophilus, I Baptize thee in the name of of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Then the Minister returning to the Pulpit, exhorted the Congregation to
observe to the Glory of God, the freedom of his Grace and Election, that he did
out of the midst of a most damnable Sect call this soul to himself, in a way
more than ordinary; and that we should praise God for the work of Grace
bestowed on him, and that we might hope that God was preparing by such means a
way to bring in the Conversion of the Jews, and the Fullness of the Gentiles,
amongst which the Turks should be comprehended, of whom this man and some
others, being the first fruits, we might expect hereafter a full Harvest. They
were also exhorted to rejoice with and for him, that he was now in the bosom of
the Church, that they should embrace him in their hearts through the Communion
of Saints, and pray for him.

These Exhortations being ended, the Action was concluded with a Prayer, and
the singing of a part of a Psalm.

And this Relation is thus made public, that all those to whose hands it may
come, should be edified thereby, and stirred up to consider Gods works, to give
him due praise for the mercy which he shows to any sinners; and to pray that
he would daily add such as belong to his Election unto his Church, till all
flesh see his glory together: And that this Proselyte may be made instrumental
to advance his Glory toward his own Nation in due time, being delivered from
the Temptations and Assaults which Satan has made upon him in a way not
ordinary, wherein the Lord has hitherto graciously supported him, and whereof
hereafter in due time some more particular account may be given. In the mean
time this is offered to the ingenuous and true-hearted Christian, that various
and uncertain Reports may be prevented concerning this Action, which we hope
will redound to the Glory of our gracious Lord Jesus Christ, in whose name it
has been performed, and to him with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all
Honor, Praise, and Thanksgiving rendered from all his Creatures, and in all his
Congregations for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

