A Brief Account OF THE Illegal Proceedings and SINFUL DOCTRINES of JAMES
BEDFORD Priest of Blunsome and Earith in Huntington SHIRE, Who by many has
been esteemed eminent, and above all the Priests in the Isle of Ely for his
opposing the People called QUAKERS.

This is to discover his fruits and Doctrines both to Rulers, Priests and
people, that both Rulers, Priests and people may see the iniquity that is
upheld amongst them, and which many of the Priests still persist in; this is to
discover to them a little of their abomination (among much more that they are
found in and of the horrible and filthy thing that is committed in the Land,
and in particular by James Bedford Priest of Blunsome and Earith in Huntington
Shire, that so they that will uphold or countenance these Priests in their
iniquities may be left without excuse, and they that love their souls may save
themselves from that perverse generation, who are destroyers both of bodies and
souls for dishonest gain, because of whose iniquities the Nations deeply
suffers and wants the true establishment; for it is Right ousnesse that
establishes a Nation, and Iniquity that confounds and imbondageth it; So mark
the following account, which is as it was certified from the hands of some of
the Sufferers hereafter mentioned, who are known to be credible and honest men.

London, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1660.

The said Priest Bedford his proceedings against John Cranwell of Earith for
the four years p^st, etc.
THe two former years he the said Priest Bedford came into John Cranwells f^ld
and took 4 Lambs without leave, and sent his men for Tithe Wool at shear-day,
but John Cranwells refused to give him any (because he was convinced in his
conscience that Tithes now in the priesthood of Christ ought not to be paid,
and that it was not equity that he should maintain such a Minister as he is not
taught by) whereupon the said Priest Bedford sent his men and unlockt John
Cranwells barn door, and took away as much wool as they thought good, and also
took away of his Hay and Corn what they would, and did cast John Cranwell into
Huntington Goal; So the Priest having dealt thus illegally (and as appears
being convicted in his conscience of the unlawfulness of this his proceedings.)
The two last years, the Priest said he would go on Legally, in the year 1658.
he did fetch a warrant for John Cranwell to bring him before two Justices to
show cause why John had not set forth his Tithe, which J C. did show before
Justice Pedley and Robert Vintener, so after some words passed, they called
three men to be sworn; then they did ask them what Lambs and sheep John
Cranwell had that year, and what Hay and Corn, and what they did value the
Tithe of them to be worth that year; and they did value it at 12 l. almost; but
if John would pay the Priest, they said they would abate twenty shillings, John
told them he owes the Priest nothing, nor would give him any thing; Then they
said they would make a warrant for fifteen pounds, which they did; And a while
after Priest Bedford came with the Constable and took three Cows which was with
calf, which the Constable said was worth 15. l. also they took, Carts, and 4
pair of wheels which also was worth 15. pound, but they brought three again,
and kept one of them, ( viz. the best) worth six pounds, and so they took one
and twenty pounds worth of goods for Tithes demanded but to the value of twelve
pounds, according to their own account. But mark how this said Priest has
added to his Iniquity, In the year 1^59. the said James Bedford the priest came
violently with two rude fellows with him upon John Cranwells ground, and the
priest said to John Cranwells Son that he came for Tithe Hay, and John's Son
discharged them off his fathers ground, and the Priest said he did not care for
that, he came for his dues; so John's Son whipped away their horses (when the
Priest would not remove them) upon which one of the Priests men swore that if
he whipped away their horses again, he would run his fork into his belly, then
the Priest said he would bear him harmless if it cost him an hundred pounds,
and the Priest then threatened to overthrow John Cranwells Cart, which Cart
stood then laden upon John's own ground a little way off them; and John's son
putting away the Priests horses again, (notwithstanding his and his men's
threatenings) the Priest rode galloping, and striving to make John Cranwells
horses overthrow the Cart; and John Cranwels Son told the Priest it was a shame
for him to take away his Fathers goods in that manner; the Priest said he could
find in his heart, if he were not a Minister, to come off his horse and whip
John Cranwells Son; so the Priest forcibly took away what Hay he would.

And moreover the Priest his men came by night, and bound up and carried away
half an aker, and half another half aker of Jo. Cranwells wheat, and about the
worth of another rood of wheat the Priest took away for small Tithe, as he said.

And the said Priests men violently took away of Jo. Cranwells Barley and pease
as much as they would, never setting out the Tithe, so that the quantity of or
worth of all I.Cs. Goods which this Priest has taken away cannot be certainly
known, he has taken away so much in such an illegal and fellonious manner, as
all that reads this may judge, and see what fruits are brought forth by these
Teachers in this Nation, who profess to be Ministers of the Gospel, and to
take the cure of souls, when thus they are found in Robbery and oppressing the
people, and to these unjust proceedings they take the more Liberty from the
Rulers not putting a stop to them, pretending they have the Law and Government
on their sides.

To all the aforesaid wicked actings of Priest Bedford, those whose names are
hereunto annexed, can testify the truth of the same, Richard Catlin, Stephen
Chody, Matthew Peacock, Bennet Cranwel.

And likewise take notice of the further Illegal proceedings of the said James
Bedford against Thomas Purcas of Blunsome; as first of all in the year, 1655.
it seemed not enough for the said Priest Bedford to cast Thomas Purcas into
prison, but after he was forth of prison, sent his men to the land of the said
Thomas Purcas, and took away what of his Hay and Corn they would. And also at
another time the said Priest sent his man into his yard, and fetched away a Pig
after a fellonious manner, and said his Master would bear him harmless.
Moreover in the year 1658. the said James Bedford cast the said Thomas Purcas
into prison again, where he continued nine weeks, and after he was forth of
Prison, he sent his men upon the land of the said Thomas Purcas, and took away
from him what they would, as aforesaid. And moreover in the year 1659. Priest
Bedford himself came upon a land of the said Thomas Purcas, and beat off the
said Thomas his Team, and took away all the Grain of that Land except three
Sheaves; And yet notwithstanding all this his so wicked actings, his
covetousness in all this was not satisfied, but sent his men to another land
of the said Thomas, and out of six shockes took away five and left but one, and
his servant Thomas Bar by force pulled away the sheaves out of the said Thomas
his cart, and other of his men at several other times did the like.

To all which aforesaid several actions done by the said Priest and his men,
there are many witnesses can testify the same; wherefore men may here plainly
see what spirit this Priest Bedford is of, and in what paths he walks, even in
the steps of the false prophets which Christ prophesied of, which should appear
in sheeps clothing, but inwardly ravening Wolves, as by his fruits aforesaid
he is made manifest, Mat. 7.15. And now seeing this said Priest Beford has
been had in great esteem for an eminent disputant against the Quakers, and
after a meeting that John Whitehead had with him at Hadnam in the I Will of Ely,
Justice Castle of Hadnam did esteem of this Priest Bedford above all the
Priests in the I Will of Ely, in saying That he had done more (in disputing
against John Whitehead) then any Minister in the I Will of Ely would have done,
and so he set him above all the Priests in that I Will, (though his folly and
confusion was plainly manifest both at that meeting and other places;)
Therefore take notice of some of the Priests Doctrines here, from whence the
Readers hereof may easily judge what an ignorant company of Priests they have
in the I Will of Ely, if this Priest Bedford be above them all.

Pr. At the said meeting, he the said Priest Bedford denied that every man is
enlightened with a spiritual Light, and affirmed that the light within led men
to murder, instancing for his proof, John 16.2. and Paul's persecuting the
Saints.

Answ. Christ is the true Light that lights every man that comes into the
World, and his light with which he enlightens every man is Spiritual; so the
Priest in saying that the light within led men to murder, he has blasphemed
against the Light of Christ, who came not destroy men's lives but to save them;
and the gifts of his light or grace which he gives freely unto mankind, are
of the same Nature that Christ is of from whence they flow forth, and what Paul
did in persecuting the Saints, he did it ignorantly and not by the light, for
the light showed him his transgression in so doing, and they spoken of John
16.2. who thought they did God service in killing the Saints were not led by
the light, for they and their thoughts were deceived by him who was a murderer
from the beginning.

Pr. At a meeting which was at Blunsome Steeple-house the fourteenth day of the
twelfth month, where George Whitehead opposed the said Priest Bedford, the
Priest scoffed at quaking and trembling, judging it to be of the Devil, as also
he did at falling down (as some have done when they were smitten by the power
of God.)

Ans. Here the priest scoft at the power of God, and reproached its work, which
caused Moses to quake, and David's flesh to tremble, and him to morn all the
day long, and the word of the Lord said unto Ezekiel, Son of man, eat thy bread
with quaking, and Paul fell down to the earth when he was smitten, and he
trembled, and said work out your salvation with fear and trembling, and John
fell down at the feet of Christ; many more examples might be shown for this
against Pr. Bedfords blasphemy, whom we ask if it was not the power of God that
caused the Devils to tremble? Surely he is not come so far as the devils
were, to acknowledge the power of God, when they confessed to the Name of
Jesus, Eze. 12.17, 18. Acts, 9.4.6. Rev. 1.17.

Pr. Bedford scoft at the Quakers silent meeting, and called it a Rediculous
Foppery.

Ans. So he might as well have scoft at Job and his Friends for sitting upon
the ground together in silence seven days and seven nights, Job. 2.13. chapter
3.1. And at Ezekiel, who witnessed the like, Ezekiel. 3.15, 16, 17. And says the
Lord, keep silent O ye Islands before me, and let the People renew their
strength; so the Prophets and Holy men of God knew a time to be silent and a
time to speak, and in silence they waiting renewed their strength.

Pr. Bedford much scoffed at going naked; Instancing a friends going naked in
Cambridge.

Ans. So he would have scoffed at the Prophet Isays, going naked and barefoot
for a sign and a wonder, Isa. 20. and at Saul's being naked a day and a night
when the Spirit of the Lord was upon him, and therefore it was said is Saul
also among the Prophets? 1 Samuel 19.23, 24. And some of the servants of the Lord
in this age, have been moved to go naked, for a sign to those whose shame and
nakedness the Lord would discover, as he has done the priests nakedness, and
the Scholars of Cambridge their shame and filthiness, since the friend went
naked there.

Pr. Affirmed that the Quakers tread under foot the word of God, in denying the
Scriptures to be the Word.

Ans. This is also a lie and a slander, for we own the Scriptures in their
place in owning that to be the Word which they say is the Word, and that is God
and Christ, who was before the Scriptures (which is the writtings) were;
wherein are the words that God spoke, but the word was before the words or
writtings were.

Pr. Affirmed that all the Scriptures from the beginning of Genesis to the end
of the Revelation is the word of God, and that the Devils words are the word of
God.

Ans. So you may see here this priest makes no distinction between the Devils
words (which are in many places recorded in the Scripture) and the word of God,
but in counting the Devils words the word of God, he would here make the Devil
a Minister of Gods word, and here all may see his blasphemy, for the Devil was
a liar from the beginning, as he was when he tempted the woman, and spoke quite
contrary to what God had said, Genesis 3.3, 4.

Pr. That the Colleges were not built by the Papists, for he said the College
at Jerusalem was before the Papists were, 2 Kin 22.14.

Ans. See what a silly priest this is, the College (so called) at Jerusalem
was but one, and there is no mention of any being made Ministers at it; but that
Huldah a Prophetess dwelt in that College, who spoke the words of the Lord,
such a one as the priests will not allow to preach; but here are many Colleges
in England, at Oxford and Cambridge, which this priest Bedford could not clear
from being built by Papists. Also this Priest Bedfords deceit and lies against
the people of God called Quakers, was taken notice of in many other things
which he read in a book, as he had gathered them out of the priests books; and
that he durst not at all fairly dispute with G. Whithead at the said meeting,
but filled up much of the time with vain stories, lies, and scoffing, laughing,
and filthy talk not fit to be mentioned, of which many of his hearers were so
ashamed, till many of them cried out against him, and some said he was mad, and
others asked what he was else but a beast? When he spoke much of a Quakers
calling him a beast, which he was proved to be from Titus. 1.10.11, 12, 13. And
thus poor people have long been led captive by such profane priests as this,
whose profaneness is gone abroad, and will remain upon record for future ages,
by whose iniquities the soul of the Righteous is grieved, and this Nation
greatly suffers by reason of such profane Teachers, who are the Leaders that
cause the people to err: And how can ever a Nation be settled in peace, while
such are upheld by the Rulers to be leaders of the people as oppress them,
whose practices and principles tends to the rum both of bodies and souls, let
the serious consider it, and the people lay it to heart.

G. W.

THE END.

