The Charitable Farmer of Somersetshire: OR, GOD'S Great and Wonderful Work*

Being a True Relation of an Honest, Godly Man, that lived at Welling, within
three Miles of the City of Wells, which sold his Wheat to poor people at Six
Shillings a Bushel, when the Market price was Ten and Eleven Shillings, for
which he was much derided and scoft at, by his Rich Neighbors: but was
recompensed by an extraordinary Crap of Wheat, the like never before heard of,
each Stolk of Straw, having diverse full large Ears, some Seven, some Eight,
Nine, and Ten, so to Thirteen, but generally Ten Ears on every Straw throughout
the Field, which was Ten Acres and upwards, of which, diverse Ears are to be
seen at diverse Coffee-houses in the City of London.

Likewise a pattern for all Covetous Greedy-minded men, to be Charitable unto
their poor Neighbors, from the consideration of so Remarkable an Example.

By Law. White.

He finds Seed to the Sower, and Bread for food, and will multiply your Seed,
and increases fruits of your Benevolence.

2 Cor. 9.10. He that withholds Corn, the people shall curse, but blessing
shall be upon the head of him that sells it,

Prove 11.26. four corn plants, an illustration of the foregoing quotations

GOOD People, I would desire you to draw near, and spare so much time as the
Reading of this little Book will take reading over, to ye. For it is such a
Subject that the Oldest Man or Woman living, never heard the like, nor
Chronicles do not make mention of such another Wonder.

I think it is very well known to any sober Christian, that the wickedness of
the times has draw'd Gods judgments on us sufficiently of late days, that is,
I mean within these ten years, when first the sickness the Lord poured on us,
which made thousands of rich people fall from all their pride and bravery into
a shroud and Coffin, and their carcasses that in their life time was so
pompar'd up with the best that this sinful world could afford, yet at last in a
short time became a pray for worms, but no sooner the Lord had caused the
destroying Angle to cease, but we like disobedient children as soon as the rod
of correction was over, returned to our old sinful ways, which raised the Lords
indignation against us, and even forced the Lord to kindle a fire amongst us, as
we found to the ruin of many thousands of them, whom he preserved alive in the
sickness time, methinks the thoughts of those high and dreadful flames should
never be out of your minds, methinks I hear still the great craking of the
timber, and the noise of people, some crying, I am undone, others praying it
might not come to their house, others crying a hundred pound for a cart to
carry but one load of goods away, the shrieks and cries of women in childbed in
the fields, poor infants crying with hunger to their Parents.

But alas what do I talk of these, I shall be but laughed at by some for
rehearsing of this judgment, for I believe it is no more thought on by some as
if it had never been, and I fear by too many of them that suffered by this
calamity.

But now behold the mercy of the Lord what a great blessing he bestowed on the
builders of this City to raise so many great and stately fabrics out of a heap
of rubbish to the wonderment of the whole world, for which his holy name be
praised for ever, ever, Amen.

But neither mercies nor Judgments of God will work upon some peoples
consciences, it is but the other day since the Wars killed so many of our brave
Seamen, both Knights, Squires, and Gentlemen, and many others, whose lives
were as sweet to them as the rest.

Which has left a many poor Widows and fatherless Children behind, that now
stands in great need of their Husbands, and Children their fathers, that is
fain to pinch and go with many hungry belly over they did before the wars came.

But now for me to come to my intended matter, which is a thing so strange that
will cause a wonderment from all those that knows what belongs to the subject
which I am ready to declare, if you will have the patience to stay but a short
time till I rehearse it over, I hope you will not think much of your time, nor
your penny neither if you buy the book, I believe it is very well known to all
by sad experience I fear too many of the poorer sort that most kinds of
provision have of late been deer, and more particularly bred, which is the
staff of life. Wheat being sold in several places of England, for ten and
eleven shillings a bushel or strike, in which scarcity many poor people
suffered through the wretched covetousness of some rich Farmers, who kept up
their Corn on purpose to make a Dearth, and would not bring it to market till
they had got it to such a rate that the poor could not reach, as if it had been
their Delight to starve the poor, it rising from ten to eleven, and so to
twelve and upwards, all the last spring in many places in this Kingdom, which
caused many risings by the poorer sort of people in several Markets to cut the
Bagars sacks in pieces that is, those men that buys Corn in cheap Markets, and
carries it to other places, and there makes their prizes on it and so hoysts up
the market in both places, where they buy it and sell it: I see one Wednesday
in VVoolverhampton market this spring above an hundred of men, old and young in
arms, and cut those Bagers sacks, and took their corn, and filled their pockets
with it, and said their wives and children was ready to starve. And at Oster in
VVostershire was another rising by the poor against the rich Farmers for
hoarding up their Corn, and at Wastle was the same, at Sturbridge, and
Bromsgrove, and many other Markets in and about England, which are too many to
set down here. For shall I tell you, the poor suffered so much Hunger, that
they were fain to make Bread for their poor Children with Pease and Beans, and
were exposed to much want and hardship, and yet poor souls after it was bakt it
went down with poor little Babes as sweet as Honey, when they were fain to take
a Hatchet and Chop it to pieces: and truly they might have eaten Stones, if it
had been possible, before they could have found any love or charity from these
greedy covetous men, that sold their Corn at such a deer rate, as one above all
the rest, that brought his Corn to sell in VVolverhampton Market, in the County
of Stafford, having sold his Wheat three or four Market-days together for Nine
or Ten Shillings a Strike: when the fifth day he had brought a greatquantity of
Corn to sell, expecting it would have risen still, but it did not fall out
according to his desire, but fell six pence in a strike, to the great content
of the poor, which did so heart-burn this Greedy, covetous Miser, that he would
not sell one peck of his Corn that day, but caused it all to be set up, and
said, Let whose will sell, for he would not, for if he kept it but two or three
years longer, he hopt to sell it as dear as Mercers do their Pepper, which is
after the Rate of sixteen-pence the pound: This was told me by one that heard
the words spoke. And truly I fear their be too many such greedy covetous
hounds as he, that had rather see the poor starve, then relieve them with one
Quart of Corn, or thinnk it better to keep a pack of dogs then maintain a
fatherless child or two, but though there be so many such base men as they, yet
God has planted his grace in some men's hearts, and awaken their consciences in
these Deer and bad times that poor People now goes through, as one I shall
instance unto you, which is this.

An honest godly Farmer living at a small Village called Welling, within three
miles of the City of Wells, in the county of Somerset, whose name I am
obliged to conceal, having no leave from him to publish it, he taking into
consideration the deplorable condition of many poor familles round about him,
that was almost ready to starve, he resolved to afford them all the pity and
charity he could to relieve their want and misery, and also to contribute what
he could spare to their relief; And to that purpose having a considerable store
of wheat by him, he freely sold it to all such as he knew to be poor people
after the rate of six shillings a bushel, although it were generally seld by
all others in the Markets thereabouts at ten and eleven shillings at least, and
thus he continued selling most part of the winter in the year of our Lord,
1673; And the Spring following in the year, 1674. As long as he had any wheat
left that he could spare from his own necessary use, and by this Christian
compassionate Dealing it is verily believed he was under God a means to preserve
above an hundred families.

This good Samaritan, though he had a competent estate to live contented and
comfortable with, yet he was no great Rich man, which occasioned several of his
rich Neighbors to look upon themselves far beyond him in point of estate, and
thus forth they began to envy and deride him, as acting very foolishly, in not
making the most of his own, as they vainly called it, forgeting that whatsoever
we enjoy, it is but lent us by the Lord, who expects it to be improved to his
service, and the good of our fellow creatures: One of these churlish- Nabals,
as it is said, one day teling him that if he parted with his Corn so sillily, he
would shortly come to want Bread himself: To all which this good man meekly
answered, that he thought it his duty to relieve people in distress, to his
ability: that he reckoned that he might afford it at that rate he sold it for,
and verily believed he should never be the poorer for nor exacting those
unreasonable prizes which others took for that God was able to make up to him
some other way, and that he would cast himself wholly on the Lords good
Providence.

And now Christian Hearers, prepare your attentions to observe Gods wonderful
making good that promise in his Holy Word.

That he will never deceive them that trust in him, for by a strange means he
has been pleased to return to this Charitable Farmer ten fold, in a mavelous
Crop of Wheat, such as never was in any age before, for having sown a piece of
ground with Wheat, containing above Ten Acres, though the foil were but mean,
and not any way considerable repared by amendment, yet the blades came up very
thick, and promising a good crap, but what was more infinitely wonderful, when
it came to Ear, there came forth several and distinct Ears upon one straw, some
having seven, some eight, some nine, and so to thirteen upon some, so that
throughout all that Ten Acres of Corn, every stalk one with another may be
justly reckoned to Produce Ten Ears a Piece, the Wheat is of that kind which
they call bearded, and has many bristles growing up with the Ears, the straws
are somewhat bigger then Ordinary, yet not much, and it is very wonderful to
think how they should be able to support such a weight, for the Ears are
generally large and full of excellent Wheat, so that it is reasonably computed
by the most modest Guessers, that there is as much Wheat produced upon these
Ten Acres, as ever there was before upon Ten times the same quantity of
ground, for that it yields in Threshing answerable to the bulk and growth of
it. This Relation is a truth known and admired throughout most of the west of
England, and to several persons in this City of London, who has brought up
diverse lately from those parts, and are to be seen in diverse Coffee-houses
about the City: some scoffing Athiest may by chance render it to be a lie, and
will not believe it to be a thing of truth, for some be more like Jews then
Christians, and will not believe any thing but what their own eyes do see, but
I hope the more sober finding it an undoubted reality of which they cannot but
be satisfied, upon a small inquiry will regard it with more consideration, and
give glory to God, who by so remarkable an instance has been pleased to
declare his providence and make known, not only that he is, as to his
existence, that he is a rewarder sometimes even in this life of all those that
trust in him and obey his commandments, and may this president awaken all to
abandon their cruelty and uncharitableness, and learn to do good with what the
Lord has bestowed and given unto them in temperate blessings, for where the
Lord gives much, much he expects of them again, to the use of the poor, as you
may see in Bro. 19, 17. He that has pity on the poor lends unto the Lord,
and that which he has given will he pay him again. But men are grown to that
pass they will not believe God, but rather trust to their own wicked and sinful
lusts, and spend pounds on their base corrupt wills, in feasting and junketing,
to fill their stinking bodies full of diseases, with excessive eating and
drinking, whilst many would be glad of the least of that to refresh them with,
as many gluts, and gives up again, and whilst they be thus merry, with Warm
Lodging, Good Fires, fine Apparel, and as is said, has the world in a Sling,
and makes so much of themselves, these I say will hardly give a Meals Meat to a
hungry belly, or an old Coat to Chiver the Nakedness of a poor fatherless
Child, or a peck of coals to a distressed widow to undress her poor babes by:
No, no, I say, these love so much of pleasure, they cannot endure the poor at
their Doors, but like Dives, set their Dogs to drive them away. There is, I
fear, too many that be like unto that greedy young man in the Gospel, that came
to our Blessed Savior to know how he might be saved, and when he had heard
that he must give all to the poor, he went away with a sorrowful heart, for he
had great Possessions, as you may read more at large, in Mat. 9.21. Men are
grown so greedy of gain, that they will with a willing mind deceive the poor
laborors of their wages: gripe them of that which is their due, and think they
never work cheap enough to enrich their covetous desires, for they lie hoarding
up their money, and make it their god, for where their riches lies there their
heart is also, but know, oh man, that the Lord will bring you to a reckoning at
last, then you will curse the day that ever you was born, and wish you had
never known what riches was, without thou had made better use of it, as the
Lord had commanded thee. The Prophet Jerimiah complains of this sin greatly,
as you may see in Jer. 6.13. For from the least of them even unto the greatest
of them, every one is given unto covetousness, and from the prophet even unto
the Priest, every one deals falsely, many more places in Scripture could I
give to this purpose, as in Hebrews 13.5. Luke 12.15. Ephesians. 5.3. and in Prove.
21.26. He coveteth greedily all the day long, but the righteous gives and
spares not: all along the Scripture, you shall not find one word of comfort
for a covetous man, but to the charitable person there is a many good proofs;
as you may find, Pro. 11.25. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that
waters shall be watered also himself. Thus you may see how he that is
bountiful to the poor God will never let want, neither in this world nor that
to come, some thinks if they give but a shilling or two in 7 year it is enough,
but if they spend 10 or 20 shillings in 2 or 3 hours idly, that is not thought
too much, I wish that men would be wiser, and lay up for their own salvation,
which charity is the bond of perfectness, Colos. 3.14.

Thus to conclude, I desire all good Christians to be charitable to their poor
brethren, and God will restore again to them tenfold.

FINIS.

