Antichrist in Flesh Unmasked, AND THE Quakers Christianity Vindicated, FROM
THE Malicious and Injurious Attempts Of Edward Pay, William Alcott, and Henry
Loader,


In their late Defaming Confused BOOK Falsely Styled, Antichrist in Spirit
unmasked, or Quakerism a great Delusion, Wherein their Causeless Outrage, Folly
and Falsehood are deservedly Exposed.

But ye are forgers of lies, Job 13.4. London, Printed for Thomas Northcott, in
George-yard in Lombardstreet, 1692.

CHaritably hoping that many among the People commonly called Anabaptists, are
more Tender and Honest minded than some of their Ministers or Leaders, who have
shown their Envy and Bitterness against us, I would tenderly propose a few
things to the more Honest, Moderate and Charitable among them in and about
Deptford and elsewhere, that may be concerned in reading that Scandalous and
Malicious Book against us, Falsely styled, Antichrist in Spirit Unmasked, or
Quakerism a Great Delusion; lately Owned and Published by their Brethren,
Edward Pay, Henry Loader, William Alcott,

I. That they have Causelessly and Unjustly begun a Quarrel against us, to
Defame us, as a People who have had nothing but Love and Good Will to them and
that People, and maliciously tending to Reproach and Blast our Credit in what
we have solemnly professed, as to our Christian Belief and Religion, both to
the Civil Government and Nation.

II. They appear Envious against our Present Liberty, as Men of a Turbulent,
Persecuting Spirit, by seeking to invalidate and make void one Condition of our
present Liberty, which through God's Providence is granted us and them; and
that is our Profession of Faith, in the three Divine Witnesses in Heaven, the
Father, Son and Holy Spirit, being one God, blessed for evermore: And
acknowledging, the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given by
Divine Inspiration.

Which Profession, though sincerely owned and consented unto by us before the
Parliament, and accordingly accepted and inserted in the Act For exempting
their Majesty's Protestant Subjects, dissenting from the Church of England,
from the Penalties of certain Laws, and therein confessed to be a Profession of
their Christian Belief: Yet contrary thereunto these Persons have grossly
Belied and Misrepresented Us, the People called Quakers; accusing us with
Vilifying and Contemning the Holy Scriptures, and that we own not the
Scripture, but seemingly allow it, Epist. and Page 14. And that The Quakers are
great Enemies to, and Contemners of Holy Scriptures, p. 20. both contrary to
our Sincere and Christian Profession, before-cited, and to the Civil
Government's Belief and Acceptance thereof; wherein these Anabaptists have
neither done honestly toward us, nor prudently toward their Superiors, thus
to contradict, and consequently to affront the Government in its Belief and
Charity toward us, and to set Subjects at Variance, and to raise Persecution
against us again, instead of being humbly thankful for their and our present
Liberty.

III. They have not only abused particular Persons, but a People, a Religious
Society, fearing God, and truly esteeming the Holy Scriptures; when we have
solemnly and sincerely declared to the Government, That we believe the Holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are given by Divine Inspiration:
Wherein we are Believed, Accepted and Tolerated by the Government. Two or three
Anabaptist Preachers divulge the contrary to the World in Print, That the
Quakers are great Enemies to, and Contemners of Holy Scriptures, and no
Christians, but deluded Impostors, and their Profession a Compound of Heresies,
p. 8, 20. And what is the Consequence, but therefore the Quakers are not fit to
be tolerated, nor to have their Liberty of Conscience or Exercise of Religion?
And no Doubt, had these angry Anabaptists Power, we should not enjoy our
Liberties, the very Nature and Tendence of these their Bitter Lying Invectives,
being to bring Persecution upon us, as a People not to be given any Credit
unto, in our solemn Profession before Authority.

IV. Pray observe, That much of the said Pamphlet, or Book against us, styled,
Antichrist in Spirit, is collected out of other Books and Pamphlets of our
Adversaries, long since Answered and Refuted; and their Authorities are utterly
denied by us. As the Westmorland Petitioners, who were Envious Persecutors,
Thomas Hicks his Fictitious Abusive Dialogues, who was proved a notorious
Forger of Lies: And a most Malicious Libel, styled, Tyranny and Hypocrisy, etc.
without Author's Name, yet cited and insisted upon against us. Thus Credulous
and Malicious are these Persons, Edward Pay, Henry Loader, William Alcott, as
to take Scandalous Pamphlets on Trust, whose Authorities we utterly Deny, and
Challenge them to prove them Authentic; they having been long since
sufficiently Answered, Disproved and Refuted, in our Friends Books; one
entitled, The Christian Quaker, in Folio; another, Reason against Railing;
another, The Counterfeit Christian, in 8o. another, Judas and the Jews;
another, The Divinity of Christ, etc. in 4o. another, The Christianity of the
People called Quakers vindicated, in Answer to Dr. Forde; and many others of
our Friends Books, which contain sufficient Answer to all the chief Objections
and Reproaches scraped up in this Inveterate Lying Pamphlet aforesaid.

V. They have Unjustly and Falsely Curtalized and Perverted diverse of our
Friends Words and Passages in their Books, leaving out the Explanatory Words
and Sentences.

VI. They have argued fallaciously in diverse things, deducing Inferences and
Charges from a particular to a general, as from a particular Person, chargeable
(as supposed) they charge the General, that is, a Body of People, which is very
unjust; as if where we find false Logic, Absurdities and Errors committed, by
these particular Persons, Edward Pay, Henry Loader, William Alcott, we should
charge them upon their whole Society or Body, surely they would not be so
served.

VII. It would be well for their Hearers, who are more Peaceable and Prudent,
not to be subject to such Envious and Turbulent Teachers; whose Work tends to
Sedition, Strife and Discord, among their Neighbors; but rather to reprehend
their Rage and Railery, and caution them to live peaceably among their
peaceable Neighbors, that mean them no harm.

VIII. It is a manifest Sign the Lord has forsaken their Shadows and Forms of
Profession, who are turned into so much Envy and Bitterness as these Men are,
against other Dissenters more Christian like than themselves: That they are
turned from the Spirit into the Flesh, which Envy is a fruit of. The Primitive
Tenderness, Simplicity and Spiritual Discoveries and Preaching that were
formerly among some of their Ancient and Eminent Brethren being now lost, and
slighted by these Gainsaying Adversaries, (which is their sad Apostasy) who
instead of owning the Sufficiency of the Spirit's Teaching, as they did
formerly, now oppose Immediate Inspiration, p. 16. and possessing the Kingdom
of Christ, p. 52. and say that, The Disciples did not expect this Christ to
come into them, p. 53. (who is the same only and very Christ of God, of whom
the Holy Scriptures testify) they Quoting Deuteronomy. 18.15. Acts 3.22. Mat. 17.5.
Luke 24.39. Joh. 20.19. p. 52, 53. And also deriding at the Quakers exhorting
People to Turn to the Light within, p. 54, 55, 56. Thus Carnal, Blind and Dark,
have these Baptist Preachers shown themselves, and how grossly Ignorant of the
Spiritual Appearance and Kingdom of Christ and his Light within, and his own
and Apostles Testimony thereof. The Lord deliver well-meaning People from such
blind Guides.

Of the Word Quakerism (which is a Nickname in Derision put upon our Christian
Profession) you tell us, It Is derived from a Gesture used Much among them
formerly in their Meetings; (meaning the Meetings of the People called Quakers)
as was manifest (say you) by the Westmorland Petitioners, viz. That their
Practice did exceedingly savor of Sorcery, because of the Swellings, Quakings,
Roatings and Foamings, that were among them at their Meetings, p. 7, 8.

Were you Eye or Ear-Witnesses of these Gestures? No, you had this Story from
the Westmorland Petitioners; and what were they but a Company of envious
persecuting Priests, and Magistrates whom they had Instigated to Persecution?
Are you not so Credulous as to take upon Trust any old Story to render the
People called Quakers Odious and Ridiculous? Is this your Christianity and
Religion? Lord deliver every well-meaning Person from you and your Envy. We
deny your Story of Swellings and Foamings, as charged on Us or our Meetings in
Westmorland, etc. But that there has been Weeping, Trembling and Lamentation,
sometimes in our Solemn and Religious Assemblies in Westmorland and other
Places, I and many more were and are Witnesses; when the glorious Power and Day
of the Lord arose and broke forth in our Meetings, to the Breaking, Humbling
and Tendering many Hearts, from a living Sense of his Divine and Dreadful
Presence, which was truly felt among us; and that the Holy Men of God did
Witness Quaking and Trembling, as Holy Scripture testifies: This you grant is
true. And the same (say you) may be said of Wicked Men and Devils. And what
then? God's dreadful Power and Presence can make all Dread and Tremble and Bow
before it, even both good Men and bad Men, yea and Devils also; yet the Power
is the same that is over all. Wicked Men and Devils have been sometimes
terrified by it, and made to tremble for fear of his Wrath, because of their
guilt of Iniquity; and good Men and Women have in an humble and a contrite
Heart and Spirit, Trembled in a Holy Reverence and Sense of the Presence and
Power of our Lord Jesus Christ among them, in their Inward Attention upon him
and his Word, and in their fervent Prayers and Supplications to God. And how
can it be better than Blasphemy to account this Sorcery? Such wicked
Construction and Insinuation we utterly deny and testify against, and put you
to prove it who have received this false Story against us, of Swellings and
Foamings, and Sorcery, etc. at our Meetings, with such wicked defaming
Constructions. I my self was frequent at our Meetings in Westmorland very
early, near the very beginning of them in that Country, and solemnly Declare
it, I never saw such Gestures, as Swellings and Foamings: And I have lately
enquired of several of our Ancient Friends who were conversant at those early
Meetings in the North, and they Declare the same, That they never saw such
Postures in our Friend's Meetings. But set case any have been disordered
through some Natural Infirmity Distemper, Swooning or Falling Sickness --

-- What does this affect us or our Meetings on a Religious Account? It may be
some of your own People's Case. And suppose it should be made appear that
diverse Anabaptists, after they have been Dipped and received into
Church Fellowship, have run Mad or Distracted; and others guilty of great
Enormities; how would this affect either their Church-Profession or Society?
Pray consider it, have you done well, or as you would be done by, in raking up
and aggravating old Stories against the People called Quakers, to render them
as black and deformed as you can? Upon this Story you make this farther
Aggravation, from Luke 9.39. We reed of him that was Possessed, that he Foamed
when the Diabolical Spirit did tear him. True, and what then? Is this any Proof
against the Quakers, that they are so Possessed or guilty of Sorcery? No sure.
--

-- We read further also concerning that Man that was possessed, That when he
was brought unto Jesus, as soon as the Spirit saw him, he tore him, and fell
down on the ground wallowing and foaming; and that when Jesus rebuked the
Unclean Spirit, and charged him to come out of him, and enter no more into him;
then the Spirit cried and rent him sore, and came out, Mark 9.20, 25, 26. Luke
9.39, 42, 43. Now, suppose, that in any meeting of the People called Quakers,
any such Operations or Gesture has been in any particular Person formerly, that
some Unclean Spirit has so torn and disordered him or her; we may charitably
believe it has been because Jesus Christ has come in Spirit and Power among
them, to rebuke and cast out such Unclean Spirits, and to deliver them that
were infested thereby; When our Friends have been solemnly met together in his
Name and Fear, in Fasting and Prayer, to wait upon and worship him. And that
such Unclean Spirit did not enter them in such Assemblies as ours, but when
they were Followers of the Envious Persecuting Priests (who used to Revile and
Rail against the Quakers in their Pulpits) and of such Malicious Preachers as
these Anabaptists, who, as persons possessed with a Lying, Unclean Spirit, are
now still foaming out their own Shame and Malice against an Innocent People, as
these Men have done in their Lying Abusive Pamphlet, falsely pretending to
Unmask Antichrist in Spirit, whilst their Work of Malice and Falsehood bespeaks
Antichrist, in their proud puffed up envious Flesh and Fleshly Minds,
scurrilously perverting our Words, detracting and defaming others more Harmless
than themselves, and no whit inferior to them, as Men, in Education, Parts or
Morals. And I hope we are and shall be of more Credit and Reputation in what we
solemnly declare and write, than they in falsely telling the World, That it is
nothing so believed by us, as pretended in our Pamphlet, meaning that Paper
concerning our Christianity; which they not being able to refute, now falsely
tell People, That it is nothing so believed by us; as Henry Loader and William
Alcott, have unjustly done in their Epistle to the Reader; though they are so
credulous of their Brother Edward Paye's Work or Pamphlet, as to Believe
neither Ambition, Self-Interest or Prejudice moved him to it; but purely the
Honor of God, Defense of Truth, and Good of Souls: And they also Hope and
Believe that he has been careful truly to cite the Quakers own Authors. But we
know the contrary, and that he has both falsely cited, grossly belyed, and
perverted the Quaker's Words and Authors, and taken many false Things on
Credit, and in their Implicit Faith; not only the said Story from the
Westmorland Petitioners, but also out of his Brother Thomas Hicks, his
abominable Forgeries and Lies in his fictions Dialogues, and others, long since
refuted, to his own and his Compurgators and Abetters utter Shame and Disgrace.
And you who are such credulous Approvers and Espousers of this Edward Paye's
malicious Work against us, do charge us with this horrid Lie, viz. That the
Holy Scriptures, this Generation of Men contemn and vilify.

God knows the contrary, and he will judge righteously between us. You have
herein Grossly Belyed and Defamed us, our real Intention, and our Solemn
Profession for the Holy Scriptures, and sincere Esteem of them, as therein we
have been Credited by the Government, and many others, we doubt not but we
shall still have Credit against your shameful Lies and Defamations to the
contrary; whereby you have most Diabolically and Foully Foamed out your own
Shame and Envy, as will farther appear, That the Foaming Unclean Spirit, and
Lying Devil is not cast out of you. Oh! how well it would be for you, if you
would humbly wait for and own Christ's Appearance in Spirit, and Power to cast
out that Unclean, Lying Spirit that Possesses you, and has moved you to approve
and divulge so many gross Lies as are in your said Book.

Out of your Brother, Thomas Hick's Dialogue, you represent the Quaker to
answer thus, viz. When we make use of the Scripture, it is only to quiet and
stop their Clamours that plead for it as their Rule, p. 14.

This is one of your Brother Hick's gross Forgeries in the Quaker's Name, which
you have taken on Trust out of his fictitious Dialogue. Oh! blush and be
ashamed of adopting and promoting such False, Deceitful Stuff; and also of your
subjoyning in the Person of the Quakers this Forgery, viz. We own not the
Scripture; we seemingly allow it, but our End in this is only to stop their
Clamours that plead for it as their Rule.

These Words, subjoyned to Hick's Forgeries, I charge upon you Edward Pay,
William Alcott and Henry Loader, as abominably False and Slanderous. Will this
Deceitful Method bring any Honor to you, or honest Proselytes to your Church,
think ye? Would you be Popular and Famous by such gross Forgery? Is this the
Fruit of your Religion, you Dip and Proselyte People into? You are hard put to
it: It is a Sign your Dispensation is decreasing, and your Glory eclipsed, when
you can espouse and invent such gross Forgeries, and make Lies your Refuge. Woe
unto you Lying Hypocrites; When and where did ever we, the People called
Quakers, say, as you say in our Name? viz. That we own not the Scripture; we
seemingly allow it, but our End in this is only to stop their Clamours, etc.
These your horrid abusive Forgeries will be a sore Blot and heavy Burden upon
you.

And now, pray, observe what strange Test or Proof, your Agent, Edward Pay,
puts upon us to evince Immediate Inspiration, viz. Now let the Quakers resolve
me by their Immediate Inspirations, What those Things were that Jesus did, that
are not written, John 21.25. And what were the Contents of that Writing on the
Ground, John 8.6, 8. or else let their proud Boastings of Immediate Inspiration
be condemned to perpetual Silence, and Shame cover their Faces. And waiting for
their Resolve herein, etc. -- p. 15, 16.

And why so? If we do not resolve by Immediate Inspiration what those things
were that Jesus did, that are not written, John 21.25. And what were the
Contents of that Writing on the Ground, John 8.6, 8. Hereupon you have past
Unjust Judgment, and falsely charged us with proud Boasting, and argued absurdly
against Immediate Inspiration, as if none have the Spirit of Christ unless they
know and can declare all things it knows; or could write as many Books of those
Things Christ did, as (was supposed) the World it self could not contain, John
21.25. And then, by this, you Baptists will greatly fall short of being
Christ's Ministers or Ambassadors, and have shut your selves out from any Share
in the Spirit of Christ, or Divine Inspiration. And how then will you prove
your Call to Baptize People in Water? Though herein you have most egregiously
contradicted your selves, in pretending to Christ in you, from 2 Cor. 13.5. and
to be the Temples of God, 1 Cor. 6.19. To be in Christ new Creatures, 2 Cor. 5.
p. 22. And to have the Spirit of Christ, or else none of his, p 23. And that
Christ gives his Spirit to them that obey him, Acts 5.32. p. 69. But does he
give the Knowledge of all those other things that he did (which are not written)
to all them that obey him, think ye? Or otherwise is it just to condemn them
all to perpetual Silence and Shame, for owning that Christ has given them his
Spirit, when they cannot tell all those other things? Must we needs be as
omniscient as the Spirit of God is, or else be condemned as wholly destitute
thereof? Do you think you have well argued, or given just Judgment in this
Matter? Oh! Blind Guides, self-contradicting and self-condemned Hypocrites. How
has Antichrist appeared in your Proud and Envious Flesh against Christ in
Spirit?

On Matthew 24.26. you say, It is more than probable, That Christ pointed at
this Generation of Impostors, the Quakers; who say, Behold he is in the Secret
Chambers, [which is a gross Lie, by the way] ay within thee, not at a distance
from thee, etc.

To deem them Impostors that say Christ is within thee or them, is to render
the Holy Apostles Impostors, who preached Christ within the Word, nigh in thy
Heart, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. (which therefore was not separate from them, and only
at a Distance) yea and to render your selves also Impostors, who have confessed
the same Truth of Christ within, p. 22, 23, 69. from 2 Cor. 13.5. 1 Cor. 6.19.
2 Cor. 5.17. Ephesians. 2.22. John 16.7. Acts 5.32. Thus you Anabaptist Preachers
have contradicted your selves, as well as shown your Antichristian Spirit
against Christ within; and that you are blind Guides, and self-contradictory
Opposers of the Mystery of Christ, as well as Defamers of us for his sake.

You most shamefully belie the People called Quakers in your Comparison, p. 18.
where you say, The Names they (i. e. the Quakers) give the Holy Scriptures,
viz. no better than an Old Almanac, Precepts and Traditions of Men, etc.

Pray where do they (that is, the People called Quakers) give the Holy
Scriptures those Names you charge upon them? They are such gross, notorious,
old Lies, that it is high Time for you to be horribly ashamed thereof, as they
are quite out of date with all sober minded People that know us; so we doubt
not but you, who are now the Promoters thereof, will be as much out of Credit
as the first Fomenters, have long been.

You abuse and wrong us about the Titles of our Books (as if higher than we
give to the Holy Scriptures) perverting them by leaving out the Explanatory
part of the Titles; as for instance [A true and Everlasting Rule] being the
first Words of the Title, you leave out the next following in the same
Sentence, viz. [from God discovered] thus you deal very disingenuously by them
and others. p. 18, etc.

We know none among us that call the Holy Scriptures, a Dead or Carnal Letter,
nor do we own the Words. By the Holy Scriptures we intend the Holy Testimonies
and Doctrine of Faith and Practice therein contained, which is both Living and
Spiritual to them that are alive unto God in Christ. Though the outward Letter
or Writing in it self alone be Dead, the Holy Matter contained in it is Living,
to them that are Living and Spiritual. There is the Letter of the Shadows of
the Law and Old Covenant, which is abolished by Christ, and therefore Dead. And
all Shadows and Carnal Ordinances, comparatively, are but dead Letter. When
Paul preferred the Newness of the Spirit to the Oldness of the Letter, and the
Ministry of the Spirit above the Letter; this was not to slight or contemn the
Holy Scriptures: No more do we in allowing the Holy Spirit, the same Preference
which the Scripture allows. Moreover to them that are Dead to the Spirit, to
God and Christ, the Scripture is Dead, the Words therein are Dead, and even the
Spiritual Living Ministry is Dead as to them; The Savor of Death unto Death,
in them that Perish; but the Savor of Life unto Life in them that are Saved.
As the mere Characters or Letters, as written in Paper and Ink, have no Sound
nor Voice till Sound be given them by the Reader; so, the Words contained in
them, or Preaching from them, have no Life, but as the Spirit gives it, without
which all Preaching is Dead and Fruitless. I am persuaded in Conscience, That
in these things our Friends real Intentions in their Writings is explained (and
never to contemn the Holy Scriptures) and our Adversaries hard and ill
Constructions answered. And though the Holy Spirit, from whence the Holy
Scriptures proceeded be of itself All sufficient to guide in all the Ways of
God both with and without the Scriptures (or where they are not in Writing)
this is not to contemn or slight them where they are; but to use them with the
help of the same Spirit, rightly to understand and practice them: It being the
Inspiration of the Almighty that gives Understanding of the Mind and Will of
God, and without which the Scriptures cannot be truly understood. It was from
the same Inspiration (or Spirit of God) the Holy Scriptures first came; and
from thence they had their Authority and real Credit. And by no other Argument
or Demonstration can the Divine Authority of Holy Scriptures be effectually
proved or evinced, to such as question their Authority, but by the same Holy
Spirit of God in Man, bearing Witness to the Truths therein contained. It must
be something superior to the Scriptures, that must so prove their Divine
Authority to them that question the same, which we do not at all, blessed be
God; and therefore Challenge these Adversaries E. Pay and W. Alcott to prove,
that the People called Quakers, or any Persons continuing in Society with them,
do say, The Holy Scripture is but a dead carnal Letter, or that so call the
Doctrins or Testimonies therein contained; for we positively deny any such
Expressions.

Note also, that these Adversaries have apparently perverted and wronged George
Whitehead's Words, both in Citation and Construction, about the Holy Scriptures
and the Person of Christ, p. 11, 12. and 22. And likewise grossly Abused,
Wronged and Mischarged G. Fox, James Parnell, G. Keith, foully perverting and
misconstruing their Words, p. 28, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 59. And they have
also Abused, Vilified, Defamed and Wronged, W. Smith, H. Smith, J. Naylor, E.
Buroughs, Isaac Pennington, S. Crisp, W. P. and others, Men of better Fame and
Repute than themselves, and more Righteous and Innocent than their Defamers.

Now I would seriously enquire of you William Alcott and Henry Loader,

1. Was Edward Pay deputed and approved by your Congregation, or any select
Assembly of Elders or Ministers of the Baptized People or Churches, to Write
and Publish his said Book against the People called Quakers? Or did he do it on
his own Authority and Head, with your Approbation only?

2. What Ministers or Elders of your Churches, besides your selves, did peruse
and approve of Edward Paye's said Book before Printed, and of the Printing
thereof, to defame us as a People?

3. Is the said Edward Pay indeed esteemed among you and your Society a good
Christian, a Person of a Godly and Sober Conversation, of sound Judgment Piety
and Parts, meet to manage Matters of Controversy about Religion?

4. Do you intend to stand by him the said Edward Pay, in all the Matters that
he has Written in Charge, both against certain Persons and against the People
called Quakers, in his Book?

Pray give us your direct and plain Answer to these Questions; the Reason
whereof being, 1. That Edward Pay and you also have concerned us as a People,
in your severe and unjust Accusations, in his and your Book. 2. That we have an
Answer drawn up more Comprehensive and Particular, reserved for Publication, if
we may find a farther Occasion or Necessity for it. Therefore it is but equal
and reasonable you should be so Ingenuous, as to tell us plainly, whether your
said Book with our Answer may affect your selves only, or your whole Society of
People; seeing it affects us as a whole Society of People. If your Book against
us, be only your own private Act whose Names are to it, and not more generally
owned, nor stood by among your People; we would be so just as not to reflect it
on your whole Society or People.

London, the 2d of the 1st Mo. 1691/2. By a Lover of Peace, and the Souls of
Men, George Whitehead.

TO conclude in general against your false Charges, and manifold Abuses and
Calumnies, contained in your said Book, i. e. Antichrist in Spirit, and to
anticipate farther Objections on the Matters herein.

We sincerely Profess and Declare in the Sight of God and Men, that we do
faithfully Believe and Profess, That the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament were given by Divine Inspiration: And that the three Divine Witnesses
in Heaven above, namely, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, are one True and
Eternal God, Blessed for evermore, whose Omnipresence and Omnipotency, we also
Believe and Profess.

And the Divinity and Humanity or Manhood of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, the Eternal Word of God: And that in the fullness of time he took Flesh,
being Miraculously Conceived by the Holy Ghost and Born of the Virgin Mary, and
suffered the cruel Death of the Cross, as an Universal Offering and Sacrifice
both in his Body and Blood shed thereon, for the Sins of the whole World, and
was Buried, and Rose again the third Day, and Visibly Ascended (was seen in his
Ascending) and passed into Heaven and Glory: And that he Ascended far above all
Heavens, that he might fill all Things: And that by his Suffering and Sacrifice
he has obtained Eternal Redemption for us, which through Faith in his Name and
Power, true Repentance and Conversion, we livingly receive and effectually
partake of.

That we are not Pardoned, Justified, Redeemed or Saved by our own
Righteteousness, Works, Merits or Deservings; but by the Righteousness, Merits
and Works, of this our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, being both
imparted and imputed to us, as he is of God made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption. Our Reconciliation, Redemption, Pardon,
Sanctification and Justification, having respect both to his suffering Death
and Blood upon the Cross: (As the one Peace - Offering and Sacrifice, and as
our High Priest, thereby making Atonement and Reconciliation for us, and
giving himself a Ransom for all Mankind.) And also to the effectual saving Work
of his Grace and good Spirit within us, bringing us to experience true
Repentance, Regeneration and the new Birth, wherein we partake of the
Fellowship of Christ's Sufferings and Power of his Resurrection.

In which Grace we ought to persevere in newness of Life and faithful Obedience
unto him, unto the end that we may be Heirs of the Eternal Salvation, which
Christ is the Author of. -- We sincerely Believe also, That the Man Christ
Jesus is the only Mediator between God and Men, our Intercessor and Advocate
with the Father; and that he exercises his Kingly Office, and his Priestly and
Prophetical Office in his Kingdom and Church here on Earth, wherein he Governs,
and plentifully affords both Immediate Inspiration and Instruction to his
Faithful Followers, who walk in his Light to guide them into all Truth; and he
that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his. -- And that this same Lord
Jesus Christ, who dyed for all Men, enlightens every Man coming into the World,
and was and is the Light of the World, the Way, the Truth and the Life; and
that the same Christ that was Crucified and put to Death, as concerning the
Flesh, and quickened by the Spirit and Power of the Father, he is Inwardly
Revealed and Spiritually in the Hearts of True and Spiritual Believers, by his
Holy Spirit, Life, Light and Grace: And that therefore his coming and appearing
Outwardly in the Flesh and Inwardly in the Spirit, cannot render him two
Christ's, but one and the same very Christ of God blessed for evermore.

Also the saving Baptism, which is, that of the Spirit and the Lord's Supper in
his Church and Kingdom, we believe and receive in him the Substance
Spiritually, not apprehending our selves bound to remain under any outward
Shadow or Type thereof in the clear Gospel-day of Christ.

The Immortality of the Soul of Man, being Created in God's own Image, and
Inspired by him that formed Man. And the Resurrection of the Dead and Eternal
Judgment: And that every Man shall be reserved in his own distinct Being for
his due and future Reward; the Wicked unto the Day of Judgment, Destruction and
Wrath; but the Righteous unto Eternal Life and Glory, in their Spiritual Bodies
like unto Christ's Glorious Body, where they shall be equal to the Angels of
God in Heaven. These Things we sincerely Believe and Profess according to Holy
Scripture-Testimony, and as set forth therein, as the Lord is pleased to give
us Understanding thereof. -- Being ready and willing to give more large Account
and Demonstration of our Holy and Christian Profession, as the Lord shall lay a
necessity upon us. And our Belief and Profession of these Matters is not new to
us, but according to that Light and Understanding we have received of the Lord
and believed from the Beginning, since we were a Suffering People gathered by
him; as also diverse of our Ancient Friend's Ministry, Books and Writings, do
more fully signify and demonstrate.

POSTSCRIPT.
To evince with what Consciences these Anabaptists, E. Pay, W. Alcott and H.
L. have writ against the Quakers, pray observe these two or three Instances
more.

1. E. P. etc. p. 46. read p. 6, 7. Readiness Errand to Damascus. And G. Fox takes
the Name to himself, saying, He is the Eternal Judge of Quick and Dead.

Answ. This is notoriously false in Fact, being in the very same Book Readiness
Errand, recorded among those Matters Falsely charged on G. F. by his Adversaries
the Priests and others, in the County of Lancaster, in their Petition, p. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. of Readiness Errand, where G. F. opposes and answers their
Objections.

2. E. P. etc. p. 29. That they (meaning the Quakers) say, That Christ has no
Body but his Church. Quoting Readiness Errand, p. 9.

Answ. Which is notoriously false again. For it was the said Priest's Objection
against L. F. that he professed, That Christ had never any Body but his Church,
Saul 's Errand, p. 2. Which was also false, and there recorded among their
other false Charges objected; though in the Answer it is confessed, That Christ's
Church is his Body: It Is also confessed, That we are Members of his Body, of
his Flesh, and of his Bones: Which grants his particular Body, and his Churches
Union therewith. Therefore, far from such Profession, as, That Christ had never
any Body but his Church.

E. P. etc. p. 59. See Parnell 's Shield of Truth, p. 12. Where he calls
Water Baptism a formal Invention and Imitation of Men, and so a mere Delusion.

Answ. This James Parnell speaks not of Water Baptism, without Distinction, as
they state it against him for he says it was a Figure, (meaning as John and
the Disciples used it) but of Sprinkling Infants, as he says, He received
Water upon his Face, as his Parents told him. This he calls an Invention of Men
(and so do Baptists, I think) p. 67, 68. Collection of J. P. 's VVritings. Thus
Immorral and Unjust are these Anabaptists in writing against us.

FINIS.

