WHereas the Worshipful Company of the MERCERS, London, upon a Proposal made to
them by the Reverend Dr. Assheton, did, by a Paper dated the 8th of Febr. School.
publish and declare in the Words following: That is to say,
By the Wardens and Commonalty of the Mystery of the MERCERS, at Mercers-Hall
in Cheapside, London, the 8th Day of February, School.
THE Reverend William Assheton, Doctor in Divinity, Rector of Beckenham in
Kent, and Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Ormond, having out of a Charitable
Design, for the Maintenance and Relief of Widows of the Clergy, (which very
frequently are left in a poor Condition when their Husbands dye) employed his
Thoughts to consider of a Way for their Relief and Support; and thereupon
thought of a Proposal, in which he includes also others beside Clergymen, viz.
Physicians, Lawyers, Merchants, Traders, or any other Persons that shall
Subscribe the Sum of 100 l. or more, during the Time of their joint Lives; in
case the Husband shall die, and leave his Wife a Widow, that then there should
be paid her, during her Life, the Sum of 30 l. a Year per Cent. free of all
Charges; at the two usual Feasts of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, and St. Michael the Archangel; and that the Sum to be Subscribed should
be limited to 100000 l. And in case the Wife dye, during her Husband's
Lifetime, the same to go to the Benefit of those that did undertake the same.

The said Reverend Dr. Assheton, considering where the said Subscription-Money
might be lodged safely, and reasonable Security given for the due Payment of
the Widows, did think it could not be better secured than in the Hands of the
Worshipful Company of Mercers, London; and did at a General Court of the said
Company, held on Friday the 11th of November School, make this Proposal to the
said Company; who thereupon appointed a Committee to consider of the same, and
what Security the Company could give; which Committee had several Meetings
thereupon; and having had several Discourses with Dr. Assheton, and acquainted
him what Estate they had to settle for Security, being clear Rents, 2888 l. 8
s. 10 d. per Ann. (besides the Payments by the Benefactors to be paid out of
the same;) which, by a moderate Calculation would yield, when the Leases come
out, above 13500 l. per Annum clear, as aforesaid; And the said Dr. Assheton
judging the same to be reasonable Security, the said Committee made their
Report to a General Court the 23d of December. School. Which Court having read the
Report of the Committee, did suspend their Resolution of the same for that
time, and another General Court was appointed to be held the 13th of January
following; that so all the Members of the said Company might have time to
consider of the said Proposal, and the Report of the Committee thereupon; that
so they might the better be enabled to give their Resolutions in the whole
Affair; And at the said General Court the Company did accept of the said
Proposal. And do hereby publish and declare,

1. That in case 100000 l. shall be subscribed and paid in to the Company in
such manner as is hereafter mentioned; The said Company do undertake to pay
unto the Widows of the Subscribers, according to the aforesaid Proposition, 30
l. per Cent. per Annum, free of Taxes and Charges, at the two usual Feasts of
the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and St. Michael the Archangel.

2. That for better Security of the Payments, as soon as the said 100000 l.
shall be Subscribed, the said Company will settle and convey in due Form of Law
the Lands, Houses and Estate before mentioned, in Trustees, for the due payment
of the said Annuities.

3. That all married Clergymen, and other married Persons, Except as hereafter
is Excepted, that inhabit in the Kingdom of England, and do not exceed the Age
of 60 Years at the time of the Payment of the Money, and receiving the
Company's Bond, and are then in good and perfect Health, and have Subscribed
any Sum not less than 50 l. nor exceeding the Sum of 300 l. in case they die in
the Kingdom of England, and leave their Wives Widows, the said Widows shall
receive, as beforementioned, the Sum of 30 l. yearly for every 100 l. so
Subscribed; and so proportionably for a greater or lesser Sum, as
beforementioned.

4. That every Person at the time of his Subscription (which shall be made in
Person) shall express the Place of his Abode, the Name of his Wife, and his and
her several Age in such manner as is hereafter mentioned.

5. That no Person that goes to Sea, nor Soldier that goes into the Wars, shall
be admitted to Subscribe to have the Benefit of this Proposal, in regard of the
Casualties and Accidents that they are more particularly liable to.

6. That the Book of Subscriptions shall be laid open at Mercers-Hall on or
before the First day of March School, and shall continue to the 24th day of June
1699, (in case the 100000 l. be not Subscribed sooner) and Members of the
Company shall attend to take the said Subscriptions on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and
Fridays every Week during that time, between the Hours of 9 and 12 in the
Forenoon, and 3 and 6 in the Afternoon.

7. That as soon as the said 100000 l. is Subscribed, public Notice shall be
given in the Gazette; and all Persons that have Subscribed, are then, within 30
Days next following, to Pay in the Moneys by them Subscribed at Mercers-Hall to
the said Company; for which purpose, Members of the said Company shall attend
on the Days and Times aforesaid.

8. That on the Payment of the Money, the Person shall have a Writing under the
Seal of the Company, acknowledging the Receipt thereof; and engaging, That if
his Wife be left a Widow, she shall receive the Moneys in proportion to his
Subscription as before specified; but unless the Money be actually paid within
the Time limited, the Widow to have no Benefit by the Subscription; and at the
same time the said Person Subscribing, shall give a Bond to the Company, That
in case his Wife shall dye before him, to give notice to the Company thereof
within one Month after her Decease.

9. That any Widow that shall have Right to receive any Annuity by this
Subscription, shall give notice of the Time of her Husband's Death to the
Company within one Month after his Decease; and when she comes to receive the
Benefit of this Proposal, shall bring a Certificate, Signed by the Minister,
Churchwarden or Churchwardens, and Parish-Clerk of the Place where her
Husband died and was buried, if her Husband was not a Minister; but if her
Husband was the Minister of the Parish where he was buried, then to have the
Minister's Hand of the next neighboring Parish; and the other Hands as
beforementioned.

10. In case it shall happen that any Man who has Subscribed shall voluntarily
make away himself, or by any Act of his, occasion his own Death, either by
Duelling, or committing any Crime whereby he shall be Sentenced and put to
Death by Justice; in any or either of those Cases his Widow to receive no
Annuity, but upon delivering up the Company's Bond, to have the Subscription
money paid to her.

11. In case any Person that shall Subscribe shall not pay in his Money within
the Time limited, such Person's Subscription shall be esteemed null and void,
and the Company may admit any other Person, duly qualified, to Subscribe in his
stead.

The Form of the Subscription.

12. I A. B. inhabiting in the Parish of (...) in the (...) of (...) do
Subscribe and Promise to pay (...) Pounds on the Terms beforementioned; for
the Benefit of (...) my now Wife, Aged (...) Years, the Daughter of (...) of
(...) in case I dye before her:

The Obligation of the Company.

13. WE the Wardens and Commonalty of the Mystery of the Mercers of the City of
London, do acknowledge to have Received of A. B. Inhabitant in the Parish of
(...) in the (...) of (...) the Sum of (...) Pounds, which he has Subscribed
for the Benefit of (...) Aged (...) Years, the Daughter of (...) of (...) his
present Wife; And we do promise and oblige our Selves, and our Successors, in
case the said A. B. shall Dye (Except in such manner as is Excepted in the
General Proposal) before his said Wife, and leave her a Widow, to pay unto her,
during her Life, the Sum of (...) Yearly, free of all Charges, being 30 l. per
Cent. per Annum of the said A. B. his Subscription, at the two usual Feasts of
the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and St. Michael the Archangel: The
first Payment to be made on the first of the said Feast-days that shall happen
six Months or more after the Decease of the said A. B. she producing this
Obligation and due Certificates of her Husband's Death. To the which Payment we
bind our Selves and our Successors firmly by these Presents. In Testimony
whereof, We have hereunto affixed the Seal of the said Company the (...) Day of
(...) Anno Dom. 169^

14. The Bond to be given to the Company, To be of the Penalty of the Sum
Subscribed.

The Condition to be as follows:

WHereas the above-bound A. B. has Subscribed and Paid to the Wardens and
Commonalty of the Mystery of the Mercers of the City of London, the Sum of
(...) for the Benefit of his present Wife (...) the Daughter of (...) and
Received an Obligation from the said Company for the due Payment to his said
Wife, of the Sum of 30 l. per Cent. per Annum, in case she survives him, during
her Life. Now the Condition of this Obligation is such, That in case his said
Wife shall dye before him, if he the above-bound A. B. shall within 30 Days
after his said Wife's Decease, give Notice to the said Company of her Death,
under his Hand and Seal, and deliver up the Obligation he had from the Company;
and also if the said A. B. shall remove his Habitation or Dewlling Place, and
shall give Notice thereof to the said Company within 30 Days of such his
Removal, with the Name of the Place and Parish to which he is removed; And in
default of Notice to be given as aforesaid, Then, if the said A. B. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall pay One Pound per Cent. of his
Subscription-Money for every Month he shall delay so to do; That then this
Obligation to be void, and of no effect, or else to remain in full force.

AND whereas the Subscriptions upon the said Proposal has not answered
Expectation, and may not without a longer time come up to the Sum proposed; and
the Company considering what might be the Reason thereof, do conceive it to be
the Uncertainty of the Things taking Effect in the Manner proposed, and that
there was no Settlement as yet made; Have therefore at a General Court, held
for the said Company, the 16th of June 1699, Resolved, and do hereby publish
and declare, That the said Settlement proposed in the former Paper, shall be
forthwith settled by able Counsel in the Law, in Trustees of undoubted
Reputation and Ability, for the Benefit of the Subscribers, that so there might
never be a failure; And any of the Persons that have Subscribed, may, if they
desire it, have liberty to accompany the Members of the Company to go with them
to the Counsel to see the making of the said Settlement; and as soon as the
said Settlement is made, Publication shall be made thereof; and those Persons
that have Subscribed, are to pay in their Moneys according to their
Subscription.

The Company intend to proceed with Effect as soon as the Settlement is made,
and the Money Subscribed paid in.

And the Company will take Subscriptions at any time hereafter, till such time
as the Sum of 100000 l. be Subscribed, but will not exceed that Sum at any one
time; And in case of the Death of any Persons, whereby the Subscriptions fall
off, the Company will admit any other Person or Persons to Subscribe such Sum
or Sums as will make up the said Sum of 100000 l. but never to exceed the same.
And after the said Settlement shall be made, every Subscriber is to pay in the
Money by him Subscribed at the time of his Subscription.

The Company have thought fit also to enlarge the Sums to be Subscribed, viz.
That all Married Men of the Age of Thirty Years, or under, may Subscribe any
Sum not exceeding 1000 l. That all Married Men not exceeding the Age of Forty
Years, may Subscribe any Sum, not exceeding 500 l. And that all Married Men,
not exceeding the Age of Sixty Years, may Subscribe any Sum, not exceeding 300
l. And the Widows of all Persons Subscribing, according to these Limitations,
shall receive the Benefit of 30 l. per Cent. per Ann. according to the former
Proposals.

The Company do also declare, That any Person (under the Limitations
beforementioned) may Subscribe for the Use and Benefit of any Person or
Persons, as such Subscriber shall by his Last Will and Testament direct, during
the Natural Life of his Wife, in case she survives him; Declaring in his
Subscription, That it is so intended, and such Person or Persons shall receive
the Benefit of such Subscription accordingly.

That the Obligations to be given by the Company shall be made suitable to
these Alterations, as well for those that have already Subscribed, as those
that shall Subscribe hereafter; and the Bond to be given by the Subscribers
shall be only of the Penalty of half the Sum Subscribed by any Person. And
whereas in the Company's Obligation, the First Payment to be made to any Widow,
or other Person, who should be entitled to any Benefit, by virtue of any
Subscription, was, by the said Obligation in the former Proposal, to be on the
First of the Feast-days therein mentioned, that should happen Six Months, or
more, after the Decease of the Person or Persons so Subscribing; The Company
have thought fit, and do hereby declare, That such First Payment shall be made
at such of the said Feast-days which shall happen Four Months, or more, after
the Decease of the Person or Persons so Subscribing, and the Obligation to be
made accordingly.


