A Charitable Essay, IN Order to allay the Outrage of a Contentious Apostate
inverting his Error (from true Christian Faith and Charity) upon him, in his
Book, falsely Styled, New Rome Unmasked, etc.
-- Thy Backslidings shall reprove thee, Jer. 2.19.
IN the first place, let it be Noted, that Francis Bugg in his Epistle
Dedicatory to Sir H. N. (in his late Book, falsely Styled, New Rome Unmasked,
and her Foundation shaken,) does thus Apologize, viz. I have adventured to
spend some Leisurable Hours to set forth to the World some Reasons, why it is
no Apostasy from the Christian Faith to separate from the Quakers: Be pleased
therefore, that under your Name and Patronage, they may appear as a Covert to
vail their Imperfections, for defective they must needs be in many respects;
first, for that I am not endued with that Spirit the Apostles had. Pray Observe
here his Reasons against the Quakers, (so called,) must needs be very lame and
defective indeed in many respects, because they proceed not from the Spirit of
Christ, being that very Spirit the Holy Apostles, and all true Christians, had
and have, according to their several measures and degrees thereof; but it
appears, F. B. is not endued therewith, but with another (a contrary) Spirit,
from whence all his lame defective Reasons, and bitter Reproaches against us
proceed; whence we may Argue, 1. He that has not the Spirit of Christ, is none
of his, Romans 8.9. but F. B. has not the Spirit of Christ, he is not endued with
it, therefore he is none of Christ's, consequently no true Christian. 2. He
that for some time was (in measure) endued with the Spirit of Christ, and
afterward so ^ he forfeits and loses such his Induement, or (...) therein, he
is an Apostate from Christ and (...) Spirit; but, F. B. was for some time so
ind^^^ with the Spirit of Christ, and afterward has backslidden, and turned
from the same Spirit, pa^^ therefore he is an Apostate from Christ and (...)
Spirit. I suppose the First Proposition, no ^^tional Christian Man will deny;
the Second (...) Commendations, of the People called Quak^^ their Doctrine and
Ministry, As a dispensation of (...) love of God sent as a visitation to
Mankind, (...) Christian Society, Love unfeigned, and blessed E^^ as in the
beginning, and for many Years, etc. w^^^ accordingly he has highly commended,
both (...) fore and since his Conformity, in his Two Bo^^ one Entitled, De
Christiana Liberate, Chapter 1. (...) 2. Printed Anno 1682. The other, The
Qui^^detected, p. 3. Printed 1686. about Two Y^^^ after his Conformity to the
Church of Engl^^^ so that he must needs have been endued with (...) Spirit of
Christ, whilst he felt his Blessing (...) Presence among us; but now he has
lost tha^ duement, he is not now endued with the Spir^ Christ, which the
Apostles had, but since t^^ a bitter Enemy to us, and Railer in Print age^ us,
therefore he is an Apostate, not only (...) the People called Quakers, but from
Christ (...) his Spirit. He proceeds in his Apology, (...) ^ sufficient to
grapple with such Scholars as are some be Chieftains of the Quakers. Answ.
However ^1 F. B. art so plentifully accomplished with ^y and Scorn, and so puffed
up with Pride and ^^tempt against us, that thou know how to (...), Scoff,
Flout, Disdain, Detract, and Per^^; such Rhetoric thy Bottle and Bundle is
^lenish'd withal. But 'twere far more reputa^^ for thee to study to be Quiet,
and mind thy (...) Business, than to busy thy self in Defaming (...)
Reproaching others.

Thou have accused us with a Crooked Creed, ^ch thou call the Qu^kers Creed,
(made up of (...) Articles, or Six Creeds rather,) which thou ^^derest contrary
to what is either Apostolical, or ^istian, chiefly concerning Jesus Christ, and
the (...) Scriptures, falsely insinuating our denial there^^ as in thy Epistle
to the Bereans, ch 3. p. 16. (...) I must tell thee, 'ti such a Creed as I
never (...) before, to be termed a Creed; it is a Creed (...) thy own modelling,
of thy own forming as ^^reed, of thy own construing, and of thy own ^^demning
also, as Anti-Apostolical, Anti-Chri^^n, Blasphemous, and what not, etc. Thy
(...) and chief Charge of our not owning Him that (...) Born of the Virgin Mary
to be Christ; or, that (...) Quakers cannot call HIM Christ; and far^^r, that
the Quakers deny the same Christ Jesus, chapter (...) [all which being Notorious
Falsehoods,] thou (...) deduced from Three Articles, or Creeds, ^^u have formed,
as the Quaker's out of Isaac ^^nington's Questions to the Professors; so thou
art ^ome such a Learned Creed-maker, that thou ^^st make Questions, Creeds, or
turn particu^^^ Questions into a general Creed, and then ^^ke thy false
Construction, and thereupon Cry (...), Oh! Horrible Blasphemy. And therefore
the ^^trary sense of every Article alleged against (...) Quakers, may be
rationally and justly invert^^^ upon thee as thy Sense and Creed.

1. In the First Article, or Creed, thou Ob^^est, and would impose on the
Quakers, that (...) Scriptures do expressly distinguish between CHRIST and the
BODY in which he came, be^een the SVBSTANCE which was Veiled, and (...) VAIL,
etc. Lo I come, a Body have thou pre^red me: There is plainly HE, and the BODY
which he came; there was the outward Vessel, (...) the inward Life, etc. This
being by F. B. ^demned as contrary to the Testimony of the ^rious Angels, the
holy Apostles, blessed ^rtyrs and true Confessors, for above these ^ Christ for
whom the Body was prepared; 'twas not Christ that came in the Flesh or Body;
there is no such distinction in Scripture as between Christ and the Body, the
Vail and the Substance, the outward Vessel and the INWARD LIFE. Then, behold!
this Creed-maker's Creed, how contrary to plain Scripture Phrase and
distinction it is, viz. The Body of Jesus, Mat. 27.58. Christ come in the
Flesh, 1 John 4.2, 3. who calls his Body this Temple, Joh. 2.19, 21. and the
Apostle calls his Flesh the Vail, Heb. 10.20. Lo, I come, a Body have thou
prepared me, Psalm. 40.7. Heb. 10. Was not this I and Me Christ the Son of God?
And how plain is the distinction? And Dr. Barns himself (even as F. B. cites
him, p. 19.) has the same distinction in his Creed or Belief, That Jesus Christ
who was conceived by the Holy Ghost TOOK Flesh o^ the blessed Virgin Mary. Very
true; who took Flesh of the Virgin? 'Twas Jesus Christ; therefore, Jesus Christ
was before. Yet we'll readily grant that though the Names Jesus and Christ
chiefly and in the first place belong to him that took the Body or Flesh (as J.
P. explains his meaning) yet the Names Jesus and Christ were given to both his
Body and Soul jointly and severally in a Synecdochical way of speaking.

It was Christ that dyed; but how? As concerning the Flesh, 1 Pet. 3.18. For
his Divine Life never dyed; nor did the Soul of the Messiah ever die. But to
which chiefly and primarily were the Names Jesus and Christ given? 1. If to the
Body or Flesh he took, then the Body was above and more excellent than his
Soul, and the Flesh above the Spirit. 2. And if so then the Son of God either
was not, or was not Christ before he took the Body. Oh! horrible Ignorance. How
now F. B.! Why did not thy Minister stop thee from running into such
Socinianism? Whither art thou run in thy Opposition and Creedmaking; to render
the Quakers horrible Blasphemers? As to J. P.'s words chiefly objected, That we
cannot call the Bodily Garment, Christ. The word Garment I take to be only a
figurative manner of speaking, as the word, Vail which is his Flesh is, Heb.
10.20. An Ingenious Man would allow him his own meaning as he explains it;
namely, That we cannot call the Body (which he took upon him) chiefly and in
the first place Jesus Christ. It not being first, nor the entire Christ,
because he was the Son of God, and consequently Christ, before he took upon him
that Body, even when God created all things by Jesus Christ, ^

2. A Question, Creed 2. If any have felt the saving Arm of the Lord, a measure
of the same Life, Power and Anointing revealed in us and in our Vessels as was
in his; Is it not of the same Nature, etc. Is not Christ the Seed? If this Seed
grow up in me, is not Christ then formed in me? If I be ingrafted into and grow
in it, am not I ingrafted into Christ? Is not this the same Christ that took
upon him a Body of Flesh, and offered it without the Gates of Jerusalem? [To
all which we say Yea] Is there any more Christ's than one? Or is there any
other than he? Is Christ divided? Is there one Christ within, another without?
[To all which we say Nay.] Our Adversary concluding his Remark hereupon, That
if the same Christ that offered up that Body be IN them, as they say, even the
very same that suffered Death at Jerusalem; then he cries out, Oh! horrible
Blasphemy. Pray then observe this Opposer's contrary Creed, e converso. 1. That
a measure of the same Life, Power and Anointing revealed in us, as was in
Christ, is not of the same Nature [what pure Nonsense is this?] 2. That Christ
is not the Seed; or, that Christ is not formed in them that are ingrafted into
him and grow up in him 3. That this Seed, Christ, into which true Believers are
ingrafted, is not the same Christ that took on him the Body of Flesh, and
offered it without the Gates of Jerusalem [Oh horrible Ignorance! the Seed
Christ is but one and the same indivisible Christ.] 4. That there is more
Christ's than one, there is one without, another within; another than him that
took the Body that suffered at Jerusalem, or that Christ is divided: [Oh
horrible Antichristianism!] thus to oppose and deny Christ within, the Word of
Faith ingrafted, and consequently Christ's coming in Spirit, as not the same
Christ that came and suffered in the Flesh, contrary to the express Testimonies
of the holy Prophets and Apostles, and of Christ himself, which are for the one
Seed, the one Lord Jesus Christ, as both in the Flesh and in the Spirit; the
word of Faith, the ingrafted word who is not divided; even the same Christ that
suffered in the Flesh, being spiritually in true Believers; read Joh. 17.23,
26. I in them, and they in me, etc. Whence I argue, If it was the same Jesus
Christ that offered up the Body that said these words, I in them and they in
me, then the same Jesus Christ is in true Believers: But it was the same Jesus
Christ, etc.

Creed 3. To whom do the Names and Ti^^^ (...) and in the first place belong?
Do they belong to the (...) which was took by him, or to him who took (...)
Body, etc. [They belong chiefly and in the (...) place to him, the Son of God,
who took (...) Body in J. P.'s Sense.] But this Creed ma^^ F. B. objects, viz.
That the natural consequence of (...) is, 1. That the Names Jesus and Christ do
no^^ properly belong to the Body as to the Treas^^ in the Body, That here they
separate that which (...) has for ever joined together. [False, by the (...)
we may distinguish where we do not separat^^ Then do but turn these Questions
cited into F. ^ contrary sense (in opposition to that of J. P. and it is this,
viz. That the Names and Titles JESUS and CHRIST do not CHIEF^Y and in^ FIRST
PLACE belong to him (i. e. the So^^ God) who took the Body but chiefly and in
the (...) place to the Body which he took upon him, which (...) prepared for
him. Behold this Creed-mak^^ Creed! How Unchristian in it self, and A (...)
christian in its natural consequence, suppo^^^ Jesus Christ the Son of God was
not in being ^^fore his Incarnation. Oh horrible Antichr^^anism! against which
I propose these Ar^ments.

1. If Jesus Christ was before he took the (...) or Flesh, then the Names Jesus
and Christ, (...) chiefly and in the first place belong to Him that t^^ the
Body; but Jesus Christ was before he (...) the Body; therefore, etc. The first
Prop^^tion is unquestionable; for the second I far^^^^ argue.

2. If the Son of God was before he took (...) Body, then Jesus Christ was
before he took (...) Body; but the Son of God was before he took (...) Body;
therefore, Jesus Christ was before he (...) the Body (or came in the Flesh.)
The first par^^ not to be doubted, That the Son of God was (...) Anointed of
God, the Christ of God, the Savi^^ the second Part, is evident that the Son of
(...) was before he took the Body, because God n^^^ the Worlds by his Son, Heb.
1.2.

3. If God created all things by Jesus Ch^^^ then Jesus Christ was before he
took the Bo^^^ but God created all things by Jesus Chr^^^ therefore, etc. See
Eph^s. ^.9.

4. If that Spiritual Rock which all Israel di^^^ of was Christ, then Christ
was before he took Body; but that Spiritual Rock which all (...) drank of was
Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. And (...) esteemed the Reproaches of Christ gre^^ Riches
than the Treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.^^ Therefore Christ was in M^ses's days.

Christ was before Abraham was, Jo. 8.58. His g^^^ (...) have been from of old,
from everlasting, Mica 5.2. (...) also Heb. 7.3. Therefore Christ was before
(...) took Flesh, or was born of the Virgin Mary: (...) general Consequence
deducible from (...) Premises is, That the Names Jesus and Christ ^esty and
primarily belong to him that took the ^^dy, though sometimes given to each, and
to ^^th.

The Creed-maker further objects, viz. They (...), That his Body was of an
Earthly perishing Na^^^e. But what are they that so say? He has ^^e
notoriously wronged the People called Qua^^s, by imposing a false Creed upon
them.

Where do they say, That Christ's B^dy either ^s or is of an earthly perishing
Nature? I utterly any the Charge, and F. B. also to be our Creed^ker, Construer
or Expositor, who has un^tly inferred this upon us from Is. Pennington's ^^ing,
He took upon him the Flesh and Blood of our ^ture, which is of an earthly
perishing Nature. ^hereby neither he nor the People called Qua^^s say, That
Christ's Body either was or is of (...) earthly perishing Nature; for his Flesh
saw no ^rruption, therefore did not perish; tho^ our ^^ture, our Flesh and
Blood be of an earthly pe^^ing Nature, so is not Christ's. I cannot ra^nally
suppose that J. P. ever intended that ^rist's Body (which on Earth did not
corrupt) (...) of an earthly perishing Nature now in Hea^^^ as ours is now on
Earth; (take his Words al^^^ Grammatically) for it is such an absurdity as I
(...) not think ever entered into If. Pennington's ^art, being a Man both of
Learning, Sense and ^^nscience; [The Flesh and Blood of our Nature] ^^ng
antecedent next to [which is of an earthly ^^shing Nature.] Therefore
[perishing] appears ^ly Relative to Flesh and Blood, as it is our's and ^^us,
and not to Christ's Body which is incor^^tible.

Object. Does not the Name belong to the whole ^^y, etc. So that there are as
many Christ's by their ^^ctrin, as believing Quakers. Oh! horrible Bla^^emy.

Answ. No, that is not our Doctrine; there is one ^^dy, and so but one Christ, 1
Cor. 12.12. But ^n the Question into F. B.'s contrary Doctrine ^lyed, and then
it is The Name Christ belongs not ^^be whole Body, Christ's Body (i. e. his
Church) ^ot Anointed; it therefore has no right to his Name (...) any Member
thereof; but then does not this ^ear contrary to the Apostle's Doctrine, viz.
(...) as the Body is one and has many Members, and all (...) Members of the
Body, which is one, though they ^many, yet are but one Body; even so is Christ,
1 Cor. 12.12. The Protestant Annotations in Queen Elizabeth's Bible are, That
we might be one Body with Christ, and the whole Church one Christ. And on
Ephesians. 1.23. The Church is also called Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. (What says our
Adversary to these Annotations? Dare he judge them horrid Blasphemy?) And he
that establishes us with you in Christ Jesus, and has (...), Anointed us, is
God. 2 Cor. 1.21.

Quest But does not the Name belong to the whole Body (and every Member
therein) as well as to the Head?

Answ. 1. Not Equally, because he is the Head. 2. Nor Literally to be so named,
but vertually and spiritually, and so truly, with respect to that divine Power
and Spirit, whereby both the Head and the Body are Anointed; and each Member
partakes thereof in some measure. But Christ, the Head in all things, has the
Pre-eminence, he was Anointed (more eminently) in Fullness, his Members in part
or measure by the same Spirit and Power; he was Anointed above his Fellows,
implying their being anointed in degree. (...), Christ, signifies Anointed, as
being the very Christ, the only begotten Son of God, which I know no Member of
his Body assumes to himself; but (...), Christian, which has relation to Christ
the Anointed; for where Christ's Church, which is his Body, is said to be the
Fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.23. It Is not of the Church as
distinctly considered from the Head; but Christ the Head is included in that
Fullness, though his own proper Existence be entire, complete and most glorious.

Creed 4. A word to all you Deceivers, etc. I cannot apprehend how he can make
the Quaker's Creed of this, supposing the whole Passage, unless every
particular Reproof must be taken for a general Creed, and then Argumentum ad
Hominem; may not this Creed-maker's calling the Quakers and their Ministers, (
New Rome, Painted Harlot, Apostates, Deceivers, False Christ's, Great
Impostors, Deluded Souls, Black-guard of Liars, a Tribe of Wretches, a Pack of
Hypocrites, the greatest Cheats, etc.) be esteemed Francis Bugg's and his
Minister's Creed? But I dare say, many of the Church of England, would not like
such a Creed to be formed and forged upon them from F. B.'s Railery, and
indecent Treatment of the Quakers.

As to his Charge on G. F. etc. of the Letter being Dust, Death, Carnal,
Killing, the Husk, etc. Cr. 4. and 6. and p. 78. I must refer the Ingenious
Reader to G. F.'s own Explication in this very Matter; where he intends by
Letter, not the Doctrine contained; thus distinguishing it in his Great Mystery,
fol. 78, viz. The Letter, Paper and Ink; that the Letters are Carnal, but the
Scripture, the thing it speaks of is Spiritual, the Word is Spirit. (Thus G.
F.) His distinction appears between the Letter and the Spirit, as between the
Shadow and Substance, and to be partly grounded on Heb. 9.10. Romans 2.29. and 2
Cor. 3.6. and partly relating to the Nature of what he intends by Letter
abstractly, as in Paper and Ink which will decay; and is not the Kernel, the
Seed, the Life or Spirit which will never decay; neither do we ascribe Holiness
to the Paper and Ink, or dead Characters, but to the holy Doctrine and blessed
Precepts contained, which therefore are called The Holy Scriptures, which we
never did say are either Carnal, Death or Killing, but spiritual living and
permanent. The Holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. being put for the Holy Doctrine
therein contained, is a Metonymical Phrase. Yet we are truly thankful to God
for preserving to us the outward Writings, Scriptures or Books commonly called
the Bible.

Creed 5. The Light, Christ, by whom all things were made and created,
glorified with the Father before the World began, and which the Scripture
testifies of, IS ABOVE the Scripture, and before the Scripture was, etc. And
this Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and forever, whom the Saints came to
witness WITHIN them, not another Christ nor many Christ's, etc. G. F.'s Great
Mist. p. 254.

Against which F. B. objects, viz. According to their Creed last recited, the
same Christ by which all things were made and created in IN THEM, which If
true, then that proves sufficiently what Eccles. says, viz. That the World was
made by him [which F. B. injuriously construes S. E. (upon the Quaker's Creed)
to say of G. F. Oh! horrible and blasphemous Slander against us, and expressly
contrary to G. F.'s own Testimony for Christ before-cited.]

But invert the said opposed Creed on our Opposer, to his contrary sense, and
then it will run thus, viz. 1. That Christ the Son of God, by whom all things
were made and of whom the Scripture testifies, is NOT above the Scripture, nor
before the Scripture was. (Is not this Socinianism, and a Denial of Christ's
Divinity?) 2. That the Saints came NOT to witness this Christ within them
(which is to deny their Christian Faith of Christ within, 2 Cor. 13.5.) Oh!
what horrible Antichristianism and sad Apostasy is the Man run into, thus to
(...) out of himself and the Saints too; contrary to Christ's own (an his
Apostle's) Testimony. Read Joh. 17.23, 2^ 2 Cor. 13.5.

Creed 6. All Teaching which is given for^ by Jesus Christ, is to bring up the
Hearers (...) Perfection, even to the Measure, Stature and Fullness of Christ,
etc. On which he REMARKS, viz. Come and see once more this dar^ dismal,
antichristian and uncharitable Creed of the^ deluded Souls, etc. They, like the
Pharisees, hold SINLESS PERFECTION, etc.

Answ. Come and see once more what F. (...) holds, e converso, to the contrary,
viz. That (...) Teaching (or Ministry) given by Jesus Christ, is (...) to bring
up the Hearers to Perfection, that is, Sinles^ though it was to present them
perfect in Christ, a^^ that all might come in the Unity of the Faith, and (...)
the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect Ma^^^ and unto the measure of
the Stature of the fullness (...) Christ, as the Apostle expressly declares,
Ephesians. (...) Oh! what sad and dismal darkness of Apostasy, (...) the Man fallen
into? Contrary both to Christ and his Apostle's express Testimony. Read Jo^
17.21, 22, 23, 34. etc. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.

In Creed 6. ibid. He that has the same Spir^ that raised up Jesus from the
dead, is Equal w^^ God (which we do deny) quoting Readiness Erran^ etc. p. 8. and
also Great Myst^ry, p. 78, 127, 28^ where (quoth F. B.) their being equal with
God (...) not denied but strongly employed.

Answ. We deny both to be any part of o^^^ Creed. The first, as being some
acciden^ Mistake (in Readiness Errand) as it is really su^pos'd, being also
contradicted by G. F. in his (...) ownng the Charge, and denying himself or a^
other Creature to be equal with God his Creato^ But testifies, the Son and Holy
Ghost, to (...) equal in Power and Glory with God the Father Great Mystery, p.
127. and p. 254. and Readiness (...) p. 5, 6, 8.

Let us take a view of some of F. B.'s 12 ^^^rors charged on the Quakers
Doctrine, on whi^^ (with his 6 fictitious Creeds) his 12 Chapte, (...) and much
of his Book, are grounded.

1. Against G. P.'s Great Mist. p. 89. viz. T. (...) the Quakers have a Spirit
given to them beyond all Forefathers (since the days of the Apostles) in
Apostasy, etc.

[The very intent and meaning of G. F.'s wo^^ herein, was not beyond all the
Forefathers, with^^ exception, but beyond all in the Apostasy.]. And further,
And they can discern who are Saints, (...) who are Devils, and who are
Apostates, without spe^^ing ever a word. (But add further) They that be Power
and Life of Truth (as G. F. there says) (...) so discern between Saints and
Devils, etc ^^d that is possible, as it is for humble Men to ^ern wicked Persons,
even by their proud and ^^y Looks, wanton and scornful Eyes, envious (...)
fallen Countenances; the show of whose ^^untenance testifying against them; and
more ^^ecially by the Gift of discerning of Spirits, given (...) some in the
Church of Christ, Apostates and ^^ked Spirits are discernable from Saints. The
(...) part that a Spirit of Understanding and Dis^ning was given, and among us
beyond all such ^^^e-fathers as were in the Apostasy, F. B. did long ^^ieve was
no Error. But now if he will have it ^^e, invert it upon him, and then it must be
in (...) sense, 1. That it is an Error to profess a Spirit ^^en us (now adays)
beyond all the Forefathers in (...) Apostasy. 2. That they that be in the
Power and ^^^e of Truth cannot discern between Saints and De^^^^, especially
when silent. These being opposite ^he Doctrins he deems Erroneous; by the
first, has excluded himself (as well as others) from (...) Spirit of Christ,
which is beyond all the Fore^hers in the Apostasy, and thereby he has ^luded
Christ and his Spirit, which the true ^^ostles had; consequently he is endued
with the ^rit of Apostates, and in a great Apostasy, (...) only from the
Christian Society of the People ^^ed Quakers, but also from Christ himself, his
^^rit, Light and Truth. By the second, he has ^^osed (and excluded himself
from) the Saints ^^ht of discerning (by the Power and Life of ^^uth) between
Saints and Devils.

His 11th Erroneous Principle charged on the ^^kers, chap. 1. out of Good
Advice, p. 39. (...) That Edward VI. by Archbishop Cranmer, was ^^pelled to
sign a Warrant to burn poor Joan of ^^nt, counted an Enthusiast, for which F.
B. sadly ^^t on presumption) vilifies W. P. etc. p. 72, (...) and which he
says, He does not believe, but ^^ges it upon him G. W. and the rest as a Lie,
until ^^prove it by a Protestant Author.

Answ. See Speed's Chronicle, p. 1103. how ^^arly it is proved, and how averse
Edward VI. ^^s to signing the Warrant to burn Joan Butcher; (...) how Dr.
Cranmer (his Godfather) Archbishop, ^oured to induce him to set his Hand to the
^^rant of her Execution, and with what relu^^ncy he did it, but not without
Weeping: See (...) Boker's Chron. p. 311. Now, F. B. may ^^u not be horribly
confounded and ashamed of (...) precipitant foolish rashness, in reviling and
^^ustly condemning us as Liars in this Mat^^^ (...) 12th supposed Error. I
affirm the true Church is in the true Faith, that is, in God; and we must
either believe this AS the true Church believes, or else it were but both a
Folly and Hypocrisy to profess our selves Members thereof.

This he charges upon my self as one of the Quakers great Errors (wherein I did
not make the Church the Foundation, but Example of our Belief;) whence it
follows, inverting it to his contrary Principle ^mplyed, that either the true
Church is not in the true Faith, that is, in God, and therefore we must not
believe as she believes; or else, that though the true Church be in the true
Faith, that is, in God, we must not believe this as the true Church believes,
or we must not believe in God as the true Church believes; let him take which
he pleases, seeing he opposes my Affirmation as erroneous; and then behold this
blacksliding Adversary's Faith, and return upon him, Oh! horrible Apostasy from
the Faith of the true Church.

If F. B. says, the aforesaid Inversions are not his meaning; then what did he
oppose as Erroneous, pray? Must not the contrary Sense of every thing he
opposes be taken for his Sense? Or did he wittingly and wilfully oppose Truth?
It must be the one or the other. Take which he pleases, and let him wind off the
Dilemma if he can.

The most of the rest of his Articles that concern Doctrine, are answered in
diverse other Books; as in my late Answer to the Baptists at Depiford, and
Enquiry into a late Pamphlet, styled, Some of the Quakers Principles and
Doctrins, etc. And in my Answer to Dr Ford's Preservative against Quakerism. At
present I wave and pass by many of his Personal Abuses, gross Detractions,
Raileries and Slanders, and unjust Comparisons between Us and the Papists and
Popes; and many of his foul Reproaches cast upon the Servants of Christ, both
living, and the dead in Christ, which the righteous God takes notice of.

Only, F. B. I may remind thee, That thy Stories against me, As an ill
Instrument to set Man and Wife at variance, and in breaking a Match, p. 60. are
both utterly false; and the Match, pretended, was not of my breaking; as I can
easily evince. As also thy Consequence, That G. W. has outdone the boldest
Jesuits that ever thou read of. And even in thy Title Page, terming me a Chief
Cardinal. In both whereof it appears, thou makst no Conscience of defaming and
scandalizing me and others to (...) than 'twas to render thee an Informer; as
also, in thy charging me with being a Deceiver of the People, p. 33, 34. On a
Supposition from T. R.'s Account, that thou voluntarily paid thy Fine before
Distress, when 'twas after, according to thy Certificate, p. 34. But suppose
his Account was a Mistake as to such Circumstance of time of payment, and I
mistaken too in such Supposition, (had thou no better Character for him, than
Lying Lawyer; nor for me, than Deceiver of the People?) Which I placed not on a
necessity from God (as is falsely pretended) but on a Supposition, nor was it
Matter of Doctrine; does it follow that I am, therefore, a Deceiver of the
People? How does that appear, from the true state of the Case? And upon what
Proposition and Argument? I Will suppose one for thee. He that has been mistaken
in a Supposition about a Circumstance of time, is a Deceiver of the People; but
G. W. has been so mistaken; Ergo, and then I must deny the major or first
Proposition; and can produce sufficient Exceptions to invalid the Argument.

I have not room here closely to pursue the Dilemma upon thee, for thy
temporizing Retraction and Excuse of thy being not ^f the same Mind thou wast
in in 1686. concerning us in the beginning; and that thou had then better
Thoughts of us respecting our beginning, than now thou have; and that by reason
thereof thou wast in an Error, also granting thou wast mistaken in thy
charitable Opinion of us, and in the greater Error, etc. p. 12, 13, 14. Which
feigned Retraction (being in opposition to thy own plain declared Testimonies
both before and since thy Conformity) will not excuse thee from
Self-condemnation, nor from Sinning against Light and Conviction in thy
temporizing Backsliding.

And now, F. B. as concerning thy Proposal to G. W. etc. To prove what we have
said, or retract what we cannot, of our Principles which we hold (and which
thou chargest and rechargest on us as thou say) according to E Burrough's
Proposition, than to let thee have a Months notice thereof, any four, six or
ten of our ablest Captains; it is ablest Preachers (...) thy Epistle to Bereans,
p. 12.) and that in Mild^^ hall too (as thou boastingly challengest) and t^^
wilt take the like number of MEN on thy side; (...) if we refuse this, then
it is in thy purpose to trou^ thy self no more after this manner, chap. 12. p.
7^ and chap. 1. p. 1, 2. and Postscript, p. 89. andp. ^

Answ. This we look upon as a conceited, pro^^ Boasting (as well as unequal)
Challenge on t^^ part, and therefore refuse it; and we are (...) bound to dance
after thy Pipe; nor to run af^^ thee to Milden-hall to wait upon thee. Wheth^^
thou will keep to thy parpose, to trouble (...) self no more after this manner,
or break thy P^^mise; look thou to that, if thou think th^^ have any
Reputation to lose. We reject thy ^^ceited boasting Challenge, 1. Because it
supp^seth ^y self such a qualified Person as E^^ made his Propositions unto,
which was for (...) Meeting of a few of the ablest Priests and Pro^^sors, which
thou attemptest no proof for (...) self being one of them; and thy own
Self-c^ceit can be no proof thereof to us.

2. Nor that the number intended on thy (...) are of the ablest Priests and
Professors; the^^ fore thy Challenge suits not thy instance.

Nor do thou produce any Deputation from (...) Church, Bishops or Clergy of
England, that th^^ will own and stand by thy Books against us, (...) entrust
thee and thy number of Men to cont^^vert Matters of Religion on their behalf;
(...) Deputation might justly be expected thou shou^^est have produced;
considering how lofty, (...) sulting and extensive thy Challenge is; and (...)
it tends to affect a People and their Profession we having also many foul
Abuses and Perversi^^ to charge against thy Books, and not at all ^^merous or
doubtful of dealing with thee, etc. (...) a Christian way, if the Lord should
require (...) (remembering how thou will accept G. W.'s th^^ Charges p. 31.) But
we are not under thy (...) risdiction, Command or Summons, either as M^^^ or
Christians.

By a Servant of Jesus Christ, G. WHITEHEAD

WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed, do, in Behalf of the Peo^^^ commonly
called Quakers Certify all Per^^s that are or may be concerned, That

(...) Francis Bugg, in his late great Book, styled, ^^w Rome, has most
injuriously and falsely accu^^^ and charged the said People, and their Mini^^ers
as follows, viz.

I. With Denying Christ Jesus who was born of (...) Virgin Mary, who suffered
without the Gates (...) Jerusalem, rose again and ascended into Hea^^n, etc.
and that they believe and say, That they ^^nos call HIM Christ, chap. 3. p. 16.
and Epi^^e to Bereans, p. 2.

II. That the Quaker's Prophets give Witness to (...) For INSTEAD of this
Christ; that they call ^m G. F. the Branch, the Star, the Son of Righ^^usness;
and put the North of England for the ^^wn of Bethlehem; Epistle to the Ber^^^s,
and (...) 81.

III. That they ( i. e. the Quakers) say, His Body ( viz. Christ's Body) was of
an earthly perishing Nature, Epist. ibid Remark on Creed 3.

IV. That they say, The HOLY SCRIPTVRE is Carnal, Dust, Death and Kills, etc.
Epist. ibid. on Cr. 6. and p. 78. And to aggravate Matters against the Quakers,
F. B. most unjustly and maliciously affirms their Creed to be Antichristian,
Blasphemous, Idolatrous, if not a Compound of all Heresies, Epist, ibid on Cr.
6.

Whereupon we do, in the Holy Fear of Almighty God, and in Behalf of the said
People, Declare and Testify, That all these, and all other his Accusations of
the same kind, or depending thereupon, are utterly false, wicked and malicious,
and never so believed, so said, nor so affirmed by Us, as charged against Us;
but contrary to our Persuasion, Principle and Profession.

^^gned in London, the 3d. day of the 2d. Month, called April, 1693. Tho.
Green, James Park, Sam. Waldenfield John (...) Benjamin Antrobus, John
Butcher, Gilbert Laity, Theodor Eccleston, John Bowater, Richard Needham,
William Robinson, Francis Etteridge.


FINIS.

