WHereas Not. Thompson has lately, in his public Intelligence of the 25th of
October 1681, published these Words following, as delivered by the Earl of
Huntington to His Majesty; the said Earl being at that time admitted to the
Honor of Kissing His Majesty's Hand. That is to say, That the said Earl had by
experience found, That they who promoted the Bill of Exclusion were for the
subversion of Monarchy it self. We who will not deny our selves interested in
the promotion of that Bill in Parliament, then judging it the best means of
uniting His Majesty, and the universality of His Subjects, and of calling back
such Hearts (if any such were) as had in the least deviated from him, or His
Royal Power: Finding our selves for that very Reason involved in this
ignominious Censure, held it expedient to resort to the Earl of Huntington, to
know whither he owned what Thompson had no less insolently than injuriously in
his Lordships name published; which we accordingly did, and having demanded of
the said Earl the truth of that matter, He positively denied the utterance of
any the said words, either to His Majesty or any body else; with strong
Asseverations, That he knew of no persons whatever so wickedly disposed as the
words published by Thompson, in his Lordships name, imported.

However, since ill designs frequently meet with success, and the Trade of
subverting men's Reputations is as really practiced, as some persons of great
Ignorance, and depraved manners, would have the subversion of the Government
believed to be; and since we find our selves in Print, Published, and probably
to have ridden post through the whole Kingdom, pursued with so reflective a
Character, which will well enough serve turn to gratify the Revenge of some,
and the Malice, Pride, Ignorance and ill-humour of others: We think fit hereby
to declare, That whither the Lord Huntington has, or any other person shall
hereafter affirm, That we who were for passing the Bill of Exclusion of the
DVKE of YORK (and with our selves, we may with Justice enough comprehend the
universality of those worthy Persons of both Houses who concurred with us in
opinion) were for the subversion of the Monarchy, or had any the least thought
or imagination tending to so horrid a Stratagem, so contrary to common safety,
the Laws of this Kingdom, and we hope to the Will of the Wise Disposer of all
things, That such Assertions, by whosoever made, abound as well with Impudence
and Falsehood, as with Levity and Misconclusion; and we would remind such
Traducers of the good Statutes of this Realm, which forbid any man to be so
Hardy as to publish Falsehoods, (one Statute calls them False-Lies) 3. E. 3.
34. 2. R. 2. 11.
whereby Discord or occasion of Discord or Slander may arise between the King
and His People, or the Great men of the Realm, the execution of which Laws we
submit to His Majesty's Will and Pleasure, Relying on his Royal Word in his
late Declaration: For certainly nothing can more justly provoke the Indignation
of a Prince than High Treason; nor distemper the mind of a Loyal Subject, than
to have his Innocence so venemously blasted. And we further declare, that we
always were, and are still readier, and more heartily disposed to Draw our
Swords, and expose our Lives for the advancement of the Kings Honor, support
of his Crown and Government, and safety of his Person, than such Impotent
Defamators (how Great soever) either are, or perhaps know how to be: to whom we
subjoyn their dark countenancers, whose special skill lies in pilfering away
the credit of well-deserving Subjects, and privately insinuating such
reproaches, as either they dare not, or are ashamed to fix a name to.

This We think fit to publish under our Hands, to disabuse the World, which
such dabling Politicians endeavor so shamelesly to impose on.

November 2. 1681. MONMOUTH. F. GRAY. HERBERT.



