THE Right Method For the proving of INFANT BAPTISM.

With some REFLECTIONS On some late Tracts against INFANT BAPTISM.

By JOSEPH WHISTON, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden-Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXC.

The Right Method for the proving of INFANT BAPTISM, etc.
THAT Sacred Adagy delivered to us by the Wise Man, Prove. 17.14. is sadly
verified, not only in Temporal, but in Religious Contentions. Contentions once
begun, be the Object or Subject Matter what it will, are seldom soon composed
or suppressed, but often grow to greater Violence, and in respect of those that
are religious, unsuppressible, unless by the interposal of a Divine Hand. One
Reason whereof is, because the Parties litigant, act under the Inforcement of
Conscience, either regularly, guided by Divine Light, or misguided by some
Mistake the Understanding lies under. It Is the unquestionable Duty of all
Christians, especially the Ministers of the Gospel, who are Christ's Stewards,
entrusted with the Preservation as well as Dispensation of his Truth to the
World, to contend for it as well as preach it, see Jude 3. Now the litigant
Parties on both Hands suppose, at least pretend, they are his Truths they
contend for. Neither are all Contentions of this Kind absolutely reproveable;
the Sin usually is rather in the manner of Management, than in the Contentions
themselves, as absolutely considered. All Truths (as must be granted on all
Hands) are not revealed so evidently in the Scriptures, as to admit of no
Debate about them. Now till Men discern what is Truth, it may be useful, yea a
Duty, to contend for what at present they apprehend to be so. Yet this must be
said, that it is Matter of much Admiration, as well as great Lamentation, that
after a long ventilation of disputable Doctrines and Practices, all sincere and
intelligent Christians, who have received any measure of that Unction from the
Holy One, whereby the Laws of God are put into their Minds, and written in
their Hearts; that is, an inward Principle and Disposition is wrought in them,
inclining them to a ready compliance with, and submission to the whole revealed
Will of God, should not discern on which side Truth lies, so as to coalesce in
the same Judgment and Practice. Shall we impute it to an Obscurity in Divine
Revelations? That would be a Reflection upon the Knowledge, Wisdom, or
Faithfulness of our Lord Christ, in whom, as the Apostle tells us, are hid all
the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; and who, as the same Apostle assures us,
has been faithful in all his House; the Fault therefore must lie on the part
of Christians themselves. For instance, That the Doctrine and Practice of
Infant Baptism have been of a long time controverted in the Church, is known to
all. Now whence it should be that this Controversy is not come to an Issue,
considering what has been said on the one and the other Part, but fresh
Contentions should arise, may justly require the most sedate and serious
Enquiry; but I shall not at present enlarge upon it. Two things I would only
say;

First, That on the Part of those that have pleaded the Cause of Paedobaptism,
I cannot but conclude, that many Mistakes they have lain under, both about the
Tenor of the Covenant, on which they have duly founded their pleas, and about
the Benefits accruing to Infants by their Covenant, Interest, and Baptism, did
at the first in a great measure give Rise to this Controversy, and have
contributed not a little to the long continuance of it. Had the true Tenor of
Abraham's Covenant been clearly discovered, asserted and established by
Scripture Light, and the full Good and Benefit accruing to Infants from their
Interest therein, and their Baptism, as the present Token of it, allowed to
them in a consistency with all the Truths of the Gospel, I cannot but think
that this Controversy had been, if not wholly obviated, yet quickly suppressed
among all sincere and intelligent Christians. To me it is past doubt that
Mistakes on the part of Paedobaptists, have greatly promoted the Cause of
Antipaedobaptism: this sufficiently appears by some late Tracts by the Men of
that Persuasion.

Secondly, On the part of the Antipaedobaptists, I shall only say, that I do
heartily wish, that if the Lord had seen it meet, there had been a more equal
Dividend, that those among them that are men of greater Parts and Abilities,
had a greater share with their Brethren of lower Parts and Abilities, in their
Sincerity, Simplicity, and Love unto Truth, and those weaker Ones had a greater
share with their Brethren in those Parts and Abilities they have attained to.
Some seem sufficiently furnished with Abilities for the finding out, at least
discerning Truth when set before them, and yet by one Means or another comply
not with it, but on the other hand do oppose it: Others have sufficient
Sincerity and Love to Truth, to engage them to a compliance with it when
discerned, but have not such acuteness of Understanding, nor solidity of
Judgment, as is necessary for the finding out or discerning a Truth that lies
at all below the very Surface of the Scriptures. I shall therefore, that I may
reduce this Controversy into as narrow a compass, and thereby lay the whole of
it within the view of the shortest and narrowest-sighted, as possibly I may;
and also obviate all unnecessary Digladiations or Impertinences on the one Hand
or the other, present, as it were, in a short Scheme, the Method I have
proceeded in, in the Pleas I have made on behalf of the Covenant Interest and
Baptism of the Infant Seed of Believers, and in which I judge it absolutely
necessary, that whoever will successfully plead the same Cause, do proceed. And
thus in the general I have laid the Foundation to the Pleas I have made in that
Covenant entered with Abraham, recorded in Genesis 17.7. For though there be much
in the New Testament strongly persuading that it is the Mind and Will of our
Lord Christ, that the Infant Seed of his People should be by Baptism solemnly
dedicated to him, as joint Confederates with their Parents, yet it must be
granted that his Mind and Will is not so fully and clearly revealed therein, as
to admit of no Debates about it. Will we have full Satisfaction about the Mind
and Will of our Lord Christ, with reference to this Practice, we must enter at
the Revelations he has made thereof, in the first establishment of that
Covenant with Abraham.

Yet let me add, that I suppose there is a Mistake in the Recommenders of a
late Tract, passing under the Name of Mr. Philip Carry to the World, when they
say that some of the Paedobaptists themselves do confess, that Arguments taken
from the Baptizing of whole Families, from Christ's blessing little Children,
and from 1 Cor. 7.14. have no weight in them. I remember not that any have
confessed so much, I am sure they had no Reason so to do. We only say, that
those and the like Scriptures, as taken abstractly by themselves, do not make
such a full, clear, and convincing discovery of the Mind of our Lord Christ in
this. Matter, as to set this Practice above all rational Doubts. There is
undoubtedly much, yea very much Weight in them, especially when added as a
farther Confirmation of what is pleaded from this Covenant: and let any
Baptists pretend what they will, they never have, nor will be able to answer
some of those Arguments Mr. Baxter has urged from that 1 Cor. 7.14. But this I
was saying in order to a full Establishment of this Practice, it is absolutely
necessary that a Foundation be laid where I have laid it, viz. in the
forementioned Covenant. But more particularly that this Foundation may be
surely laid, as I have done, so all others engaging in the same Cause, must do
these five things.

(1.) It must be solidly proved, that this Covenant is not the Old Covenant
which the Apostle tells is done away, but that it is the Covenant of Grace,
that very Covenant under which Believers still are. And I fear not falling
under the Censure of over-Confidence in the Minds or Judgments of judicious and
unbiassed Persons, if I say this is fully done already. See among others my
Answer to Mr. Cox, p. 95, to the 139. with the places there referred unto,
where I have demonstrated these three Positions.

1. That God in those Transactions with Abraham, recorded Genesis 12. at the
beginning, did not make or establish the Covenant of Grace with him: My meaning
is, he did not then complete the Covenant of Grace with him. This I grant, that
God did then begin to deal with Abraham with reference to his establishing his
Covenant with him; did as it were draw the first Lines of that Covenent he
intended afterward in a more formal express manner to enter with him. Hence
the Apostle Peter, telling the Jews that they were the Children of the
Covenant, cites one Promise then made to Abraham, Acts 3.26.

2. That the Covenant recorded in Genesis 17.7. is not the Old Covenant, nor had
any reference or relation thereunto.

3. That that Covenant is the Covenant of Grace, the same which Believers are
still under. And would our Opposers satisfy the World in their Judgments and
Practice, they ought to return solid and satisfactory Answers to those
Arguments pleaded in Confirmation of each of those Positions; their Silence
wherein renders all their Discourses utterly insignificant in the Judgment of
all Men of a competent Understanding. Alas! can they think a loose Discourse,
however filled up with Scripture-Quotations, can be of any use to such Persons,
so long as those Arguments remain unanswered? And it seems strange to me that
Men of any Judgment, Gravity or Conscience should recommend to the World any
Discourses so excessively defective in that regard, in the Management of the
Cause they plead. It being evinced and demonstrated past all rational
Contradiction, that this Covenant is not the Old Covenant, said to be done
away, but the Covenant of Grace. The most copious Harangue of Words, how many
Scriptures soever are alleged therein, signifies nothing, save only to show
how tenacious Men are of Error; and how they will wrest and pervert the
Scriptures, to confirm themselves and others therein, when once embraced by
them.

But it may be some will say, There are two Treatises, the one of Mr.
Grantham's, the other of Mr. Philip Cary's, wherein there are several
irrefragable Arguments to prove the contrary, viz. That that Covenant is not
the Covenant of Grace. To that I answer, It is true, that there are such Books
abroad; but so long as those Arguments remain unanswered, here is only the
opposing of Arguments to Arguments, and which are the most valid and
demonstrative, possibly Men of weaker Capacities are not able to determine to
the Satisfaction of their own Consciences. Hence such Methods of Procedure
serve only to confirm those that are before resolved, and puzzle weak
conscientious Christians that are sincerely inquiring after Truth. I shall only
add, that the Arguments I have laid down are unanswerable, is undoubted to me,
the sure-footing they have in the Scriptures of Truth assures me of that;
neither is the Silence of our Adversaries after their so long Presentation to
public View, any small Addition to that Assurance. I shall now try whether
those Arguments laid down by the two forementioned Authors be so or no.

To begin first with those laid down by Mr. Grantham; he attempts to prove two
things.

1. That Circumcision was not a Gospel-Ordinance. 2. That that Covenant
recorded Genesis 17.7. is not a Covenant of Grace. For the
1. What he means by a Gospel-Ordinance, is to me difficult to determine; and
therefore I shall only declare what I mean by a Gospel-Ordinance; and in brief,
I mean an Ordinance or Act of Worship instituted in the Covenant of Grace,
having an immediate and direct Respect thereunto, for the Confirmation,
obtaining or conveying the Good therein promised. Now let us see the strength
of his Arguments, and they are these three.

1. That which could profit no Man, except he kept the whole Law, was no
Gospel-Ordinance: but Circumcision could profit no Man, except he kept the
whole Law, Ergo, etc. And he cites Romans 2.25. for the Proof of his Minor
Proposition.

Before I answer to either part of his Argument, I must distinguish of these
two Terms [ Law and Keep.]. Thus by Law may be meant either the Moral Law, and
that taken in a strict and proper Sense, as the Law or Covenant of Works, the
Sum of which the Holy Ghost reduces to a Do this, and live. Or,

2. That Term Law may intend the whole Revealed Will of God concerning Man's
Duty; and then under this Term Law, we are to include both the Moral,
Ceremonial, and Judicial Law, and that in their utmost Extent and Latitude.

2. For that Term Keep, it may be meant either of a perfect, sinless keeping,
so as the Persons so keeping the Law, shall live therein, according to that of
the Apostle, Gal. 3.12. Or,

2. It may be meant of a sincere and upright Keeping, so as not willingly or
wilfully to fail in doing any thing required, or doing any thing so bidden. Now
if Mr. Grantham takes these Terms in the first Sense, (which in case he does)
Law here can only refer to, or be understood of the Moral Law, and that as a
Law of Works; seeing God never required of, or expected from his People a
perfect sinless Obedience to the Ceremonial Law, no, nor to the Moral Law, as
the Rule of that Obedience he requires of his People. And then I deny the Minor
Proposition, and say, those words of the Apostle prove it not; and my Reason
is, because the Apostle there speaks of the Law as considered under another
Notion, and of another manner of keeping than is intended by Mr. Grantham. But,

2. If Mr. Grantham understood these Terms [ Law and Keeping] in the latter
Sense, then I deny the Major Proposition, and affirm on the other hand, that
that (take it of Circumcision in particular) might be and was a
Gospel-Ordinance, which yet would not profit Men except they kept the whole
Law, seeing it might and did profit them who did so keep the Law. Thus the
Apostle affirms it did profit them that kept the Law. What is here said of
Circumcision may be alike said of Baptism. It profits not those that keep not
the Law in the latter Sense beforementioned; but as for those that do so keep
the Law, it does profit them. No Ordinance will profit any Men in case of their
failing in that Obedience indispensably required in the Covenant they are
under, which is no Argument at all that it is no Gospel-Ordinance.
Gospel Ordinances will not profit Men, as of themselves, in case they are
Hypocrites, and do not walk up to that Profession they make; which is all that
the Apostle intends in that place.

2. His second Argument is this, If Circumcision bound Men to keep the whole
Law, then it was no Gospel-Ordinance, etc. Before I return an Answer to this
Argument, I shall premise, that by Law in Gal. 5.3. which he cites to prove his
Assumption, we are (as I suppose is granted on all hands) to understand the
Mosaical Law, the Law given by Moses at Mount Sinai, and that in the utmost
Latitude and Extent of it. Now this Law may be considered two ways, 1. As given
by God to the People of Israel. 2. As after misinterpreted and misunderstood by
them.


1. As given by God, it had only a Subserviency to the Covenant of Grace, and
answerably as in it there was a Revival of the Law given to Adam in Innocence;
so there were various Sacrifices and Ceremonial Observations anew instituted,
that so the People, seeing the Exactness and Severity of the Law, and finding
their own Inability so to perform it as to live therein, they might be engaged
to flee unto Christ, and take hold of the Covenant of Grace confirmed, (as the
Apostle speaks, Gal. 3.17.) in him, whereunto they were guided by the
Sacrifices, and those other Ceremonial Observations. Hence the Law is said to
have been a Schoolmaster, to bring them unto Christ, Gal. 3.24. whether we
read as in our Translation, or only a Schoolmaster unto Christ, it is all one,
seeing a Schoolmaster it was. Now take the Law, as thus given by God himself,
and Keeping in the latter Sense beforementioned, I grant his Assumption, but
deny the Consequence in the Major Proposition; and affirm, That tho
Circumcision did bind Men to keep the whole Law during its continuance in the
Church, yet it might be and was a Gospel-Ordinance: and supposing the Apostle
only intends this Term [Law] in this Sense, yet he might justly argue against
Circumcision, as laying them under this Obligation to keep the Law, because
there was now a change and alteration in the Law. The whole Ceremonial Law was
abrogated and laid aside: and for them to put themselves under an Obligation to
keep a Law that was now abrogated, was sinful, and would have deprived them of
any Benefit by Christ, tho they obliged themselves to keep it in that Sense in
which the Jews under the first Testament were bound to keep it, and their
keeping of it was acceptable to God, and profitable to themselves.

2. Take the Law as misinterpreted and misunderstood by the Jews, viz. as tho
it had been a Law through their mere keeping of which they should be saved,
without the Mediation of Christ; (as it is evident they did so understand it)
then I deny the Assumption, and affirm, that Circumcision never bound any Man
so to keep the Law: and then the Apostle in arguing against Circumcision, deals
with the Galatians, according to that false Notion of the Law they had imbibed
from their false Teachers, and tells them, that in case they were circumcised,
that is, as obliging themselves to the Law in the Sense now mentioned, they
would be Debtors to do the whole Law, not only uprightly and sincerely, but to
do absolutely all things written therein, seeing neither their Sacrifices nor
Ceremonial Observations appointed in that Law, would yield them any Relief, in
case of their failing to do all things written in the whole Law, and their
returning and adhering to the Law in this sense, would deprive them of any
Benefit by Christ. And thus I judge we are to understand the Apostle in that
place: So that take the Apostle's Sense which way we will, the Argument is of
no force. Take the Sense the former way, then the Consequence is unsound; if we
take his Sense the latter way, the Antecedent is false. And a greater Absurdity
can hardly be vented by Men, than to say, That God ever designed Circumcision
as an Obligation unto the Jews, thus to keep the Law, or any part of it. But,

3. His third Argument is this, That which was always in comparison of the
Gospel a weak and beggarly Element, was never a Gospel-Ordinance; but
Circumcision was such, Ergo, etc.

Answ. Here I shall positively deny the Consequence in the Major Proposition,
and affirm, That that might be in the Apostle's Sense said to be a weak and
beggarly Element; which yet, during the First-Testament-Administration, might
be a Gospel-Ordinance. Will Mr. G. say, That the Jews had no Gospel Ordinances?
Yet all their Ordinances come within the compass of these weak and beggarly
Elements. Take it of the Passover, surely that was a Gospel-Ordinance, and yet
one of these weak and beggarly Elements.

But to hasten; As a close of this, and to make way to what follows, I shall
offer this one Argument to prove, That Circumcision was a Gospel-Ordinance, it
is this, If Circumcision was the Token of the Covenant of Grace, and as such a
Representation and Seal to those to whom it was applied of those great
Gospel-Blessings, Righteousness, Interest in God, and Sanctification, then it
was a Gospel-Ordinance; but the former is true, therefore the latter. I am
aware Mr. G. will deny the Assumption; but I prove it thus, If that Covenant,
Genesis 17.7. be the Covenant of Grace, and Circumcision was the Token of that
Covenant, and, as such, a Representation and Seal to those to whom it was
applied, of those forementioned Gospel-Blessings, then it was a
Gospel-Ordinance.

The Minor or Assumption in both Arguments, consists in two Branches; both
which I know will be denied: But it is the former Branch that at present falls
under our Consideration, and supposing that be sufficiently proved, the latter
will hardly meet with any opposition. Now that being already demonstrated, I
shall at present add no more; only consider what Mr. G. has said to prove the
contrary, That that Covenant is not the Covenant of Grace, but the Old
Covenant, or that Covenant said by the Apostle to be done away; and this he
says will appear three ways:

1. From the recital of the Covenant it self.

2. From the Nature of Circumcision; and chiefly because the Covenant of Grace
was not peculiar to Abraham and his Seed, but common to others, though they
were not circumcised.

He begins with the First, and thus expresses himself; Whosoever shall
diligently read it, (that is, the Covenant recorded Genesis 17.4 to 15.) will not
find one word of the Promise of Blessedness to all Nations. So that it seems he
does not find in this Covenant, as there set down, any thing positive that
makes it appear to be the Old Covenant, only Negatively he cannot find what he
supposes should have been in it. Had it been the Covenant of Grace, he cannot
find one Word of the Promise of Blessedness to the Nations.

To which I say, It Is exceeding strange. Are not the Promises of God's being a
God to the Nations, yea and with them, to their Seed; and a Promise of Heaven
included, and principally intended in the Promise of Canaan, Promises of
Blessedness to the Nations? What can be called a Promise of Blessedness, if the
one or the other of these be not so? See Psalm 144. ult.

But it may be said, These Promises are not made to the Nations, but to
Abraham's Seed in their Generations.

To that I say, It is granted. But then let it be remembered, That in Abraham's
Seed, all that in or from among the Nations do believe in Christ are intended.
So that here is an express Promise of Blessedness to all Nations, upon
condition of their Believing. And upon no other Terms is that Promise, Genesis 12.
at the beginning, made to the Nations, as Mr. G. himself acknowledges, page 4.

The Truth is, in that of Genesis 12. we have only a more general and indefinite
Promise of Blessedness to the Nations, not expressing wherein that Blessedness
shall consist. But when God comes in a more express and formal Way to establish
his Covenant with Abraham, as he does in this Genesis 17. he not only promises
Blessedness to the Nations upon their Believing, but particularly declares
wherein that Blessedness shall consist, and who among the Nations shall be the
Subjects of it; and these are Abraham's Seed in their Generations. Now then how
any should suppose that this is not the Covenant of Grace, because of a
supposed Defect in it of the Promise of Blessedness to the Nations, is to me
unimaginable. But this is all that Mr. G. can find in the Covenant it self, as
a Reason inducing him to think it is not a Covenant of Grace, but must needs be
the Old Covenant: Whereas the Reason why he cannot find what he looks after,
is, because he will not see it: and indeed none so blind as they that will not
see.

2. He argues from the Subjects of this Covenant. And he argues thus; If the
Covenant of Circumcision had been the Covenant of Grace, and Circumcision the
Sign of the Covenant of Grace, then had all true Subjects of it, as such, been
new Creatures in Christ Jesus: but the true or right Subjects of the Covenant,
(I suppose he means this Covenant) and Sign as such, were not new Creatures in
Christ Jesus.

Before I return an Answer to this Argument, I shall only ask Mr. G. this one
Question, and that is, Whether he judges, that to be a New Creature in Christ
Jesus, was indispensably necessary to the Salvation of Men under the First
Testament? If he say it was, then I deny his Minor Proposition, and affirm on
the other hand, That all the true and right Subjects of this Covenant, (I mean
of such as were of ripe Years) ought to have been New Creatures, and then as
such had the Promises to them in their Generations, including their Infants
with themselves. If Mr. G. say it was not necessary, then I shall only say, Let
him say what was necessary to their Salvation, the same was necessary to their
Admission into this Covenant, and having the Token of it applied unto them. But
for a further Answer to this Argument, I shall refer the Reader to my Answer to
Mr. Danvers, p. 98, and 117.

3. He argues from the Author of Circumcision. And thus he conceives Circumsion
could not be a Gospel-Ordinance, because (as he thinks) Moses gave it as an
Obligation to keep the Ceremonial Law.

Answ. Mr. G. seems to be proving, That the Covenant of Circumcision could not
be the Covenant of Grace; but here he returns to prove, That Circumcision was
not a Gospel-Ordinance. But let us see the Strength of his Reasoning. He had
before argued from the Obligations Circumcision brought Men under to keep the
whole Law: So that the Strength of this Reason lies only in this, That it was
given by Moses; and this he would prove from John 7.22. where says our Lord
Christ, Moses gave you Circumcision. But let it be observed, that our Lord
Christ himself qualifies that Assertion, and therefore immediately adds, Not
because, or rather, as I judge, (...) there should be read; not that, or not as
though Circumcision was of Moses; and so here is a plain denial that
Circumcision was of Moses. And hence when our Lord Christ adds, verse. 23. If
any Man on the Sabbath receive Circumcision, that the Law of Moses should not
be broken; he seems evidently to deal with the Jews according to their own
Sentiments about Circumcision. They looked upon it as appertaining to the
Ceremonial Law; but says Christ, It was not of Moses, but of the Father.
However (for this is of no great Consideration) it is certain, Circumcision was
long before Moses: It was given to Abraham, and that as the Token of the
Covenant of Grace, and so might and did continue, although on the account of
somewhat Ceremonial in it, it was inserted in the Sinai-Covenant; and
answerably the Command was repeated by Moses. But for further satisfaction to
this, see my Answer to Mr. Cox, p. 117. But,

4. There is yet one thing more that Mr. G. seems to lay great weight upon, and
that is this; That the Covenant of Grace was not peculiar to Abraham and his,
but common to others, though they were not Circumcised. Which after he
expresses thus; The Obligation to be circumcised, was peculiar to Abraham, and
to his Seed or Family, in such a sense, as none but they were obliged to be
circumcised.

But to that I would say, I grant, That the Covenant of Grace might be common
to others, though they were not circumcised, as Mr. G. himself affirms. But yet
I would willingly know, how far Mr. G. will extend that Term [Family], whether
he only intends Abraham's natural Lineage or Posterity; and so Seed and Family
are of an equal extent. And if he thus understand that Term [Family], then how
notoriously false his Assertion is, is obvious unto all. But if he extend it to
all that were adopted into Abraham's Family, as those bought with Money, or born
in his House, and the Proselites; how the restraining Circumcision to them
should in the least intimate, and much less prove, That that Covenant was not
the Covenant of Grace, nor Circumcision a Gospel-Ordinance, is impossible to
imagine. But that which I suppose he drives at, is this, There were some in the
Covenant of Grace which were not circumcised, nor under an Obligation to be
circumcised. Now in Answer to this, I would only demand of Mr. G. Whether he is
sure the Covenant now entered with Abraham, was so far promulgated, as that the
Persons he talks of had knowledge of it? Or suppose they had some notice of it,
Whether their Duty to be circumcised was made known unto them? Either of these
things being granted, how their not being circumcised, should intimate that
this Covenant is not the Covenant of Grace, nor Circumcision a
Gospel-Ordinance, is as much above the Reason of Man to apprehend as the
former. I would commend to Mr. G. the Case of Cornelius in Acts 10. the latter
end.

There is only one thing more that I would take notice of in Mr. G's Discourse.
And thus he argues against that Covenant, its being a Covenant of Grace, from
the Date of the Promise. But I have returned so satisfactory an Answer to that
in my Answer to Mr. Cox, that I shall and no more; see p. 97, and so on.

I shall now come to what Mr. Carry has said in pursuance of the same Design,
namely, to prove, That that Covenant, Genesis 17.7. is not the Covenant of Grace,
but on the other hand, that it is the Old Covenant, or a Covenant of Works:
only I shall premise, that at present I design not a full Answer of his Book;
that I have already done in my Answer to Mr. Cox. Neither do I know how I could
more effectually answer his Book, than by laying down and proving those three
Propositions there laid down and proved.

I shall now only take notice of what is Argumentative in his Book, and
considering the Commendation it has by Five (as I suppose) of the chiefest of
that Persuasion, and a Commendatory Epistle by a Sixth, I might justly expect
something extraordinary; and I shall not deny but that my Expectations were
somewhat high. But if ever that Proverb, Parturiunt Montes, were verified, it
is here. Alas! what do I meet with but Ridiculus Mus? For I have yet observed
but two Arguments syllogistically framed, by which he attempts the Confirmation
of his Notion, and the very recital of them may, in the judgment of all
unbyassed Persons, be a sufficient confutation of them.

There first is in his p. 120. and it is this; If that Covenant (he means that
recorded in Genesis 17.) was as much a Covenant of Works as that Covenant of Mount
Sinai, and that Covenant mentioned Deuteronomy. 29.9. nay, as much as the Covenant
made with Adam before his Fall; then it is not a Covenant of Grace: But it was
as much a Covenant of Works as either of the Covenants beforementioned were;
Therefore, etc.

A lusty Argument, if it would stand. But truly I might with sorrow say, as the
Apostle, of some, that would be teachers of the Law, There are some that would
be Teachers of the Gospel, neither knowing what they say, nor whereof they
affirm. But to the Argument:

I positively deny the Minor Proposition, as that concerns the Covenant made
with Adam, and that entered with the People of Israel at Mount Sinai. As for
that Covenant mentioned Deuteronomy. 29. it is the same with this in Genesis, both
which I affirm to be one and the same Covenant of Grace.

But Mr. Carry attempts to prove his Minor thus; It must needs be as much a
Covenant of Works, as that entered with the People at Mount Sinai, yea as that
made with Adam in Innocence; because although God promised to be a God to
Abraham and his Seed, yet it was upon condition of Obedience, with an
answerable Threatening. But can Mr. Carry, or any other Man of common sense,
think that the bare requiring of Obedience in any Covenant, or Threatening of
Judgments in Case of Disobedience, makes it presently a Covenant of Works? Is
it not expressly said, That our Lord Christ is the Author of Salvation to all
that obey him? and does he not say, according to the Covenant of Grace? Yea,
and is not Faith it self an Act of Obedience, and yet the Condition of the
Covenant of Grace? Mr. G. expressly grants that it is; and (if I do not mistake)
so does Mr. Carry also. And for Threatenings, does not the Apostle tell us, If we
live after the Flesh, we shall die? Romans 8.13. Yea, does not our Lord Christ
give us the Sum of the Gospel Covenant, in his Commission to his Apostles, Mark
16. and yet does he not say, He that believes not, shall be damned? But not to
waste time, Mr. Carry must know, that it is not the bare requiring of Obedience,
nor yet the denouncing Threatenings, that makes a Covenant a Covenant of Works,
but the commanding a perfect sinless Obedience to all that is written therein,
and threatening Death unto all, in case of the least failure in such an
Obedience. And therefore to proceed. His,

2. Argument, which is of a like validity with this, we have, p. 204. and it is
this, That Covenant in which Faith was not reckoned to Abraham for
Righteousness, could never be a Covenant of Faith, (of Grace I suppose he
means). And this Argument he takes to be irresistible. Strange Confidence! And
not to spend Time in showing the Insufficiency of his Proof, that speaking of
Circumcision when his Argument speaks of the Covenant; and sure there is a wide
difference between the Covenant, and Circumcision the Token of it. So that this
Argument of it self falls to the ground for want of Proof. But yet let me ask
this one Question of Mr. Carry, and that is, Whether Faith was reckoned to
Abraham for Righteousness by a mere Act of Sovereign Grace, without Respect had
to any Covenant he was then under? Or, was it reckoned to him by virtue of some
Promise of any Covenant that he was then under? If he say the former, Then I
shall only say, how his having his Faith reckoned unto him for Righteousness,
by such an Act of Sovereign Grace, should be an Argument that this Covenant
after entered with him, was not the Covenant of Grace, is above the reach of
Man's Understanding to apprehend. But if he say the latter, then I shall
affirm, That was the Covenant of Grace; the same for substance with this now
entered with him, only before less complete, but now fully completed: and how
the Institution of Circumcision could either cast Abraham out of it, or alter
the Tenure of the Covenant, so as that before he had Faith reckoned to him for
Righteousness, by virtue of the Promises contained in it, but after neither had
nor could have Faith alike reckoned to him for Righteousness by virtue of the
same Promises, is as much above the Understanding of Man as the former.

We will suppose an Heathen or a Pagan converted and enabled to believe: Now
upon his very first Conversion and Believing, he has his Faith reckoned to him
for Righteousness; but afterward this Man is baptized, shall we now say that
the Covenant he is received into, and of which Baptism is a Sign or Seal,
neither is nor can be the Covenant of Grace, because he had his Faith reckoned
to him for Righteousness before his Baptism, or while in an unbaptized
Condition; how absurd would that be? So that this Argument is so far from being
irresistible, that it has not the least weight in it. But to proceed. Having
removed out of our way these feeble Argumentations, whereby these two Authors
endeavor to prove, That that Covenant Genesis 17.7. is not the Covenant of Grace,
but the Covenant of Works, (the direct contrary whereunto I have affirmed)
whereby the Arguments I have laid down for the Proof of my Assertion, may be
rendered somewhat doubtful in the Judgments of Persons of weaker Capacities,
seeing Propositions lying so diametrically opposite the one to the other cannot
both be true. I doubt not those Arguments laid down by me will be seen in their
full force.

And therefore I shall return to my first Design, which is (as I have said) to
direct to the laying a sure Foundation to the Practice of Infant Baptism in
this Covenant established between God and Abraham, and his Seed in their
Generations.

2. The second thing then to be done is, to determine the true and proper
Subjects of this Covenant.

The first (as I have said) is convincingly to prove, that it is indeed the
Covenant of Grace, the very same Covenant under which Believers still are.

2. The second thing (I now say) is to determine the true and proper Subjects
of it: And that they are and were Abraham and his Seed in their Generations,
the very words of the Covenant do assure us; for so the Covenant runs, I will
establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee, in their
Generations. Here let it be observed, That it is not said, I will establish my
Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed in thy Generations, but between the
and thee, and thy Seed in their Generations, to be a God unto thee and thy
Seed. Now the Question is, Who we are to understand by Abraham's Seed? and who
are intended and included in that Phrase, Their Generations?

For the first, I answer, That by Abraham's Seed, we are undoubtedly to
understand all that is Scripture bare that Denomination of his Seed: And these
are of two sorts, 1. His Natural Seed. And, 2. His Spiritual Seed. All those
who through their taking hold of, and Reception into this Covenant, were, or
are adopted into his Family, as the Proselytes under the first Testament, and
Believers under the New. As for Believers under the New Testament, (whom at
present we are only concerned in) that they are to be accounted as Abraham's
Seed, is expressly according to the Letter of the Scripture; Romans 4.16. Gal.
3.29. Now I say, this Covenant God promises to establish between Himself and
Abraham, and all his Seed, whether Natural or Spiritual: Here is no Exception
of the one or the other kind of his Seed, but the words are absolute, I will
establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee, in their
Generations: And when God makes no Exception, we ought to make none.

2. But who are intended and included in this Clause [Their Generations]? Who
are these Generations of Abraham's Seed? To that I say, they are the natural
Infants, or natural Seed of Abraham's Seed. And that we are to understand the
Infant Seed naturally descending from this Seed of Abraham, I have (as I hope)
sufficiently proved formerly, and have as yet met with no Contradiction. And
indeed, unless we include the Infant Seed of Abraham's Seed in that Clause,
[Their Generations] there can be no Reason assigned of God's adding it; nor can
it be interpreted in any other Sense, in a Consistency with the Truth and
Faithfulness of God in his Covenant. But,

3. That which is to be done in pursuance of the End mentioned is, to settle
and establish the true Tenor of this Covenant, as here established between God
and Abraham, and his Seed in their Generations. And for this we must observe
that this Covenant, as here established, may be considered two ways.

1. As having a more general Respect to all Abraham's Seed.

2. As having a peculiar and special Respect to those who heretofore did, or
yet do stand immediately related to him as his Seed. Such were the Children
immediately descended from his own Loins, as Isaac, Ishmael, etc. and such are
his Spiritual Seed, viz. Believers: they stand in as an immediate Relation to
Abraham, as his Seed immediately descending from his own Loins did: And the
Covenant, as established with these, gives them a present actual Right to, and
Interest in the Good promised in it. And for the more clear understanding the
true Tenor of this Covenant, these three things must be observed.

1. That the Covenant was and is established between God and all these his
immediate Seed, universally one as well as the other. That it was so
established between God and Abraham's natural Seed, I have fully proved; and
that it is so established between God and his Spiritual Seed, will certainly be
readily granted by all that lay claim to this Spiritual Relation unto Abraham.

2. That it was and is established between God and every one of these that were
or are the Seed of Abraham in their Generations, including (as I said) their
Infant Seed with their Parents, between God and whomsoever this Covenant has
been established, it always has been, and is established between him and them
in their Generations: this is according to the express words of the Covenant:
So that supposing it to be granted (as I judge it is passed all rational
Contradiction proved) that in that Clause [Their Generations] the natural
Infants of Abraham's Seed are included, it must be granted, that all the
Infant Seed of Believers are (as such) in Covenant with God, and answerably
have a present Right and Title to the Good promised in it.

3. That this Covenant indispensably requires a personal Acceptance of, and
Closure with it, by all between God and whom it has been or is established. As
for grown Persons, their first Admission into it does indispensably require it:
as for Infants, whether naturally descended from Abraham, or from his Seed,
such a personal Acceptance of and a Closure with it, always has been and is
indispensably required upon their coming to Years of Discretion, and thereby
they did and do become Abraham's Spiritual Seed; and as such convey
Covenant Interest to their Seed. And from these three things we may infer these
two Colloraries.

1. That all Abraham's natural Posterity immediately or mediately descending
from him, did, as grown up to Years of Discretion, hold their Interest in the
Covenant, and Right to the Good promised, not as his Natural Seed, but as his
Spiritual Seed. And the like must be said of Believers Seed, I mean of such who
have their Covenat-Interest continued to them.

2. That however the Covenant might have a more general Respect to all
Abraham's Natural Seed mediately descended from him, yet none of them could
merely as his Natural Seed, lay a just Title to the Covenant, nor did the
Covenant secure to them any part of that Good contained in it. Their Parents
failing to take hold of the Covenant, did forfeit both their own and their
Childrens Interest; the like is still true under the New Testament.

4. In pursuance of the same Design, the Terms of the Covenant including both
the Stipulations or Promises made on God's part, and the Restipulation or Duty
required of those with whom it is made. And this Stipulation on God's part in
the general consists in these two Promises:

1. That he would be a God to them. And,

2. That he would give them the Land of Canaan, including and principally
intending the Heavenly Inheritance, viz. Heaven it self. So that whosoever God
does enter this Covenant with, as he engages himself to be a God to them, so to
give them the Land of Canaan, either literal Canaan, or the Heavenly
Inheritance typified thereby. And hence these Promises being made both to
Abraham and all his Seed in their Generations, including both Parents and
Children, it sufficiently appears, that the Good, or the Benefits and Blessings
accrewing to Infants by their Covenant Interest, are vastly more than merely
Nominal, as Mr. Carry will still needs suppose them to be. But see my Essay, p.
99, to 163.

2. The Restipulation on the part of those with whom this Covenant is entered in
the general is, that they keep the Covenant, so Genesis 17.9. And for a more clear
understanding of this, and the improvement of it to the End mentioned, these
four things must be carefully observed.

1. That by Keeping the Covenant is firstly intended, the Application of the
Token, Sign or Seal of the Covenant, and that as obliging to the performance of
the whole of what God requires of those it is entered with. Token, here we must
not take abstractly in it self, but including its Use and End. And hence,

2. Under this Command, To keep the Covenant, is required the performance of
all that Duty specified in the Covenant, according to the Capacity of the
Subjects of it.

3. That this Command, as more generally laid down, obliges all the Subjects
of the Covenant universally: and answerably as it obliges Parents, so their
Seed; as it obliges all them taken into Covenant under the first Testament,
whether of Abraham's Natural Seed, or Proselytes, always including Parents and
Children, so it still obliges Abraham's Spiritual Seed, viz. Believers, still
including Parents and Children. And hence,

4. We must necessarily distinguish between this Command as more generally
expressed, and the Designation of the Token to be kept. The Command is
absolute, and extends to all Abraham's Seed in their Generations, and being
never repealed, must needs extend to Believers under the New Testament, and
that in their Generations, that is, both Parents and Children: So that tho
there has been an alteration in the Token of the Covenant, it was formerly
Circumcision, but now Baptism, yet the Command is the same, that still abides
in its full force; and answerably here we have an express Command for the
Baptism of the Infant Seed of Believers, tho not eo nomine as Baptism, yet as
the Token of the Covenant: as take the Command abstractly by it self (as we
ought to do) it did not require Circumcision eo nomine as Circumcision, but as
the Token of the Covenant. God first gives out a Command to keep his Covenant,
intending, though not only, yet primarily, the Token of it; and as so given
out, it obliges all Abraham's Seed in their Generations, whether those under
the first, or Believers under the second Testament: and then he specifies what
should then be the Token of it, and that was Circumcision. But when our Lord
Christ comes in the Flesh, he lays aside that Token, and intimates another,
which is Baptism: but the Command to keep the Covenant, as abstractly taken,
abides in its force throughout all Ages. This indeed our Opposers seem
unwilling to understand: but let things be seriously and impartially weighed,
and Truth will appear and prevail.

Lastly; In pursuance of this Design, the Scriptures must be thoroughly
searched, and whatever is found in them for the further Discovery, and assuring
us of the Mind and Will of our Lord Christ, relating to the Practice under
Consideration, must be taken in, and improved for this End and Purpose. The
full Mind and Will of our Lord Christ is not held forth in a single Scripture,
or in any part of the Scriptures, but the Revelations of it lie scattered
throughout the whole Scriptures; and whoever will make a through and impartial
search, they will find much, possibly much more than yet has been brought to
light, clearly manifesting and assuring us, that this is indeed his Mind and
Will, viz. That the Infant Seed of Believers, as taken into the same Covenant
with their Parents, should be baptized. Those that see meet, may peruse what I
have written of this import in those small Tracts, here referred to. And to sum
up all in brief, If any Man ask me what Warrant I have to baptize the
Infant Seed of Believers? they may take it thus:

1. I find that that Covenant recorded Genesis 17.7. was a Covenant of Grace, the
very same Covenant under which the Church and People of God ever since have
been and still are. This to me is past all rational Contradiction.

2. I find that God did establish this Covenant between himself and Abraham,
and his Seed in their Generations.

3. I find that in this Clause [Their Generations] the Infant Seed of Abraham's
Seed were and are universally included.

4. I find that this Covenant, as actually conveying a present Interest in, and
Right to the Good contained in it, did only extend to Abraham's immediate Seed,
whether those naturally descended from him, or those who became his Seed by
taking hold of the Covenant, and answerably that all his mediate Seed held
their Interest in the Covenant, not as his Natural (tho many of them were so)
but as his Spiritual Seed; as having personally taken hold of the Covenant
themselves. And,

5. I find that this Covenant was always entered with Abraham's Seed, whether
Natural or Spiritual, in their Generations, including their Infants with the
Parents. It was so during the First-Testament-Administration, and answerably
must needs be alike so under the New.

6. I find that God did expressly command, that both Abraham and his Seed in
their Generations, should keep this Covenant, intending thereby, tho more, yet
firstly, that they should observe and apply the Token of it, as Parents should
have it applied to themselves, so that they should take care that it be applied
to their Children as Joint-Heirs of the Promises with themselves.

7. I find that Baptism is the present Token of the Covenant; and consequently
is the Token now to be applied by virtue of that Command, obliging all
Abraham's Seed in their Generations to keep the Covenant. And,

Lastly, I find variety of other Scriptures fully assuring me, that I do
rightly understand his Mind and Will as thus revealed in his first establishing
this Covenant with Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, and his Seed in their
Generations. And from the whole, I would now ask, Where are those far-fetched
Consequences that our Opposers talk of, that we are forced to make use of for
the Proof of Infant Baptism? Let but Abraham's Covenant be rightly understood,
taking in all other Scriptures confirming the Practice we plead for, and here
will be found no other Consequences, than what are necessary to a right Use and
Improvement of any Command or Promise whatsoever contained in the Scriptures:
And what should hinder then, but that this Controversy at last should come to a
Period?

I have only further to touch in brief upon a Sheet of Paper lately come forth,
in opposition to the Practice of Infant Baptism, by an Anonymous Author; the
desire of some that I should return an Answer unto which, has occasioned the
foregoing Pages. Who the Author is, I have as yet no intimation: I shall only
say, That if he be one that has assumed the Work of a Teacher among the Men of
his Persuasion, he has done prudently in concealing his Name; but if he be a
private Member of any of their Congregations, (as I suppose he may be) he might
have made himself known. For who will expect from any, more than they have
received, or might justly be expected to have attained to? He seems to be (and
I hope is) one of those for whom I have heartily wished that they had a greater
share in those Abilities, that some of that Persuasion have attained to. But
(be he who he will) he attempts to prove these two things:

1. That Baptism ought to be administered universally, by Dipping or Plunging
the whole Body under Water.

2. That grown Persons professing their Faith and Repentance, are the only true
Subjects of Baptism.

As to the first, I shall say but little, did not he, or any other of his
Persuasion, make that manner of Baptizing simple and absolutely necessary to
the Truth and Validity of that Ordinance, and annul it when otherwise
administered, they should meet with little opposition from me. I doubt not but
Baptism, as so administered, is true Baptism, and was (at least sometime) so
administered in Primitive Times, and a considerable Time after; but that our
Lord Christ does indispensably require it to be so administered universally,
that I deny: and doubt not but that Baptism administered, either by pouring
Water on, or washing the Face with Water, yea, or sprinkling Water upon the
Face, supposing the right Form of Baptism to be observed, is true Baptism, and
valid to all its Ends and Purposes, and need not be repeated: and I judge that
our Lord Christ expresses Baptism by a Word that will admit of a different
manner of administering it. But for this I shall refer this good Man, and all
others that desire Satisfaction, to my Answer to Mr. Danvers, page 143, to the
end. All that he has added to what others have said, is an Observation he has
made, that in the Dutch Testament, John the Baptist is called John the Dooper.
But of how little Consideration that is, is obvious unto all: The utmost that
can be made of it is only this, That one Man, or at least very few that
translated the Bible into Dutch, judged it best so to render the word (...),
and what signifies the Judgment of One, or a few Men? Suppose our English
Translators had rendered it John the Washer, (as they might have done) would
this Man have taken their Translation as a certain Determination of this
Controversy? But I shall refer the Reader to the Place mentioned: as also to
Mr. Walker's Treatise of this Subject, the best that I judge is extant. And if
any be yet unsatisfied, they have the liberty from me to act according to the
Light they have received, provided they do not plead the Manner of Administering
that Ordinance against the dueness of Infant Baptism. The Manner of
administering that Ordinance, concerns not the Subjects of it. Whence it is most
unreasonable and absurd to plead the Manner of Administering Baptism against our
Practice. Let the Subjects be determined, and let every one act according to
his own Light in the Manner of Administering that Ordinance.

But to proceed; The other Thing that he attempts to prove, is, That only grown
Persons, professing Faith and Repentance, are the true Subjects of Baptism.

And as for this I shall not say much: Those that will impartially peruse and
weigh what I have already said, (they imitating the Noble Bereans, Acts 17.)
will (as I judge) see it wholly needless. Indeed, for such as Mr. Grantham, who
cannot see Blessedness promised to the Nations in that Covenant, Genesis 17.7. I
shall despair of their discerning the Mind and Will of our Lord Christ
contended about, though appearing in the clearest Noon-Light of Divine
Revelations. But for those who have Eyes to see Truth when brought to Light, I
shall not be so uncharitable to suppose, that what this Honest Man has said,
will raise the least Hesitations in their Minds about the Interest of the
Infant Seed of Believers in the Covenant, or their Right to Baptism on the
account of that their Interest. But yet let us take a brief view of what he
has said to prove his Assertion. And he attempts to prove it three ways.

1. From Scripture. 2. By Reason grounded upon Scripture. 3. From certain
Absurdities which he supposes will follow upon our Practice.
1. For Scripture. And thus he would prove his Assertion two ways.

1. From the Scriptures recording the Baptism of grown Persons, without making
mention of the Baptism of their Infants. And he Instances in those that were
baptized by John Baptist, the Disciples of Christ, and Philip. To which I will
say only two Things.

1. Supposing that some of them had Infants, How does our Author know but that
they were baptized, though the Scripture records it not? We find no record of
the Apostles Baptism, and yet undoubtedly they were baptized. But,

2. Suppose that they had Infants, and they were not Baptized, that does not at
all prejudice the Cause of Paedobaptism. For let it be considered that all
these, excepting the Eunuch, who undoubtedly then had no Infants, at least with
him, whose Baptism we have now respect unto, their Infants as well as
themselves had been before circumcised: and the Parents might, and it was
necessary they should be baptized, but their Children might not, neither was it
necessary that they should, having already the Token of the Covenant applied to
them, which as yet was not laid aside.

But it may be said, So had their Parents. But to that I say, 'Twas necessary
that their Parents should be Baptized, as an Obligation to, and whereby they
did in a special manner visibly own and acknowledge, That that very Person, viz.
Jesus Christ, was the true Messiah promised to their Fathers. Hence it is no
way absurd, nor the least prejudice to the Cause of Infant Baptism, to grant,
that none of the Infant Seed of believing Jews, till the absolute abrogation,
and laying aside of Circumcision, was published and fully, made known to the
Church, were baptized: But now after the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ,
when Circumcision was wholly laid aside, we still find when Parents were
Baptized, their Households, peculiarly including their Children, were Baptized
with them. But it may be our Author will say, he does not argue merely from the
Scriptures not mentioning the Baptism of Infants, but from that taken in
Conjunction with John's Preaching Repentance, and Christ's making Disciples by
teaching them, and the Apostles requiring Faith of those that they Baptized.
But to that I Answer; Both John Baptist, our Lord, and the Apostles, having to
do with grown Persons, they did, and it was necessary they should preach
Repentance, teach and instruct them before they baptized them, and upon their
professing their Faith and Repentance, administer that Ordinance to them: But
what is that to Infants? They might have, and had, by virtue of their Parents
Faith, an Interest in the Covenant, and upon that account had a right to
Baptism, which when Circumcision was laid aside, and Baptism instituted, was
applied to them. But,

2. He would prove his Assertion from the Commission given by our Lord Christ
to his Apostles. But to that, having so fully proved that the Commission does
not exclude, but on the other hand include Infants, supposing their Interest in
the Covenant, and yet the fitness and meetness of our Lord Christ's expressing
the Commission as he has done, that it is wholly superfluous to add any thing
more. See my Plain Proof of Infant Baptism, p. 73. as also my Answer to Mr.
Danvers, Chap. 2. p. 25. and therefore shall proceed.

Our Author offers two Reasons why Baptism is by Dipping, Washing, or burying
the Body all over in Water, only to Believers upon a profession of their Faith
and Repentance.

1. That it is the Positive Law and Sovereign Will and Pleasure of God.

In Answer to which: As to the Manner of Administering Baptism, which his two
Reasons seem to have a peculiar respect unto, having spoken to that already, I
shall add no more, but take his Reasons as respecting the Subjects of Baptism;
and as to this First I say, in a direct Opposition to what he says, That it is
not the positive Will or Pleasure of God, that Believers only should be
baptized, but it is alike his positive Will and Pleasure that their Infants
should be baptized with them. This I have fully proved, which I refer him unto;
and proceed to his

Second Reason, and that is taken from two Ends of Baptism.

To which I say, that there are other Ends of Baptism, with reference to which
it is the Will and Pleasure of God that it should be applied to Infants. To
instance only in these two:

1. That by it they may be by a solemn Right or Ordinance of his own
Institution, dedicated, given up, and engaged unto God in Christ.

2. That in and by it, the Benefits and Blessings of the Covenant may be
represented and signified, and the Promises wherein they are contained,
ratified and confirmed, both to Parents and Children, which when they come to
Years of Maturity, they are to improve, as to encourage, so to engage
themselves personally to close in with the Covenant, and give up themselves to
God in Christ, according to the Tenor of it; and thereupon strengthen and
confirm their Faith in a believing Application of the Promises to themselves.
Hence what he says of all Worship, which he says is not commanded by our Lord
Jesus Christ in his Holy Word, is vain Worship, etc. It concerns not us, seeing
we affirm it is according to the Will of God revealed in his Word, That Infants
should be baptized. But,

3. He argues from certain Absurdities, which (as he supposes) will follow upon
our Practice. Of which I must say in the General, that they are all mere
Mistakes and Scare-Crows, the Effects of a clouded Fancy. As,

1. That we go to Moses for an Institution of Baptism. When as we go not to
Moses, but to the Covenant of Grace established with our Father Abraham and his
Seed in their Generations, and confirmed of God in Christ, 430 Years before the
Law was given by Moses. For his Second, viz.

2. That our Practice lays a Foundation for a National Church: It Is still a
gross Mistake. It Is well known that there are in England, and New England, who
plead for and live in the Practice of Congregational Churches, and yet maintain
the Doctrine and Practice of Infant Baptism, and that in a perfect consistency
with their Principles and Practice. For the Third, viz.

3. That it affirms the Children of Believers, were by Virtue of their
Parents Faith in the Covenant of Grace, united or ingrafted into Christ,
contrary to Ephesians. 2.

But that our Practice should contradict the Apostle, in that Ephesians. 2. where all
are said to be Children of Wrath, which are the Words, I suppose, he has
reference to; supposing our Principles rightly understood, is unimaginable.
Yea, it is because we believe them to be Children of Wrath as well as others,
that we so earnestly contend for their Covenant Interest, and the Dueness of
their Baptism up on the Account thereof. They may be, and are, Children of
Wrath by Nature, as having sinned in Adam, and being shapen in Iniquity, and
conceived in Sin; and yet upon their Birth into the World, be, as the Seed of
Believing Parents, taken with their Parents into the Covenant of Grace; and
hereupon have a Right to be implanted into Christ's Mystical Body, whereby they
are secured, during their pure Infant-State, from the Effects of that Wrath
they were by Nature the Children of: And who can assign any show of Reason, why
it may not be so? They are not the Children of Wrath, and in the Covenant of
Grace, at one and the same instant of Time: their State, as Children of Wrath,
precedes their State, as in Covenant with God.

4. As for the Fourth Absurdity, it is deceiving of Souls; I shall only say,
That if any such thing does happen, it is from the ignorance or neglect of
Parents, or those that should instruct them. We only affirm, That their
Covenant-State secures them from the Effects of Wrath during their pure
Infancy. The Covenant indispensably requiring their personal Faith and
Repentance, when they come to Years capacifying them to Believe and Repent. And
what Deceit is here put upon any? For his

Last Absurdity, that still is but his own Fancy, proceeding from his Ignorance
of the true Doctrine of Infants Covenant Interest and Baptism. Will he but
peruse what I have written in my Essay, p. 143. etc. he may see this Absurdity
fully removed out of his Way. But,

Lastly, This Our Brother (for so I shall own him) comes to answer some
Objections against what he has said.

1. As for that Objection he raises from what we are taught concerning the
Doctrine of Baptism in the Liturgy of the Church of England, not being
concerned in it, I shall say nothing to it. But for his,

2 Object. I shall briefly touch upon that, and hasten to a close. It Is raised
from the Pleas we make for Infant Baptism, from the Covenant made with Abraham
and his Seed in their Generations. And as a Reply to what he says in Answer to
this Objection, or these Objections: he pretends to answer Two Objections, the
One raised from Acts 2.38. the Other from Genesis 17.7. But they may be reduced
into One. I shall referr him, and all others, to what I have written, to show
the Sureness of the Foundation laid in this Covenant entered with Abraham for
the Practice of Infant Baptism, a Summary of which may be seen in the
foregoing Pages: and shall only take notice of what he says of a Covenant of
Election, unto which both Abraham, before he was called, and also many
Children, both of Believers and of Unbelievers, did belong. But as to that I
say, That a Covenant of Election is a mere Chimaera: there is no such thing
revealed in the Scriptures. That there is an Election of Grace, the Apostle is
express; but of a Covenant-Election we find not the least mention throughout
the Scriptures: and possibly our Author means no more than what we affirm.
Which if it be so, I shall let the Unscripturalness of his Expression pass: but
shall affirm, That none, whether Old or Young, ever were, are, or shall be (so
far as is revealed unto us) saved merely by virtue of their Election. I shall
not determine what Reserves God has kept secret in his own Breast concerning
the Salvation of Infants descending from wicked Parents, whether Heathens or
nominal Christians: Secret things belong unto God. Neither does the Case of
such Infants at all concern the present Controversy. But this I say, According
to what is revealed in the Scriptures, None ever were, are, or shall be saved
by virtue merely of their Election; but all that are saved (so far as God has
revealed unto us) must be, and are saved by Virtue, and according to the Tenor
of the Covenant of Grace, viz. This Covenant established with Abraham as the
Father of the Faithful, and his Seed in their Generations. Hence I shall aver
(how cruel soever I may be judged to be by Mr. Grantham), That no Unbeliever
can, according to any Divine Revelation, have any assured Hope, either of their
own, or of their Childrens Salvation who die in their Infancy. But this is a
Controversy excentrical to my present Design, neither do I desire to engage in
it. This I am satisfied in, That all the Seed of Believers, at least that do
own their Childrens Covenant Interest, and do not, out of contempt to the
Ordinance of God, neglect their Baptism, are infallibly saved (if they die in
Infancy); as for others, let the Day declare it. As for him that will undertake
to reprove God, in case he do not save all Infants, I shall only say as God
himself does in a like Case, Let him answer it.

But to have done. As for what our Author enlarges upon that Supposition, That
that Covenant entered with Abraham, was the Old Covenant, it is utterly
insignificant, seeing I have so fully proved, That that Covenant is not the Old
Covenant, nor had any Relation to it, but indeed is the Covenant of Grace, that
Covenant-Believers are still under, and therefore I have no Reason to take any
notice of it.

As for what he says in Answer to that Question, Whether Baptism came in the
Room or stead of Circumcision? It is enough for us, that Baptism is the Token
or Seal of the Covenant; (which our Author acknowledges,) and answerably does
correspond with, and come in the stead of Circumcision, in the General Notion
of it, viz. as the Token of the Covenant. Hence whatever other Differences may
be assigned, they concern not this Controversy.

I have only this to desire of this good Man, That he will be persuaded that he
has not as yet looked half the way into this Controversy. And shall add, that
if any will yet agitate this Controversy, I earnestly beg of them to do it, so
as to approve themselves unto him that searches their Hearts, and is ready to
judge the Quick and the Dead, and show themselves to be Men.

FINIS.
The Author has published these Treatises also about this Subject, viz.
1. INfant Baptism from Heaven, and not of Men; or a moderate Discourse
concerning the Baptism of the Infant Seed of Believers.

2. Infant Baptism from Heaven, and not of Men, the 2d Part: Or an Answer to
Mr. Danvers's Treatise of Baptism. Wherein Infants Right to Baptism is further
confirmed.

3. An Essay to revive the Primitive Doctrine and Practice of Infant Baptism,
in the Resolution of Four Questions. 1. What are the Reasons of God's
appointing the Token of his Covenant to be applied to the Infant Seed of his
People. 2. What is the Good or Benefit they receive thereby. 3. What is the
Duty of Parents toward their Children, as bearing the, Token of the Covenant.
4. What is the Improvement that Children, as grown up to Years of Maturity, may
and ought to make of the Token as applied to them in their Infancy.

4. Infant Baptism plainly proved. A Discourse wherein certain Select Arguments
for Infant Baptism, formerly syllogistically handled, are now abbreviated, and
reduced to a plain Method for the Benefit of the Unlearned. With a large
Epistle to the Pious and Learned among the Antipaedobaptists, especially the
Authors of the late Confession of their Faith.

5. A brief Discourse concerning Man's natural proneness to, and tenaciousness
of Errors. Whereunto are added, some Arguments to prove, That that Covenant
entered with Abraham, Genesis 17.7. is the Covenant of Grace.

All sold by Jonathan Robinson at the Golden-Lion in St. Paul 's Churchyard.
Together with several other Treatises in Defense of Infant Baptism, by Mr.
Baxter, Mr. Wills, Mr. Barret, etc.

A POSTSCRIPT: Being a further Defense of INFANT BAPTISM, against Mr. Keach.
WHEN the foregoing Sheets were just wrought off the Press, a little Tract came
to my hand, put forth by Mr. Benjamin Keach, one of the Epistolers to Mr.
Cary's Book, which I have perused; and although I find not my self, in the way
wherein I have proceeded, farther proof of Infant Baptism much concerned;
neither do I fear but that any who shall truly weigh what I have written, will
see what he has said is sufficiently obviated, and therefore I might well, and
at first view of his Book, have thought to have let it pass without taking any
notice of it. Yet because it is possible something that he has suggested, or
rather repeated from others, may somewhat obstruct Persons of weaker
Capacities, in their compliance with that Practice I have pleaded for; I have,
upon second thoughts, judged it meet to consider what he has written, so far
as I conceive necessary; for I would not willingly leave any thing behind me
unremoved out of the way of the weakest of sincere Christians, complying with
the Mind and Will of our Lord Christ, in reference unto that practice wherein
his Interest and Kingdom, the Glory of God, the Good of Children, and the
Comfort of their Parents, is so nearly concerned; and the rather, because our
Lord Christ seems in a special manner to have allotted me, with some others,
the maintaining of this Province: And it may not be unuseful, at least to Mr.
Keach himself, to remark some few things in the general, before I come to a
particular consideration of what he has said; and,

First, It may be remarkable how confident he is, when the Grounds he proceeds
upon are so slight and trivial, and which have been before fully removed, giving
us too much ground to suspect, he has as yet looked but a very little way into
this Controversy. How slight and trivial his Grounds are, and where he might
have seen them before removed, shall be showed after. Yet see how he expresses
himself, page 65. in an Apostrophe to our Lord Christ; Lord, says he, that Man
should be so bold and presumptuous, as once to attempt to alter or change any
thing (he has respect unto the Subject of Baptism) of this Holy or great
Commission, or adventure to do things contrary to what is given forth here by
Jesus Christ, as King and Law giver of the New Testament. When he might, and it
is somewhat hard for me to persuade my self, that he has not seen it fully
proved, that in the Pleas we make for Infant Baptism, we make not the least
alteration or change in that Commission, but affirm that it was necessary, that
although it be the Will of Christ that Infants should be baptized, yet he
should express himself therein as he has done. I shall only say at present,
it is easy, and not unusual for Men, Cynick-like, by crying out of other's
supposed Evils, to discover the same more prevailing in themselves.

Secondly, It may be remarked, how partial he is in his own Cause; it appears
that he takes it for granted, as indeed we all do, that Christ has power to
preserve, protect, and uphold all grown Persons, in their being Baptized by
Dipping or Plunging, how aged, weak, and infirm soever they are, and that in
the coldest Climates, and sharpest Seasons; and he would persuade himself, yea,
is very confident, none ever received the least hurt or damage by being so
baptized, (yea, he concludes, as he may justly do, That our Lord Christ would
not institute any Ordinance to destroy the Lives of any Person) thus page 66.
and yet he pleads it as an Evidence, That Infants cannot be the Subjects of
Baptism, because their tender Bodies cannot bear it in these cold Climates
without palpable danger of their lives. And tells us again, That Christ never
appointed any Ordinance to destroy the lives of any of his Creatures; thus Page
the 4th of his Epistle, and 32d of his Book. But let me say, Why cannot Jesus
Christ preserve, protect, and uphold Infants, as well as grown Persons, whose
Age, Weakness, and Infirmities, in conjunction with the tender and delicate way
and manner of living, renders their Bodies alike tender as, if not more tender
than the Bodies of Infants, and whose Baptism by Immersion would as palpably in
danger their lives, as the Immersion of Infants would endanger theirs. But it
seems, in the conceit of our Author, that is an Argument against the Subjects
of Baptism, which is none against the manner of baptizing, when as the thing it
self is indeed as strong an Argument against the one, as against the other: And
for mine own part, were there a necessity of Baptism by Immersion, I could as
easily trust our Lord Christ with the preserving the lives of Infants, as of
grown Persons, viz. such as those aforementioned: But our Author here gives as
a hint why they so zealously plead for baptizing by Immersion, it is, that they
might exclude Infants from Baptism.

Thirdly, I cannot but remark Mr. Keach his great disingenuity, (that is the
mildest term I can give it) for indeed it is very bad, exceeding bad, and a very
great disparagement, both to himself and his Cause. I shall only give a
twofold Instance: First, in his quoting Mr. Baxter, and other Paedobaptist
Assertions, concerning the Use and End of Baptism, and the Qualifications of
the Subjects to be baptized, as though they were contradictory unto their
practice; whereas what they say, is indeed no way contradictory thereunto, but
fully consistent therewith; and in particular, as for Mr. Baxter, he has fully
vindicated himself, which yet Mr. Keach has the ingenuity to take no notice
of: And it is certain, the Use and End of Baptism are not such, but that it may
be fitly applied to Infants; and how unreasonable and absurd is it to conclude,
that because such and such Qualifications are required in the Adult, therefore
Infants are not to be baptized? that there were certain Qualifications required
in the Adult Heathens to their Circumcision which their Infants were incapable
of yet, and that their Infants were circumcised with them, is undeniable. Now
suppose any of the Priests or Levites, whose Lips were, as the Holy Ghost
speaks, to preserve Knowledge, should preach or write of those Qualifications;
for any from thence to conclude against the circumcising their Infants, how
absurd would it be? It may be our Author will say, they had an express Command
for their Circumcision. To which I answer, It is granted, and we affirm that we
have, if not an express Command, yet that which is equivolent thereunto, for
the baptizing of Infants: of which more immediately.

2ly. Our Author's Disingenuity appears in his frequent Citations out of Mr.
Danvers Book (a Book of which it must be said, it has been and for ever will
be a Reproach to the Cause it pleads; and I cannot but hope himself has
repented, as others of that Persuasion are ashamed of it) without taking notice
of the Answers long since returned unto it; yea, such is the Disingenuity of
our Author, that he cites some Testimonies against Infant Baptism, which have
been past all Contradiction, proved to be mere Falsehood and Forgeries, take
that Instance, page 91. where he quotes the Magdeburgenses, as cited by Mr.
Danvers. It is true, our Author has the Wit to leave out part of Mr. Danvers's
pretended Citation, wherein that Falsehood did particularly lie, but he has the
Disingenuity to conceal part of what those worthy Authors say, which had he
produced, would have quite spoiled their Testimony, seeing they positively
affirm, that Infants as well as the Adult, were in Primitive Times baptized.
Now how Men of any Conscience can use such disingenuous Methods, is to me a
Riddle. I shall only add, O my Soul, enter not thou into their Secrets. But to
come to the Book: as for what he says in his first Chapter, we are fully of the
same mind with himself; the four next Chapters are wholly taken up in Attempts
to prove, that it is only Baptism by dipping or plunging the whole Body into
Water, which is true Baptism. I shall not say much to this, having already
given a clear account of the Grounds on which I judge that our Lord Christ has
not indispensably tied up his Church to that manner of administering that
Ordinance, which Mr. Keach may consider if he please. At present I shall only
observe a few things in those Attempts made by our Author, and pass on.

First, I cannot but observe how he will needs oppose Rantism or Sprinkling, to
Dipping, or Plunging, or immerging the whole Body under Water, as tho that
were, if not the only, yet the main and most principal used manner of
Pedo-Baptists administering that Ordinance: hence he strenuously applies himself
to prove that there is a difference between (...) and (...), and that the word
(...) cannot signify to sprinkle; and this I suppose he does ad faciendum
populum, seeing he cannot but know that many, if not most, or all
Pedo-baptists, especially who conscienciously make the Word their Rule,
administer that Ordinance by washing, or pouring Water upon the Face of the
Party baptized, whether Infant or Adult.

Secondly, It may be observed, That whereas our Author insists so much upon the
word (...), to prove that baptizing must necessarily be by slipping or plunging
under the Water, and that as essential unto true Baptism: It is certain, and
himself acknowledges it, that this word is of a large Signification: First, It
signifies to Die, and this seems to be its first and most native Signification.
This some of his own Authors, and others might be mentioned, do affirm; and
answerably it signifies to plunge, Tingendi causa, in order to Dying or giving
some new Color; the primitive word being taken from a Dyers Fat. Hence we read
in Profane Authors (...), tingere lanas, to die Wool; so (...), double-dyed
Purple. Hence it will follow, that barely to dip or plunge into Water, is not
the first or primary Signification of the Word; It notes something more than a
bare dipping or plunging into Water; it notes such a Dipping or Plunging as
whereby the thing dipped or plunged may receive a new Die or Color which it
had not before. 2ly, It signifies barely to dip or plunge, and it signifies
dipping or plunging; because things died are dipped or plunged into that Liquor
or Liquid Matter they are dyed in. 3ly. It signifies to wash, so Mr. Lee (one
of the Authors cited by Mr. Keach) tells us, that the word (...), as Hesychus,
Stephanus, Scapula and Budeus, the great Masters of the Greek Tongue, make
good, by very many Instances and Allegations out of Classick Writers, imports
no more than Ablution or Washing; so that according unto these great Masters of
the Greek Tongue, Ablution or Washing, is as ^roper a Signification of this
word, as dipping or plunging. Hence for any to argue merely from the
Signification of the Word, is exceeding weak, and utterly unconvincing. But,

3dly. It may be observed, that whereas our Author says, that when it
signifies Washing, it is such a Washing as is done by dipping so much as is
washed; it must be said it is otherwise. Take it only of washing the Hands, tho
other things might be mentioned, so the washing the Hands or the Feet of the
Priest under the Law is included in those (...), mentioned Hebrews 9.10.
compared with Exodus 30.18. So the Pharisees washing their hands before Meat, is
called Baptism, Luke 11.38. where it is said they marvelled that he, meaning
Christ, (...), that he had not been baptized. Now it is certain in washing
their Hands they did not always, if ordinarily, dip or plunge them into the
Water, but had Water poured upon them: see 2 Kings 3.11. So that the word,
according unto its use in the Scripture, may be rendered very fitly to wash; and
signifies such washing, as is by pouring Water on the Party or Subject washed.
I shall not fear to affirm, that the washing one Part of the Body by pouring
Water, is according to the Scripture-Acceptation of the word, true Baptism.
Doctor Owen, who understood the Greek as well as most in his Day, if not as any
in any former Age, tells us, That Baptism is any kind of washing, whether by
dipping or sprinkling, putting the thing to be washed into the Water, or
applying Water unto it, see Heb. 9.10. And how invalid then is his Argument
taken from the bare signification of the word.

4thly. It may be observed, that whereas our Author tells us, that Dr. Du-Veil
affirms, that the constant Practice of the Universal Church till about the Year
1305, was to baptize by Immersion, it must be said, that suppose Mr. Keach does
faithfully cite him, he was under a very great Mistake, the contrary may be
evidenced past all rational Contradiction, only to instance in those at
present, called Clinici, which were such as were baptized on their Beds, of
whom we read at least 1000 Years before that; and hence note,

5thly. The utter Improbability that our Lord Christ should bind up his Church
to such a manner of administering this Ordinance, as would necessarily exclude
many thousands from it, or expose them to apparent danger of Life, as in the
case of Infants, the dueness of whose Baptism I hope has been sufficiently
proved; so in the case of Persons in extreme old Age under lingering Sickness
and Weakness, especially such who have lived Valitudinarian Lives all their
days; but he seems evidently to have used this word (...), which admits of
different Modes of administering this Ordinance, either by dipping, or plunging,
or washing, whether by pouring Water upon the Subject, or otherwise applying
Water unto it, and a liberty of administering it either way, has constantly
been maintained in the Church.

I shall only further note, in the last place, that whereas our Opponents
generally insist upon John 3.23. where the Evangelist gives the Reason of
John's baptizing in Aenon, to be the muchness of Water being there; and it must
be granted, they are somewhat countenanced in their Notion by our late
Annotators, and some others; this I would say, that neither the Learned
Annotator upon that Book, nor our Brethren seem duly to consider the Original,
for it is not, there was (...) much Water, but (...) many Waters, many Streams
or Rivolets of Waters; and Travelers tell us they were so shallow as not to
reach above the Ankle, (see Sandys Travels) so that the Evangelist giving that
as the reason of John's baptizing there, viz. because there were many Waters,
seems rather to imply that several were employed in baptizing, than that
Baptism was administered by Immersion, the small quantity of Water there hardly
admitting that way of administering the Ordinance. But I design Brevity, and
answerably shall refer both our Author and all others to what I have said in my
Answer to Mr. Danvers, and also to Mr. Walker's Treatise of this Subject before
referred unto, and come to the main Controversy between us and our Brethren,
and that concerns the Subjects of Baptism. And I call this the main
Controversy, because neither my self, nor, so far as I know, do any
Pedo-baptists deny the Validity of Baptism by Immersion; neither shall I deny
that Baptism was sometime so administered in Primitive Times; that it was always
so is altogether uncertain; yea, there is a very great probability that it was
not. See our new Annotations, that Mr. Keach often cites upon John 3.23.
Therefore, I say, the main Controversy is about the Subjects of Baptism; and
the Question is, Whether only Adult Believers are the Subjects of this Holy
Sacrament? or, Whether their Infant Seed are not the joint Subjects of it with
themselves? The former is affirmed by our Brethren, we affirm the latter. Our
Author attempts to prove the former Two ways.

1. More laxly.

2. More Strictly and Syllogistically. And what he says in a more lax or loose
Way, he afterward reassumes and forms into Arguments. And therefore, I shall
pass that by, and the rather, because I have already fully obviated all that he
says in my Answer to Mr. Danvers, who argues from the very same Topics that
our Author does, (which he might have, and I suppose has seen, though for
Reasons that may be guessed at by others, but are best known to himself, he
has taken no notice of) and come to his Arguments; the four first of which are
but a repetition of what he had in a more lax or loose way formed up into
Syllogisms, so that I might justly pass them also by, but yet briefly to touch
upon them.

The First is this; If there be no Word of Institution, nor any thing in the
Commission of Christ, for the baptizing of Infants, but of Believers only; then
not Infants, but Believers only ought to be baptized: but the former is true,
therefore the latter.

Answ. I find Mr. Keach himself takes (as he ought to do) Authority from
Christ, equivalent to a Word of Institution, or the express mention of Infants
in the Commission. And that being granted, I deny his Minor Proposition, and
affirm, That we have full Authority from Christ to baptized Infants. This I
have so fully and demonstratively proved already, (some account of what I have
said in proof of it, may be seen in the foregoing Sheets) that it is
superfluous to add any thing more. I have proved that they are joint Subjects
of the Covenant with their Parents, and as such, the proper Subjects of
Baptism. If Mr. Keach will satisfactorily answer the Arguments I have offered,
he will do both the Church of God and my self no little Service.

As for what he adds in confirmation of his Minor Proposition, it is mere
trifling; in brief, it is this, It Is evident and owned by the Learned, That
those who are enjoined to be baptized in the Commission, are first to be
taught, or made Disciples.

To which I shall say, Suppose we have sufficient Authority from Christ to
baptize Infants, how evident soever it be, that those who are enjoined to be
baptized, are first to be taught and made Disciples, we have sufficient Warrant
for their Baptism, that Authority of our Lord Christ is our Warrant.

2. We say, that Infants are Included in the Commission. All that are to be
baptized, their Baptism is enjoined in the Commission: But Infants are to be
baptized, Ergo, etc. As for those Learned Men he speaks of, if he means that
they own, That all those universally who are enjoined to be baptized, must be
taught, or made Disciples, he must certainly intend the Learned of his own
Persuasion; which now few they are, is sufficiently known; neither is it of any
great concern what they own or disown in this Controversy. As for others, what
they own, concerns only the Adult; which makes nothing against the baptizing of
Infants, whose right to Baptism comes in another way, viz. from their
Covenant Interest, as having the Promises made unto them as the Seed of
Believing-Parents. And as for what our Author says in Answer to that Objection
of some Paedo-Baptists, viz. That Children are part of the Nations commanded by
Christ to be baptized, I shall pass it by (not being concerned at all in it)
and proceed;

2. He Argues from the Scriptures requiring Faith and Repentance, as
Prerequisites of all them that are to be baptized.

Answ. I shall only say, this requires better Proof than what our Author has
here given; which I shall expect ad Graecas Calendas. He only cites Acts 2.36,
37. and Acts 8. I suppose he has respect to the 37th Verse, and an Answer to a
Question in the Rubrik; but to how little purpose, is obvious unto all. That
Faith and Repentance are required as Prerequisites of all the Adult that are to
be baptized, is granted; but that they are required of all universally, neither
is nor can be proved. Therefore to pass this, and,

3. The Sum and Substance of his Third Argument is this, As there is no
Precept, so no Precedent in Scripture, that any besides such as professed Faith
and Repentance were baptized, therefore not Infants; but only such ought to be
baptized.

Answ. In Answer whereunto, I doubt not it has been fully proved, that we have
a Precept for Infant Baptism. See my Infant Baptism from Heaven, First Part,
page 114. And besides the other Revelations our Lord Christ has made of his
Will, are obliging and equivalent to a Precept. And this being granted, That
because there is no Precedent in Scripture that any Infants were baptized,
therefore they ought not to be baptized, is a non sequitur; a Precept is enough
without any Precedent. But,

2. I say, We are not altogether without Precedents: Thus, in all those
Households that were baptized, when yet only the Parents, or chief Governors,
are recorded to have believed.

4. His Fourth Argument is this, Because Paul, who declared the whole Counsel
of God to the Churches, and Primitive Christian, never declared any thing of
Infant Baptism; therefore they are not to be baptized.

Answ. I shall not at present enquire how, or in what sense Paul is said to
have declared the whole Counsel of God. Two things I would only say:

1. That it is certain, so far as the Declarations Paul made of the Counsel of
God are recorded in Scripture, he did not declare absolutely and universally
his whole Counsel. This is too evident than to need proof: neither is it absurd
to say, that the Apostle declared much more of the Counsel of God, than what is
contained in any of his Sermons or Epistles, it being contained in other parts
of Scripture. And for the Penmen of the Holy Scriptures, to have set down the
whole of what every Prophet, or our Lord Christ, or any of his Apostles
declared to the Churches, had been superfluous: it is enough that the whole
Counsel of God is contained in one or another part of the Scriptures; and we
are sure they contain this part of his Counsel, that Infants ought to be
baptized. But,

2. I say, that the Apostle did declare something, yea, much of this part of
his Counsel. For,

1. He declares, That if either Parents are Believers, then their Children are
Holy, that is, Holy foederally.

2. Paul declared, That the Infant Seed of Believers do appertain to the
Mystical Body of Christ. He expressly declares, that that Promise, Genesis 17.7.
was made unto Christ, Gal. 3.16. that is, Christ Mystical; and that Promise
extended unto Infants, it being made to Abraham's Seed in their Generations,
(as is before proved) and this the Apostle perfectly understood.

3. He declares this as part of the Counsel of God, that all that appertain to
this Mystical Body, ought to be admitted or incorporated there into by Baptism.
This is doubt not but Mr. Keach will readily grant.

6. He argues thus; Whatsoever is necessary to Faith or Practice, is left in
the written Word, or made known to us in the Holy Scriptures: but
Infant Baptism is not contained therein; therefore Infant Baptism is not of God.

Answ. This Argument has been already sufficiently anticipated. I shall only
say at present, That Infant Baptism is contained in the Scriptures; and must
say, the Reason why our Adversaries see it not, is their too evidently shutting
their Eyes against that Light held forth unto them: Hence all our Author's
Quotations are impertinent, soeing we ground our Practice upon the Scriptures.
Let our Author satisfactorily Answer what we have said, and then let him
triumph. But,

6. He argues thus; If no Man or Woman, at any Time or Times, were by the
Almighty God, Jesus Christ, nor his Apostles, neither commended for baptizing
any one Child, or Children, nor reproved for neglecting to baptize such; then
Infant Baptism is not of nor from God.

Answ. This Argument our Author seems to have borrowed from Mr. Ives; and he
might have seen it sufficiently baffled long since: See my Infant Baptism from
Heaven, First Part, p. 300, to 310. I shall only add, as it is formed by Mr.
Keach, That the Consequence in the Major Proposition needs proof. Why should we
impose upon the Spirit of God? Is it not enough that he has revealed our Duty?
What necessity is there that he should leave upon Record a Commendation of any
for the Practice of it, or a Discommendation for the Neglect of it? And
therefore for our Author to say as he does, page 69. is exceeding weak. He
should have proved that it is universally true, with respect to all
Gospel-Duties, at least Ordinances: and that it must necessarily be so, let him
produce a Commendation given to any Woman for participating in the Lord's
Supper, or Discommendation for the Neglect of it. But not to stay upon such
Trifles.

7. Our Author argues, from a supposed Reflection, That the Doctrine and
Practice of Infant Baptism make upon the Honor, Care, and Faithfulness of
Jesus Christ, our Blessed Mediator, and Glorious Lawgiver; he supposes they
render him less faithful than Moses, and the New Testament in one of its great
Ordinances, nay Sacraments, to lie more dark and obscure in God's Word, than
any Law or Ordinance in the Old Testament did, and therefore cannot be of God.

Answ. But to this, I say, Our Lord Christ has perfectly revealed his Will
relating to this practice; and it must be said, it is from the Darkness and
Ignorance, if not wilful Blindness of our Opponents, that they do not, or
rather will not see it, and consequently does not at all reflect on the Honor,
Care, or Faithfulness of Christ, it rather reflects upon themselves; and this I
shall add to speak, with utmost holy fear and trembling in such tremendous
Matters, that it had vastly more reflected upon the Honor, Care, and
Faithfulness of our Lord Christ, had he not declared his Will to us, that
Infants should not be Baptized, supposing that had been his Will, then his
revealing it no plainer than he has done, when it is his Will that they should
be Baptized does: But for this, see my Answer to Mr. Danvers, page 56, and 57.

But to come to our Author's last Argument, which is this; That Ordinance God
has made no Promise to Persons in their Obedience thereto, nor denounced any
Threatening or Punishment on such who slight, neglect, and contemn it, is no
Ordinance of God; but God has made no Promise to Persons that Baptize their
Children, nor denounced no Threatening nor Punishment; therefore Infant Baptism
is no Ordinance of God.

Answ. As previous to an Answer to this Argument, it may be inquired what Mr.
Keach means here by an Ordinance of God? if he means any Act or Part of Worship
that is contra-distinguished from all other Acts or part of Worship, as
preaching the Word is an Ordinance contra-distinguished from the Celebration of
the Sacraments; then I shall readily grant his Conclusion, and do affirm, That
Baptism, as applied to Infants, is not distinct Ordinance from Baptism as
applied to grown Persons, no more than Baptism as applied to Women, is a
distinct Ordinance from Baptism as applied to Men; or as it is applied to young
Men, is a distinct Ordinance from Baptism as applied to old Men; it is not any
Consideration or Circumstance relating to the Subjects of an Ordinance, that
makes that an Ordinance distinct from the same Ordinance, as the Subjects of it
fall under other Considerations or Circumstances; Circumstances relating to the
Subjects of Ordinances, diversifies not Ordinances. And therefore if Mr. Keach
understand this Term Ordinance in this sense, let him make the utmost he can of
his Argument, we are not concerned in it. But, 2dly. If he mean by Ordinance,
any Duty enjoined by God respective to his Ordinances, take it of Baptism in
particular; then I deny the Consequence in his Major Proposition, and affirm,
That that may be a Duty, unto the Performance of which no particular, explicit
or express Promise is made, or against the Neglecters or Contemners of which no
particular or explicit Threatening is denounced; it is enough that God has
revealed our Duty, and promised Rewards in the general to the Obedient, and
denounced Threatenings and Punishments on the Disobedient; and how many Duties
might be mentioned that have no particular, explicit or express Promise made to
the Performance of them, nor any such Threatening or Punishment denounced
against those that neglect or contemn them. But to hasten, having, tho briefly,
yet I hope satisfactorily showed the Invalidity, yea Vanity of these Reasonings
of Mr. Keach, to prove, that the Adult are only the proper Subjects of Baptism;
I shall now briefly consider what he has said to invalidate our Argument for
Infant Baptism taken from the Covenant entered with Abraham, Genesis 17.7. which,
he rightly says, is the main and great Argument which we bring for our
Practice. Indeed he in reciting our Argument has confusedly jumbled several
things together, which I suppose he will not find so jumbled together in any
Pleader for Infant Baptism: In brief, our Argument is this; If the Infant Seed
of Believers are in common with their Parents the true and proper Subjects of
the Covenant of Grace, then they are the true and proper Subjects of the Token
of that Covenant, which now is Baptism: but the former is true; therefore the
latter. Now let us see what our Author has said to this Argument; and it may be
observed, that he does not at least expressly deny that Covenant to be the
Covenant of Grace, yea, implicitly he grants it so to be, wherein he leaves, if
not the most of those who, especially of late, have pleaded the same Cause with
himself: I suppose he has seen the unsuccessfulness of their Attempts, and
therefore was not willing perdere oleum in proving what he knew could never be
proved. But he offers four things to invalidate our Argument: 1. He says, and
is very positive, That this Covenant was not made with Abraham, and his Carnal
(he should have said Natural) Seed according to the Flesh: But that it was made
with him and his Spiritual Seed, and such who had the Faith of Abraham. And he
seems greatly to wonder that all Men should not be convinced by those three
Scriptures compared together, Gal. 3.16. and 29.9. Romans 7.8. that is, to see
how confidently he expresses himself, page 100. one would think the Apostle
might be believed in his expounding that Text, meaning that in Genesis 17.7. Page
106. when he had feigned an Objection that some might make, which he thus
frames, Say what you will, the Promise and Covenant of Grace was to Abraham,
and his Natural Offspring. He returns this Answer, Why, Do you not believe the
Apostle who tells you the quite contrary? So once again, after he had cited
those forementioned Scriptures, he adds, Could the Apostle in plainer terms
have detected the Error of these Men? he means those who say that Covenant was
made with Abraham and his See according to the Flesh. Strange Confidence! But
who so blind as they that shut their Eyes? But in Reply unto this, I shall only
say, Or Author lies under a double Mistake; the former is about what we affirm,
the latter about the mind and meaning of the Apostle in those places. 1. The
Mistake he lies under about what we affirm, is this; he supposes we say, that
that Covenant was made with Abraham and all his Natural Offspring, whether
immediately or mediately descended from him merely as they were his
Natural-Off-spring, whereas both my self and many others, both formerly and of
late, do affirm, that that Covenant was actually entered only with Abraham and
his Natural Seed, immediately proceeding from his own Loins, and that all his
Natural Seed mediately descended from him, held their Interest in the Covenant,
either as his Spiritual Seed, or as their Infant Seed; and that Abraham's
Natural Seed immediately descending from his own Loins, were taken into this
Covenant with Abraham himself, is made evident past all rational Contradiction:
See my Infant Baptism from Heaven, first Part, Page 2. and so on; neither does
the Apostle in any of the places mentioned in the least contradict this.

2. Our Author mistakes about the mind and meaning of the Apostle in this
Scripture, he supposes that he excludes both Abraham's Natural Seed, whether
immediate or mediate, as also the Infant Seed of all Believers, from this
Covenant and the Promises of it, which never entered into the Thoughts of the
Apostle to do. As for that in Romans 9.7, 8. see my Infant Baptism, Part 1. Chap.
7. throughout, where I have proved that the Apostle is so far from excluding
Abraham, or any Believer's Natural Seed from this Covenant, or any Promises of
it, that as to Abraham's immediate Natural Seed he necessarily supposes their
Interest in it. And for Gal. 3.16, 29. I shall only say, that in case that
Covenant was entered with Abraham and his Natural Seed immediately descending
from him, and all his Spiritual Seed in their Generations, including their
Infants with them, which I have demonstrated that it was; the Apostle is so far
from excluding them, that it is past all rational Contradiction he does include
them; the Promise is made unto Christ, that is, Christ Mystical, as our Author
himself acknowledges, but the Promise was made to Abraham and his Seed, in
their Generation, including Infants with their Parents, therefore will we
believe the Apostle, Infants with their Parents are included in that term
Christ; it is Christ Mystical, including himself as Head, Abraham and his Seed
in their Generations, that the Covenant was entered with: For the Lord to say
unto Abraham, I will be a God unto thee, and unto thy Seed, in their
Generations, is all one, as the Apostle Expounds it, as to say, I will be a God
unto Christ; so that Abraham and his Seed in their Generations, still including
himself as Head, constituted and make up Mystical Christ. Now then those two
Mistakes of our Author being rectified, his first Consideration vanishes, and
makes not the least head of Opposition against our Arguments. But, 2. he puts a
Supposition that we could prove all the Children of Believers to be in that
Covenant made with Abraham, yet our Author thinks it does not from hence
follow, that they may be baptized, unless we can show the Lord Christ has
enjoined them so to be. But to this I would say, Would he really grant this,
the main of our Controversy were at an end. And will he grant this, as will he
yield unto Truth he must do, then I shall refer him to these three Arguments I
have laid down to prove, That they not only may, but ought to be baptized. See
my Infant Baptism, Part 1. Chapter 9. Till which Arguments are answered, which Mr.
Keach may do at his Leisure, if he pleases, it is utterly superfluous to add
any more. We shall not deny what he has said, viz. That it is not enough to say
Children are in the Covenant, therefore they ought to be baptized: yet let me
say, this would carry a fair probability in it; but this I say, If our Lord
Christ has assured us, that it is his Will that being in Covenant they ought
to be baptized, as those Arguments fully prove he has; Then that is enough to
warrant our Baptizing of them. Hence as to our Author's two other
Considerations, they only designing the Confirmation of this Assertion, I shall
say nothing especially having touched upon what he says in them in my Answers
to Mr. Grantham, and therefore shall come to a Close, not finding my self
concerned in his Answers to the other Scriture-Proofs and Arguments
Pedo-Baptists produce for the baptizing of Infants. I shall only further desire
both Mr. Keach, and those others whose Books I have now considered, seriously
and impartially to weigh what I have said in Answer to what they affirm
concerning Circumcision, its being only a Seal unto Abraham of the
Righteousness of Faith, and not so to any of his Seed, in my Infant Baptism
from Heaven, Page 228, unto 236. and shall only add my hearty Desire our
Opponents will truly and impartially weigh what has been offered unto them,
and determine, as they will answer it at the great Day of Accounts, which we
all profess our selves Expectants of; and in case any of them will return any
Answer to what I have written upon this Subject, I desire they would do it with
what speed conveniently they may: My Age now tells me my appearing before our
Lord Christ cannot be very far off, and I would gladly, either be convinced of
my Error, suppose I have erred, (Infallibility I pretend not unto) which yet at
present I am above any suspicion that I have done, or may have opportunity to
show them the Insufficiency of the Answers returned by them.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 23. line 10. read some. P. 31. l. 10. after made, add must be fixed. P.
33. l. 19. read institutes.


