A few Positions of the Sincere Belief and Christian Doctrine of the People of
God called Quakers (to obviate Misrepresentations and Calumnies about the same.)
Being Inserted as an Appendix to a Book, Entitled, A Sober Expostulation with
some of the Clergy, etc.
1. WE, the said People, are bound in Conscience and Duty, by the Holy Spirit,
and Light of Christ Jesus, only and humbly to Adore and Worship the only True
and Living God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all Creatures, and
not to Adore or Worship any Mortal Man, or Creature, or any other God
whatsoever.

II. To Believe and Confess the Holy Divine Three (or Scripture Trinity) that
bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, (or Son) and Holy Spirit, and that
these Three are Essentially One in the Divine Being and Substance, One God,
Blessed for Ever.

III. We are livingly Taught and Led by the Light and Spirit of Christ Jesus,
the Living Word in our Hearts (and that according to Holy Scripture) to
Believe, Own and Confess the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, that is, his Real
Coming in the Flesh without us; even the same Jesus of Nazareth that was
Conceived in the Virgin Mary, by the Power of the Holy Ghost overshadowing her,
and Born of her in Bethlehem of Judea, Mat. 2. 1. and that he was Crucified,
and put to Death, as concerning the Flesh, without the Gates of Jerusalem; and
we highly do Value and Esteem his Sufferings, Death, Precious Blood, and whole
Sacrifice for Sinners; together with his Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven
and Glory; and that he only was and is the Promised Messiah, the very Christ,
the Only Begotten Son of the Living God: And as for his Divinity, That he is
the true Light, Life, Power, and Wisdom of God, and none other, according to
plain Scripture Testimony.

IV. The Divinity and Humanity (i. e. Manhood) of Christ Jesus, that as he is
True God, and he is most Glorious Man, our Mediator and Advocate, we livingly
Believe, and have often Sincerely Confessed in our Public Testimonies and
Writings.

V. That as sincere and fervent Prayers to God, in the Name and Spirit of
Christ Jesus, is the Duty of all true Believers and Christians professing him,
for whatsoever they stand in need of, especially with respect to the Peace and
Happiness of their Immortal Souls; so all who are truly humbled under a Sense
of their Sins, in order to true Repentance and Conversion, ought to crave
Forgiveness in the Name, and for the Sake of Christ Jesus, which has been our
Practice, both Public and Private, and God in Mercy has accordingly answered
us, who by his Grace in our Hearts, has led many, both to confess and forsake
Sin, that they might find Mercy in Christ Jesus.

VI. Though we are bound in Conscience truly to Esteem and Magnify the Divine
Light, the Ingrafted Word, the Spirit and Power of Christ in Us, as sufficient
and able actually to save and deliver the Soul from Sin, Death and
Condemnation; and thereby we Confess the Man Christ Jesus, with respect to his
entire Existence or Being, as without Us, as well as we do own him Spiritually
within Us; knowing that this Light, Life, and Spirit of Christ Jesus, Testify
of him, and certainly Guide the truly Obedient and Sincere Believers, in his
Name and Power Inwardly, Livingly and Experimentally, to partake of the Real
Benefits, Fruits, and Blessed Ends of his outward Suffering, Sacrifice and
Death for Mankind, to wit, their Repentance, Conversion from Sin, Effectual
Reconciliation unto God, Eternal Salvation, and Complete Redemption, which
Christ Jesus has obtained for Us ( i. e. for all Mankind) through his Mediation
and Sufferings.

VII. Our Really Believing and Confessing the Lord Jesus Christ, his Passion,
Sufferings, Death, Atonement, and Reconciliation made for Us, and his
Resurrection, Ascension and Glorification (as without us) according to
Scripture, cannot be to Allegorize these away, as if only transacted within Us
(as we have been unduly Accused) for they were really done and transacted
without Us, by our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ; though our true Knowledge of the
Power and Effect of his Resurrection, and Fellowship of his Sufferings, and our
being Conformable to his Death, must be Experienced within Us, if ever we Live
or Reign with Him.

VIII. We sincerely Prefer and Esteem the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, contained in that extant Book, commonly called the Bible (as most
Eminently Confirmed by Divine Authority, and Faithful Witnesses) before all
other Books whatsoever extant in the World; and yet our preferring the Holy
Spirit (from whence the Scripture came) before the Letter of the Scripture, is
not to undervalue the Scripture, for the Spirit must needs have the Preference
and Pre-eminence, as being the Author, and Original Cause, and Dictator of the
Holy Scriptures, and Giver of Light and Life also, whereby truly to understand
them, and to live accordingly.

IX. As for Baptism and the Lord's Supper, they are Scripturally considered by
us in their several Dispensations, both as in the Figure, and in the Substance,
in the Type and Antitype, as the Outward or Literal were Typical or Figurative
of the Inward and Spiritual, we confess and own, considered in their Places,
and proper Dispensations; but the Substance is more Excellent and Permanent
than the Shadow; as the Inward and Spiritual Grace is more Excellent than the
Outward and Visible Signs; and as Christ's Spiritual Baptism, which is the
Saving Baptism, was Typified by John's. And to Eat, and Drink, or Sup with
Christ in his Kingdom, of that Spiritual Meat and Drink which he gives for Life
to the Soul, was Typified or Figured forth by his Outward Supper of the
Passover, Bread and Cup; for the Outward Element of Water cannot wash away Sin
from the Soul, neither can the Outward Bread or Cup, give Life or Nourishment
to the Soul.

The Shadows flee away, but the Sun and Substance remain.

X. We sincerely Believe, and have often Confessed the Immortality of the Soul
of Man, that was Created in God's Image, and the Doctrine of the Resurrection
of the Dead, according as laid down in Holy Scripture, 1 Cor. 15th Chapter; and
of Eternal Judgment by Jesus Christ, as being Judge of the Living, and of the
Dead, in the Great and Last Day of Judgment, at the Great Harvest, which is the
End of the World, God having appointed a Day wherein he will Raise the Dead,
both the Just and Unjust, and also Judge the World in Righteousness, by that
(Heavenly and most Glorious) Man Christ Jesus whom he has ordained, Acts 17.
31. before whose Tribunal-Seat all must appear, to Receive their Final Judgment
and Sentence, according to their Deeds done in the Body, whether they be Good
or Evil.

XI. That Christ's Gospel Ministry must be free, without forced Maintenance
filthy Lucre, or Covetousness.

XII. That Magistracy, or Civil Government, is God's Ordinance; the Good Ends
thereof being for the Punishment of Evil Doers, and Praise of them that do Well.

These Things we Sincerely Believe and Own; and we know no Doctrine or
Principle (Preached, Maintained, or Received among, or by Us, since we were a
People) contrary to these beforementioned; nor do we Own any contrary
thereunto.

Signed in Behalf of the said People, and to Clear my own Innocence in
Particular; By George Whitehead.

WE whose Names are underwritten (being in Christian Society with the People
commonly called Quakers) Do in good Conscience Declare and Certify all Persons
concerned,

1. That we sincerely Believe and Confess, That Jesus of Nazareth, who was born
of the Virgin Mary, is the true Messiah, the very Christ, the Son of the Living
God, to whom all his Prophets gave Witness. And we do highly value his Death,
Sufferings, Works, Offices, and Merits for the Redemption and Salvation of
Mankind, together with his Laws, Doctrine and Ministry.

2. That this very Christ of God, was and is the Lamb of God that takes away
the Sins of the World, who was slain, was dead, and is alive, and lives for
evermore, in his divine eternal Glory, Dominion and Power with the Father.

3. That the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are of divine
Authority, as being given by Inspiration from God.

4. And that Magistracy or Civil Government is God's Ordinance, the good ends
thereof being for the Punishment of Evildoers, and Praise of them that do Well.

And we know of no other Doctrine or Principle preached, maintained, or ever
received among, or by Us, since we were a People, contrary to these
beforementioned.

Signed in Behalf of the said People, Thomas Lower, William Crouch, William
Ingram, William Meade, William Macket, Philip Ford, Francis Camfield, John
Edge, Thomas Hutson, Charles Marshall, Josiah Ellis, Gilbert Latey, Theodor
Eccleston, Joseph Wassey, Thomas Cox, John Bowater, John Vaughton, William
Philips, Edward Brook, William Townsend, John Hall, George Oldner, Thomas
Barker, Abraham Johnson, Tho. Twinbarrow, Michael Russel, John Harwood, John
Danson, John Stringfellow, Will. Paul, Fra. Etteridge, Benj. Bealing.


This last Declaration was subjoyned to a Paper, Entitled, The Quakers
Vindication, and given to the Members of Parliament in the Year 1693.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the Meeting House, in
White-Heart-Court, in Gracious-Street, and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street,
School


