Whereas John Pennyman of late did bring or cause to be brought unto the
Exchange, in London, several Books and Writings, and amongst others the holy
SCRIPTURES of Truth, which testify of Christ, with other Writings and
Testimonies recorded of the holy Servants of God, and Martyrs of Jesus; with
intention to destroy and burn the same (as by his outward Actions and
Expressions might justly be judged and suspected.) Now we the People of the
Lord (called Quakers) do declare unto all People, That we do utterly disown and
testify against that Action, of the said John Pennymans, touching the said
Books and Writings (so far as he had any Intention, or did give just cause of
Jealousy or Sufpition of such Intention, to destroy and burn the same) and
that he therein was instigated by the Devil, what ever otherwise his pretenses,
are or might be; even that spirit that ruled in those, who in the days past
crucified Christ, and persecuted and shed the Blood of his Holy Servants,
Prophets, and Martyrs; and in endeavoring to Burn and Destroy their Writings,
manifests that it would do the same things now, if it had the same Power. And
we do further declare and testify, That we dearly and truly own the holy
Scriptures, before mentioned, given by inspiration, as a true and infallible
Testimony of Christ, spoken forth by his own Spirit, (which is our Guide and
Leader) and that they are written for our learning; and the Writings and
Testimonies of, and concerning the Lord's faithful Servants, and Martyrs is a
good savor to us, and their memorial is blessed forever. And we further
declare and testify, That we have no union nor fellowship with the said John
Pennyman, nor that spirit that now rules in him, he being departed from that
pure, meek, holy Spirit, which sometimes he had some knowledge of: And that he
has given just cause (before the said Action, and since also) of jealousy and
fear, that he is in measure broken and discomposed in his Mind and
Understanding; nor can he have any union or fellowship with us, until he shall
publicly condemn this Action of Folly and Wickedness committed by him, and
give a full Testimony of his unfeigned Repentance for the same. And we also
testify, That if any Person whatsoever shall Act or Speak any thing that is
evil, under pretense of a Motion from the Spirit of God, we utterly deny that
Motion to be of God; for the Holy Spirit of God never did, nor never will move
to that which is evil; and all evil is of the Devil. And this we have thought
fit thus publicly to declare, for the vindication of Truth, and the Lord's
People, who profess and enjoy it, that the Innocence of the Upright may be
cleared and manifested, and all Iniquity and Unrighteousness judged and
condemned, and God and his pure, holy Truth exalted, over all Unclean, Dark,
Deluded, Arrogant, and Imaginary spirits whatsoever.

Given forth the 10th day of the Month called August, 1670. By us, Who are in
scorn called Quakers.


