AN ESSAY To Promote VIRTUE By Example, IN A COLLECTION OF Excellent Sayings
(Divine and Moral) OF Devout and Learned Men, In all Ages, from the Apostles
Time, to this present Year, 1689.

By William Whitcombe, Gent.

Licensed, March 2d. 1688/9.

LONDON: Printed for the Author: And are to be Sold by Edw. Evets, at the Green
Dragon, in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1689.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
I Here present to thy Perusal and Consideration these Serious Sayings,
following; Spoken and Delivered not Rashly, but upon the Experience of whole
Lives; and that too in those most seriously Reflecting Moments, the Close of
Life, and Approach of Eternity. And moreover, not by any one Party, or
Persuasion, or of any one Age; but of all Men, of all Persuasions, of all Ages:
Spoken too, when they were so disinterested and disobliged from the World, as
neither to be deluded or abused thereby; nor by any the most tempting Baits of
Honor or Wordly Profit whatever.

With this Authentic stamp upon them, they are offered to thy Reading, and
retired Thoughts; and for this Great End, That these Memoirs, and Relics of
the Learned and Pious in all Ages, together with what other Examples of the
like Kind thy farther Conversation with Good Books, or Good Men may afford
thee; may, in some Measure, excite thee, by a Zealous Imitation of their Lives,
to endeavor to arrive to the Comfort and Peace of their Deaths; and that
Eternal Glory that Crowns them. And considering how certainly, and very shortly
we must Die, as they did, thou may therefore Labor to Die as happy too. The
Design of these Collections, of so many Warning-pieces from departed Saints,
being no other, than making the Dead an Instrument toward the Salvation of the
Living.

W. W.

Excellent Sayings OF DEVOUT AND Learned-Men, etc.
Alphabetically Digested.
Abby-Lands.
THE Pope, by a Bull, would confirm Abby-Lands; but who (said Burleigh) can
confirm the Pope's Bull?

In the Secret Judgment of God, it is to be Admired and Adored, in that those
Houses and Abbeys, that were so full of all Abominations, (as appeared to the
Kings Commissioners, upon Examination, and remains upon Record) so Horrible to
be heard, so Incredible to be believed, that it is a Wonder God would suffer
them unpluck'd up: So that we may say with Mat. Paris, Cujus foetor usque ad
Nubes fumum toterrimum exhalabat, i. e. Whose filthy Stink did Breath a most
Pestiferous Fume, even to the Clouds of Heaven; and, with Sodom's Sins, cried
aloud for Vengeance, etc.

Accusation.
IF God's People be Accused falsely, Christ will Justify them: If they have
Sinned, and truly Believe, Repent and Amend, He will Pardon them, through His
Meritorious Righteousness and Sacrifice; and will make them, and pronounce
them, Just.

Adversity.
PRosperity is not without many ^ears and Distastes, and Adversity not without
many Comforts.

The Virtue of Prosperity is Temperance, the Virtue of Adversity is Fortitude:
Prosperity does best discover Vice; but Adversity does best discover Virtue:
Prosperity is the Blessing of the Old Testament, Adversity of the New, and the
clear Manifestation of the favor of God. The good things of Prosperity are to
be Wished; the good things of Adversity to be Admired.

My Lord Cook would say, That no Wise Man would do that in Prosperity, whereof
he would Repent in Adversity. His Motto was, Prudens qui Patiens.

Advises.
EDward Earl of Rutland left these Four Advises behind Him, viz. First, Be
always Employed: Secondly, Look to the Issue: Thirdly, Be Furnished with a
Friend: Fourthly, Reflect on thy Self, Vita est in Reflectione.

Affections.
OBserve this Rule, That we never give this Affection of Love leave to run out
alone, without Judgment and Consideration going before it, and along with it:
That we suffer not our Passions, which are, Love, Hatred, Anger, Joy, Grief,
Fear, or Hope, to deal out their own Measures, but our Judgment and
Deliberation: That we always keep this Affection of Love, especially under
Discipline and Government, and suffer it not to run away from us, as an unruly
Beast without a Chain; for it is certain, the due Government of this Affection
governs all the rest. Vae Soli. If any Affection come alone, I will ask him for
his Fellow: If Love to God or Good come alone, I will ask him, Where is Hatred
for Sin? If Grief, or outward Crosses, come alone, I will ask him, Where is thy
Fellow? that is, Joy in the Lord, and in Spiritual Mercies. If Fear of Evil
come alone, I will ask, Where is thy Fellow? that is, Hope in the Lord, in his
Promises, and in his Providence.

Afflictions.
NIciphorus says, God so moderates our Actions, using the Scourge of
Affliction for our Castigation and Conversion; and, after due Correction, shows
his Fatherly Affection to those that Trust in him for Salvation. Christ asked
Peter Three times, whether he Loved him, not for his own Information, but that
for his Threefold Profession, he may help and heal his Threefold Negation.

Among the many Preparations for Afflictions, patiently take this one, which
includes the rest, viz. Labor to get thy Peace made with GOD, through Jesus
CHRIST our Lord: When this is once done and attained, thou art above the Love
of the World, and fear of Affliction, because thou have an Assurance of a
greater than this World can give, or take away; a Kingdom, Heb. 12.2, 9. an
Hope, an Expectation, that is above the reach and Region of Affliction; and
renders the greatest and sorest Afflictions as they are; namely, Light and
Momentany: And yet, notwithstanding, because thou art in this glorious
Expectation, yet but in this lower Region, and so subject to Passions,
Perturbations, and Fears. The Merciful God has engaged his Promise to support
thee under them, to Better and Improve thee by them, and carry thee through them
by his All-sufficient Grace and Mercy, 119. Psalm. 74. 1 Cor. 10.13. 2 Cor. 4.17.

Christians, under your greatest Afflictions lies your greatest Treasure:
Afflictions are Good, but not Pleasant; Sin is Pleasant, but not Good; there is
more Evil in a Drop of Corruption, than in a Sea of Afflictions: God seperates
the Sin he Hates so deadly, from the Soul He Loves so dearly. By the greatest
Afflictions, God Teaches us the sweetest Instruction.

A Believer, when he lies under the Hand that does Afflict him, he lies in the
Heart that does Affect him. Believers are Crucified by the World, that they may
not be Crucified in the World. The Flesh is an Enemy to Sufferings, because
Sufferings is an Enemy to the Flesh: It may make a Man an Earthly Courtier, but
it will never make a Man an Heavenly Martyr. They that carry not the Yoke of
Christ on their Neck, will never carry the Cross of Christ on their Backs: but
the Believer Studies more how to Adorn the Cross, than how to avoid the Cross:
None so Courageous as those that are Religious. A Believer never falls asleep
for Jesus, till he falls asleep in Jesus. Some Glory in that which is their
Shame, and shall we be ashamed of that which is our Glory. It Is an Honor to be
Dishonored for Jesus Christ. Tell me, Believer, Is not Christ's Cross better
than the Worlds Crown. Fiery Trials make Golden Christians; Sin has brought
many a Believer into Sufferings, and Sufferings has kept many a Believer out
of Sin, Psalm. 39.9.119.71.61.67. we always expecting some trouble or other to
interrupt our outward Peace and Rest.

Non prodest Medicamentum dum ferrum in vu^nere, Until Sin, which is the Cause,
be removed, the Effect, which is Trouble, Afflictions, will not cease.

The Neopolitans are wont to say, They had nothing to trouble them, but than
they are troubled at nothing.

The vigorous perpetuating of the remembrance of our Afflictions and
Deliverances, will be an effectual means to perpetuate the due Fruit of them in
their Life, Vigor, and Intention.

A Worthy Divine, lying on his Deathbed, being asked whether his Pains were
great, he answered, That he did not esteem that a Pain which would be to him
the end of all Troubles, and the beginning of Eternal Joys.

Saint Austin says, Not to be without, but to Overcome Afflictions, is
Blessedness.

Saunders, the Martyr, being in Prison, Writ to his Wife, That Riches have I
none to endow thee with, but that Treasure of tasting how sweet Christ is to
hungry Consciences (whereof I do feel part) that I Bequeath to Thee, and the
rest of my Beloved of Christ.

Fini rerum Caput, as one Wittily said, Begin therefore at the End, judge
nothing, but hope well, till thou see the Conclusion.

One was wont to say, He was not always Merry that Laughed.

Afflictions undo many Pleasures more.

Alms.
SAint Cyprian says, Let not that Sleep in thy Treasury that may be profitable
to the Poor.

He says likewise, That which we must necessarily part withal, it is Wisdom for
us to distribute, so that God may everlastingly Reward us. And also, He that
gives an Alms to the Poor, offers a sweet smelling Sacrifice to God. Vide
Charity.

Works of Charity do good, both to him that Relieveth, and him that is
Relieved; but he that does Good, gets more Relief by it than he to whom it is
done, For it is better to Give than Receive, Acts 20.35. Giving Charitably is a
casting of Seed, bringing an everlasting Harvest: It Is a sending up sweet
Vapors into Heaven, which are thickened there into a Rain of Blessings. Vid.
Charity.

To Attribute too much to Ones Self.
GVstavus Adolphus, three days before his Death, said, Our Affairs answer our
Desires, but I doubt God will Punish me for the folly of my People, who
Attribute too much to me, and esteem me as it were their God; and therefore he
will make them shortly know, and see that I am but a Man: I submit to his Will,
and I know he will not leave this great Enterprise of mine Imperfect: And soon
after was Slain, yet with Victory over his Enemies.

An Apology for the Christians by Justin Martyr.
IN his First Apology, he defended the Christians against the Senate of Rome,
and purged them from those Crimes which were falsely charged against them by the
Ethnicks.

The Second to Antonius the Philosopher, (amongst many other things) he says,
Other Men that are Appeached in Judgment, are not Condemned till they be
Convicted; but for us, you take the very Name for a sufficient Crime; whereas
you ought to see Justice done rather on your Accusers: So that if a Christian
that is Accused, deny his Name, him you Release, not being able to charge him
with any other Offense; but if he stand to his Name, you Condemn him: whereas
it were your Duty rather to Examine their manner of Life, and so according to
their Demerits, to see Justice done upon them.

Ambition.
BErnard says, It is a gilded Misery, a secret Poison, an hidden Plague, the
Engineer of Deceit, the Mother of Hypocrisy, the Parent of Envy, the Original
of Vices, the Moath of Holiness, the blinder of Hearts, turning Medicines into
Maladies, and Remedies into Diseases.

Anger Sinful.
TO keep thy Heart patient under Provocations to Anger, First, against Humble
and Low Thoughts of thy self; and then thou will have a Meek Spirit, and
Peaceable Deportment toward others. Secondly, Be often Sweetning thy Spirits
with God, and they will not be easily Imbittered with Wrath toward Man.
Thirdly, Get due Apprehensions of the Evil Nature, and Effects of Sinful Anger,
as that Anger is a short Madness; Anger is the Fever of the Soul, the Eclipse
of Reason, etc. Fourthly, Consider how sweet a thing it is for Christians to
Conquer their Corruptions, and to carry away the Spoil of them, Prove. 16.32.

Shame your selves by setting before you those most eminent Patterns for
Meekness; Learn of me, says Christ, for I am Meek and Lowly in Spirit, Mat.
11.29. and Moses, Numbers, 12.3.

Consider more helps against it, First, By considering our own Failings,
especially in reference to Almighty God, and our Duty to him, etc. Secondly, By
considering the unreasonableness of that Distemper in respect of our selves; It
puts thee into Perturbations, it gratifies thy Adversary, etc. Thirdly, Is in
respect of others, even of the Persons provoking; It may be they are
Instruments permitted by God, either to Correct or Try thee, etc.

Expedients against it, even when occasion is offered. First, Take this
peremptory Resolution and Practice, viz. I will not be Angry though an occasion
be offered. Secondly, Take this Resolution, never to give thy self leave to be
Angry, till thou see any such thing is done or no, etc. Thirdly, In case of
Provocation to Anger by Words, consider this, that nothing so much gratifies an
Ill-Tongue, as when it finds an Angry hearer; and nothing so much disappoints
and vexes it, than Calmness and Undisturbedness: It is the most innocent and
exquisite Revenge in the World, to return gentle Words, or none at all to
Ill-Language: But, on the other side, Anger and Perturbation do not only
produce what thy Adversary desires, but also puts Discomposedness and Impotency
upon thee, that thou becomest unable to keep silence, or to speak with that
Reason or Advantage thou should. J. Hale.

Give diligent Ear unto CHRIST's Words, and thou shall little regard Ten
Thousand Words spoken by Men. De Kempis.

I strive with my own Spirit, says Devour Mr. Corbet, to subdue it to the Will
of God, and in whatsoever I am tempted to be Impatient, therein I labor most
for Patience. My great Care, says he, is that I may not Sin against my God, in
any kind; and more especially that I may not Sin by a Rebellious Impatiency,
under his Correcting Hand. Ibid.

Anger does languish by Suppression, but flows higher by Expression. Beda.

Atheism.
THe Fool has said in his Heart, There is no GOD, It is not said, The Fool
has thought in his Heart there is no GOD: So that he rather says it by Wrote
to himself, as that he would have, than that he can thoroughly believe it.

The great Atheists indeed, are the Hypocrites, who are ever holding Holy
things without feeling. Bacon.

If Atheists say, The World or its Materials were Made, they must grant a GOD
that made it? If they say, They were not Made, they then assert an Eternal
Being of it self; that is, they allow the Difficulties for which they pretend
to deny a GOD.

Cares.
WHen Men Believe weakly, and Love GOD but little, they can scarce find whether
they Believe or Love at all; and therefore remain in doubt. To Remedy which,
follow your Duty till Grace be increased, ply your Work, wait upon God in the
use of his prescribed Means, and he will undoubtedly bless you with Increase
and strength of Grace. If you would lay out those serious Affections in Praying
and Seeking unto Christ, and for more Grace, you would, in time, Believe
strongly, and Love fervently; and thereby put it out of doubt, whether you
Believe or Love or not. Mrs. B.

If by moderate and due Care we would resign up our Selves and Concernments
into the Hands of God, He would charge himself with us; but if we will
Immoderately Care, and be so peremptory in our Designs, and will not submit
them to him, then God is discharged, and we must look to our selves.

You need not fetch the Misery of another Day and put to this; it has enough
for its own.

Let them consider, that fear Want, that they want nothing so much as Faith: A
little more trusting in God, and a little less sinful Foresight and needless
Care, would do well.

Our daily Defects and Disappointments procure Misery and Vexations.

He that would make Earth sure, must first of all make Heaven sure: Shall I, by
taking thought what I shall Eat, and what I shall Drink here, never fear
Wanting or Begging a drop of Water hereafter? Shall I be Solicitous for
Clothes, and do not know but my Soul and Body may lie naked in the scorching
Flames of the Wrath of God to all Eternity? Besides that, I have a Promise of
God for outward things, if I make it my business to look after Heavenly; Its a
very needless Care: God provides Meat for me, that I may not be taken off my
Work to seek those things that are Heavenly, Mat. 6.33.

Christ Crucified; the knowledge of it.
IT is a kind of Catholicon of universal Use and Convenience, in reference to
this Life. Am I in Want, in Prison, in Contempt, in Banishment, in Sickness, in
Death? this Knowledge gives Contentedness, Patience, Cheerfulness, Resignation
of my self to his Will, who has Sealed my Peace with him, and Favor from him,
in the great Covenant of his Son: I could live upon this, though I were ready to
Starve, when I am assured that it is for my Good, and the glory of his Name, I
shall be delivered; if not, I can be contented if my Jewel, the Peace of God
and my own Conscience, by the Blood of Christ, be safe, if not in Wealth,
Honor, greatness in Esteem in the World. This Knowledge teaches me Humility,
as knowing of whom I have received it: Fidelity, as knowing to whom I must
account for it; and in all, it teaches me not to overvalue it, nor to value my
Self the more by it or for it: It makes Death not Terrible, because a most sure
Passage to Eternal Life. Here I find a way to get my Sins Pardoned; whereas,
all the World, without this, cannot contrive a Satisfaction for me: I find such
a Way to obtain such a Righteousness as is valuable with God, and perfect
before Him, even the Righteousness of God in Christ; and here I find the means,
the only means, to avoid the Wrath to come, the Terror of the Judgment of the
Last-Day. Everlasting Life to all Eternity, which the blessed God, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, all the blessed Angels, and the Spirits of Just Men made perfect.

The knowledge of Christ above all other Knowledge, and Christ Crucified above
all other Knowledge of Christ; being the highest manifestation of his Love. J.
Hale.

With all my Heart (says Calvin) I embrace the Mercy of God, which he has
used toward me, for Jesus Christ's sake, recompencing my Faults with the
Merits of his Death and Passion, that satisfaction being made, by this means,
for all my Sins and Crimes, and the remembrance of them may be blotted out. I
witness also, and profess, that I humbly beg of him, that being washed and
cleansed in the Blood of that highest Redeemer, shed for the Sins of Mankind, I
may stand at his Judgments-Seat, under the Image of my Redeemer.

Had Christ been God only, he could not have Suffered; had he been Man only, he
could not have Merited. Christ's Blood was shed as well for Oblution, as for
Absolution.

Diffidence of ones Self and Dependence of Christ is the Motto of a Christian.

Counsel.
THe greatest Trust between Man and Man, is the Trust of giving Counsel. For in
our Confidences (says our Lord Bacon) Men commit the parts of Life, their
Lands, their Goods, their Children, their Credit, and some particular Affairs;
but to such as they make their Counselors, they commit the whole, by how much
the more they are obliged to Faithfulness and Integrity.

There is no such Flattery as of a Man's self; and there is no such Remedy
against that Flattery, as the Liberty of a Friend: Counsel is of Two sorts, The
one concerning Manners, the other concerning Business: For the first, The best
Preparative to keep the Mind in Health, is the faithful Admonition of a Friend:
The calling of a Man's self to a strict Account, is sometimes too piercing and
corroding. Reading good Books of Morality is a little Flat and Dead. Observing
our Faults in others, is sometimes improper for our Case; but the best Receipt
(best, I say, to work, and best to take) is the Admonition of a Friend.

Conviction.
IF you be troubled for Sin, observe whether your trouble for it be inward as
well as outward, and reaches not only to open Sins, but to secret Lusts; to
Inward and Spiritual Sins, such as Hypocrisy, Formality, Lukewarmness,
Deadness and Hardness of Heart; and if so, this is a sure sign of the Work of
the Spirit, because the Trouble occasioned by these Sins, bears a more
immediate Relation to the Holiness of God, who only is offended by them; they
being such that none else can see or know.

Covetousness.
HE that is Covetous when he is Old, is as a Thief that Steals when he is going
to the Gallows.

Bags of Gold to us when Saints, will be but as a Bag of Pebbles, when Men.

Alexander of Hales, says, That Covetousness deserves the Hate of all, for
these Reasons: First, It is a Sin against Nature, making the Soul Terrestrial,
which should be Heavenly. Secondly, For the many Curses against it in the
Scripture; Woe to them that join House to House, etc. Thirdly, For the many
Evils it subjects them unto: It is the Root of all Evil. Fourthly, It makes a
Man a Fool; O Fool this Night, etc. Fifthly, It canses Strifes, from whom are
Strifes. Sixthly, It brings Men into Snares, which drown Men in Perdition.

Fulgentius used to say, CHRIST Died for Men and Angels; for Men, that they may
rise from Sin; and for Angels, that they may not fall into Sin. And if they go
to Hell that do not Feed the Hungry, Cloth the Naked, etc. If want of Charity
be Tormented in Hell, what will become of the Covetous.

Tertullian says, Gold to many Men, is much better than their Faith and
Honesty; And the Love of it makes many so Covetous, as if they were to Live
here for ever. Avarice is not the Vice of Gold, but of Men that use it.

Conscience.
THe Two main Principles that guide Human Nature (says Judge Dodderidge) are
Conscience and Law; by the former we are obliged, in reference to another
World; by the latter, in reference to This.

St. Ambrose was wont to say, A clear Conscience should not regard slanderous
Speeches; nor think, that they have more Power to Condemn him, than his own
Conscience has to clear him.

Aquinas was wont to say, That Day will come, when Fair-Dealing will be found a
Jewel; when a good Conscience shall be better than a good Purse; when the Judge
will not be put off with fair Speeches, nor drawn aside with hopes of Reward.

Isidore says, All things may be shuned but a Man's own Heart; a Man cannot
run from himself; a guilty Conscience will not leave him wheresoever he goes.

It is very dangerous to quiet Conscience with any thing but the Blood of
Christ: It Is bad being at Peace till Christ speaks Peace: Nothing can truly
satisfy Conscience, less than that which pacifies God; and that is, the Blood
of the Lord Jesus Christ. Mead.

Whosoever will keep the Peace of his Conscience, and his Confidence in God, must
carefully keep himself from all those things that displease his Holy Eyes, and
turn away his Gracious Countenance; lest that when need of our Duty calls us to
draw near him by Prayer, we feel our selves pulled back by Guilty Fears. Du
Moulin. 63.

The Glory of a good Man, is the Testimony of a good Conscience.

A good Conscience is able to bear very much, and is cheerful in Adversities.
To walk inwardly with God, and not to be possessed with any outward Affection,
is the State of a Spiriritual Man.

Have a good Conscience, and thou shall ever have Joy.

Charity.
CHrisologus says, Let not thy Care be to have thy Hands full, when the Poors
are empty; for the only way to have full Barns, is to have Charitable Hands.

St. Ambrose says, It is not so much to be enquired, how much thou Give, as
with what Heart. It is not Liberality, when thou take by Oppression from one,
and give to another.

St. Cyril says, It is the best way for a Rich Man, to make the Bellies of the
Poor his Barn; to succor the Fatherless and Naked, and thereby to lay up
Treasure in Heaven, that he may be received into the Heavenly and everlasting
Habitations.

Chastity.
A Woman is truly Chaste that has Liberty and Opportunity to Sin, and does not.

Commands.
GOD comes to us, not a Naked GOD, but Clothed with His Commands; and if we
Love Him, we must receive Him so Clothed.

GOD hears our Prayers according as we keep his Commands. Whatsoever God
forbids in the Act, he forbids likewise in the Thoughts.

If Christ be not our King to Rule and Govern us, he will neither be our
Prophet to Fore-warn, nor our Priest to Expiate: If Christ has freed us from
the Damnation of Sin, he has also freed us from the Dominion of Sin. If, with
his Blood, he has quenched the Fire of Hell for us, he has also quenched the
Fire of Lust in us. Christ's Justifying Blood is given by his Sanctifying
Spirit. Touchstone of a Christian.

Conversion.
LAbor after, and Pray for a through Conversion; beg of GOD that he would make
a saving Change in your Souls, that you may be altogether Christians; all other
Changes, below this saving Change, this Heart change make us but almost
Christians.

Morality and Civility may commend us to Men, but not to God, they are of no
moment or value to the procurement of Eternal Salvation. The sober Man, not
being renewed throughout by the Spirit of God, shall as surely go to Hell as
the beastly Drunkard.

Corruptions.
WHilst Grace is Imperfect, Corruptions will be strong. The great Corruptions
that the Godly find in themselves, keep them from being Proud, and despising of
others. Hildersam.

Custom.
THe Halsion Days of the Gospel provoke Hypocrisy, but the Sufferings for
Religion prove Sincerity. He that is a Professor of Religion, merely for
Custom, when it Prospers, will never be a Martyr for Christ's sake, when it
Suffers.

Covenant the Second.
THe Son of GOD came to make known unto us the Will of his Father; in
performance of which, we shall be sure to be Accepted and Rewarded by Him: And
this was one great part of his Business, which He performed in those many
Sermons and Precepts we find set down in the Gospel; and herein He is our
Prophet, it being the Work of a Prophet of Old, not only to Foretell, but to
Teach. Our Duty, in this particular, is to hearken diligently to Him, to be
most ready and desirous to learn that Will of God which He came from Heaven to
Reveal to us. The second Thing He was to do for us, was, To satisfy GOD for
our Sins; not only that One of Adam, but all the Sins of Mankind, that truly
Repent and Amend, and by this means to obtain Forgiveness of Sins, and the
Favor of God; and so to Redeem us from Hell, and Eternal Damnation, which was
the Punishment due to our Sins: All this He did for us, by his Death; He
offered up Himself a Sacrifice for the Sins of all those who heartily bewail
and forsake them; and in this He is our Priest, it being the Priests Office to
Sacrifice for the Sins of the People. Our Duty in this particular is truly and
heartily to Repent, and forsake our Sins, without which, they will never be
Pardoned us, although Christ has Died. Secondly, Steadfastly to Believe, if we do
that, we shall have the Comforts of this Sacrifice of His; all our Sins, how
great, or how many soever, shall be Pardoned, and we saved from those Eternal
Punishments which were due to us for them. And for that other part, viz. That
of Praying, that he not only performed on Earth, but continues still to do it
in Heaven: He sits on the Right Hand of God, and makes Requests for us. Rev.
8.34. Our Duty herein, is not to resist this unspeakable Blessing of His, but
to be willing to be thus Blessed, in being turned from our Sins; and not to make
void and fruitless all his Prayers and Intercessions for us, which will never
prevail for us, whilst we continue in them. The third thing that Christ was to
do for us, was, To enable us, or give us strength to do what God requires of
us: This He does, First, by taking off from the hardness of the Law given to
Adam, (which was, Never to commit the least Sin upon pain of Damnation) and
requiring of us only, an honest and hearty Endeavor to do what we are able; and
where we fail, accepting of sincere Repentance. Secondly, By sending his Holy
Spirit into our Hearts, to Rule and Govern us; to give us strength to overcome
Temptations to Sin; and to do all that He requires of us: And in this He is our
King, to Govern, Rule, and Subdue our Enemies. Our Duty in this particular, is,
To give up our selves Obedient Subjects of His, to be Governed and Ruled by
Him; to Obey all his Laws; not to take part with any Rebel; that is, not to
cherrish any One Sin, but diligently to Pray for his Grace to enable us to
Subdue them all, and then carefully to make use of it to that purpose. Lastly,
He has purchased, for all that faithfully Obey Him, and Eternal and Glorious
Inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven, whither He is gone before to take
Possession for us. Our Duty herein, is, First, To be exceeding careful, that we
forfeit not our Parts, which we shall certainly do, if we continue Impenitent
in any Sin. Secondly, Not to fasten our Affections on this World, but to raise
them, according to the Precept of the Apostle, Col. 3.2. Set your Affections on
things above, and not on things below; longing to come to the Possession of
that Inheritance of ours; in comparison of which, all things here below should
seem Vile and Mean. Whole Duty of Man.

Christ indeed has freed us from the Impossibilities of the Covenant of Works,
and from the Burden and Yoke of the Legal Ceremonies, but not from the
Difficulties and Pains of Gospel Duties. Baxter's Rest.

Comforts.
FEtch thy Comforts from Heaven, and not from Pleasures or Hopes here below. De
Kempis.

What profit can it be for thee to bewail that Sin which thou will not forsake?
What Reward can thou expect for that Obedience which so soon faints? What
Comfort in that Joy that is but Temporary?

How truly sweet (says St. Austin) is the loss of those Earthly Sweetnesses
those Transitory Joys, which I was formerly afraid to lose, and rejoice now to
Banish: It is Thou, O Lord, who ar^ entered in, who art sweeter than a^^
Sweetness, etc.

As thou have raised me by thy Power, so Rule me by thy Providence that thy
Grace may be far sweete^ with my Sufferings, than my Pleasures with my Sins.
Mr. Corbet.

When I walk in Darkness, and see no Light in outward Comforts, Human Helps,
and visible Means, I will Trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay my self upon
my GOD. Ibid.

Contentation.
BE not troubled if this Man lives in Tranquillity, and thou in Tribulation, God
will have it so: He puts thee in the Combat; thou therefore must Sweat before
thou come off with Victory, whereas he that comes forward in the World, goes
back in Grace. His Estate is miserable that goes Laughing to Destruction; As
the Fool in the Stocks for Correction. Theophilact.

He that sets his entirest Love on God, yet has Liberty to Issue a Subordinate
Portion of Love to other good things; as, Health, Peace, opportunity to do
Good, Wife, Children, Friends, and in these he may be crossed and disappointed;
but the predominant Love of God, delivers the Soul from Discontent and
Impatience, even under these Losses; because the Soul is still assured of what
it most values; the Love of God returned to the Soul, which compensates and
drowns those other Losses, and the Discontent that may arise upon it.

Trouble makes every sad Accident a double Evil, Contentedness none at all.

When we lose our Estates, let us not lose our Constancy and Cheerfulness. If
thou have lost thy Health, do not lose thy Patience also. If thou Die a little
sooner than thou expected'st, do not Die unwillingly. If thou have no Friend,
be not also thy own Enemy. If others Vex thee, do not withal Vex thy self. If
thou be Ill to Day, be not solicitous for to Morrow, sufficient to the Day, is
the Evil thereof.

Despair.
FRancis Spira, about the Year, 1548. says this of himself: I was excessively
Covetous of Money, and accordingly I applied my self to get it by Injustice,
Corrupt Judgment, Deceit, Inventing Tricks to delude Justice; Good Causes I
either defended Deceitfully, or Sold them the Adversaries perfidiously. Ill
Causes I maintained with all my Might. I willingly opposed the known Truth and
Trust committed to me, either Betrayed or Perverted: And for the Inordinate
Love of the things of this World, I wholly Wounded my Conscience by an Infamous
Abjuration of the Blessed Truth, which I formerly Professed, upon the serious
Consideration of what I had done in cold Blood, acknowledging my self utterly
undone for ever. This poor Man became a Spectacle of such Spiritual Misery and
Woe to the whole World, that there is not any thing left to the Memory of Man
more Remarkable: his Spirit was suddenly smitten with the dreadful Sense of
Divine Wrath for his Apostasy, and splitting in pieces (as it were by so
grievous a bruise) his Heart fainted fearfully, and failed him quite, and fell
asunder in his Breast, like drops of Water: Hear some ruful Expressions (out of
his Desperate State) from his own Mouth: O that I were gone from hence; that
somebody would let out this weary Soul of mine: I tell you, there was never
such a Monster as I am; never was there a Man alive such a Spectacle of
exceeding Misery. I now feel God 's heavy Wrath, that burns like the Torments
of Hell within me, and afflicts my Soul with Pains unutterable. Verily,
Desperation is Hell it self, the gnawing Worm of unquenchable Fire, Horror,
Confusion; and which is worst of all, Desparation continually Tormenting me:
And now I count my present State worse, than if my Soul were separated from my
Body with Judas: The Truth of it is, never had Mortal Man such experience of
God 's Wrath and Hatred against him as I have: The Damned in Hell, I think,
endure not the like Misery. If I could conceive the least spark of Hope in my
Heart of a better State hereafter, I would not refuse to endure the most heavy
Wrath of the great God, yea, for Two Thousand Years, so that at length I could
get out of Misery. O that God would loose his Hand from me; and that it were
with me as in times past, I would scorn the Threats of most Wicked Tyrants,
bear Torments with Invincible Resolution and Glory in the outward Profession of
Christ, till I were choked with the Flame, and my Body turned into Ashes.

Discression.
It Is more Discression to hold the Style of Miserable, which begets an Infamy
without Hatred, than to desire that of Liberal, which being maintained by
necessitous Courses, procures an Infamy with Hatred. Machiavil.

Death.
THe Young Man has Death at his Back, the Old Man before his Eyes. That Is the
more dangerous Enemy that Pursues thee, than that which Marches before thy
Face. Aquinas.

Set Death into your Minds, and it will put Life into your Actions.

St. Austin says, There Is nothing more abateth Sin, than the frequent
Meditation of Death. He cannot Die Ill that Lived Well; and seldom does he Die
Well, that Lived Ill.

Ambrose says, Death is the Burial of all Vices.

To be willing to Die, consider the harmlesness of Death to the People of God,
though it keeps its Dart, yet it has lost its Sting.

Thy Heart may be kept from shrinking back, in time of Sickness, by considering
the necessity of Death, in order to the Fruition of God, 2 Cor. 5.6. Whilst we
are at home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord.

Another Argument to this unwillingness to Die, is, The immediate Succession of
a more excellent, and a more glorious Life; it is but Wink, and you shall see
God, Romans 8.10, 11. At Death you will be freed from Trouble here, and have
Communion with God, and Communion of Saints. Flavel.

Cardinal Richleu, being Tempted to doubt and disbelieve a God, another World,
and the Immortality of the Soul; and by that Distrust, to relieve his aching
Heart, but in vain, So strong, he said, was the Notion of God on his Soul, so
clear the Impression of him upon the frame of the World, so unanimous the
Consent of Mankind, so powerful the Conviction of his own Conscience, that he
could not but taste of the Powers of the World to come, and so Live as one that
must Die; and so Die as one that must Live Eternally: And being asked one day,
Why he was so sad? he answered, Monsieur, Monsieur, the Soul is a serious
thing; It must be either Sad here for a moment, or Sad hereafter for ever.

Cardinal Mazarine, when he came to Die, said, O my poor Soul! Whither will thou go? saying, one Day, to the Queen Mother, Madam, your Favors have undone
me; and were I to Live again, I would rather be a Capuchine, than a Courtier.

Sir Francis Walsingham, toward the latter end of his Life, grew very
Melancholy, and Writ to the Lord Burleigh, to this purpose, We have lived long
enough to our Country, to our Fortunes, and to our Sovereign: It is high time
to live to our Selves, and to our God. In the multitude of Affairs that pass
through our Hands, there must be some Miscarriages; for which a whole Kingdom
cannot make our Peace. Whereupon some Court Humorist being sent to Divert Sir
Francis: Ah! said he, whilst we Laugh, all things are serious round about us;
God is serious when he Preserves us, and has Patience toward us; Christ is
serious when he Dies for us; the Holy Ghost is serious when he striveth with
us; the Holy Scripture is serious when it is Read to us; the Sacraments are
serious when they are Administered unto us; the whole Creation is serious in
serving God and us; they are serious in Heaven and Hell; and shall a Man that
has one Foot in the Grave, Jest and Laugh?

Dr. Dunn, a Man of as great Parts and Spirit, as any in this Nation, being on
his Deathbed, taking his solemn leave of all his most considerable Friends,
left this with them, I Repent of all my Life, but that part of it I spent in
Communion with God and doing Good. That Person, in a Dying hour, shall wish
himself not a Man, that has not been a good Christian. When Queen Mary Died,
Mr. Fox that Writ the Book of Martyrs, was Preaching Comfort to the English
Exiles in Geneva, at which time, he did tell them, That now was the time come
for their return into England, and that he brought them that News from God; for
which Words, many of the Grave Divines Rebuked him greatly for the present, but
afterward excused him by the Event, for it appeared that Queen Mary Died but
the Day before he so spoke to them.

Judge Nichols used to say, That he knew not what they called Puritan
Preaching, but (he said) that Preaching which went next his Heart; and spoke
(as Attorney General Noy used to say of Doctor Preston) as if they knew the
Mind of God.

Mr. Seldom, that Universal Scholar, being suspected by many, to have too
little Affection to Religion, a little before he Died, sent for the Bishop of
Armagh, and Dr. Langbane, and told them to this effect, That he had Surveyed
most part of the Learning that was amongst the Sons of Men: And that he had his
Study full of Books and Papers, of most Subjects in the World, yet at that time
could he not recollect any Passage out of those many Books and Manuscripts he
was Master of, whereon he could rest his Soul, save of the Holy Scriptures;
wherein the most remarkable Passage that lay upon his Spirit was, Titus the 2.
ver. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

Grotius, one of the greatest of Scholars, concluded his Life with this
Protestation, That he would give all his Honor and Learning for the plain
Integrity and harmless Innocence of Jean Urick, who was a Devout Poor Man, who
spent Eight hours of his Time in Prayer, Eight in Labor, and but Eight in Sleep
and other Necessaries. And with this Complaint, to another who admired his
Astonishing Learning and Industry, Ah Vitam perdedi opero se nihil Agendo: And
this Direction to a Third, that desired, in his great Learning and Wisdom, in
brief, to show him what to do; who bade him, Be Serious.

Count Gundomer was as great a Wit and Statesman as ever Europe knew, and took
as much Liberty in point of Religion; till drawing toward his latter end, he
would say, as they say of Ansalem; I fear nothing more in the World than Sin;
often professing, That if he saw Corporally the Horror of Sin on the one hand,
and the Pains of Hell on the other, and must necessarily be plunged into the
One, he would choose Hell rather than Sin; yea, that what liberty soever he had
taken, he had rather be torn in pieces with Wild Horses, than wittingly, or
willingly run into any Sin.

Above all (says Sir Philip Sidney, at the time of his Death) govern your Will
and Affections by the Word and Will of your Creator; and in me behold the end
of this World.

Damnation.
PEter Lumbard says, GOD Condemns none before he Sins; nor Crowns any before he
Overcomes.

Disrespect.
IF any despise thee, do not bear a grudge against him for it: And be not
offended with any, merely because they do not Honor thee. If any neglect or
slight thee, care not for it, yet observe it.

Distrust.
IT is Distrust of God, to be troubled about that which is to come; Impatience
against God, to be troubled for what is present; and Anger at him, to be
troubled at what is past, Vid. Afflictions and Sufferings.

Doubting.
ONe cause of uncomfortable Living is, That Christians look more at their
present Cause of Comfort or Discomfort, than they do at their future Happiness,
and the way to attain it. Another cause of Doubting, is, The weakness, and
small measure of your Graces, a little Faith and Love in and to Christ, is next
to none at all, and therefore not easily diserned as they will be when they are
strong; labor therefore, by Prayer, for more.

What thou Doubtest, do not.

Duties.
INternal Acts of Duty put a Goodness into Externals. It is our Faith, Fear,
and Love of God, that makes our Duties good. The Almost-Christian can Pray, but
cannot Love God; can Teach or Hear, but he cannot take delight in God, Job
17.10. for Delight arises from a suitableness between the Faculty and the
Object. Now, none more unsuitable than God and a Carnal Heart: Also Delight
arises from having what we desire, and from enjoying what we have. How then can
he delight in God, that neither enjoys, nor has, nor desires Good. Delight
in God is one of the highest Exercises of Grace; and therefore how can he
delight in God that has no Grace.

Would you be a Christian indeed, then be much in the use and exercises of
Religious Ordinances; but much more on Faith, and dependence on Christ and his
Righteousness. The Profeffor rests in Duties, and so is but almost a Christian;
but ye must be sure to rest upon the Lord Christ: This is the way to be
altogether a Christian; if you believe that you are Abraham's Seed, and Heirs
according to the Promise.

Let me Pray now, as if I should never have Time to Pray more; Hear now, as if
this were the last opportunity to of Hearing. Leave nothing to do till to
Morrow, that may possibly be done to Day. What true Christians should we be, if
we did not reckon of a Morrow? but see what a grand Deceit lies here; by
putting it off till to Morrow, we gratify our Conscience in this, That we
intend to do it hereafter; but most of all please Corruptions, in this, That we
do it not to day.

If thou would keep thy Heart from vain Excursions, realize to thy self, by
Faith, the Holy and Awful Presence of God in Duties. Flavel.

Delays.
THe Ripeness of the Occasion must ever be well weighed: there is surely no
greater Wisdom than well to Time the first onset of things. If a Man watch too
long for Dangers, it is ods but he will fall asleep. -- On the other hand, to
be deceived with too large Shadow, as some have been, when the Moon was low,
and shone on their Enemies Back, and so to shoot before the time. To teach
Dangers to come on by too early buckling to them, as another extreme. Bacon's
Essays. 195.

Disparagement.
CErtainly, he that Disparages another by a Satirical Wit, as he makes others
afraid of his Wit, so he has need to be afraid of others Memories. Ibid.

Dissimulation.
THe best Disposition and Temper, is, to have openess in Fame and Opinion,
secrecy in Habit, Dissimulation in seasonable use, and a Power to feign, if
there be no Remedy, Ibid. 31.

Doctrine.
CHRIST came down from Heaven for this very end; namely, To teach us the way to
Eternal Life, and therefore says of himself, I am the Way, the Truth, and the
Life, I come to Teach all these things unto you, and all the World. B. of
Hereford.

Dignities.
SOme that lived commendably before they attained to Dignity, being set on the
Candlestick of the Church, turn their Light into Darkness; It had been better
for such Lights still to have been under a Bushel.

Drunkenness.
AS the Clouds darken Heaven, so Intemperate Banqueting the Mind: As the
Violence of Winds and Waves sinks a Ship; so Drunkenness and Gluttony sinks our
Souls and Bodies into Hell. Chrisologus.

Qui peccat ebrius luat sobrias, If thou Offend when thou art Drunk, thou must
be Punished when thou art Sober.

Delights.
THeodoret says, The Delights of the Soul are to know her Maker, and to know
her own State.

Devils Power.
THe Devils, without Christ's leave, had no Power over the Gaderan's Swine;
much less have they Power over GOD's Sheep. Tertullian.

Equity.
EQUITY without Goodness, is Severity; and Justice without Piety, Cruelty.

Earthly Things.
COnsidering the Vanity of Earthly Things Iraeneus says, What is that Honor
that is so short lived, as that perhaps it was not of Yesterday, neither will
be to Morrow: And such Men that labor so much for it, are but like Froth,
which, though it be uppermost, yet is unprofitable.

Evidences.
WHen thou have Evidences of thy Sincerity, which cannot in reason be
gainsaid, hold to them and take Comfort in them; yet still endeavor, by
reviews, and diligent searchings, to clear it more and more. We keep our
Evidences, by keeping our Graces in lively Exercise.

Election.
GOD by his Word calls all; but his Secret Election appoints who shall hear
with Fruit.

GOD has, according to the Tenor of his Covenant, procured Salvation for all,
if they will Believe; but he has procured for his Chosen, even this condition
of Believing.

Envy.
OF all other Affections, it is most Importune and continual; for of all other
Affections, there is an occasion given but now and then; but Envy is ever
working on some or other: And it is also noted, that Love and Envy make a Man
Pine, which other Affections do not, because they are so continual: It is also
the vilest Affection, and most depraved; for which cause, it is the proper
Attribute of the Devil, who is called the Envious Man, that sows Tares among
the Wheat by Night; as it always comes to pass that Envy works Subtilty, and
in the Dark, and to the prejudice of good things, such as Wheat. Bacon's
Essays. 49.

Prosper says, The Envious Man has so many Tortures, as the Envied has
Praises. It is the Justice of Envy to Torment and Kill the Envious.

Examination.
THe end of Examination is to bring a Man to such a sight of his Sins, as might
truly humble him, and make him sensible of his own danger, that has provoked
so great a Majesty, who is able so sadly to revenge himself upon him: and that
will surely, even to the most Carnal Heart, appear a most reasonable ground of
Sorrow. But that is not all, It must likewise bring him to a sense and
Abhorrency of his Baseness and Ingratitude, that has thus offended so good and
Gracious a God; that has made such unkind and unworthy Returns to those tender
Mercies of his. Whole Duty of Man. Vide herein Humility.

It Is said of Sir Thomas More, That the Government of his Family was, exact
enjoining all his Children to take Virtue for their Meat, and Play for their
Sauce.

Encouragement.
ONe Writ to the Duke of Buckingham, That Disincouragements would deter Men of
Parts, whom Encouragements might make Servicable.

Elegancy.
SIR Francis Bacon's Axiom was, Words should wait on Things, and not Things on
Words. And his Resolution was, That all affected Elegance was below the Gravity
and Majesty of a public Discourse.

FAITH.
I Have One Definition of Faith, which is the best: Faith, says Lord Chief
Justice Hales, is a firm assent to the Sacred Truths, whether the Truths relate
to things past; as, that God made the World; that Christ, the Messiah, is come
in the Flesh, etc. Or to Things present; as, That Almighty God knows all I do,
and knows all I think; or, That he is a reconciled Father unto me, in Christ
Jesus; Or Things to come, which principally excite those Two great movers of
the Soul, Hope and Fear, in relation to the future Life of Rewards and
Punishments. Hale.

Faith works by Love, consumes our Corruptions, and Sanctifies the whole
Man throughout.

I come to God, by Jesus Christ; and as I believe in God, so I believe also in
Jesus Christ; and rejoice and glory in Him, acknowledging my own unworthiness
and sinfulness: I rest entirely on Him, as the ground of my Justification to
Life, and of all favor and acceptance with God.

I most heartily take Christ according to the offers of the Gospel; not only to
be Justified from my Sins, and delivered from the Wrath to come, by his Merits,
but also to be Sanctified by his Word and Spirit; and to be Governed by his
Law, and to be brought by him unto Fellowship with GOD. Corbet 's
Self-Imployment.

Though there be not a cooperation of Faith, and other Graces to Justify, yet
there is a co-existence of Faith and other Graces in the Persons Justified.

Faith cannot be the Hand to take Christ, but Love will be the Warmth to heat
our Affections to Christ; they always go together like Mother and Daughter,
Gal. 5.6. Phil. 5.

Faith is required as an Hand which we should put forth to receive Pardon for
our Sins. First, At God's Hands, as a Free-Gift, for he blotteth out our
Transgressions for his own sake. Isa. 43.25. Secondly, At Christ's Hands, as a
purchased Commodity bought for us, with his own precious Blood, and given to
you.

There is First an Heart mollifying Faith. Secondly, An Heart purifying Faith.
Thirdly, A fruitful Faith. Fourthly, An Heart Praying Faith. Fifthly, A
Victorious Faith.

Though we are Justified by Faith, yet it is by Faith working by Love, Gal. 5.6.
And he that Loves God, keeps his Commandments, John 14. Bishop of Hereford 's
Legacy, 66, 67.

As to Faith Justifying, and the Merit of Good-Works, Bishop Cranmer concluded
with this, That our Justification was to be ascribed only to the Merit of
Christ Jesus; and that those that are Justified must have Charity as well as
Faith; but that neither of these is the Meritorious Cause of our Justification.

When ever we read of our Justification by Faith, it is meant of our
Justification in a Gospel way; and that is by Christ alone Meritoriously, and
by what he has done and Suffered: Faith being but the conditional means.
Christ's Satisfaction contrived, provided, accepted, and the Conditions
performed, then every Saved Person will appear Righteous before God; and it
will be very apparently a Righteous thing with God, to bring such to Glory, who
have Christ's Righteousness by way of Satisfaction, to answer for them in
respect of the Law, and their own Faith, and sincere (though imperpect) Obedience
to answer the terms of the Gospel.

Faith, to Live by it.
IT is an Heavenly and Dutiful committing our whole Persons, and of our whole
Estates upon God, with a Pious dependence on Christ, for suitable and
seasonable Supplies in all our Exigencies, Occurrences, and Changes whatsoever.
When the Soul is in any Exigence, and comes to Christ, and puts it self upon
him, and trusts to him for help: This is to Live by Faith; and this Faith
extends it self both to our Spiritual and Temporal Estate. The Just shall Live
by his Faith, Gal. 3.11. speaking of the Temporal State; And Live by Faith of
the Son of God, (says St. Paul) Gal. 2.2. speaking of the Spiritual State.

By reason of the Dignity of Christ's Person, his Obedience and Sufferings
being performed in our Nature, and wholly upon our account, God by an Infinite
Gracious Statute, in Heaven, accepts them for us; (though not as done by us) and
reckons all the Effects and Advantages of them by way of Imputation to us.
Justification Evangelical.

We should not try Men's Faith by their Persons; but their Persons by their
Faith. Tertullian.

Chrysostom says, As a Rock, though the Winds blow, and the Waves beat against
it, is Immovable; so Faith, grounded on the Rock Christ, holds out in all
Temptations, and Spiritual Combats.

Chrysologus says, Neither in the Steel alone, nor in the Flint alone, any
Fire can be seen, nor Extracted, but by Conjunction and Collision; so, nor by
Faith alone, nor by Works alone is Salvation to be attained, but by joining
both together.

Alexander of Hales says, What the Eye is to the Body, Faith is to the Soul,
it is good for direction if it be kept well. And as Flies hurt the Eyes, so
little Sins, and Ill-Thoughts do the Soul.

Says Luther to Melancthon, Who feared to Profess the Truth, If the Cause be
bad, lets revoke it, and fly back; but if it be good, why do we make God a
Liar, who has made us such great Promises, viz. Cast thy Care on the Lord, and
be of good Comfort, I have Overcome the World. If Christ be the Conqueror of
the World, why should we fear it, as though it would Overcome us? therefore be
not afraid, but Courageous and Cheerful, solicitous for nothing, the Lord is at
hand to help us.

Calvin says, With all my Heart I embrace the Mercy which God has used
toward me, for Jesus Christ 's sake, recompencing my Faults with the Merits of
his Death and Passion, that Satisfaction may be made, by this means, for all my
Sins and Crimes, and the remembrance of them may be blotted out.

I have not lived so, that I am ashamed to live longer, neither do I fear to
Die, because I have a Merciful Lord, in that a Crown of Righteousness is laid
up for me: Christ is my Righteousness. Father, let thy Will be done, thy Will,
I say, and not my own, which is imperfect and depraved. This Day let me see the
Lord Jesus, etc. Jewel.

Fall of Man.
Anselm says, O hard hap! What did Man lose? What did he find? He lost the
Blessedness to which he was made, and found Death, to which he was not made.

Fortune.
SIR William Saint James was wont to say, That none Fought well, but those that
did it for a Fortune.

Fortune (says Sir Ralph Winwood) may begin a Man's Greatness, but Virtue must
continue it.

Friendship.
Friendship (says my Lord Bacon) eases the Heart, and cheareth the
Understanding, making clear Day in both; partly by giving the purest Council,
or partly from our Interest and Prepossessions, and partly, by allowing
opportunity to Discourse, and by that Discourse to clear the Mind, to recollect
the Thoughts, to see how they look in Words, whereby Men attain to the highest
Wisdom, which (Dionisius Aeriopagitus says) is the Daughter of Reflection.

Forgiveness.
IF a Man (says Sir David Brook) wrongeth me once, God forgive him; If he
wrong me the second time, God forgive me.

O God Forgive me my Ten Thousand Talents: I come to Jesus Christ, who has
made satisfaction, and lay this heavy Reckoning to his Account. Lord forgive me
mine Iniquity, for it is very great. Vid. Page 70.

Frugality.
Frugality is the Left Hand of Fortune, and Diligence the Right.

Fasting.
FAsting, and other Holy Revenges upon our selves for our Sins, are very
acceptable to God; yet we must not think, that either those, or any thing else
we can do, can make satisfaction for our Offenses; for that nothing else but
the Blood of Christ can do: And therefore, upon that, and not upon any of our
Performances, we must depend for Pardon; yet, since that Blood shall never be
applied to any but Penitent Sinners, we are as much concerned to bring forth
all the fruits of Repentance, as if our Hopes depended on them wholly. Duty of
Man, 126.

Fear.
THe Man that Fears GOD is the Wisest Man; and he that upon that account
departs from Evil, is the Man of greatest Understanding. Hales's
Contemplations, 15.

When Trembling is the Fruit of a Spirit broken for Sin, and the Law in its own
Eyes, there God will look. Mead. 72.

How great a Madness is it to Fear Man, will soon appear, if we do but compare
what Man can do unto us, and what God can do: And First, It is sure, it is not
in the Power of Man (I may say, Devils too) to do us any hurt, without God
permit and suffer them to do it: So that if we do but keep him to be our
Friend, we may say with the Psalmist, The Lord is on my side, I need not fear
what Man can do unto me; for let their Malice be never so great, he can
restrain, and keep them from hurting us: Nay, He can change their Minds toward
us, according to that of the Wiseman, Prove. 16.7. When a Man's Ways please the
Lord, he can make his very Enemies to be at Peace with him. A notable Example
of this, we have of Jacob, Genesis 32. Who, when his Brother Esau was coming
against him, as an Enemy, God wonderfully turned his Heart; so that he met him
with all the loving Expressions of Brotherly kindness, as you may read in the
next Chapter. But Secondly, Suppose Men were left at liberty to do thee what
Mischief they could; alas! their Power goes but a little way; they may perhaps
rob thee of thy Goods, it may be they may take away thy Liberty, or thy Credit,
or perchance thy Life too, but that thou know is the utmost they can do. But
now God can do all this when he pleases; and that which is infinitely more, his
Vengeance reaches even beyond Death it self, to the Eternal Misery both of Body
and Soul in Hell: in comparison of which, Death is so inconsiderable, that we
are not to look upon it with any dread. Fear not them that Kill the Body, and
after have no more that they can do, says Christ, Luke 12.4. and then
immediately adds, But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear; fear him, which
after he has Killed, has Power to cast into Hell; yea, I say unto you, fear
him. In which words, the Comparison is set between the greatest Ill we can
suffer from Man, the loss of Life, and those sadder Evils God can inflict on
us: And the latter are found to be the only dreadful things, and therefore God
only to be Feared. Duty of Man. 20.

Let your Fear of Men, stir up an Holy Fear of GOD.

Grace and Merits.
CArdinal Pool was wont to say, (though a Papist) We cannot give too much to God
's Grace, nor too little to our own Merits. He said, when he returned into
England, I came hither not to Condemn, but to Reconcile; not to Compel, but to
Desire.

God's People.
THey are a small part of lost Mankind, whom God has from Eternity
Predestined to the Glory of Heaven, for the Glory of his Mercy, and given to
his Son, to be by him in a Spiritual manner Redeemed from their lost Estate,
and advanced to this higher Glory; all which Christ does in due time accomplish
accordingly for them, and by his Spirit upon them: But this is but a piece of
their Description concerning God's Work for them and upon them. Lets see also
what they are to do in regard of the working of their own Souls toward God and
their Redeemer again, viz. These People of God are that part of the Externally
called, who having been by the Spirit of Christ thoroughly, tho imperfectly
Regenerated, and hereby Convinced, and sensible of the Evil in Sin, that Misery
in themselves, that Vanity in the Creature, that Necessity, Sufficiency, and
Excellency of Jesus Christ; that they abhor that Evil, bewail that Misery, and
turn their hearts from that Vanity, and most affectionately accepting of Christ
for their Savior and Lord, to bring them to God their chief Good, and present
them perfectly just before him: Do accordingly enter into a Cordial Covenant
with him, and herein persevere to their lives end. Baxter.

A Godly Man is one of those whose Conversation is in Heaven, his Hopes and
Heart are likewise there, for his Riches, his House, and his Relations are in
Heaven, a Godly Man's All is there; ask him what he has on Earth, and he will
tell you nothing, or less than nothing: Ask him then, wherein are his
Blessings? he will tell you, where his Father is, there are my desired
Blessings, there are my hopes, there is my All, there I wish that I my self
were with them. Wadsworth on Phil. 12.

I would not only have God hereafter, but in this World for my chief good; for,
as far as I am able to discern my heart and ways, I have chosen the Lord for
my Portion, I take my rest in him, and not in the Creature; to Love, Fear,
Admire, and Bless him, and to have my Communion with him, is my Joy: an Eternal
Vision and Fruition of God, is my great hope, he is even now better than the
whole World. Mr. Corbet's Enquiry, page 6.

Lactantius says, Godliness Enriches the owner.

Grace.
GRace flowing from the Spirit of God, makes the Soul like a Fountain, whose
Waters are pure and wholesome; for Grace Beautifyeth, Cleanses, and Saves the
whole Man. Ignatius.

When a Man desires Grace from a right sense of his natural State, when he sees
the vileness of Sin, and the woeful, defiled, and loathsome condition he is in
by reason of Sin, and therefore desires the Grace of Christ with uncessant
earnestness, to renew and change him, this is Grace. Mead 68.

Grace is a comprehensive Word, and includes in it not only favor and
acceptance with God, but also those other accessaries of the Gifts of Bounty
and Goodness, which comes from the great Giver of every good and perfect Gift,
as Wisdom, Righteousness, Purity of Heart, and the like. Hales.

Grace is precious, it suffers not it self to be mingled with External
things, nor with Earthly Comforts; thou ought therefore to cast away all
hindrances of Grace, if thou desire the Infusion thereof. De Kempis.

The least Grace gives a full Interest in the Blood of Christ, whereby we are
fully and thoroughly Purged; and it gives a full Interest in the strength and
power of Christ, whereby we shall be perfectly preserved. Mead.

To quicken your Graces, you must first quicken your Humility, by considering
your many Sins repeated. Secondly, you must quicken your Faith, by Meditating
on the Promises to all Penitent Sinners. Thirdly, by quickening your Love to
God, by considering his Mercies, especially those remembered in the Sacrament;
his giving Christ to Die for us, and your Love to your Neighbor, nay, to your
very Enemies, by considering that great Example of his Suffering for us, when
we were Enemies to him.

You must know, that it is not gifts but Grace that makes a Man a Christian; a
Man may Preach like an Apostle, and Pray like an Angel, and yet have the Heart
of a Devil: It is Grace only that can change the heart, a graceless Professor
may have more gifts than the most sound Believer; he may out-Pray, out Preach,
and outdo them; but they in Sincerity, and Integrity, outdo him.

Good and Wicked Men, and Hypocrites.
THey are like True and Counterfeit Money, the one seems to be good, and is
not; the other both seems and is good. Ignatius.

Goodness.
GOod things of this life, if they be our only Portion, we are in a sad
Condition; so Gregory the Great thought, for he could never read those words:
Son, remember thou in thy life time received thy good things, without Horror
and Astonishment, least having such Dignities and Honors as he had, he should
be excluded from his Portion in Heaven.

The signs and parts of goodness are these; If a man be Courteous to Strangers,
it shows he is a Citizen of the World, and that his heart is no Island cut off
from other Lands, but a continent that joins to them: If he be Compassionate
toward the Afflictions of others, it shows his Heart is like the noble Tree,
that is Wounded it self, when it gives the healing Balm: If he easily pardons
and remits Offenses, it shows his Mind is planted above Injuries, so that it
cannot be shot: If he be thankful for small Benefits, it shows he weighs men's
Minds, and not their Trash: But above all, if he have St. Paul's affection, That
he could wish himself Anathematized from Christ for the Salvation of his
Brethren, it shows much of a Divine Nature, and a kind of Conformity to Christ
himself. Bacon's Essays. 70.

Grandees.
It is said that Great Men are the first that find their own Griefs, and the
last that find their own Faults: The Lord Rich was quick in both, and has
taught us this, that certainly Men of great Fortunes are strangers to
themselves, and while they are in the puzzle of Business, and have no time to
attend the Welfare either of Body or Soul; and that they must withdraw from
this World, before they retire to another.

Happiness.
THe way to attain to it in short is, by the constant and sincere endeavors of
a holy Life, in and through the Merits of Jesus Christ: Christ indeed is the
Author of Eternal Salvation, but Obedience is the Condition of it; so the
Apostle tells us, That Christ is the Author of Eternal Salvation to them that
Obey him, Heb. 5.1.

I long to enjoy thee, O Lord, most inwardly, but I cannot attain unto it; my
desire is, that I may be given up to Heavenly things; but unmortified Passions
and Temporal things weigh down my Mind. I would be above all things, but with
the Flesh I am forced to be subject against my will. Thus unhappy Man that I
am, I fight against my self, and am grievous to my self: Whilst my Spirit seeks
to be above, my Flesh seeks to be below.

Say not that we are unable to set our Hearts on Heaven, this must be the Work
of God, and therefore all your Exhortations are in vain; for I tell you, though
God be the chief disposer of your Hearts, yet, next under Him, you have the
greatest Command of them your selves; and a great power of ordering your own
thoughts and determining your own Wills in their choice; though without Christ
you can do nothing, yet under him you may do much, and must do much, or else it
must be undone, and you undone through your own neglect. Do your own Parts, and
you will have no cause to Distrust whether Christ will do his: Do not your own
Consciences tell you, when your Thoughts are abroad, that you may do more than
you do, in the restraining of them; and when your Hearts be flat, and neglect
Eternity, and seldom mind the Joys before you, that is most wilful. If you be
to study a set Speech, you can force your Thoughts to the intended Subject. If
a Minister be to Study a Sermon, he can force his Thoughts to the most saving
Truths, and that without any special Grace. Might not a true Christian then,
mind more the things of the Life to come, if he did not neglect that Authority
over his own Thoughts, which God has given him; especially in such a work as
this, where he may more confidently expect the Assistance of Christ, who uses
not to forsake his People, in the work he sets them upon. Mr. Baxter 's
Rest. Part the Fourth. 53.

Heavenly Sayings.
Robert Rollock says, I bless God I have all my Senses entire, but my Heart is
in Heaven; and Lord Jesus why should not thou have it? It has been my Care,
all the Day long to Dedicate it unto thee: I pray thee take it, that it may
live with thee for ever.

Hooper Martyr, said, Imprisonment is painful, but Liberty upon Evil Conditions
is worse: The Prison stinks, yet not so much as sweet Houses, where the Fear of
God is wanting. I must be alone, and Solitary; it is better be so, and have God
with me, than to be in the Company of the Wicked. Loss of Goods is great, but
the loss of Grace and God 's favor is greater: I cannot tell how to answer
before Great and Learned Men; yet it is better do that, than stand Naked before
God 's Tribunal. I shall Die by the hands of Cruel Men: He is Blessed that
loses his Life, and finds Life Eternal. There is neither Felicity nor
Adversity in this World is great, if it be compared with the Joys of the World
to come.

Bilney the Martyr being going to be Burnt, was, by a Friend, Exhorted to take
his Death patiently: to whom he said, I am Sailing, with the Mariner, through a
boisterous Sea, but shortly shall be in Heaven; help me with your Prayers.

Bishop Ridley Writing to Mr. Bradford, said, Blessed be God, notwithstanding
our hard restraint, and the Evil Reports raised of us, we are Merry in God, and
all our Care is and shall be (by God 's Grace) to please and serve him; from
whom we expect (after these Temporary and Momentany Miseries) to have Eternal
Joy and Felicity with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. And Writing to Mr.
Latimer, in Prison, he said, Good Father, let me have somewhat more from you to
Comfort my Stomach; for unless the Lord assist me, in his Service, I shall play
the Whiteliver'd Knight; but he can make a Coward in his Cause to Fight like a
Man.

Jerome of Prague being ready to be Burned, these were his last words, This Soul
of mine, in Flames of Fire, O Christ, I offer unto thee.

Sir Thomas More said, We go to Hell with more pain than we may go to Heaven
with.

Honor.
IT is Machiavils Rule, That they that rise very high should descend timely, to
quit the Envy, lest they lose the Honor of their Greatness.

Queen Elizabeth asked Sir Nicholas Bacon, Why his House was so little; he
answered, My House is not too little for me, but you have made me too big for
my House.

Heavenly Country.
HOw Worthy, yea, how necessary a thing it were that they (that is, the Lord
Burleigh, and Sir Francis Walsingham) should at length bid farewell to the
Snares, one of a Secretery, and the other of an Ambassador, and should both of
them set their Minds upon their Heavenly Country; and by Repentance, ask Mercy
of GOD.

Human Affairs.
Human Affairs are so uncertain, that he seems the Wisest Man, not who has a
Spirit to go on, but he that has a Wariness to come off: And that seems the
best Course that has most Passages out of it.

Hatred.
THe World perhaps does not Love us, have we not reason to thank it, if it make
us place our Affections on Heaven.

Epiphanius used to say, That he never let his Adversary Sleep; not that he
disturbed him in his Sleep, but because he agreed with him presently, and would
not let the Sun go down upon his Wrath.

Prosper says, Thou shall neither Hate the Man for his Vice; nor Love the Vice
for the Man's sake.

Heart and Tongue.
CYprian says, Two things never wax Old in Man, the Heart ever imagining new
Cogitations, and the Congue uttering vain Corruptions of the Heart.

Hearing the Word.
Cyril says, Some came to Church to see Fashions, others to meet their
Friends; yet it is better come so, than not at all: In the mean time, the Net
is laid, and they that intend nothing less, are drawn into Christ, who catches
them not to destroy them, but that being Dead, he may bring them to Life
Eternal.

St. Bernard, when he came to the Church Door, used to say this to himself;
Stay here all my Worldly Thoughts and Vanity, that I may entertain Heavenly
Meditations.

Heretics.
IRaeneus was wont to compare the Heretics and Schismatics of his Time, to
Esop's Dog, that lost the Substance of Religion, whilst they gaped too
earnestly after the Shadow.

It was St. Hierom's saying, Dead Flesh is to be cut off for fear of Gangrene.
Arias at first was but a Spark, but being not suppressed betimes, proved the
Incendary of the whole Church.

Holiness.
ISodore faith, Knowledge and a Good Life are both very profitable; yet if both
cannot be attained, a Good Life is rather to be sought than much Knowledge.

Hope.
WE will never part comfortably with our Enjoyments on Earth, till we have
comfortable Thoughts of better in Heaven.

That Hope of Salvation that is not accompanied with Heart Purification, is
vain Hope.

Humility.
IT is a lowly frame and habit of Spirit, arising from a due sense of the
glorious Excellency of Almighty God, and our own Frailties and Infirmities, and
upon our Infinite dependence on his Bounty, Goodness, and Mercy, whereby we are
under a constant, firm, and sound Conviction; that all that is in us, or that
is Enjoyed, or can be expected by us, is from the free and undeserved
Liberality of that glorious GOD.

An Humble Man (says Alexander of Hales) is like a good Tree; the more fuller
of Fruit the Branches are, the lower they bend themselves.

It is the empty Soul (I mean, one empty of Pride, Self-conceit, and
Vainglory) that is capable of Satisfaction with the Divine Goodness.

If an Humble Man does any Good, Noble, or becoming Action, he checks the first
motions of Pride and Ostentations in himself, and receives not the Applause of
others, but directs all to the Praise and Glory of it to that God that has
done it for him, and by him, Not unto us, but unto thy Name give the Glory. C.
J. Hales. 141.

And Justice Hales said, I can call my own Experience to witness, that even in
the external Actions, Occurrences, and Incidencies of my whole Life, I was
never disappointed of the best Guidance and Direction, when in Humility, and
the sense of my own deficiency and diffidence of my own Ability to direct my
self, or grapple with the difficulties of my Life, I have with Humility and
Sincerity employed the secret Directions and Guidance of the Divine Providence;
and I dare therein appeal to the vigilant and strict Observance of any Man's
Experience, whether he has not found the same Experience in relation to
himself, and his own Actions and Successes, whether those Counsels and Purposes
which have been taken up, after an humble Invocation of the Divine Direction,
have not always been most successful in the end. 146, and 130.

Hypocrisy.
Hypocrisy is to do the outward Acts, without the inward Sincerity; now, to do
them without Sincerity, is to do them without Love; for to do a thing in Love,
is to do it in Sincerity; that is the best way to know it by: A man that does
much to God, but not out of Love, all that he does is out of Hypocrisy. Doctor
Preston.

The Hypocrite has a Profession that he may not seem Wicked, but it is but a
Profession, and therein he is Wicked. He that pretends to Godliness by a
specious Profession, and yet does not practice Godliness by an holy
Conversation, he has a Form, but does deny the Power. Mead.

It is seriousness and earnestness about fleshly Vanity, and want of
seriousness about things Spiritual and Eternal, which is the temper and
Character of the Hypocrite.

Jests.
ARche made King James sensible of the danger the Prince was in in Spain, by
telling him he would change Caps with him; Why, (said the King?) because thou
have sent the Prince into Spain, from whence he is never likely to return; But
said the King, What will thou say, if thou see him return back again; Marry,
said he, I will take off the Fools Cap which I now put on thy head for sending
him thither, and put it on the King of Spains for letting him return.

Secretary Baurus's Son kept a Gentleman's Wife in Shropshire, and when he was
weary of her, caused her Husband to be dealt with to take her home again,
assuring him of 500 l. for Reparation: The Gentleman went to Sir Henry Sidney
to take his Advice, telling him, That his Wife promised him to live a new Life,
and to say the truth, 500 l. would be very seasonable at that time: By my
troth, said Sir Henry, take her home and the Money with her, and then whereas
other Cuckholds wear their Horns plain, you may wear yours Guilt.

Injuries.
INjuries of Evils present, are to be neglected for hopes of things to come.
St. Cyprian.

You must (says St. Jerome) be a Dove and a Serpent, the one not to do hurt to
others, the other not to be hurt by others.

He knows not how to live, that kno^^ not how to bear Wrongs. David Chiterus.

The Mercies and Forgiveness that I find and hope for, at the Lords hands,
engages and disposes me to forgive Injuries and Abuses done to me: And I
should not think it much, that I, who am so sinful, should bear some
Contumelies and Abuses from Men. Corbet.

The more Men Wrong thee, the more watchfully maintain thy Love to them. Ibid.

When that another has spoken to thy Disgrace, beware of a transport of Anger,
that thou speak not harshly and unadvisedly against him, or too Passionately,
or as too much concerned for self. Ibid. Vid. Wrongs.

Incarnation.
TO believe the Incomprehensible Mystery of our Savior's Incarnation, that the
omnipotent Divine Nature, and the weak Nature of Man are united in one Person
of Christ, is sure a very hard thing of Belief, and requires the express Word
of God to submit to and captivate our Understandings, in Obedience to it, for
the Union of the Divine Nature. Vid. John 1.1.

Idleness.
HE is a Sluggard that would reign with God, and will not labor for God. In the
promised Reward he takes delight, but the Commanded Combats affright him. Bead.

Ingratitude.
ST. Austin called Ingratitude the Devils Sponge, whereby he wipes out all the
favors of the Almighty.

Integrity.
SAint Cyprian says, There can be no Integrity whereby they that should Condemn
the Wicked are ever wanting; and they only which should be Condemned, are ever
present.

Judgment.
SAint Jerome said, Whatsoever he did he still thought that that Voice was still
in his Ears, Arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment.

Interest.
THey who least consider Hazard in the doing of their Duty, fare best still:
The surest way to Safety is, to have one Interest espoused firmly, as never to
be changed.

KINGS.
IT is a Maxim, that KINGS are like the Sun; and Usurpers like Falling-Stars:
for the Sun, though it be Effuscated, or Eclipsed with Mists and Clouds, yet at
length becomes refulgent; whereas the others are but Figures of Stars to the
view, and prove no more than Exhalations, which suddenly dissolve and fall to
the Earth, where they are consumed.

First, Jesus Christ is his Enemies King. Secondly, His Saints King. Thirdly,
His Fathers King. The First he Rules Over; the Second he Rules In; and the
Third he Rules For.

Knowledge.
ST. Basil said, To know thy self is very difficult; for as the Eye can see all
things but it self; so some can discern all Faults but their own.

There is a common Knowledge, and there is a saving Knowledge, common
Knowledge, is that which floats in the Head, but does not Influence and affect
the Heart: This Knowledge Reprobates may have, Numb. 23.10. but then the saving
Knowledge of God and Christ, which does include the assent of the Mind, and
consent of the Will: This is Knowledge which implies Faith, Isa. 5.8. By his
Knowledge shall my Righteous Servant Justify many.

For us to know, but to know, that is Curiosity; to know, to be known, that is
Vainglory; but to know, to Practice what we know, that is Gospel-Duty.

He only knows GOD aright that knows how to Obey him; and Obeys according to
his Knowledge of him, Psalm. 111.10. a good Understanding have all they that
keep his Commandments.

Law of GOD.
EVsebius says, That Moses Wrote the Old Law in dead Tables of Stone; but
Christ did write the lively and perfect Documents of the New Law, in Tables of
the New Testament, in living Souls.

One Law Executed, is worth Twenty Made.

No Laws, so no good could be done by a Governor that was not Absolute, without
either restraint or a Competitor. Machiavil.

Law and Equity have Two Courts, but Law and Equity should dwell in one Breast.

Light Gold.
THe Master of a Company affirmed, That they had a pair of Scales that would
turn with the Two hundredth part of a Grain: I should be loath said Mr.
Attorney General Noy, standing by, that all my Actions should be weighed by
those Scales. We are all but Light Gold.

Liberty.
A People accustomed to live under a Prince, if by accident they become free,
are like Beasts let loose, and have much ado either to maintain their
Government or their Liberty. Machiavil.

Love.
LOve is nothing but a disposition of the Will, whereby it cleaves or makes
forward to some good thing that is agreeable to it self. Preston. 216.

St. Jerome used this excellent saying, If my Father stood Weeping on his Knees
before me, and my Mother hanging on my Neck behind me, and all my Brothers,
Sisters, Children, and Friends howling on every side, to retain me in a sinful
Life, I would run over my Father, fling my Mother to the Ground, despise my
Kindred and fling them under my Feet, that I may run to CHRIST. Here Is Love and
Fortitude!

St. Austin says, Love is strong as Death; as Death kills the Body, so Love
of Eternal Life kills Worldly Desires and Affections.

The Love of Christ being predominant in the Soul, deadens the Affections to
any thing else.

Christ asked Peter Three Times, Love thou me, not for his own Information,
but that by his Threefold Profession he might help his Threefold Negation of
him. Nicephorus.

To Love God, and to be conformable to him, is that which I most of all desire
should be in me. Corbet's Enquiry.

God will never Damn in Hell any Soul, that has the habitual Predominance of
the Love of God in his Soul, though culpable or otherwise sinful whilst remains
such; yea Hell and such Love are inconstant. Ibid. 30.

I Love to Love GOD (says Mr. Corbet) and desire this Love, not only as an
evidence of my Salvation, but for it self: I had much rather have an Heart to
Love him perfectly, than to have all the Honors, Riches, and Pleasures of this
World. Ib. 17.

Love to God is the Fountain and Spring of all true Obedience; most of the
Hypocrites Love, empties it self in Vainglory. Mat. 6.2, 5. Hos. 10.1.

We know that we have passed from Death unto Life, because we love the
Brethren, John 3.14, 10. there we understand Brethren by Grace, and not by
Nature, or otherwise; to love God for Godliness sake, the Saints for Saintships
sake; this is a sure Testimony of our Christianity.

A Sinner cannot Love a Saint, Quatenus a Saint; neither can a Saint love a
Sinner, Quatenus a Sinner. John 15.19. Psalm. 57.4.

It is a true Rule, That Love is ever Rewarded, either in the Recipoque, or
with an Inward or secret Contempt. Watch against all secret Pleasure, in the
lessening of another for advancing of thy self.

Divine Love (says Basil) is a never failing Treasure; he that has it is Rich,
and he that wants it is Poor.

Chrisostom says, A Bulwark of Adamant is not more impregnable than the Love
of Brethren.

We can hardly spare time for God, because we Love him too little; but we have
abundance of spare time for our Idle Aversions, only because we love them too
much.

Sir Thomas Howard was wont to say, That the less others set by him, the more
he would set by himself.

God makes his Love sensible to the faithful Soul, and says to it, by the
Presence of his Spirit, Soul I am thy Salvation; and the Soul says to him,
Lord thou art my God, I am thine, save me, teach me to do thy Will: God
Communeth with the Soul, by his Word and Spirit, that is by Prayer and Holy
Meditations. Pe. Du Moulin. 39.

All the Deliverances that God sends his Children, all the Blessings that God
pours out upon them, they take them as Productions of the Fatherly love of
God, who has Adopted them in his Son; they taste that love in the Enjoyments
of present Goods; they breathe that love in hope of future and eternal Good;
they rest upon that love, when they sleep; they rest upon that love in the
Occurrences of their Life, with what face soever the World looks upon them;
they see through them the evident love of God, being certain that nothing happens
to them but is directed by the good hand of their loving Father. Ib. 37.

Life to come.
THe Life to come is blessed Eternity, certain Security, a secure Quietness,
quiet Joyfulness, happy Eternity, and Eternal Felicity.

Lies.
A Lie, as Mountane says, is only to brave it toward God, and to be a Coward
toward Man; for a Lie faceth God, and shrinketh from Man.

Lusts.
AS a great shower of Rain puts out the force of Fire, so Meditations of God's
Word puts out the Fire of Lusts in our Souls.

Maxims.
VIdeo and Rideo is God's Motto on Affronts. Video and tacio, was Queen
Elizabeth's. And Prudens qui Patiens, Sir Edward Cooks.

Melancholy.
A Mind, in the dark of Melancholy and Trouble, fears every thing.

Mistakes in Divinity.
THere will be Mistakes in Divinity whilst Men Preach: And Errors in
Government whilst such Govern.

Mirth and Vanity.
SIR Edward Fines would say, That he that would be Merry for a Day, let him be
Trimmed; He that would be Merry for a Week, let him Marry: He that would be
Merry for a Year, let him Build: And he that would be Merry for Ages, let him
Improve his Land.

Marriage.
HOly Marriage (says St. Austin) is better than proud Virginity.

Meekness.
THeodosius Senior, Commanded, That he that Reviled and spoke Evil of him
should not be Punished, because if it proceeded from levity, it is not to be
regarded; if of Madness, it was to be pitied; if of Injury received, it is to
be Pardoned in them.

Malice.
Origin says, That Gods Providence has ordered all things for some End or
Purpose: He made not Malice, and though he can restrain it, yet he will not; for
if Malice were not, Virtue should not have a contrary, and so should not shine
so clear: For the Malice of Joseph's Brethren was the means whereby God brought
many admirable works of his Providence, as the Story shows.

Mass.
AT Rome, says Luther, I heard them say Mass in such a manner, as I detest
them: For at the Communion Table, I heard Curtesans laugh and boast of their
Wickedness. And others, concerning the Bread and Wine on the Altar, saying,
Bread thou art, and Bread thou shall remain: Wine thou art, and Wine thou shall
remain.

Martyrdom.
IGNATIUS said of his Tormentors, That the Lions Teeth are but like a Mill, for
though it bruiseth yet wastes not the good Wheat, only prepares and fits it to
be pure Bread: Let me (says he) be broken by them, so I may be a pure Manchet
for Heaven.

Mr. Latimer being ready to be burnt, said, God is faithful, that will not
suffer us to be Tempted above that we are able, etc. When the Fire was brought,
he said to Bp. Ridley, Be of good Comfort, Brother, and play the Man, we shall
this day light such a Candle by Gods Grace in England, I trust shall never be
put out.

Mr. John Philpot, in a Letter which he wrote to Mr. John Careless, then a
Prisoner in the King's Bench, he thus writes, I am in this World in Hell, and in
the shadow of Death, but he that for my deserts has brought me down into Hell,
shall shortly lift me up into Heaven, where I shall continually look for your
coming, and others of my faithful Brethren in the King's Bench. And though I tell
you I am in Hell in the judgment of the World, yet I assuredly feel in the
same, the Consolation of Heaven: Praised be God, their loathsome and horrible
Prison is pleasant to me.

Mercy.
CHrisostom says, God had rather Men should love him, than fear him; to be
called Father, rather than Master: He wins by Mercy, that he may not perish by
Justice.

Only a Godly Man knows how to make use of Mercies.

Neatness.
SIr Edward Cook was wont to say, It is profitable to be Neat, that the outward
Neatness of the Body may be a moniter of the purity of our Souls.

Negotiating.
USE such Persons as affect the Business wherein they are to be Employed, for
that quickneth much, and such are fit for the matter: As bold Men for
Expostulation; fair spoken Men for Persuasion; crafty Men for Enquiry, and
Observation; Froward and Absurd Men for Business that does not well bear out
it self: Use such as have been Lucky, and prevailed before in things wherein
you have employed them; for they will endeavor to maintain their Prescription:
It is better sound a Person with whom he deals a far off, than to fall on the
Point at first, except you mean to surprise him by some short Question. Lord
Bacon's Essays.

Nobility.
NObility without Virtue is a Disgrace; Virtue without Nobility is low; but
Nobility adorned with Virtue, and Virtue embellished by Nobility, raises a Man
as high as Nature reaches; and he in whom these two Concur, have all the Glory
a Man can attain unto (that is) both an inclination and a power to do well. In
the Life of Francis Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury.

Obedience.
LET it be thy serious and fixed purpose every Morning (through the assistance
of Grace) not willingly or knowingly to commit any Sin, or to do any thing, thy
Conscience shall tell thee is displeasing to God; but if contrary to thy
serious intention through Infirmity, sudden Surprisal, violence of Temptation,
or Incogitancy, thou do at any time fall, humble thy self before the Lord,
bewail and confess thy Faults with sorrow and grief, and speedily recover thy
self by a serious Repentance, by flying to the Blood of Christ for Pardon.

Our Natures must be renewed before the Command can be rightly obeyed, Mat. 7.18.

Whatsoever a Man's performances are, they cannot be called Obedience whilst the
Heart remains unregenerate, because the Principle is false and unsound: Every
duty done by a Believer is accepted of God, as part of his Obedience to the
Will of God, though it be done in much weakness; because, though the Believers hand
is weak, yet his Heart is right; the Hypocrite may have the most active Hand,
but the Believer has the most faithful and sincere Heart.

Our applying to God, through Jesus Christ; (id est) our address to the Father,
through his Son (begetting in us a sense of that Love which our Savior had for
us) cannot but kindle returns of Love suitable to it; and that must needs
reform the inward Man; upon which, purity and holiness of Life, will certainly
follow.

Right Obedience to Christ: First, It must be Evangelical. 1st. For the Matter
of it, Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you, John 15.14. 2ly.
To the manner of it, according to what God requires of us: God is a Spirit, and
they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth, John 4.24. 3ly.
The ground of it; This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance,
that Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners; of whom I am chief, 1 Timothy 1.15. Secondly, It is an Universal Obedience, Numb. 14.24. But thy servant
Caleb, because he has another Spirit with him, and has followed me fully; him
will I bring into the Land, etc. Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when
I have respect to all thy Commandments. Thirdly, It is a continual Obedience,
Psalm. 119.112. I have inclined my Heart to perform thy Statutes always, even
unto the end.

God is never absent, though the wicked have him not in their Thoughts; where he
is not by Favor, he is by Punishment and Terror. Greg. the Great.

Painting of Faces.
THey that love to Paint themselves in this World, otherwise than God has made
them, may justly fear, that at the Resurrection, their Creator will not know
them. Cyprian.

Passions.
IT is the greatest Slavery in the World, to be subject to ones own Passions.
Justin Martyr.

Patience.
OTher Graces are but the parts of a Christians Armor, but Patience is the
whole Armor of the Man of God; the Enemy foils us without it, but we foil him
with it, Ignatius.

O that I could live (says Mr. Corbet) by Faith, in this time of Affliction; I
endeavor to press upon my Soul those Arguments which the Scripture affords
with Patience, and Long-suffering, with Joyfulness; but this will not do the
Work, except the Spirit of Faith and Patience be given from him, from whom
comes down every good and perfect Gift: I do pray, I do cry to my Father, that
he would give me the gracious Spirit, according to his Promises, that I may
show forth the Power of his Grace, and that I may not Dishonor him.

A Soul patient when Wrongs are offered him, is like a Man with a Sword in one
hand, and a Salve in the other; could wound, but will heal, Alexander of Hales.

Do not promise to thy self that which God never promised thee. This heals the
evils that arise from vain hopes, and cools the anger of those Sores that are
caused by frustration of our Expectations. It is lawful to desire several
things which are uncertain, if God sees them good for us; but let us not
promise to our selves any of them. Do not entertain thy thoughts with promises
of Contentment in such a relation, in such a condition, nor success in such an
Enterprise, no, though thou go about it wisely; but promise to thy self pardon
of Sin and Eternal Life, if thou do thy Duty, and the Grace of God to do it, if
thou pray for it and wilt use it; for this our Merciful Father has promised.
And if we will hope for any thing, let it be (as I said before) in the days of
our Sorrow and Adversity, to support our Heaviness; but not in the days of our
Prosperity, to please our Fancies.

Parents.
PArents ought to offer these things to their Children, as Instructions both in
God's Word, and Human Arts, which preserves them from Idleness and Folly, gives
them Wisdom, and learns them Subjection and Obedience to their Superiors.
Justin Martyr.

Peace.
WHat will it avail thee to Dispute soundly of the Trinity, if thou be void of
Humility, and art thereby displeasing to the Trinity: high Words surely never
make a Man, neither Holy nor Just; but a Virtuous Life makes him dear to God: I
desire rather to feel Compunction, than to understand the Definition thereof.
If thou do know the whole Bible, and the Sayings of all the Philosophers by
Heart, what would that profit thee, without the Word of God: Vanity of Vanity,
all is Vanity; but to fear God, and him only, this is the highest Wisdom, by
contempt of the World, to attend the Kingdom of Heaven. It is Vanity then to
tend after Perishing Riches, to hunt after Honors, to climb to high Dignities,
and to labor after that, for which we afterward suffer more grievous
Punishments. Vanity it is to wish to live long, and carelessly to live well.
Vanity it is to mind only this present Life, and not to foresee these things
that are to come. Vanity it is to stay and set thy love on these fading and
Perishing things here below, and not to hasten thither where everlasting Joy is
permanent.

Call often to mind that Proverb, The Eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the
Ear with hearing; endeavor therefore to withdraw thy Heart from these Visible
things, and turn thy self to the Invisible; for they that follow their
Sensuality shame their own Consciences, and lose the favor of God.

Thou must labor to break thy Will in many things, if thou will have Peace and
Concord with others. It is no small thing to live in Chistian Communion. It is
no small thing to dwell in Religious Communion, and to converse therein without
Complaint, and persevere therein faithfully till Death. Blessed is he that has
then lived well, and persevered therein till Death.

The Kingdom of God is within you, (says the Lord) turn thee with thy whole
Heart to God, and forsake this wretched World, and thy Soul shall find rest.
Learn to despise Exterior things, and to give thy self Inferior, and thou shall
perceive the Kingdom of God to come into thee; for the Kingdom of God is Peace;
and within, the Holy Ghost, which is not given to the Wicked: Christ will come
unto thee, and show thee his Consolations, if thou prepare for him a worthy
Mansion within thee: All his Beauty and Glory is within, and there he pleases
himself; the Inward Man he often Visits, and has with him sweet Discourses,
much Solace, much Peace, and wonderful Familiarity.

O faithful Soul, make ready thy Heart for this Bridegroom, that he may
vouchsafe to come into thee, and dwell within thee: If any love me he will keep
my Words, and we will come and make our Abode with him: Give therefore
admittance to Christ, and deny entrance to all others. When thou have Christ,
thou art Rich, and he will suffice thee; he will be thy faithful and provident
Helper in all things, so that thou shall not need to trust in Men; for Men are
quickly changed and quickly fall; but Christ remains firm, and stands sure
unto the end.

Blessed is he that understands what it is to love Jesus: Thou ought to
leave thy beloved Creature, which is not worthy of thy Heart, and set it on
Jesus Christ, who has the only right to it: for if thou fix thy Love on the
Creature thou will find it deceitful, and to fail thee then when thou stand
in most need of help: whereas Jesus Christ will never fail thee of help at all
times, but especially when there is most need; who has said, I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee.

I will hear what the Lord will speak in me; Blessed is the Soul that hears
what the Lord speaks in her, and receives from his Mouth the Word of
Comfort: Blessed are those Ears that receive the sound of the Divine Voice, and
listen not to the Voice of the World: Blessed are those Ears which hearken not
to the Voice that sounds outwardly, but to the Truth that sounds inwardly:
Blessed are those Eyes that are shut to outward things, and open to those
things that are Internal: Blessed are they that enter into the Inward Man, and
endeavor to prepare themselves more and more by daily Excellencies to the
attaining of Heavenly Secrets: Blessed are they that delight to converse with
God, and rid themselves of all Worldly Impediments. Consider these things, O my
Soul, and shut the door of thy sensual Desires, that thou might hear what
thy God says unto thee. Whatsoever I can desire or imagine for my Comfort, I
look for it not here, but hereafter; for if I should alone have all the
Comforts of the World, after that his Master has forgiven him Ten Thousand
Talents to forgive his Fellow Servant an Hundred Pence.

It is in vain to come to the God of of Peace, without Peace; or to Pray for
the Remission of our own Sins, without Forgiveness of others; we must not come
to make an Atonement with God, without Forgiveness of others; we must not come
to make an Atonement with God at the Altar, before we have made Atonement
with our Brother in our Hearts.

God giving us Peace and Content, we must give him Content, by Obeying him, or
else we do not love him. A Man is well-pleased with Himself and his own
Actions, when he does that which his own Conscience tells him he ought to do;
and is then offended with himself, when he goes against the Light of his own
Mind, neglecting his Duty, or doing that which is contrary to it. Tillotson on
Psalm. 159.156.

O how good is it, and tending to Peace, to be silent of others Faults, and not
to believe promiscuously of them, all that is said, nor easily to repeat what we
have heard, to lay our selves open to Fear. De Kempis, 257.

Use not Animosity and Contention in any matter that may be brought to a good
Issue, in the way of Peace. We are apt to hinder our Peace, by dreading and
fearing those Troubles it may be he never intended to bring upon us. Mr.
Butler, our Minister.

He that seeks Liberty and Ease, shall ever live in Disquiet; for one thing
or other will displease him. De Rempis, 82.

As far as is lawful, let us become all things to all Men, that we may live in
Peace and Quietness; And let us not, by a Tumultuous handling of any Matter,
give them occasion to oppose themselves unto us.

It is true, that to lift up our Hands pure unto God, we had need to wash them
in a better Innocence than our own; and the purest have need to be washed in
the Blood of Jesus Christ. David himself having said he would wash himself in
Innocence, Psalm. 36. And soon after, But as for me, I will walk in mine
Integrity; Immediately upon that, to Redeem and have Mercy upon him; yet God
requires our Innocence, which he examines as a Gracious Father, not as a severe
Judge. He looks more to the Sincerity of our Hearts, rather than the Perfection
of our Actions, giving Peace to the Penitent Soul void of Hypocrisy, Psalm.
32.2, Blessed is the Man to whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity; and in whose
Spirit there is no Guile; that walks before him, knowing his Infirmities, and
together with Confidence, knowing God's Mercy, and the certainty of his
Promises. Peter Du Moulin, 65.

Our Confidence in God, by the Merit of his Beloved Son, is the Ground of Peace
and Content; but that Confidence is fed by Works, we bear Testimony by our
Faith; as by the Respiration, we know that a Man is alive; so the exercise of
Good Works, is together the Work of Faith, and the way to maintain the
Spiritual Life.

Doctor Edward Fox Discoursing one Day, (when Ambassador of terms of Peace) he
said, Honorable ones last long, but Dishonorable ones no longer than Kings
have Power to break them: The surest way therefore to Peace, said he, is a
constant preparedness for War.

The only Foundation of the Peace of the Soul, and contentment of Mind, is that
Peace made for us, which God by his only Son Jesus Christ, who has taken our
Sins upon himself, and in consequence the Punishment; giving us in exchange his
Righteousness, and consequently the Reward of it; since by it we appear
Righteous before God. This is the Summary of the Gospel; it is the only Comfort
of the Faithful, that being Justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Without that Persuasion, all the Moral Precepts, and all
the Reasons of Philosophy, cannot set the Mind at rest, much less the Riches,
Honors, Pleasures, and Pastimes of this World: for who can have Peace with
himself, whilst he is in Dissension with God; and who can have Peace with God,
but by the Mediation of his Beloved Son, Jesus Christ, there being no other
Name, under Heaven, by which we must be Saved.

What though my Sins be great; yet they are less than the Merit of Jesus Christ;
no Sin so great that it ought to take away the Confidence of God's Promises; no
Sin so great that it may Damn a Soul beaten down with Contrition, but together
raised by Faith, and washed in the Blood of the Son of God: Indeed the
remembrance of my Sins must be bitter unto me; yet that Bitterness must be
Drowned in the Joy of Salvation, and my Repentance must be a step, and not an
hindrance to my Confidence: And to maintain this Peace, we must first make it
our earnest task to make our selves sure of our Peace with God, by a lively
Faith, whereby our Hearts may be Purified from Evil Works, and made Fertile in
all Fruits of Holiness; for hereby we shall have Peace with our selves, and
shall be Masters at home: Also this Peace with God, brings Peace with our
Neighbor; for he that has a Comfortable feeling in his own Conscience, that
God is reconciled with him, will easily be reconciled with his Brethren,
holding it a point of Equity, Generosity, and Gratefulness, after that his
Master has forgiven him Ten Thousand Talents, to forgive his Fellow Servant an
Hundred Pence.

Perfection.
AS to the strict, absolute, and legal knowledge of Perfection, so there is
none perfect in this Life: for as Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I have made my Heart
clean and pure from my Sin: In this sense there never was in the Earth one
perfect Man except Adam, before his Fall, and that Man Christ Jesus: But then
there is an Evangelical Perfection, that speaks Perfection in a qualified and
Gospel sense; and thus every good Man is a Perfect Man, even whilst he is here
upon Earth: Take this in Five things, 1. He is Perfect as to his Justification,
in the first moment of a Sinners Believing, 2. He is perfectly Justified, 3.
His Sins being fully Pardoned, 4. His Guilt fully Expiated, 5. His Person made
completely and perfectly Righteous, through the Imputation of Christ's perfect
Righteousness, imputed unto him (for he that has perfect Righteousness upon
him, has perfect Righteousness.) Sanctification is a Progressive Act, that
goes on by little and little, step by step, by degrees: But Justification is
of a different Nature, that is a continued, but not a Progressive Act: We are
not Sanctified all at once, but are Justified all at once; and all the
Successive Pardons that we have for Sin, are but the effect of one continued
Justification, as that is particularly applied and drawn forth. Justification
is, Simul and semel, altogether at once, as the Schools speak.

Little Grace is perfect, in as much as it is continually growing up to
Perfection, Phil. 3.22. Prove. 4.18. Dr. Jacomb.

Spencer Compton, Brother to the Right Honorable the Earl of Northampton,
calling to himself Reverend Persons, as Bishop Morley, and Dr. Earls, when he
was on his Deathbed at Bruges, he raised himself on his Pillow, and held forth
his Hands, as though he were embracing one, saying, O my Jesus! Intimating the
Comforts that flowed in and from the Holy Jesus into his Soul. After which holy
Ecstasy, composing himself to a calm and serious Discourse, he said to the
Standers by, O! do good, and keep close to the Principles of the Christian
Religion.

Public Good.
SIR John Fines said, He is High that serves a Princes private Interest: He is
always so, that is Careful of the Public Good.

Parents and Children.
THree things there are (was Sir Anthony Cook's saying) before whom I cannot do
amiss. 1. My Prince. 2. My Conscience. 3. My Children. Seneca told his Sister,
That he could not leave her a great Portion, but he could leave her a good
Pattern. Sir Anthony would write to his Daughter Mildred, My Example is your
Inheritance, and my Life is your Portion.

Prophecy.
HE that will see what shall be, let him consider what has been: As Sir
Richard Weston said, There is the same desires of Honor and Interest in every
Age, that were before it. So that, as Machivel observes, It is very easy with
him that uses Diligence, and examineth past Occurrances, to serve himself of
those Remedies which were in use among the Ancients; or if they fail, to devise
what is most like them.

Perseverance.
EPhraim Sims says, That the resolute Traveller knows his Journey to be Long,
and the Way Dirty; yet goes on in hopes to come to his House. So let a
Christian, though the way to Heaven be narrow, though it be set with Troubles and
Persecutions, yet let him go on till he has finished his Course with Joy, for
Heaven is his Home.

Pleasures.
WE must deal with Pleasures, as we do with Honey; only touch it with the tip of
the Finger, not with the whole Hand, for fear of a Surfeit. Bead.

Poverty Spiritual.
HE is poor whose Soul is void of Grace, and not whose Coffers are empty of
Money: Contented Peverty is true Riches. Greg. the Great.

Prosperity.
SIR John Fineux said, That no Man Thrived, but he that Lived as if he were the
First Man in the World, and that his Father was not Born before him.

Protection.
DEfend me (said Luther to the Duke of Saxony) with your Sword, and I will
Defend you with my Pen. Maintain my Power (says the Minister of State to his
Sovereign) and I will Support your Majesty.

Protestant and Papist.
SIR Henry Wotton, being in a Popish Chapel, a Merry Papist that knew him,
sent a Paper to him with this Question: Where was your Religion before Luther?
Under which he writ, Where yours is not; that is, in the Written Word of God.

Preaching and Preachers.
SIR Augustine Nicols, loved plain and profitable Preaching, being wont to say,
I know not what you call Preaching, but I like them that come nearest my
Conscience. The Speech of Julius Caesar is commonly known: Oportet eim
parutarem stantem mori. Which Bishop Jewel altered, and applied to himself;
Decet Episcopum concionantem stantem mori.

Pilgrim.
A Christian at home in his House, must think himself a Stranger; and that his
Country is above, where there be no Strangers. Austin.

Providence.
REmember always that God Rules the World, and those things that are Accidents
with us, are Providence with Him; and let this quiet thy Heart.

The Earl of Arundel, when the rest of the Council were for the Dealing with
the Queen of Scots underhand at a distance, he was to Deal with her plainly,
and said to the Queen: The Wisdom of the former Age was so Provident, that it
needed not; and so plain, that it admitted not Shifts.

Peter Lumbard said, The instruction of Words, is not so Powerful as the
Exhortation of Works; for if they which Teach well neglect to do well, they
shall hardly profit their Auditors.

That in a great number of People of several Ages and Conditions (who are like
an Harp with many Strings) it is hard to give every one such a Touch, as may
please all, and offend none. Naziansen.

Preaching.
LET none Glory in the Gift of Preaching, in that they Edify more by them; for
they are not Authors of Grace, but Ministers.

It is hard to be Serious in hearing him, whom I think is not Serious in
himself who Preaches it; if I apprehend he Trifles, it is a great Temptation
to me to do so too.

Pride.
REmember that they that Pride themselves in Silk Apparel, cannot lightly put
on the Holy Jesus Christ. Cyprian.

Thou boastest thy self of thy Wealth, Honor, Strength, Beautiy; consider what
thou art by Sin, and what thou shall be in the Grave, and thy Plumes will fall;
for every Proud Man forgets himself.

He that begins to grow Better, let him beware least he grow Proud; least
Vainglory give him a greater overthrow than his former Vices. Isedore.

To be Content, have a little Esteem of thy self: Superbus and aracus nunquam
quiescunt: No Man Whispers, but a Proud Man is disturbed; whereas the
observance of this Rule, will make us say when we are Contemned and Despised,
that they cannot think so low of us, as we of our selves, and then we shall not
be moved: It will help us in Poverty, Sickness, and all Misfortunes, whilst we
say less than the least of God's Mercies.

Prayer.
THat Prayer that is pure and holy, enters into the Heavens, and returns
not empty: It is a shelter to the Soul, a Sacrifice to God, and a Scourge to
the Devil.

Austin's Prayer was, Lord, first give me what thou requirest, and then require
what thou will. And he that Prays well, cannot choose but Live well.

Mr. Perkins, upon his Deathbed, said to his Friends, praying for the ease of
his Pain, Pray not for the ease of Torments, but for the increase of my
Patience.

He that Prays for the good Things that he has not, does not seek for that
which is good, but that which seems to be good.

Oh! what do I inwardly suffer, when in my Mind I consider Heavenly Things; and
presently in my Prayers, a multitude of Carnal Imaginations present themselves
before me. My God, be not far from me; depart not in thy Wrath from thy
Servant; cast forth thy Light and scatter them; send forth thy Darts, and break
all the Imaginations which the Enemy casts in: Gather in, call home my Senses
unto thee, make me forget all the things of this World; grant me to cast away
speedily the imaginations of Wickedness. Succor thou me, thou everlasting
Truth, that no Vanity may move me; come Heavenly Sweetness, and let Impurity
fly from before thee: Pardon me also, and mercifully forgive me, as often as I
think of any thing else besides thee in Prayer. I do humbly confess I am wont
to be subject to many Distractions, for I confess I am not there where I do
corporally stand or sit, but there am I, whither my Thoughts do carry me; where
my Thoughts are, there am I. There are oftentimes my Thoughts where my
Affections are, that offer themselves quickly unto me, which is naturally
delightful, and by custom pleasing. Tho. de Kempis, 268.

If thou be in God, Christ is thy Father; and therefore in Prayer, thy
Applications are to thy Father, Mat. 7.7.

If we being evil, know how to give good things, whatsoever thou can expect
from thy Earthly Father; so much, and much more, may thou expect from thy
Heavenly Father, patience to bear with thy Infirmities and Failings, Psalm.
78.18. compassion to pity thy Sufferings, Psalm. 103. Goodness to supply thy
Wants, Justice to revenge thy Injuries, Psalm. 105.14.

Those Prayers that are from the workings and sighings of God's Spirit in us,
from sincere Hearts lifted up to God, through the sense of our own Emptiness,
and from God's infinite Fullness, that are suited to God's Will, and the great
Rule of Prayer, that are for Spiritual things more than Temporal, that are
accompanied with Faith and dependence; these Prayers speak a Man altogether a
Christian. Mead.

A Prayer for Purging the Heart, and for obtaining Heavenly Wisdom.
STrengthen me, O God, by the Grace of thy holy Spirit; give me to be
strengthened in the inward Man, and to empty my self of all unprofitable Care
and Anguish, not to be drawn away by sundry desires, either mean or precious,
but looking upon all things as passing away together with them; for nothing is
permanent under the Sun, where all things are vanity and vexation of Spirit;
Oh, how wise is he that considers of them! Tho. de Kempis, 112.

A Powerful Letter.
IN a Letter to King Henry the VIII. it is concluded thus: Wherefore Gracious
King, have pity on your Soul, and consider that the Day is even at hand, when
you shall give an Account of your Office, and the Blood that has been shed
with your Sword. In which day, that you Grace may stand steadfast, and may have
your Quietus est sealed with the Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, which will
only serve at that day; is my daily Prayer, etc.

Our Persecutors.
FRet, Fume, and Gnash the Teeth, to hear that we under these grievous
Afflictions, can be so Merry; let us Pray instantly, that this Joy may never be
taken from us, for it passes the Delights of this World: This is the Peace
which passes all Understanding. This Peace, the more it is chosen, and
possessed with, the more they feel it; and therefore cannot faint, neither by
Fire nor Water.

Prosperity.
HEre lies the danger of a pleasing Condition, in regard of Pleasures, Credit,
Delights, Riches, Friends, Habitation, Health, or any inferior thing, the more
of Good that seems to be in them, (as distinct from God) the more Dangerous;
for they are more like to stand up in Competition with him, and carry it with
our partial and blinded Souls in the Competition. Remember this, if you love
your selves, when you would have all things about you more Pleasant and Lovely,
here lies the danger of a prosperous Condition and State. On the contrary, here
lies the blessed benefit of Adversity, which if Men were not Brutish and
Unbelieving, they would heartily welcome it as the surest Condition. Mr.
Baxters Rest 3d Part, 216.

Papist.
MY Lord of Worcester (being a Papist) had this Maxim, That he would not be
Disordered within himself; only because things were out of Order without him.

Queen Elizabeth was wont to say, That my Lord of Worcester had Reconciled what
she thought Inconsistent; A stiff Papist to be a good Subject.

Punishment.
Whenever God Punishes, he does it for just Cause, and the Godly never
accuse him of Rigor as the Wicked do; but acknowledge, that in themselves is
just cause why they should thus entreat them, Dan. 9.7. Why should a Living Man
complain, for the Punishment of his Sins. Hale, 130.

Reason.
It Is Human to use Reason rather than Force; and a Christian to seek Peace and
ensue it.

Reformation.
IT would be an easy matter (says Malvezzi) for Favorites to Reform Kings
Palaces, if it were not an hard thing to Reform their own Houses.

Regiment of Health.
TO be cheerfully disposed at Hours of Meat, Sleep, and Exercise, is one of the
best Exercises of long lasting: As for the passions and studdies of the Mind,
avoid Envies, Anxious Fears, Anger, fretting Inward, subtle and knotty
Inquisitions, Joys and Exhilerations in Excess, Sadness not Communicated;
entertain Hopes and Mirth, rather than Joy; variety of Delights, rather than
Surfeit on them. Lord Bacon 's Essays, 188.

Rejoicing at Death.
MR. Edward Deering said, As for my Death, I bless God I feel and find so much
inward Joy and Comfort in my Soul, that if I were to make my Choice, whether to
Live or Die, I would a Thousand times rather choose Death than Life, if it may
stand with the good Will of God: And shortly after he Died, in the Year of our
Lord Christ, 1576.

Religion.
REligion, and the Practice of its Virtues, is the Natural state of the Soul,
the condition to which God designed it: As God made Man a reasonable Creature,
so all the Acts of Religion, are equal and suitable to our Natures, and our
Souls are then in Health, when we are what the Laws of Religion require to be,
and to do what they Command us to do. Dr. Tillotson.

The great Principals of Religion, are, Knowledge, Faith, Remembrance, Love,
and Fear; by all which, the Scriptures express the Whole Duty of Man: Now, why
these are put for the whole of Religion, is, Because Remembrance, Love, and the
Fear of God, are such Powerful Instruments for to make them Religious, that
where any one of these really is, all the rest, together with the true and
genuine Effects, are supposed to be.

The Earl of Leicester, in Queen Mary's Days, although allowing himself in some
things very inconsistent with Religion, came at last to this Resolution: That
Man differed not from Beasts, so much in Reason, as in Religion, and that
Religion was the highest Reason; nothing being more Rational, than for the
supreme Truth to be Believed; the highest Good to be Embraced; the first cause
and Almighty Maker of all things to be Owned and Feared; and for those that
were made by God, and live wholly upon him, to Improve all for him, and live
wholly to him, according to the Apostle, Give up your Souls and Bodies to him,
which is your reasonable Service.

It is a great Deceit to measure the Substance of our Religion by the Bulk of
our Profession; and to judge of the strength of our Graces, by the length of
our Duties. The Scripture speaks of some that having a form of Godliness, deny
the Power; that is, do not live in the Practice of those Graces they pretend
unto in their Duties.

He that pretends to Godliness, by a specious Profession, and yet does not
Practice Godliness by an Holy Conversation, he has the form of Godliness, but
denies the Power, 2 Timothy 3.5.

Repentance.
IF thou be backward in thoughts of Repentance, be forward in the thoughts of
Hell; the burning Flames whereof, only the Tears of a Penitent Eye can
extinguish. Tertullian.

When Gold is offered to thee, thou usest not to say, I will come again to
Morrow and take it, but art glad at the present Possession; but Salvation being
offered to our Souls, few Men have to embrace it. Ambrose.

Remember that God promised Forgiveness to Repentant Sinners; yet he does not
promise that he shall have time till to Morrow to Repent. Aquinas.

Mr. Corbet was wont to say, That upon the best Judgment I can make of the
Nature of Sin, the frame of mine own Heart, and course of Life; I know no Sin
lying upon me, which does not consist with Natural Repentance, and with the
hatred of Sin, and with an unfeigned consent, That God be my Savior and
Sanctifier, and with the loving of God above all.

I have done what in me lies to call to remembrance all my remarkable Sins,
from my Childhood and Youth till now; and, as far as I can judge, I have
repented of them generally and particularly, and now repent of them all, from
the bottom of my Heart, with a self Abhorrency, if I know my own Heart, and by
the strictest and most Impartial search that I can make.

What profit can it be to thee, to bewail that Sin which thou will not forego?
What Reward can thou expect for that Obedience which so soon faints? What
Comfort in that Joy that is but Temporary? Vid. Sorrow.

Righteousness.
THe Righteous does follow the Lamb, because they are washed in the Blood of
the Lamb, Rev. 1.1.17.14. 1 John 17. for as soon as we are united with Christ,
our Sins are upon him, and his Righteousness upon us, etc. Dier 153. Isa.
61.10. That he may present to himself a glorious Church, Ephesians. 5.21.

There is but one Sun in the World, and but one Righteousness, and one
Communion of Saints: If I were the most Excellent of all Creatures in the
World: If I were equal too in Righteousness to Moses, Isaac, and Jacob, yet had
I reason to confess my self a Sinner, and that I could expect no Salvation but
by the Righteousness of Jesus Christ; for we all stand in need of the Grace of
GOD.

I would fulfill all Righteousness (says Mr. Corbet) and owe nothing to any Man
but Love: I had rather an hundredfold suffer Wrong, than do Wrong.

As Baptism is said to save us, so other Duties too, our Righteousness, which
the Law of Works requires, and by which it is satisfied, is wholly in Christ,
and not one grain in our selves; nor must we dare to think of patching a Legal
Righteousness of Christ's and our own together; that is, that our Doings can be
the least Satisfaction for our Sins or proper Merit; yet our selves must
perfectly fulfill the Conditions of the New Covenant, and so have a Personal
Evangelical Righteousness. Baxter's Rest.

Revenge.
COnsider how you daily wrong God, and you will not be easily enflamed with
Revenge against others that have wronged you.

Keep down thy Heart by this Consideration, that by Revenge thou can not
satisfy a Lust; but by Forgiveness, thou can Conquer a Lust. Flavel, 123.

Resignation.
I Will Trust God in his Way; I will strive against an over-timerous
Solicitation for my Salvation, and will commit my self to God, who is the
Infinite Goodness and Love, and I will lie down and take my Repose therein. Mr.
Corbet 's Enquiry.

I will labor in the Work of Resignation, that my Will may be confined to, and
included in the Will of God. Ibid.

It will never be well with us, till we Cordially resign up our selves, and all
our Relations; yea, and all our Interests and Concerns to God's dispose, and
say, Not my Will, but thy Will be done.

Lay thy Heart to rest in the Will of God, for there is no other rest for the
Soul to be thought of.

It is not fit or likely, that our Wills should be the Rule of GOD's Actions.

Reward.
MY Alms-Deeds shall be Graciously Rewarded, not for my Works sake, but for thy
Promise sake; not for my own sake, but for my Savior's sake: Lord, I can Merit
nothing at thy hands, but by thy own Mercy. Vid. Tit. Fasting.

Riches.
OF Riches, there is no real use, unless it be in the distribution, the rest is
but Conceit: so says Solomon, where much is, there are many to consume it; and
what has the Owner but the sight of it with his Eyes. Lord Bacon.

Remember that thou have nothing of thy own, but all is the Lords, and so
accordingly use all thou have to no Carnal Interest, but to serve him, as being
wholly Devoted to him.

I made it my choice, rather to be Poor here, and Rich in the Life to come,
than to be Rich here, and Lost in the Life to come.

As a Boat over-laden sinks, so much Wealth drowns a Man in Perdition.
Chrysostom.

If a Man wants Wealth, it is not to be unjustly gotten: If they have it, they
ought by Good Works to lay it up in Heaven. Austin.

Mr. Bradford answered Gardener, concerning the Sacrament, My Lord, I do not
believe that Christ is Corporally present in the Sacrament, but that he is
present there to the Faith of the due receiver.

Satisfaction.
WE are every where in Scripture said to be Ransomed, Redeemed, Purchased,
Bought with a Price; and that must needs be by a valuable Consideration made.
Justification Evangelical, 88. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.

Scripture.
WHen the Scripture wants a Tongue of Expression, we need not an Ear of
Attention; we may safely knock at the Council Door of God's Secrets; but if we
go further, we may be more Bold than Welcome. Cyril of Alexandria.

Basil, when he had read the Bible over, he said, It was a Physician's Shop of
Preservatives against Poisonous Heresies; a Pattern of profitable Laws against
Rebellious Spirits; a Treasure of most profitable Jewels against Beggarly
Elements; and a Fountain of most pure Water, springing to Eternal Life.

Sanctification.
Sanctification, and the New Creature, are no less than for a Man to be brought
into an Entire Resignation of his Will, to the Will of God, and to live in the
offering up his Soul continually in the Flames of Love, a whole Burnt-Offering
to Christ: And how little, says he, are many of those who profess Christianity,
experimentally acquainted with this Work on their Souls. Bishop Usher.

The Work of Sanctification, that is true and effectual, is a Work of the
Spirit of God on the Soul, enabling it to the Mortification of all Sin, and to
the Obeying of every Command to work with God in all well-pleasing. Romans 8.13.
1 Pet. 1.2. Heb. 23. Mead.

There is an Inward and an outward Sanctification; Inward Sanctification is
that which deals with the Soul and its Faculties, as Understanding, Conscience,
Memory and Affections. Outward Sanctification is that which deals with the Life
and Conversation; both these concur to make a Christian indeed. These. 5.23.

The Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.
This is my Body, by the Word [This] our Savior meant, This Bread, is
Infinitely plain to any that is unprejudiced. What did he take? the Text tells
you, he took [Bread:] What he took, he also Blessed, Broke, and Gave [This;] he
said, Take, Eat, and then adds, [This] is my Body; this will be put out of
doubt, if by the following [This,] in those Words [This is my Blood,] by [This]
be meant [This Cup,] no reason can be assigned why [This] in Mat. 26.26. should
not denote [This Cup,] if [This] ver. 28. denote [This Cup:] It is true, that
St. Matthew and St. Mark, having mentioned the [Cup,] which Jesus Took,
Blessed, and Gave, tell us, that Jesus said, [This is my Blood;] and though it be
plain, from what goes before, that by [This] be meant [This Cup:] Yet we have
further proof of it still; for, whereas St. Matthew and Mark say only [This,]
St. Luke and St. Paul say, [This Cup,] and having this Warrant for [This] in
the latter words to understand [This Cup,] where lies the Blame, when by the
former [This Bread.]

But I proceed, This Verb [IS] is Interpretable according to the subject
Matter; but where it is used of a Sacrament, and joins the sign, and the thing
signified together; and where another sense contended for is destructive to our
Senses, and against Reason and other Scripture, it is reasonable to understand
it to Import the same with the Word Signify, and this is the present Case.
There are many more Reasons, but what has been here said may satisfy any
unprejudiced Person.

Of the Real Presence acknowledged by Protestants in the Holy Sacrament, made
appear by a plain and familiar Example, viz.
A Father makes his last Will, and by it bequeatheth his Estate, and all the
Profits of it to his Child. He delivers it into the hands of his Son, and bids
him to take there his House and Lands, by this his last Will he delivers to
him. The Son in this case receives nothing but a Roll of Parchment, with a Seal
to it from his Father: But yet by virtue of this Parchment, he is Entitled to
his Estate, performing the Condition of his Will, and to all the Benefits and
Advantages of it. And in that Deed, he truly and effectually received the very
House and Lands that were conveyed to him.

Our Savior Christ, in like manner, being now about to leave the World, gives
this holy Sacrament as a final Bequest to us, in it he conveys to us a right to
his Body and Blood, and to all the Spiritual Blessings and Graces that proceed
from them. So that as we receive the holy Eucharist as we ought to do, we
receive nothing but a little Bread and Wine into our hands; but by the blessing
and promise of Christ, we by that Bread and Wine, as really and truly become
partakers of Christ's Body and Blood, as the Son by the Will of his Father, was
made Inheriter of his Estate. Nor is it more necessary for this, that Christ's
Body should come down from Heaven, or the outward Elements which we receive, be
substantially turned into it, than it is necessary in that other case, that the
very Houses and Lands should be given into the hands of the Son, to make a real
Delivery or Conveyance to them; or the Will of the Father be truly and properly
Changed into the very Nature and Substance of him.

Soul.
THat which the Soul is in the Body, that are Christians in the World; for as
the Soul is in, and not of the Body; so Christians are in, but no part of the
World. Justin Martyr.

He that feasts his Body but starves his Soul, is like him that feasts his
Slaves, but starves his Wife. Ephrahim Cirus.

As the Soul is the Life of the Body, so the Life of the Soul is God: When the
Soul departs, the Body dies; when God departs, the Soul dies. Prosper.

The reasonable Soul made in the likeness of God, may here find much
Distraction, or no full Satisfaction; for it being capable of Good, can be
satisfied with nothing but God. Austin.

The Soul of Man (says St. Austin) is a Spiritual or Incorporeal Substance;
Sensible, Invisible, Reasonable, Immortal.

Sinful Absurdities.
Saint Cyprian observes Twelve Absurdities in the Life of Man.

1. A Wise Man without good Works.

2. An Old Man without Religion.

3. A Young Man without Obedience.

4. A Rich Man without Alms.

5. A Woman without Shamfacedness.

6. A Guide without Virtue.

7. A Poor Man that is Proud.

8. A King that is Unjust.

9. A Bishop that is Unjust.

10. A Bishop that is Negligent.

11. People without Discipline.

12. Subjects without Law.

Sin.
GOD Condemns none before he Sins, nor Crowns any before he overcomes. P.
Lumbard.

It is best not to Sin, and next that, amend upon the Punishment. Justin Martyr.

Our Sins being Sins against the Infinite Majesty of God, none but our Savior,
who also is an Infinite Majesty, both God and Man, can make Satisfaction for
them. Bishop of Hereford's Legacy.

When Sinners have no sense of their Spiritual Condition, it is plain they are
dead in Sin; the Tokens of Eternal Death are upon them. Mead.

In Deuteronomy. 5.25, 28, 29. They promise to fear God, and keep his Commandments;
but they wanted a new Heart, to perform what an unsanctified Heart had promised.

There is a strife against Sin in one and the same Faculty: The Will against
the Will, Affection against Affection. And this is that the Apostle calls, The
lusting of the Flesh against the Spirit: That is, the striving of one
Unregenerate part against the Regenerate part; and this ever in the same
Faculty: But striving against Sin may be in several Faculties; as between the
Will and Conscience, as for fear of Hell; which Wicked Men may have, Acts 7.15.

It is impossible for a Man to forsake Sin, except he forsakes all that he
knows to be Sin: To hate Sin, as it is an offense to God, and wrong to his
Majesty; to hate Sin as it is a breach of his Commandments: a wicked
controuling of God's Will, which is the only Rule of Goodness; To hate Sin as
being a disingenuous Transgression of that Law of Love, established in the
Blood and Death of Christ, and so in a degree a Crucifying of Christ afresh; to
hate Sin as being a grieving and quenching of the Spirit of God, as all Sin in
its nature is. Thus to hate Sin is Grace; and thus every true Christian hates
Sin, and not for the Shame that attends it, nor as it is contrary to some other
Sin, etc.

I do not cease to lament the more heinous Sins of my Life, and cannot forbear
continually to implore the Pardon of them: I do not again return unto them, and
resolve never so to do; I watch and pray against all Sin, but especially
against those Sins to which I especially am inclined; my Conflicts are daily,
and I am hard put to it, but I do not yield up my self to any Sin, nor lie down
in it: Yea, I do not suffer Sinful Thoughts or Cogitations to lodge in me;
howbeit, I am much discomposed and damped in Spirit, deadned in Duty,
distracted in my Studies, and molested and hindered every way by Sin that
dwells in me: But I resolve that Sin shall never have rest in my Soul; and
that I will never enjoy it. I cannot keep Sin out of my Heart, yet it does not
reign in my Mortal Body; nor do I yield my Members to the Service of it. Mr.
Corbet 's Enquiry.

It is a less Evil to do Sin, and not to love it, than to love Sin, and not to
do it; for to do Sin may argue weakness of Grace, but to love Sin argues
strength of Lust. What I hate, that I do, Romans 7.14.

A Man may forsake the Life of Sin, and yet retain the Love of Sin. True
Mourning for Sin, is more for the Evil that is in Sin, than the Evil that comes
by Sin; more because it dishonors God and Wounds Christ, and grieves the
Spirit, and makes the Soul unlike God, than because it Damns the Soul, Mat.
7.11.

O Lord, when I confess Sin unto thee, grant that I may feel the burden and
weight of it upon my Conscience, that it may not be a customary Confession.
Where Confession is right, it will be distinct, especially of those which were
our chief Sins. Confession should come like Water out of a Spring, which runs
freely; not like Water out of a Still, which is forced by Fire.

Salvation by CHRIST's Blood.
TAke it for granted, there is no Man under Heaven, whereby we can be saved,
but Jesus Christ; all Grace for this Life, and for that which is to come, must
come to you, through the Channel of Christ's Blood. Acts 16.30, 31.

Sorrow.
I Could have born any Sorrow rather than this I am under; this is a good sign,
GOD has let me Blood in the right Vein, he will have me part with all manner
of Sin without exception.

It is doubtless our Sin to disable our selves by our Sorrow, for our general
or particular Callings.

Let us be heartily Sorrowful, that we have so Carnally, so Hypocritically, so
Covetously, so Vain-gloriously Professed the Gospel. Let the Plagues and Anger
of GOD, most justly fallen upon us, be applied to our Sins; that, from the
bottom of our Hearts, every one of us may say, It is I Lord that have Sinned
against Thee: It is my Wickedness that causes success, and increase of
Authority to my Enemies. M. Bradford.

Speech.
THERE is no Man that talks, but I may gain by him; and none that holds his
Tongue, but I may lose by him.

As Henry Wotton, being bound for Rome, asked his Host in Vienna, a Man well
versed in Men and Business, What Rules he would give him for his Port, Conduct
and Carriage? He answered, There is one short Remembrance, which will carry you
Safe throughout the whole World, and that is nothing but this, Keep your
Thoughts close, and your Countenance loose. He that knows to speak well,
knows also where he must hold his Peace: Said that Old Grecian, Think an Hour
before thou speak, and a Day before thou Promisest.

Spirit.
SPirit in the un-erring Sense, is nothing but Reason illuminated by Revelation
out of the Written Word; for when the Mind and Spirit humbly conform and submit
to the Written Will of God, then are you said to have the Spirit of God, and to
walk according to the Spirit, and not according to the Flesh. Mr. Hales of
Eaton College.

There is an Having of the Spirit, which is a sure Work of Saintship: Where the
Spirit is an effectual prevailing Principle of Grace and Sanctification,
renewing and regenerating the Heart: Where the Spirit is as a potent Worker,
helping the Souls Infirmities, Romans 8.26. Where the Spirit is said to abide for
ever. John 14.16.

The true Believer has so much of the Spirit, such a work of it in him, that
he cannot sin that Sin unto Death; He that is born of God, sins not; to wit,
that Sin unto Death; for that is meant. 1 John, 7.16, 1.

Mr. Smith, in a Sermon said to this purpose: If God be our Father in Christ,
he lays hold of us by his Spirit, and we lay hold of Him by Faith. Now it is
his Hold-fast of us that saves us; so that tho our Faith be as it were a sleep,
yet the Fathers Hold-fast continues firm.

Many when they hear that Spiritual Comforts are the Gifts of the Holy Spirit,
presently conceive themselves to be merely Passive therein; and that they have
nothing to do, but wait when God will bestow them: Notwithstanding, tho these
Comforts are Spiritual, yet they are rationally raised up on the
Understanding's Apprehension of the Excellency of God, our Happiness, and our
Interest in Him; and by the rolling of these blessed Objects, in our frequent
Meditations, the Spirit does advance, and not destroy our Reason; it does
ratify, and then use it as its ordinary Instrument, for the Conveyance of such
things to our Affections, and Exciting them accordingly, and not lay it aside,
and affect us without it: Therefore our Joys are raised discoursively, and the
Spirit first reveals the Cause of our Joy, and then helps us to rejoice upon
those revealed Grounds; so that he rejoices groundedly, who knows why he
rejoiceth ordinarily. Mr. Baxter's Rest, 3d. part. p. 159, 160.

Sufferings.
I May be Poor, but still I may be Just and Contented; I may be Evil spoken of,
but still I can do Well; I may be Sick, but still I may be Patient; I may be in
Prison, but there I may Pray, and Sing Psalms, as Paul and Silas did; That
which cannot hinder our Duty, should not be so sadly lamented, Baxt. Hearts
Ease. The World perhaps does not love us; have we no reason to thank it, if it
make us place our Contentment and Comfort in God, and a pure Conscience? Ibid.
17.

It is our grand Fault, that we are affected presently, according as every
thing appears in the Face, and we stay not till it turn the other side.

I saw not my Children when they were in the Womb, yet there the Lord fed them
without my knowledge; I shall not see them when I go out of the Body, yet they
shall not want a Father. Mr. Cooper.

Austin's usual Wish was, That Christ, when he came, might find him either
Praying or Preaching.

When the Donatists upbraided him unworthily with Impurity, and Impiety of his
former Life: Look, says he, how much they blame my former faults; by so much
more I commend and praise my Physician.

Belisarius having been the Thunderbolt of War, and made the East, West, and
South to tremble, the mighty Power of the Earth crawling in the Dust before
him; he that drew the whole World in throngs after him, was forsaken, and
walked through the Streets of Constantinople, with two or three Servants, as a
man that had outlived his Funerals, to serve as a Spectacle of pity; and
having his Eyes put out by the Emperor Justinians Widow, she being a
Nestorian, went up and down the Streets of Constantinople begging, Date quaeso
obelum Belisario.

This sad Example, and others of the uncertainties of humane Affairs, and the
necessity of yielding to Religious Thoughts, made Carolus Magnus, at the
Crowning of his Son, utter these serious words: My dear Son, It is to day that
I die in the Empires of the World, and that Heaven makes me born again in your
Person; If you will Rule happily, fear God, who is the Force of Empires, and
Sovereign Father of all Dominions; Keep his Commandments, and cause them to be
obeyed and observed with unviolable Fidelity: Serve Him first of all, for an
Example of the World, and lead an holy Life before God and Man Irreprovable.

A young Gallant, that visited Saint Ambrose lying on his Death Bed, said to
his Comrade then with him: O that I might live with thee, and Die with St.
Ambrose.

Danger is better then Safety, a Storm more eligible than a perpetual Calm, if
before our fears we were the Worlds, but after them became God's. Nazianzen.

Sickness.
JVnius being Sick, one asked him, How he did? said, That he had quieted
himself in God, who would do for him that which was most for his Glory, and his
own good.

Serving of God.
WHen Mr. Calvin was Banished, he said; Truly, if I had served Men, I should
have had but an ill Reward; but it is well, I have served God, who does always
perform to his Servants that which he has once promised.

See the Difference betwixt Him, and Cardinal Wolsey; who said, Had I been as
diligent to serve my God, as I have been to please my King, he would not have
sorsaken me now in my Grayhairs.

One of the Kings of Sweeden thought, said, That he should not live long,
because the people did overvalue him for his many Victories: Who was slain a
little after in Battle, but with a great Victory.

Superstition.
THe Schoolmen have framed a Number of intricate, and subtle Actions and
Theorems, to serve the Practice of their Superstitious Church. Lord Bacon.

Suspicion.
THere is nothing makes a Man more to suspect, than to know little; and
therefore men would remedy that, by procuring to know more, and not to keep
their Suspicion in smother. Bacon's Essays.

Secrecy.
SIr John Cook broke an Affair to a Partisan, that kept him under all his
days; and he that entertains a dangerous design, puts his Head into an Halter,
and the Halter into his Hand, to whom he first imparts it.

The Habit of Secrecy is Policy and Virtue.

Speak no more than thou can safely retreat from without danger, or fairly go
through without opposition.

Thoughts.
WHen a sensual Thought breaks in, then excite and taste the Powers of the
World to come, and labor to recover the Divine Frame.

Abhor every Thought, Word, or Deed, which is contrary, and tends to the hurt
of others.

Evil Thoughts are Natures Kisses.

Thoughts being neither free from God's Knowledge, Judgments, Punishments,
Laws, nor from Christ's Government, nor from the power of Conscience; surely
Thoughts are not then free to think what we please. Reynard.

Thoughts are roving and restless, till they come to their Center or proper
place; as a stone to the Earth, so are our Thoughts, till we pitch them upon
God, and acquiesce in Him; and they will be unquiet, till they rest in God,
Psalm. 119.7.

So before a Prayer against Evil Thoughts. De Kempis 201.

Temptations.
Chrystome says, The Devils assault us violently; resist the first, and the
cond will be weaker; and That being resisted, he becomes a Coward.

The Devil runs with open Mouth upon God's Children, to devour them; if they
manfully resist him, he thinks to weaken their Faith, and they by his Assaults
are made stronger; he fights against them, but they get Ground upon him; and so
what he intends for their Destruction, (full sore against his Will) makes for
their Advantage. Cyril of Alexandria.

Time.
SAys Aquinas, Make much of Time, especially in that matter of Salvation: Oh!
how much would they that now lies Frying in Hell rejoice, if they might have
the least moment of Time, whereby they might get God's favor.

Troubles and Afflictions.
VIctorinus was wont to say, There is a time to say nothing, there is a time to
say something; but there is never a time to say all things.

I have not Reigned to Day, said the Emperor, when he had done no good; To day
I have not lived, said Judge Fineux; and that we should not complain we have
little time; but that we spend much in doing evil, or in doing nothing to
purpose.

Secretary Walsingham would say, My Lord, stay a while, and we shall have done
the sooner. Secretary Cecil said, It shall never be said of me, that I do defer
till to morrow, what I can do to day: And Sir Richard Morrison used to say,
Give me this day, and the next take your self.

The Martyr, Mr. Bradford, accounted that hour ill spent, wherein he did not
not some good either with his Pen, Study, or Exhortation of others.

Trust.
AT what time I am afraid, I will put my Trust in thee; let us be confident he
will dispose of us there, where it is most necessary for us to be either in
this World, or the other. Mr. Patrick.

I trust God with my chiefest outward Concernments, even that which I am most
Solicitous in; and therein to be satisfied is of great Moment unto me; for that
it has as great an Influence on my Spirit, as any inward thing has; and I
believe God will provide for me herein, or otherwise supply the want of it: My
earnest request therefore to God is, That my outward Condition may be so
stated, by his wise and gracious Providence, as may be least exposed to
Temptations, and best disposed and furthered as to Duty. Mr. Corbet.

Truth.
DIonisius Areopagitus, said, That he desired Two Things of God, 1st. That he
might know the Truth himself. 2d. That he might Preach it as he ought to others.

Help me, O Lord, that I may examine my Self in the Evening, how I have born
the Troubles and Crosses of the Day? Did I not Murmur, Vex and Sink? Did I not
Entertain hard Thoughts, nor utter hard Words against God?

One being designed an Agent, waited on the knowing Lord Wentworth, for some
Directions for his Conduct and Carriage; who delivered himself thus, To secure
your self, and serve your Country, you must at all Times, and upon all
Occasions, speak Truth; and by this means Truth will secure your self, if you
be questioned; and those you deal with (who will still run counter) to a loss
in all your Disquisitions, and Undertakings.

Theodosius Junior said, That Emperors of all other Men were most Miserable,
because commonly the Truth of Business was concealed from them.

Vntowardliness.
SIR Edward Fox, in his First years, none more untowardly; in his last, none
more staid. The untoward Youth make the ablest Man; he that has Mettle to be
Extravagant, when he cannot govern himself, has a Spirit to be eminent when he
can.

Usurpation.
THE Earl of Strafford used this Maxim, That there is no danger small, but
what is thought so: This was his great Principle, Usurped Royalty was never
laid down by Persuasion from Royal Clemency for with Tirants, Omne, Jus Regni.

Vainglory.
I Have an Inclination to seek Self particularly in vain Applause, and that in
Religious Services; and herein I have been highly Guilty; but I shame my Self
for it before God, and am willing to be satisfied with the Praise that comes
from Him alone. I trust through his Grace, that I my self in matter of
Reputation seek to do his Will. Corbet's Enquiry.

Victory.
THere is a complete Victory, and an incomplete, over the World, 1 John 1.3. If
we say, we have no Sin, we deceive our Selves, and the Truth is not in us; The
complete Victory our Savior only performed, John 14.30. The Prince of this
World has nothing in me; which cannot be so with us, until our Change come;
for until then we carry about with us Lusts, Passions and Corruptions; which
without Vigilance kept under, and daily impaired in their Power and Malignity,
will hold Corespondency with the Prince thereof, and be ready to betray and
deceive us, tho never to regain their Empire and So veraignty; and the Reason
is significantly given by the Apostle, 1 John 3.9. For his Seed abides in him,
and he cannot Sin, because he is born of God: Indeed he may, and shall have
Sin, as he has Flesh about him, 1 John 1.3. If we say, we have no Sin, we
deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us; for tho we have Sin still
abiding in us, and like the Byas of a Bowl warping us to the World; yet that
Vital Seminal Principle of the Grace of God in Christ, always keeps its Ground,
its Life, its Tendency toward Heaven, and wears out, and gradually subdues the
contrary Tendency of Sin and Corruption. Hales 101.

Virtues.
TO set out Virtues, and by Words to destroy the same, are nothing worth: All
the Virtues are so linked together, that he that has one, has all; and he
that wants one, wants all.

Virtues separated are annihillated. Chrysologus.

Heavenly Sayings.
SEneca, a man of great Parts, Prudence and Experience, after a serious Study
of almost all the Philosophy then in the World, was almost a Christian in his
severe Reproofs of Vice, and Excellent Discourses of Virtue; (and Jerome
reckoning him for his supposed Epistle to St. Paul, and St. Paul's to him;)
being read by them that study (says Mr. Gattater) Divinity, as they that study
other Learning; came to that Excellent Temper by the Consideration of his
reduced years (which is to be seen in his Excellent Preface to his Natural
Questions;) What a pitiful Thing is Man, were it not that his Soul soared above
these Earthly Things? yea, and was somewhat dubious, as to the future Condition
of the Soul: Yet he could tell his dear Friend Lucilius, With what Pleasure he
could think of it; and at last, he was settled in his Opinion of an everlasting
State; with thought, That the Soul had the mark of Divinity in it, That it was
most pleased with Divine Speculations, and conversed with them, as matter that
did not merely concern it; and when it had once viewed the Dimensions of the
Heavens, it was ashamed of the Cottage it dwelt in: Nay, were it not for these
Contemplations, it had not been worth the while for the Soul to have been in
the Body, (as he goes on.) Whence come such amazing Fears, such dreadful
Apprehensions, such startling Thoughts of their Future Condition in Mind, that
would fain ease themselves, believing that Death would put an end or period to
Soul and Body? When, on the other side, come such encouraging Hopes, such
confident Expectations, comfortable Preposessions of their future State, in the
Souls of Men, when their Bodies are nearest the Grave? and whilst the Soul is
kept in its Cage, it is coutinually fluttering up and down, and delights to
look out now at this part, and then at the other, to take a view by Degrees of
the whole Universe. To these Notions of the future State, it was, that Caesar
owed that Opinion of Death, That it was better to die once, than to lose his
Life in continual Expectations of Death; being troubled with that Unhappiness
of Men, mentioned in Atheneus, That he had done his Work, as if it had been his
Play; and his Play, as if it had been his Work.

Daniel Hensive, Historiographer at Leyden, Secretary and Bibliotheatory of
that Famous University, appointed Notary of the Synod at Dort, said at last;
Ah, as to Humane Learning, I may use Solomon's Expression, That which is
crooked, cannot be made straight.

Methinks, says the same Hensive, (and Mr. Baxter out of him:) I can bid the
World farewell, Immure my self among my Books, and look forth no more, (were it
a Lawful Course) but shut the Door upon me, as in the lapse of Eternity; and
among those Divine Sages, employ my self with Content, and pity the Rich and
Great Ones, that know not this Happiness. Surely, then, it is true Delight
indeed, which in the true Lap of Eternity is enjoyed.

Francis Junius, a Gentile, and Ingenious Person, who has written his own
Life; as he was reading Tully de Legibus, fell into a Persuasion, Nihil curare
Deum, nec sui, nec alieni; till in a Tumult at Lions, the Lord wonderfully
delivered him from eminent Death; so that he was compelled to acknowledge a
Divine Providence therein; his Father seeing the dangerous ways his Son was led
into, sent for him home; where he carefully and holily instructed him, and
caused him to read over the New Testament, of which he himself writes thus:
When I read over the New Testament, I first lighted on the First Chapter of St.
John, In the beginning was the Word, etc. I read part of the Chapter, and was
suddenly convinced, that the Divinity of the Argument, and the Majesty and
Authority of the Writing, did exceedingly excel all the Eloquence of Humane
Writings; My Body trembled, my Mind was astonished, and so affected all the
Day, that I knew not where, or what I was: Be thou mindful of me, O my God,
according to the Multitude of thy tender Mercies; call home thy lost Sheep,
into thy Fold: And as Justin Martyr of Old, so he of late professed, that the
Power of Godliness, in a plain simple Christian, wrought so upon him that he
could not but take up a strict and serious Life.

Mr. Howard. afterward the learned Earl of Northampton, being troubled with
Athestical suggestions, put them all off this way; viz. If I could give any
account how my self, or any thing else, had a Being without God; how came there
so uniform, and constant a Consent of mankind, in all Ages, Tempers, and
Educations (otherwise differing in their apprehensions) about the Being of God,
the Immortality of the Soul and Religion, in which they could not likely come
so many; or being so many, could not be deceived, I could be an Atheist: And
when he was urged, that Religion was a State Policy, only to keep men in awe;
he replied, That he would believe it, but that the greatest Politicians have
sooner or later felt the Power of Religion, in the grievous lashes of their own
Consciences, and dreadfulness of their own apprehensions, about that State
wherein they must live for ever.

Sir John Mason, having been employed much in State Affairs, said; I have
learned this, after so many experiences, that Seriousness is the greatest
Wisdom, Temperance the best Physician, and a good Conscience the best Estate;
and if I were to live again, I would leave the Court for a Cloister, my Privy
Counselors Bustles, for a retired Life; and the whole Life I lived in the
Palace, for one Hour Enjoyment of God in the Chapel; all things forsake me,
besides my God, my Prayer, and my Duty.

Sir Henry Wotton, after so many years Study, with proficiency and applause of
the University; his being a Favorite of Robert Earl of Essex; his intimacy with
the Duke of Tuscany, and James the 6th. of Scotand; his Embassies into Holland,
Germany, yet desired to retire with this Motto, Tandem didicit animas
sapientiores fieri quiescendo. He was very Ambitious of the Provost-ship of
Eaton, that there he might enjoy his beloved Study, and Devotion; saying, That
that day he put on his Gown, was the happiest day of his Life; that being the
utmost happiness a man could attain to (he said) to be at leisure, and to do
good; never reflecting on his former years, but, with Tears in his Eyes, he
would say, How much Time have I to repent of, and how little to do it in?

Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany, King of Spain, and Lord of the
Netherlands; after 23 Pitch-fields, 6 Triumphs, 4 Kingdoms won, and 8
Principalities added to his Dominions, and 14 Wars finished, he resigned his
Empires and Kingdoms; retiring to his Devotions in a Moastery, and had his own
Funeral Celebrated before his Face, leaving this Testimony of the Christian
Religion; That the sincere Profession of it had in it Sweets and Joys, that
Courts were strangers to.

Salmasius, that excellent French Scholar, whom the Learned men of his Time
never mention, without such Expressions as these; Vir nunquam satis laudatus;
went out of this World, with these words in his Mouth: Oh! I have lost a World
of Time, that most precious thing in the World; whereof, had I but one year
more, it should be spent in David's Psalms, and Paul's Epistles. Oh! Sirs,
(said he to those about him) Mind the World less, and God more; all the
Learning in the World, without Piety, and the true Fear of God, is nothing
worth; The Fear of the Lord, that is wholesome, and to depart from Evil; that is
understanding.

Robert Rollock said at the time of his Death: Haste, Lord, and do not tarry; I
am a weary both of Nights and Days: Lord Jesus that I may come to Thee, break
these Eye-strings, and give me others: I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Thee: Haste, Lord Jesus, and defer no longer: Go forth my weak Life, and let a
better succeed. Oh my Lord Jesus Christ, thrust Thy Hand into my Body, and take
my Soul to Thy Self. O Lord Jesus, set my Soul free, that she may enjoy her
Husband.

The Earl of Strafford said; Oh trust not in man that shall Die, nor to the Son
of Man, as shall be made as Grass; there is no Confidence in Princes; the only
things that stands by a man, are the Blood of Christ, and the Testimony of a
good Conscience.

An Excellent Person having writ exquisitly for the Christian Religion, has
this Discourse of the Nature of it; viz. Does now the Conquest of Passions,
forgetting of Injuries, doing Good, Self-denial, Patience under crosses, which
are the expressions of Piety, abound to the support of a Luxurious, Malicious,
and Impatient Spirit? Is there nothing more becoming Malicious, Proud, and
Impatient Soul of Man, in examplary Piety, and an Holy and well ordered
conversation, than in the Lightness and Vanity; not to say, in Rudeness, and
Debauchery in them, which the World accounts the greatest Gallants? Is there
nothing more graceful and pleasing in the Sweetness and Ingenuity of a truly
Christian-temper, and disposition, than in the revengeful Spirit of such, whose
Honor lives, and is fed by the Blood of their Enemies? Is it not more truly
Honorable and Glorious to serve that God, that Commands and Rules the
World; than to be a Slave to those Passions and Lusts, that put men upon
continual hard Service, and torment them for it, when they have done it? Is
there nothing else to Commend Religion to the Minds of men, besides that
Tranquillity and Calmness of Spirit, that Serene and placable temper, which
follows a good Conscience, where soever it dwells? it were enough to make Men
to welcome that Guest, which brings such good Entertainment which it: wherefore
the Horrors, Anxiety, and Amazement of Mind, which brings at one time or other,
which prostitute their Consciences to a Violation of the Laws of God, and of
the Rules of rectified Reason, may be enough to persuade any Rational Person,
that Impiety is the greatest Folly, and Irreligious Madness.

Sir Thomas Smith, after he had served Queen Elizabeth, as Secretary of State,
and done many good Services, to the Kingdom; especially, in settling the
Corn-Rate for the Universities; Discharged himself of all public Affairs and
Attendants a quarter of a year before he died: Desiring the Bishop of
Winchester and Worcester, to draw him out of the Word of God the plainest and
exactest way of making his Peace with God in this present World; adds, That it
was great pity, that Men know not to what end they were born into this World,
until they were ready to go out of it.

My Lord Bacon has said, at the latter end of his Life, That a little
smattering in Philosophy would lead a Man into Atheism; but a thorough Insight
into it, would lead a Man back again unto a first Cause; and that the first
Principle of Right Reason, is Religion; in Reference to which, it was the
wisest way to live strictly and severely; for if the Opinion of another would
not be one, yet the sweetest thing in this World is Piety, Virtue and Honesty.
If it be true, none are so miserable as the Loose, the Carnal, and Profane
Persons, who live a Dishonorable and Base Life in this World, and are like to
Fall into a most woeful State in the next.

The E. of Arundel, lying on his Death. Bed, said, My Flesh, and my Heart fail
me; and his Chaplain answered the next Words, That God was the strength of his
Heart, and his portion for ever; he would never fail him. He answering, tho all
the World has failed, He will never fail me.

Sir Tho. Coventry, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, hearing some Gallants
jesting with Religion, said, That there was no greater Argument of a Foolish
and Inconsiderate Person, than to droll at Religion: It is a sign, he has no
regard of himself, and that he is not touched with a Sense of his own Interest,
who plays with Life and Death, and makes nothing of his Soul. To examine
severely, and debate seriously of Religion, is a thing worthy of a wise Man:
Whosoever turns Religion into Railery, with two or three bold Jests, renders
not only Religion, but himself Ridiculous in the Opinion of all Wise and
Considerate Men, because he sports with his own Life: For a good Man says, If
Principles were doubtful, yet they concern us so nearly, that we ought to be
serious in the Examination of them.

Carolopator relates, how the excellent Painter Methoclius Drawing the last
day, the Heavens black, the Earth on Fire, the Sea in Blood, the Throne of God
environd with Angels in the Clouds, wrought so upon Bogaris the barbarous
Prince of Bulgaria, that in a short time he yielded himself to God, by an happy
Conversion; for he dreaming of the whole proceedings of that day, amongst other
things, saw the things he made so light of, by speaking thus: I am the pleasure
thou have obeyed, I am the Ambition whose Slave thou wast: I am the Avarice,
which was the aim of all thy Actions: Behold so many Sins, that are thy
Children; Thou begottest them, thou belovest them so much; as to prefer them
before thy Savior.

Mr. John Bruen said, At his Funeral, he would have no Black; for I love not,
said he, any proud nor pompous Funeral; neither is there any cause of Mourning,
but Rejoicing rather in my particular. Immediately before his death, lifting up
his Hands, he said; The Lord is my Help, my Portion, and my Trust; His Blessed
Son Jesus is my Savior and Redeemer, Amen. For so says the Spirit to my
Spirit: Then come Lord Jesus, and Kiss me with Kisses of thy Mouth, and embrace
me with the Arms of thy Love: Into thy Hands I commit my Spirit; Take me to thy
own self. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; O come, O come, O come.

Mr. Brown of Norwich, Physician, entertained one Attribute of God, to recreate
his Devotion, and that is Wisdom; In which, says he, I am Happy; for the
Contemplation of this only, I do not Repent me, that I was brought up to Study;
the advantage I have over the Vulgar, with the content and happiness I conceive
therein, is an ample Recompense of all my endeavors, in what part of Knowledge
whatsoever; Wisdom is his most glorious Attribute, no man can attain unto it;
yet Solomon pleased God, when he desired it; he is wise, because he knows all
things, and he knows all things, because he made them all: Yet his greatest
knowledge is, in comprehending, what he made not, Himself; and this also is the
greatest Knowledge in man; for this I do honor my Profession, and Embrace the
very Council of the Devil himself. Had he read such a Lecture in Paradise, as
he did at Delphos, we had better known our selves; neither had we need to stand
in fear of him: I know he is Wise in all things; he is Wise in all, and
Wonderful in what we conceive; but farmore in what we comprehend not; for we
behold him but a squint upon reflex or shadow: Our Understanding is dimmer then
Moses his Eye; we are Ignorant of his Back-parts, and his lower-side of his
Divinity; there to pry into his Councels, is not only Folly in Man, but
Presumption even in Angels; like us, they are his Servants, not his Senators;
he holds Council but with that mystical One, the Trinity, where tho there be
three Persons, there is but one Mind, that decrees without contradicion; nor
needs he any of his Actions to be begot with deliberation; his Wisdom knows
naturally what is best; his Intellect stands fraught with the superlative and
purest Ideas of Goodness; Consultation and Electi on, which are two Motions in
us, make but one in Him; his Actions sprung from his Power at the first touch
of his Will: There are Contemplations metaphysical; my humble Speculations have
another Method, and are content to trace and discover those Expressions, he
has left in his Creatures, and the obvious effects of Nature: there is danger
to confound these Mysteries; no Sanctum Sanctorum in Philosophy; the world, to
be Inhabited by Beasts, but Studied and Contemplated by Men. It is the debt of
our Reason to Owe unto God the Homage we pay, for not being Beasts; without
this, the World is still as though it had not been, or as it had been before
the sixth day, when as yet there was not a Creature, that could conceive or
say, there was a World. The Wisdom of God receives small Honor from the Vulgar
Heads, that usually stare about with gross Rusticity, and admire his works.
Those highly magnify him, whose Judicious Enquiry into his Acts, and
deliberate Research into his Creatures, return the duty of a Learned and Devout
Admiration.

Therefore search whilst thou will, and let thy Reason go,
To ransom Reason even to the Abyss below;
Rally the Scattered causes, and that line,
Which Nature twists, be able to untwine.
It is thy Makers Will; for unto none,
But unto Reason, can he e're be known.
The Devil knows thee, but those Damned Metors,
Build not thy Glory, but confound the Creatures.
Teach my endeavors, so thy Work to read,
That learning them, in Thee I may proceed.
Give thou my Reason, that Instinctive flight,
Whose weary Wings, may on thy Hands still light.
Teach me to soar aloft, yet so,
When near the Sun, to stop again below.
Thus shall my humble Feathers safely hover,
And though never Earth, more than the Heavens discover.
And then at last, when homeward I shall drive,
Rich with the Spoils of Nature to my Hive;
There will I sit like that Industrious Fly,
Buzzing thy praises, which shall never Dye.
Till Death abridge them of exceeding Glory,
Bid me go on in a more lasting Story.
Will of God.
SOME have satisfied themselves with this single Thought, that it is in vain to
be troubled, since things must not be as we will, but as the Almighty Being
pleases. Cold comfort! But God be thanked, we have much better to Comfort us.
viz. That the World is not governed merely by God's Will, but by his Wisdom; he
disposes of all things, according to his good Pleasure, but it pleases him to
dispose of all things to the best: He rules the World, not only as an absolute
Lord, but as a loving Father.

It is a poor center of a Man's Actions, Himself, it is Earth; for that only
stands fast upon its own Center; where, all things that have Affinity with the
Heavens, move upon the Center of another, which they benefit. L. Bacon.

Seeming wise Men may make shift to get Opinion, but let no Man chose them for
Employment; for certainly, you had better take for Business, a Man somewhat
absurd, than over formal. Bacon 148.

A Noble Lord, at the time of his Death, told his Son, That he would leave him
a Legacy out of David's Psalms: Lord, lead me into a plain Path; for, said he,
I would have you a plain Honest Man. To which I may add that excellent saying,
of the same Noble Lord, The Wisdom of those young Men is most Excellent, who by
Providence and Discourse of Reason, do so Order their Affairs, that they stay
not till Necessity and Experience force them to that Order, which foresight
would much sooner have taken.

Wrongs.
WRongs many times make way for better Fortune: If Men slight us, and despise
us, and speak evil and unjustly against us, and take away our good Name; yea,
if they take away our Estates, etc. if we be not angry, nor filled with
Despite, nor retaliate their wrongs, then it is not we, but they that ought to
be troubled.

The Word.
HE that Delights in the Word, because it is Spiritual, he is a Christian
indeed; the more Spiritual the Ordinances, the more Spiritual they are, the
more does a gracious Soul delight in them; when the word comes close to the
Conscience, rips up the Heart, and discovers Sin, and yet delights in it;
notwithstanding this is a sign of Grace: Also, when Delight arises from that
Communion, that is to be had with God there, this is from a Principle of Grace,
in the Soul. Mead 73.

The Word was made Flesh, to teach Patience, and to persuade to Virtue. Vide
Scripture.

Mr. Knox was tempted by Satan, to think, that he merited for his great
Service, until God brought into his mind that of St. Paul, What have thou, that
thou have not received? Not I, but the Grace of God that is in me. Unless, says
Luther, My Adversaries can convince me by sound Arguments, taken out of the
Word of God, I cannot satisfy my Conscience; for I can plainly prove, that both
Pope and Council have often erred grievously; and therefore it would be an
ungodly thing in me, to assent unto them, and to depart from the Holy Word of
God, which is plain and cannot err.

Cromwell, from K. Henry the Eighth, advises the Covocation,

That they conclude all Differences by the Word of God; neither will his
Majesty suffer the Scriptures to be wrested by false Glosses, Papistical Laws,
or by any Authority of Doctors or Councels; much less, will he suffer any
Articles not contained in Scripture, but only founded on a Continuance of Time
and Custom, or by unwritten Verities, as you were wont to do: But the only way
to Unity, is to determine Acts and Things, by the Rule of Gods Word, as himself
requires.

In thy Zeal against others, be mindful of thy own exceeding Sinfulness; call
to mind thy great Offenses, which when they are unfeignedly repented of, give
thee to understand what Cause thou have to be Meek, Humble and Patient toward
all Men; for Right Zeal is a Celestial Fire, the true temper and heat of all
the Affections to God and Christ, Qui non Zelat, non Amat; It is a Zeal kindled
in the Soul, by the Spirit of God, who first knows it, and then sets it on
work: It is a Zeal, that has the Word of God for its Guide, directing it in
its workings, both in regard of its Object, and End, in Manner and Measure: It
is a Zeal that checks Sin, and furthers an Heavenly Life: It is a Zeal, that
makes God, and the Glory of God its chief end, and swallows up all by-ends: The
Zeal of thine House has eaten me up.

The Emperor Valence sent a Message to St. Basil, promising him great
Preferment, if he would turn Nessorian but he replied, i.e. These Speeches are
fit to catch little Children, that look after such things; but we that are
nourisht by the Holy Scriptures, are readier to die a thousand Deaths, rather
than to suffer one Syllable or Tittle of the Scriptures to be altered.

Theodosius was wont to say, That he accounted it a greater Honor, that he was
a Member of the Church, than that he was the Head of the Empire.

It is reported, That a Minister having reproved a Gentleman's Tennant, for
many Disorders, yet would not forgo them; for which, he complained of him to
his Landlord, who advised him to admonish him once more; and that if he did not
then amend, That he should then sanctify his Hand, and give him a Box on the
Ear.

Full quickly waxes cold Religious Fame.
Unless by Zeal, we do uphold the same.

FINIS.

