THE GROUNDS, AND CAUSES OF OUR SUFFERINGS Related in short: Who suffer by the
Cruelty of OPPRESSORS, IN Edmonds-Bury Goal IN SUFFOLK.

May 16 LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simonds, at the sign of the Bull and Mouth
without Aldersgate. 1656.

The grounds and cause of our sufferings related in short, who suffer by the
cruelty of Oppressors in Edmonds Bury Goal in Suffolk.
UPon the 30 day of the 5th month 1655. being the second day of the week, Gorge
Whitehead and John Harwood, passing through a town called Bury in Suffolk, who
were moved for to speak a few words to some people of that town, in which words
we exhorted the people in the name and fear of the Lord to fear God, and to
return from the evil of their ways to the Lord, and some other words to the
same effect; presently near that time while we spoke, there came a Constable of
the said Bury, and carried us two, George Whitehead and John Harwood before
one Herbert Pellam called a Justice of Peace in that Town; but his office is
not for the County of Suffolk, where we were taken, but for Essex, nevertheless
he examined us two aforesaid, but could not give no plain account why he
examined us, neither when he had examined us could he lay the least breach of
any Law to our charge; but forthwith sent us by the Constable and some others,
to one Them as VValdgrave, called a Justice of Peace, at Smallbridge in
Suffolk, who also when we came before him, examined us some few particulars;
but when he had examined us, he could lay nothing to our charge worthy of
suffering, nor show us any law that we had transgressed; but nevertheless he
sent John Harwood the next day to Bury Edmonds prison, and the next day after
he was sent to prison, George Whitehead he was also sent to the same prison:
Also upon the second day of the seventh month George Rofe was taken, and sent
to the same prison by one John Garden, called a Justice of Peace for the county
of Suffolk, and this George Rofe was sent to prison for asking a question of
one called a Minister of Stoak near Naylan, after he had ended his Sermon, so
called; so we three before mentioned, continued until the General quarter
Sessions, holden at the said Bury Edmonds, the nineth day of the eighth month,
and then we were called before one William Blumfield, called a Justice of
Peace for the said county, who then and there sat for Judge, but no more
justice then before could we there have, but greater bonds was laid upon us,
and more cruelty was acted against us three, so they sent us to prison again,
where we ever since have remained, in innocence, though in the bonds of such
cruel oppressors.

And upon the same day beforementioned, when John Garden was come from often the
Bench, and had gotten his cruel intent fulfilled against us three, as he came
out of the Sessions house door, George Fox was moved to speak a few words to
him to warn him to repentance; for which the said John Garden forthwith sent
George to this prison to us, where with us he remains, and upon the 22 day of
the nineth month, Henry Marshall was taken, and sent to this prison by the
said John Garden, for speaking to one called a Minister at Boxford, after he
had ended his sermon so called; and before he was sent to prison, John Garden
caused him to sit in a pair of Stocks about an hour; so at the next General
quarter Sessions, being held for the said County in the said Bury the 14th day
of the eleventh month, George Fox, and Henry Marshash was then called to be
tried there, where one Justice Colthrop for the said County sat for judge, but
he followed the same example of cruelty against them two, that before was acted
against us three, who at that time and place aforesaid, imposed a fine of
twenty Marks upon Henry Marshall, but did not fine George Fox, but sent them
both to prison again to us, where we all remain, and none of us convinced of
the breach of any just Law, though we thus suffer, and are more straightened of
our liberty outwardly then Thieves and Murderers. But that freedom which
stands in innocence and righteousness, wherein we suffer, our Oppressors cannot
limit, not take away: So all people that have eyes to see, and any true fear of
God in them, may see what cruelty and oppression is acted against the innocent,
by them who are in Authority, who are set to do justice, and to remove
unrighteousness, or unjust causes; but we see in this age, that the righteous
seed suffers, as ever it did in all ages, by the cruelty of them who pretend to
do justice, but do not.

A few of the cruel abuses described, which were acted in the Goal of Bury, by
Robert Newton the Jailer, and by some of his prisoners, and his servants, which
he and they have acted against us, who are sufferers for the truth, (by the
cruelty of oppressors in the said Goal,) whom the world calls Quakers: The
abuses as follows.
UPon the 21 day of the 10 month 1655. the aforesaid Jailer did smite George
Rose upon the face before several witnesses, til he drew blood; also upon the
28 day of the 10 month, the Jailer smote George Fox and John Harwood upon
their faces before several witnesses, etc. also upon the 21 day of the 11
month, the Jailer came to us in the Goal yard, and George Whitehead reproved
him for his lies, which several who stood thereby heard him utter forth, for
which he smote George Whitehead on the face and mouth til the blood came out
of his mouth, so one woman of his own generation that stood by, seeing his
cruelty and fierceness, told him he dishonored the gospel; and several other
times the said jailer has abused us, both in words and actions, as can be made
evidently appear, and also his Servant the Tapster has often abused us, and
the Jailer has sometime in our own hearing given him leave to abuse us, and
the said Tapster has often threatened us, and one time cast a stone violently;
and hit one of us on the back with it; and another time in great rage he took
up a stool, with it to have smitten some of us, or to have cast it at some of
us, but one present seeing him so violent, took hold of it, so he was hindered
from casting the stool, but often he has slandered and beaten some of us on
the faces, and buffeted some of us several times together with his fists
violently on our faces for speaking the truth; and also we have been often
abused by some of the Prisoners, for some of them have often taken away our
food from us, and sometimes have confessed the Jailer bad them, or gave them
leave to take our Food, and the Jailer would have had us to have taken a
chamber, and beds of him to have laid in, to have upholden his Oppression,
which we denied, as to pay 4.d. a night each of us for our lodging, and because
we rather choosed to suffer in the Common-Prison, then to uphold such
Oppression, the Jailer was much enraged against us, and thereby some wicked
Prisoners that were with us in the Common-goal, took greater occasion to do us
mischif, thinking thereby to make us go out of the Common-goal, to uphold the
Goalers Oppression, which we could not; and also some of the Prisoners have
several times bear some of us, and stoned us, and dispitefully used us, and
threatened often to kill some of us, and to knock some of us in the heads, and
one said, if he did kill some of us he might not be h^nged for it, and said,
that there is no Law for us if he killed us, and when the Jailer suffered him
to have too much strong Drink till he was drunken, he kicked some of us with
his feet, and one time wounded some of us on the Legs, and did exceedingly
abuse us so far as his power reached, but when he was something more moderate,
that he was not so much drunk with strong drink, he told us that the Jailer
made him worse then he would have been against us; and also much drunkenness
and swearing is acted in this Prison by prisoners, and the Goalers servants;
and drunkenness is suffered and allowed of by the Jailer, in that he suffers
and allows his servant the Tapster to let them have so much strong Drink till
they be drunk, but so that the unrighteous gain returns to him, it appears he
makes no conscience of his obtaining it, though in words he professes
godliness, and has often on the first days of the weeks, taught the prisoners
concerning the things of God, as he pretends, but his profession, and teaching,
and praying, as he pretends, will not cover his deceit and cruelty, which he
has acted against us who are innocent, and do not suffer as Malefactors,
though we undergo greater cruelty, and more straightened of our outward liberty
then Malefactors are, as it is made plainly appear.

And upon the 16. day of the 2. month, 1656. Robert Newton the jailer came into
the common Goal to us, and asked us if we would pay him for keeping of us here;
some of us asked him what we owed him, he said, fourteen pence a weak each of
you, though some of us had then been 31. weeks in this Common Goal, and none of
us there did lie in any bedding of the Goalers, but when they brought us straw
to lie upon, which was allowed by the Country for the Prisoners use, we paid
them for bringing of it, else we might not have had it; and when the Jailer
demanded 14.d. a week of us, we told him, that we demanded a free prison after
we were committed, and when some of us had demanded a free prison, he caused us
to be put into this place; so presently he commanded the Key-turner to take
away our clothes which we laid in in the nights, saying to the Key-turner, Take
away their clothes, and leave them nothing but the straw to lie upon, and take
away their boxes; so the Key-turner and the Tapster took away all these our
things, which the Jailer commanded to take away, and they left us not so much
of these things as our Night-Caps, which hung in a basket by the wall, but took
the basket and them; and moreover the Jailer threatened to take the coats from
off our backs, we told him he might do so if be would, for as well he might take
them as other things of ^urs, as (...) bed, clothes, and a coat, and a cloak
which they took, and our Boxes, wherein was our food and linen, and other
things, but he said he would not take our coats till warmer wheather; and some
of us told him h^ would shame his profession, he said, that is no matter, for
you are all Heretics. And soon after these our things were taken away, Deborah
the Goalers Daughter said to one of us, They have robbed you of all, but in
patience we suffer, and therein rejoice, in as much as we suffer with them who
ever suffered for righteousness sake, who suffered the spoiling of their goods
joyfully, and we are willing, as they were, to lay down our lives for Christ's
sake.

And when John VVateridge was Prisoner here, and the Jailer had order or
command to let him go out of prison, the Jailer demanded 4.s. 4.d. for Fees of
him, so John demanded to see his Table for it, and what Law he had to demand
such Fees of him, who was not committed for the breach of the Law, and had not
been a week in prison when he demanded it, and laid in no bedding of the
Goalers, and the Jailer demanded 4.d. a night of John VVateridge for lodging,
though John had no bedding, but laid on the Chamber Planchers; and the Jailer
kept him above a week in prison after that he order to let him forth of prison:
And upon the 26. day of the 2. month, the Key-turner took away John VVateridges
cloak, as the Jailer had commanded, as he pretended, for Fees: so when they had
taken away his Cloak, they caused John VVateridge to go forth of prison, but
kept his Cloak. And upon the 28. day of the second Month, the Jailer told us,
That it was his courtesy to us that he suffered us to have our clothes in the
winter, for he said he had order from the Justices to take them from us then;
and moreover upon the same day, a woman who is a friend to us, living in this
Town, came to this prison with something for us, as two Shirts, two Caps, two
bands, and four Handkerchiefs, all which the Jailer caused to be taken from
her, and would not suffer her to deliver them to us; and the Key-turner, took
away George Rofes coat, which usually he did wear; and other times when the
woman comes to bring us food, the Key-turner will not suffer her to deliver us
our food, till he have searched her, and seen what food she brings us, and
herein he serves the Jailer, and submits to his cruel will, who would not
suffer us to have our linen, and other things convenient for our necessities.

And upon the thirtieth day of the second Month, the Jailer came to us, and
asked us 14.d. a week for each of us for lodging, and if we would give him so
much, he said he would give us our things again he had taken from us; we asked
him what Law he could show for it, as to demand that of us who were in the
common Goal, and there laid on no beds of his; but he could show us no Law for
it, but told us, if we would have beds of his, and pay each of us seven groats
a week, and fourteen pence a week for the time we had been in the common Goal,
we should have the privileges in the house, and a larger yard to walk in, and
we might go into his garden and take our pleasure, and then he said, our
friends should come to us though he had order to the contrary, but his deceit
and oppression, we denied, and to take pleasure in these things which are
changeable, which might be gained through upholding his oppression, which we
utterly deny, and in the will of him stands our pleasure, who enters not into
the temptations of the wicked.

And upon they 3. day of the 3 month, the jailer commanded his servant the
Tapster, to take George Fox's hat from him, which the Tapster took from off his
head; but the same day the Goalers wife brought him his hat again, and said,
that she did not know that her husband commanded to take it from him; and on
the night following next, the 17. day of the 3. month, one of the Prisoners,
whom they often allow strong drink in the Goal, till often he be drunk; he did
beat us, and exceedingly abuse us, and often smote some of us on the faces, and
kicked some of us, and threw some of us violently down on the store; and when
he had ceased to beat us, the Goalers servants, the Key-turner, and the Tapster
came to us, though in the time when he abused us, some of them heard him abuse
us, but did not reprove him for it, and when the Key-turner and the Tapster
came, the prisoner thereby was but the more encouraged to do us mischief, for
the Tapster did then also beat one of us on the face when we told him the truth
concerning their wicked proceedings, and thus the go on in these courses of
wickedness and cruelty, against the righteous, who in innocence suffer with
Christ, who suffered buffetings and contradiction, and despitefull usage, as
the righteous ever did, who gave his back to the Smiter, and his cheeks to him
that plucked of the Hair, and here we have a cloud of Witnesses for our
sufferings, and therein have peace, which the envy of the world cannot take
away, and we know that if we were of the world, we should not thus suffer by
the world, for it loves its own; but we are of God, chosen out of the world,
and therefore the world hate us; but now let all that have eyes to see, see the
government that is in this Goal, though it be a place pretended to punish
Malefactors in, but they have their fredome to wickedness, and being allowed
therein wax worse and worse; but the rigteous suffers, and the unrighteous
seeks by their cruelty to add affliction to the bonds of the righteous; and
though few there be that lay the cause of the righteous to heart, yet it is
come before the Lord, and woe to the wicked and them that winck at such cruelty,
for the fruits of their doing shall they receive:

From the servants of the Lord, who are sufferers as is declared in Bury
Edmonds common Goal, etc. George Whitehead, John Harwood, George Fox, George
Rofe, and Henry Marshall.

The tenth day of the third Month, 1656.
FINIS.

