A DISCOURSE OF THE Decay of Trade, The Necessity of Recovering: The Danger of
Neglecting: The Advantage of Effecting: With the proper Means to Accomplish the
same.
Whereby the War it self will become as certainly Advantageous, as a Peace will
be Destructive. Humbly Presented by James Whiston.
WHilst England had few or no Rivals in Trade, and the Riches of the World
flowed into her Lap, she Lived at Ease (slumbring in the Downy Bed of Peace)
wallowed in Pleasures, and had no other Unhappyness, but in being too happy;
Her Abundance begot Idleness, and that a Stupid Security; so that she was not
at Leizure, either to Improve her own Advantages, or Countercheck the Designs
of her Neighbors, who Aggrandize themselves at our Expense and Impoverishment.

But now it is high time to awaken all the Vital Powers of State, and rouse the
very Soul of Government from this slothful Lethargy, to see the Danger of our
Condition, and provide for a Remedy; For if the Kingdom consults either her
Safety or Greatness, the only means of acquiring those Signal Blessings, is, by
making her self Mistress of the Seas: That, once obtained (which with
Submission) by these Methods humbly offered, and effectually pursued, (by
Divine Assistance may undoubtedly be accomplished) she has a fair Assurance,
(without the horror of much War, hazard of Mighty Armies, and Charge of
Numerous Garrisons) of gaining the Chief Trade of the World, which we above all
Nations upon Earth, have at this time, not only the fairest opportunity, but
the greatest Necessity of Endeavoring to obtain. Forasmuch as the Strength or
Weakness, Wealth or Poverty of this Kingdom wholly depends upon the Good or Ill
Management of Foreign Trade, into which (as into a wide Wilderness) Thousands
are Entered, yet few or none (though of the largest Experience) are able to
comprehend the vast Advantages thereby accruing to the Public. For oftentimes
the Merchant may get when the Public looses, and as frequently the Public may
get when the Merchant looses; both which ought to be Jointly provided for,
since it is not Just that either should be prejudiced; in regard the Public
must be taken care of, and the Merchant is as it were the Steward of the
Kingdoms Stock, which by his Good or Ill Management, proportionably either
Languishes or Increases.

Therefore how highly is it the Indispensable Concernment of the Government, to
make it their utmost Care and Labor to Understand, Preserve, and Improve this
one thing necessary, which since Trade has been known, has never been rightly
managed, and without which amendment we can never be happy: But if we gain the
Ascendant over her (who is now the Worlds most Celebrated and Courted Mistress)
we shall without undertaking much of the Toyls of Alexander and the Caesar's,
make our selves in Effect Masters of the Four Quarters of the Earth, and all
England become as one City of Trade, and the General Emporie of the World.

Hereby the Nation will be abundantly Enriched, and Money being the very Life
of War, and Sinews of all Public Action, we shall be enabled to bring the
World into a Dependant Awe, send out our Superfluities at what Profit we
please, and also return the Richest Commodities of the Remotest Climates at our
own Prices: The People will be Contented, and the Exchequer maintained in a
Full Spring Tide, ready to encounter all Emergencyes; so that it cannot be
within the reach of the Worlds United Power to do us prejudice.

Neither will the Subject only, but His Majesty also reap an Equal Advantage:
It will render him a King of Free and Able Men, which is far more Glorious than
to be a King of Slaves, Beggars, and Bankrupts: And it is an undeniable Maxim
in all States, That it is less dangerous and dishonor for the Prince to be
poor, than his People; Rich Subjects can make their King Rich when they please:
If He gain their Hearts, He will quickly be Master of their Purses. This would
exceedingly raise our Reputation abroad, and enable His Majesty to keep his
Enemies in Fear, his Subjects in Peace, and his Confederates in Security.

For, Since the Introduction of the New Artillery of Powder Guns, etc. and the
Discovery of the Wealth of the Indies, etc. War is become rather an Expense of
Money than Men, and Success attends those that can most and longest spend
Money: Whence it is that Princes Armies in Europe are become more
proportionable to their Purses than to the Number of their People; So that it
uncontroulably follows that a Foreign Trade Managed to the best Advantage, will
make our Nation so Strong and Rich, that we may Command the Trade of the World,
the Riches of it, and consequently the World it self; especially now a days,
since no Obligation either of Religion or Allegiance, so much prevails upon
Military Men as the certain prospect of Reward, being chiefly Influenced by
their Pay, as the Price of their Blood.

Neither will the persuing these Proposals, augment the Nations Wealth and
Power only, but that Wealth and Power will also preserve our Trade and
Religion, they mutually working for the preservation of each other, and vastly
Increase Industrious People: And since those who live by the Arts, are far more
in Number than they who are Masters of the Fruits, we ought the rather to
Maintain the Endeavors of the Multitude, in whom does consist the greatest
Strength and Riches both of King, and Kingdom.

Where Trade is, there will be Employment: Where Employment is, thither People
will resort: And where People resort, there will be a Consumption of
Commodities, and thereby the Public Revenue will be raised, so that would we
once make Trade flourish, we need not doubt, but People from all parts of the
Globe, would resort hither to enjoy themselves, and Improve their Stocks: For
Trade is the Lifeblood that runs through the Veins of the Nation, that moves,
maintains, and enlivens the whole Body of the People from the meanest Cottage,
to the Royal Throne; So Bountiful is it, that it would extend it self to all
Sorts, and Conditions of Men.

And though most Nations are sensible of this great Benefit (particularly the
Dutch and French) who owe their Strength and Greatness to the Favor of Trade,
yet neither of them are able to compare with us, either in Quantities of Native
Commodities, Manufactures, and Artists, or of Neighborhood to the Sea,
Convenient Ports, Goodness of Shipping, great Numbers of Rich Merchants, and
Tradesmen (who have beyond others a Natural Genius of Understanding the Mystery
of Trade,) Able Mariners, Provision of Victuals, etc. All which happily concur
in our Dominions (divided from all the World besides by a Wall of Water) as if
God and Nature had designed this Island for the Grand Market of the Universe.

Not only the Increase of Seamen, and Shipping (those Bulwarks of the British
Empire,) the Encouragement of Manufactories, but the Increase of Industrious
Inhabitants, (which if duly Employed can never be too many, their Multitudes
being always the Original Riches, as well as Strength of this Nation) and the
raising the Value of Land, and Improving of Rents, the Products of good
Husbandry, and in fine, all the Happyness and Glory of England depends upon the
Encouragement and good Management of Trade; which for want thereof (being
outdone by our Neighbors) is so far declined, that it now cries aloud for all
the Art and Industry of the Government to Regain and Preserve her from utter
Ruin: For except the Breaches made in her, are timely Repaired, the Nation
must unavoidably sink into Chaos, and Confusion.

Wherefore since Schools, Universities, Inns of Court and Colleges have been
Erected for the Advancement of Arts and Learning with Regulations and
Inspectors for the better Government of their several Faculties, which are out
of all Comparison with the Fruits of a duly regulated Trade, by which they are
all maintained: And withal considering that this Great Lady (affecting Freedom
and Security has no Inclination to continue under the Arbitrary Power of some
Princes, nor the uncertain Fate of others; with whom she has resided only as a
Sojournour) (notwithstanding she has been very highly caressed and embraced by
them) is ready to espouse both our Interest and Nation, and with her self bring
in Dowry the Treasures of the World, if we would but vouchsafe to give her a
speedy and kind Entertainment; being very sensible of the great Advantage we
give her* not only by our Free Enjoyment of Civil Rights, and Properties, but
by knocking off the Shackles upon Conscience, the Continuance of which so long
Depopulated this Nation, both by discouraging Ingenious Persons from Repairing
hither, and by forcing those of our own Country to seek Freedom elsewhere, and
Cramping the Industry of others that remain by rendering them a prey to each
other: Which deadly Wound did not end here, but Debauchery and Profaneness
were increased to such Degree, that the Nation was dissolved in Luxury, and
Intemperance, whilst the French had the Wit to take the Advantage of our
Negligence, by Encouraging Industry and Commerce (which all the while we were
Laboring to overthrow and undervalue,) By which means chiefly he is become so
troublesome to us, and so dreadful to some of our Neighbors.

How absolutely necessary is it then that all possible endeavors be made (as
the Examples of our Neighbors Successful Industry, and our own Sloth and
neglect sufficiently warn us) to study the ablest Means and Methods for
Improvement of Trade, to be considered and discussed by proper Judges of the
Case, ( Viz. a Select Society or Committee of Traders accordingly Skilled and
Experienced:) By which means we should soon feel the warm Beams thereof
extending their Bountiful Influence over the whole Kingdom.

Upon the Fitness of Persons chosen depends the Good or Ill Success of this
Great Design, For, the Arts-Man is ever the best Counselor in his own
Profession, and every Honest Able Man is safest to be Credited in the better
Improvement of the Mystery he professes. If the business of Salvation be in
Debate, we apply our selves to some professing the Ministry: If the Dispute be
concerning the Title to an Estate, we disire the Judgment of a Lawyer: If Sick,
we Consult a Physician: So when the Trade of a Nation is to be Secured or
Advanced, the Merchants and Tradesmans Advice is questionless best able to
accomplish the same: For let any Versed in Trade but reflect, how many
Interfering Accidents belong to that Mystery, and how many various Shapes every
Branch of it has taken before it arrived to Perfection; and they will conclude
it impossible for Noblemen and Gentlemen not Educated in Trade, ever to Arrive
at a perfect Understanding of the Matters in Question; for want of which their
Judgments are Abused by Clamor, Importunity, Prejudice, Partiality, or some
other prevailing Bias; and seldom or never if the Matter be of Importance
enough to require Debating, come to a right Decision; to the manifest Abuse of
the People, Damage of the Nation, and Disparagement of that Council or
Committee.

Therefore that the Predominancy of that many headed-Monster Private Interest,
that has spun so fine a Thread, and twisted it self into so many Disguises,
may not insinuate any Prejudice against this Proposal: This Establishment will
be no ways an Infringement of Royal Prerogative, nor any Intrenchment upon the
Privileges, or Invasion of the Province of our High Court of Parliament. On
the contrary, it will be an useful Assistance and Ease to both, more especially
to that great Council, necessarily Subministring to them, in the due Inspection
and Inquiry into Matters, and Things, which cannot so fully fall under their
Cognizance and Examination, and accordingly be more Reputably and Commodiously
handed up to them for their Approbation: Their Doors and Ears being always open
to the Poorest Person, that shall offer any thing of Public Advantage.

This Committee must be Capable of opening a yet much fairer Light, and Insight
into Trade, (with Submission) even to the Wisdom of Parliaments themselves; who
may thereby be the better enabled to Redress all those Male-Administrations,
and non-Improvements of Trade, which through the difficulty of Access, and the
Multiplicity of their other Affairs and Fatigues, cannot so easily fall under a
sufficient Parliamentary Inquiry.

It is an Infallible Truth that we cannot long continue as we are; And that we
can never Meliorate but by this, or such like Method as here proposed: Without
some such Helps and Succors as may be drawn from hence, we must go from one
Distraction to another, till we come to be utterly destroyed. So that if the
Earnest Expectations of the People be disappointed, by making use of Unsuitable
Expedients, the Ship of this Commonwealth (which by Embracing the Proposed
Methods may be in a fair way of entering into a Safe Harbor) on the contrary
will be driven to Sea again in a Storm, and must expect another favorable Wind
to save it, and God knows whether ever that may come. For the Poize and
Balance of Affairs is not now as in former Ages. The Bulk of France is grown
too unweildy for the rest of the World; And we have (morally speaking) no hopes
of Redemption, from being Crushed by her, if any yet greater Weight be added to
her Scale.

It is humbly proposed that an Order be Issued forth to the Sheriffs of each
County, Commanding them to give Notice to the several Merchants and Traders (as
hereafter mentioned) to meet at a certain time to choose Annually
Representatives, By a Ballating Box, according as the before said Order shall
Direct, To sit at the Guild Hall, or some Convenient Place in London, as a
Committee fully Authorized and Empowered to Inquire and Examine into all
Matters Relating to Trade.

In London,
2 East India-Company 2 African Company 2 Turkey-Company 2 Italy 2 Spain 2
Portugal 2 Barbados 2 Silk Manufacturers 12 Masters of Ships chosen by
Trinity-House. 2 Nevis and Antego 2 Montserat and St. Christophers 2 Jamaica 2
Virginia and Maryland 2 New York and New England 2 East-Countrey 2 Hamborough
and Holland 2 Canaries and Madera's. 2 Sipwrights. 2 Northumberland for Coals 2
Darby-shire for Lead 2 Cornwall for Tinn 2 Devonshire for Clothing 2
Somersetshire for Clothing 2 Wiltshire for Clothing 2 Yorkshire for Clothing
2 Norfolk for Fishing 1 Gloucester and Worcester for Clothing. 2 Norfolk for
Stuffs 2 Birmigham and Sheffeild for Iron-Ware 2 Devonshire for Fishery 2 For
Colchester, with some other Places as shall be thought fit may be added, etc.
Suppose the Number be a Hundred (or more) Persons in all, there will never
meet one time with another above Forty, who may divide into Sub-Committees for
the quicker dispatch of Business, as they do in the East India and African
Companies; which at Ten Shillings A piece for each Time, and Meeting twice per
Week, is Forty 3000 Pound per Week, which for Fifty Weeks is -- 3000 The Chief
Clerk and his Servants per Annum -- 0500 And for Coach-Hire, Letters, Fire,
Candle, and other necessary 0500 Expenses -- 0500 l. 4000

That they have power to Receive all Overtures relating to Trade, and to Grant
Rewards suitable to those Discoveries or Services that shall be rendered by any
Person, out of the profit of their sundry Discoveries, or otherwise, according
as the Nature of such Discovery shall be. To which Effect there are Thousands
who would offer considerable Matters of vast Improvements did they know once
whom to apply to.

That there be a Register of their Votes for, and against every Matter.

That whatever Proposals are offered to the Committee, shall be read three
times before they be Rejected, and their Reasons for such Rejection shall be
Annexed.

That the Committee shall have power to Choose their Officers, and to allow
Sallaries (as beforementioned) which they shall signify by Certificate to the
Lords of the Treasury, who shall be Authorized and Obliged to pay the same,
together with the Ten Shillings apiece for the Commissioners, and such Rewards
as cannot be taken out of some Proposals.

That the said Commissioners shall be obliged to give Their Majesty's (and
Parliament when sitting), and Account from time to time, of the growing
Emoluments of Trade, and of the Obstructions of the General Improvement; That
so from such Reports Their Majesty's and the Parliament may the better be
Advised how to make Laws suitable for the Encouragement of the Public Benefit.

Innumerable and almost Infinite are the Benefits which both King and People
will reap from such a Committee: And this Proposer is ready to Impart to the
said Committee several Proposals of Considerable Importance, whereby he doubts
not but they will be Enabled to Accomplish all the great Designs here mentioned
too Voluminous for him particularly to insert, or indeed to make Intelligible
without mature Debates before Persons experienced in these Matters.

Here we have at one View the Diseases of our Languishing State represented to
us. Their Progress Traced through the Variety of their Fits and Paroxisms, and
the most suitable Medicines for our Recovery plainly pointed out, and set
before us: The Embracing whereof will as undoubtedly Ascertain our Happiness,
as the Neglect Ensure our Ruin, and Enhance our Misery.

It Is true indeed, that Peace is the greatest of National Felicities, and ought
to be our most desirable Blessing, especially if we look back to that Effusion
of Blood and Expense of Treasure has already been made. And therefore to sound
the Trumpet for the Encouragement of War must be somewhat ungrateful in our
Ears. However, when those Two most Potent Motives, Honor and Interest lay that
unavoidable necessity upon us, That it is impossible we can Sheath our Swords
with any thing less than giving up our Necks to a most certain Slavery, War and
only War is our Common Security. Peace made up with an Enemy, whose Power is
too strong, and his Fidelity to weak* is only a Cobweb-Lawn to break through at
pleasure, and a Reconciliation of Friendship with such a Prince, is the only
means to Empower him to be a more dangerous, because then a more Surprising
Enemy. Should France in her present height of Greatness give a Cessation to
her Hostility (as undoubtedly her Circumstances as formidable as now they are,
would gladly Embrace, and possibly her self make the first Court for a Peace,
how Inglorious a one to us I will not determine) it is certain She can never
give a Cessation to her Ambition: And it is as certain that War is only Raked
up, not Quenched, when the Coals of Ambition are still Glowing, that at any
Convenient Rupture may set it fresh a Blazing. To that Aspirer that so visibly
aims at Universal Monarchy, Universal Peace can be no more than Disguise and
Stratagem. The Snake in the Grass is but too notoriously to be suspected under
so false, how seemingly fair Bed of Flowers. In short, in any present
Accommodation with France, her holding her hand will be no other than to take
Breath to enable her to make a stronger Blow.

These Unanswerable Truths considered, all Thoughts of present Peace with
France carry that pernicious Face, that the Consequences must be fatal For any
such Peace will be more grievous than a State of War. For our Necessary and
Continual Watchfulness and Caution under such a Peace would put us to such a
Charge, such a Lingering and Continued Expense, that must be Infinitely more
Frightful than the whole Load of a Vigorous and Pushing War. It Is true, we may
Flatter our selves with a short hope of Rest, but then we must sleep in Armor,
if we think to wake safe

Thus far appears the Visible Necessity of Continuing the War with France, as
to our Safety. Now let us consider the Motives for Continuing that War, as to
our Profit and Advantages we shall receive from it. If it were possible a
present Peace could be made with France, even without the forementioned Frights
and Hazards, That Safety and Secuity should so hemm us round, that that
Turbulent Monarch should give us no Terrors nor Alarms; and consequently give
us some small Retrenchment of our Cautionary Charge and Expense, yet what will
be the Issue of this Peace? First, We restore him the Free Trade with England;
In which France receives Immense Sums per Annum of our Money more and above our
Commerce in Goods Exchanged with them. Next it will restore him all that free
Commerce again with the rest of the World, which during the War, has been so
considerably Curtailed, to the Entire Ease of all his now groaning Subjects, to
the heartning his Tired and Fatigued Armies, and to the full Replenishing of
his own (at present Exhausted) Treasures: and if at this Ebb of his Exchequer,
with all those Encumbrances, he is able to stand against the United Forces of
Christendom; What will several Recruiting Years of Peace add to his Power? but
the rendering him so much yet stronger, as to start out again into some new War,
and pour that Torrent upon us, (when least suspected, and when we are least
provided) which all Europe may not be able to stemm, And what then follows, Let
our most dreadful Apprehensions imagine.

Now under our present indispensible Necessity of War, the Public Benefits and
Great End of this Committee of Trade will be this, That besides the
Impoverishing, and consequently weakening of France, by Their care of Securing
our Navigation from the French Rapine, etc. They will likewise be able so far
to Improve our present Trade, That our Additional Advantages thereby Gained to
the Nation, shall more than pay for the War to the Easing of the greatest part
of our Burden, and thereby the Chearing our Cause, and Edging our Swords,
whilst England has moreover this further Privilege above the rest of the
Confederacy, that whilst the War is within their Bowels, we have the Happyness
of seeing it removed from our Doors. Our Purses only feel the Pain of it, and
this Remedy is the only Means to Cure that Pain; together with many Unvaluable
Helps this Committee will be able to supply the Government withal.

Here it not too Ungrateful a Theme (for what is more distastful than the
Remembrance of past Glories, and the Upbraidings of present shame?) The bare
Recollection of our former Honor, and the Reflection on our present
Remissness, would be sufficient to awake our Drowsy Lethargy, and Exalt the
English Genius into the Noble Sphere of Ancient Grandeur. Can we pretend to
have English Blood in our Veins, and suffer the Insulting Monsieur to Ravish
our Darling Mistress under our very Noses! To Commit a Rape upon our Trade in
our own Channel, and on our own Coast? Have our Forefathers with Expense of
their blood and almost insupportable Toil past through an Ocean of hazards to
Esbalish our Title, and Assert the English right to the Seas, to extend our
Trade and Commerce beyond our Plantations, and joined the most distant parts of
the World in a Correspondence with us? Have they done thus much for us and
shall we disparage their Labors and Reproach our selves by a Stupid and Supine
negligence? Have we not formerly been the Envy, as well as Terror of our
Neighbors? else why have they of late so industriously Labored to bereave us
of our peculiar Advantage, Trade, except they believed their Interest to
Consist in our Loss, and that the Acquisition of so Rich a Prize alone, would
in reality place them as much above us, as we heretofore Esteemed them beneath
our selves? Is a Jewel of such Estimation not worth the looking after, whose
Beauty has Engaged the Hearts and Eyes of all that ever saw it? Whose single
Value is of that Importance, That whosoever possesses it, has laid the
Foundation of a Lasting and Continued Greatness?

Let us Reflect now among our selves, how much it would redound to our
Dishonor, to be blind in those Matters wherein our Ancestors have ever had the
Glory of Prudence and Foresight. Infinite is the Reputation this Little Island
has formerly achieved abroad, upon as many several Accounts as she has had
occasion to Employ her Subjects in Foreign Actions. But the Great Knowledge and
Success of her Inhabitants in the Mystery of Trade has set her so much upon
the rising Ground, and from that Eminence presented her with so charming a
Face, that they who neglected Courting her, were at the same time in Revenge
upon themselves compelled to envy her. And can we now suffer such a Beauty to
be Ravished; Such a Glory to be Sullyed, by the Vainglorious attempts of that
very Nation, that has so often trembled at the sound of English Arms, and must
of necessity (had they not forfeited all pretense to Justice) own their past
and future Success alone to our Carelessness and Imprudence!

Let us therefore acquit our selves like Men, and Convince the Doubtful World
that the English Lion is awake, and that our Councils at home, and our Armies
abroad are able still to make good the Reputation of our Records. The sole
Settlement of Trade would in Effect do our business: The Establishment of That
is an inexhausted Spring of Happyness. It would make War it self more Elegible
and Easy than a Dishonorable and Constrained Peace. The General
Inconveniences of it would hardly be felt, and that which to others is an
Improverishment and Calamity, would to us be an Augmentation of Riches and
Security. Nor would our Soldiers then be less terrible in the Field, than our
Merchants thrivingly Glorious in the City: The one Depends on the other, and if
the latter be substantially maintained, the former can never fail of Success.
Especially at this time, when they have the best Cause upon Earth to fight for,
and the Most Gallant and Skilful General Living to Head and Command them. For
as the Case stands now, there are but two ways, Victory or Slavery. We must
either make the French stoop to us, or be forced to submit to them. Whatever
the Confederates may obtain from them, when they see their Opportunity, I don't
know, but this I am sure of, There remains no Terms of Peace for us, but what
would fix an Everlasting Infamy upon the English Name. In short, the Greatness
of England and France is incompatible. If they rise, we must fall; and the
Richer they Grow, the Poorer we shall be. Their Glory will be Erected on our
Ruin, and their Honor founded on our Shame.

Let us Assume then a Noble Resolution, like that of the Old Romans against
Carthage, who resolved never to lay down their Swords till they had Humbled
that City, till they had left her never a Fort at Land, nor Ship at Sea. Why
stand we still then, are the French more Courageous than the Carthaginians, or
their Generals more Invincible than Haniball? Have we not a Royal Scipio at
Land, and an Admiral at Sea who have given unanswerable Proof that the French
may be beaten. I would not be thought a Boutefeu and Incendiary, by persuading
to continue the War, Did I not from my Soul believe, that the Embracing the
Method here proposed would abundantly Enable the Government to support the
Charge of it, and that a Peace at this time, would Introduce far greater and
more certain Calamities. For if the French King, either by Force or Fraud (for
he is for any Game rather than be Idle) Extends his Conquests through the
Confederacy, we can expect no other favor but to be the last Devoured, or
Basely Imposed upon. Let us therefore pursue our Resolutions, and take the
Advantages that are now put into our hands. We may if we please make the War it
self Subminister to Trade, and be a Means of Enlarging Ours, whilst at the same
time we beat the French out of Theirs. Besides, Can we boast of any thing we
ever got by a Peace with France? It Is to be Attributed to our Improvidence
alone, they have got so much by the War: Had we prevented their taking our
Merchantmen, France had been Beggared before now, and War had ended. They have
supported themselves at our Expense: Had we been more Careful, they had been
less Powerful. The very Ships he has taken from us has served to Equip his
Royal Navy, and so much Encouraged his Privateers, that they are become the
Nursery of all his Seamen, without which he had never been able to send his
Fleet to Sea. Nay, so haughty is he grown by these Successes, that he has
often threatened to Land an Army upon us, and Invade us with our own Ships. In
short, our Losses maintain a very great Charge of his War: For if those
Merchandises he has taken from us, as Sugars, Tobacco, etc. had been sent to
Holland and Hamburgh, The Product thereof would more than have paid our Army in
Flanders. So that if these Miscarriages are provided against for the future, It
is impossible but that War must be more Beneficial to us than Peace: Seeing it
is beyond Contradiction evident that our Commerce There, is as Mischievous to
us, as Advantageous to them: Whether we respect the Open or Clandestine
Traffic. First in the Quantity, by the vast Overbalance of their
Commodities, and next in the Quality, Those which they receive from us, being
altogether Necessary and Useful for them whilst we Import nothing thence; but
what we had better be without, and such, which if our Vanity did not consume
for them, must in Effect perish on their hands to the Infinite prejudice of
that King and People.

But if there be a Necessity that our Luxury must be indulged, there is nothing
to that purpose that France could afford, which the Industry of our Friends and
Confederates cannot supply us withal: Having of late in their several Countries
set up the same Manufactories; which if the War continues, will be so
Established, that neither we nor they shall ever stand in need of being
beholden to France for them again, to the Utter and Irreparable Damage of that
Kingdom. And thereby we shall vent greater Quantities of our own Commodities in
return for what we receive from them: Whilst our Trade with France did nothing
but furnish us with Trifles in Lieu of those vast Sums of Sterling they have
drawn from us. And though we shall in a great Measure Enrich several of our
Confederate Neighbors, as well as Advantage our selves, yet it will never put
them into such a condition of doing us hurt, as our Trade with France has done.

Let us then embrace the offered occasion, which by Improving our Trade, and
Enriching the Nation, will afford us fresh, and almost certain hopes of
Victory, under the Conduct of a Daring and Courageous King, who seems to be a
Blessing from Heaven bestowed upon us to readvance the English Spirit, which
the Luxury and Effeminacy of the Late Reigns had Stifled and Debauched, and not
suffer our selves to Slumber in a Dangerous Indifference, till Invincible
Mischiefs awake us, to see our Neighbors Subdued, our Trade Expired, and a
Triumphant Enemy at our Doors. And then I doubt not but that since the Safeties
both of Us and our Allies are floating in one Common Bottom, and Fortified by
Mutual Interests, our Joint Designs being vigorously pushed on, the Balance of
Christendom, will soon be reduced to it is proper Standard and England once more
be able to hold the Scales of Europe.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Crouch, at the Corner of Popes-Head-Alley, next
Cornhil; 1693.


