THE Real Quaker A Real Protestant, And the Spirit of POPERY directly struck at.

In Answer to a most Malicious and Scandalous BOOK, Entitled, The PAPISTS
Younger Brother.

By a Disguised AUTHOR under the Titles MISOPLANES and PHILALETHES; But on the
CONTRARY proved Philoplanes, Misalethes.

By a Servant of Christ, G. Whitehead.

Psalm. 36.2, 3. The Wicked flattereth himself in his own Eyes, until his
Iniquity be found to be hateful. The Words of his Mouth are Iniquity and
Deceit. Printed in the Year 1679.

The Title of our Adversary's Book.
THE PAPISTS Younger BROTHER:

OR, The Vileness of Quakerism Detected, as it has been Printed and Published
by Themselves.

AND An Appendix of the Quakers Unsound Faith, which is also gathered out of
Their Own Printed Books.

By Misoplanes and Philalethes.

A Hater of Error and Lover of Truth.

The Anti-title, relating to the following Treatise.
THE Real QUAKER a Real PROTESTANT. And therefore no Brother to the Papists.

AND The Verity and Christianity of that Profession nicknam'd [Quakerism]
asserted, and their own printed Books vindicated from the gross Abuses,
Slanders and Calumnies, exhibited by a Malicious Persecuting Priest, who is
justly Recharged, and proved guilty of Popery in Spirit, Practice and Doctrine.

AND An APPENDIX (to the following Treatise) of the QUAKERS Sound Faith, in
Opposition to their Adversary's Appendix, plainly evincing his Most Abominable
Abuses and Forgeries against the People called Quakers.

In all which he is evidently proved to be Philoplanes A Lover of Error
Misalethes A Hater of Truth.


AN Introductory Epistle.
Vnprejudiced Reader;
WEre it not to inform the Ignorant in Truth's Vindication, and to remove that
Smoke and those Mists from before their Eyes, which the Devil's Agents are
busy to raise and cast before them to obscure and vail Truth with Prejudice, I
should not have set Pen to Paper to Answer this Adversary; for I count him not
worth those few days, being near one Week's time, that I have spent in
Collecting and Answering so many of his gross Absurdities, Falsehoods,
Perversions and Slanderous Abuses, which I have the more particularly set down
in his own words, and some of them in his own frequent Reiterations, though I
might more concisely and briefly have collected his confused Rambles into
Heeds; but I have thus traced his Absurdities and Slanders as I met them
dispersed, that they may remain upon record as a Testimony against him (in such
an obvious manner) and all who own or abet him therein; for his Abusive Work
carries a more general Reflection than only upon himself; 1st, Because he makes
himself some great Agent and Champion for the Clergy and Church of England:
2dly, Because his large Pamphlet (being above Twenty Three Sheets) goes out
with this Approbation (viz.) LICENCED W. JANE, November 15. 1678. But as for
his own Name, he conceals it, whether from a Jealousy of his Work, or from a
Consciousness of his own Disreputation, that it may weaken the Credit thereof;
or from a Fear of incurring some of the Papists displeasure, and endangering
his own Promotion, if they should have a Day. for some Reflections upon them,
in his unjustly charging the Quakers with Popery; only he subscribeth
Misoplanes and Philalethes, whereby he would be thought to be a Hater of Error,
and a Lover of Truth; but his Work will manifest the contrary, that as a Lover
of his own Erroneous Ways he shows an absolute Hatred to Truth. His chief
Quarrel is against the inherent or inward Righteousness of Christ Jesus, for
the completing our Justification and Salvation, and against the Light of
Christ in Man, and the Doctrine of Perfection or Freedom from Sin being
attainable in this Life; as also against the Light and Spirit of Christ being
the only or chiefest Rule of Faith and Life (as it is) to all true spiritual
Christians and Believers above Scripture; so that the true Gospel and New
Covenant, Urim and Thummim, to wit, Light and Perfection, true Knowledge and
Holiness, in the Breast Plate of Judgment, in the Royal Priesthood of Christ,
are stumbled at, and blasphemously opposed by this inveterate Clergyman, to the
great Disgrace of his Coat, and Shame of his Profession, and Disparagement of
his Moregrave and Learned Brethren, for suffering such a furious discomposed
Agent to be such a public Advocate in their Cause, who when he cannot Answer,
nor give any modest Reply, he Reviles, Hectors, Vaunts, Boasts, Scoffs and
Jeers, as if by that means he would conquer all; when he cannot Reason, he
Rails and Clamours most hideously; when he cannot confute his Opposers, nor
remove the Charges against him, and those of his Spirit and Fraternity, he
recites and reiterates the Charges with Taunting, Jeering and Scoffing; and his
chief Refuge and confuting Argument is, The Church of England, the Church of
England 's Faith is Opposed; though I must needs say, he has greatly wronged
and misrepresented that Church in several particulars, wherein he is here
reprehended; for she should not be made worse than she is: and instead of
endeavoring to convince the Quakers in any Christian way of their being
Deluded, as he charges, he does not only unjustly render a Real Quaker as being
a Papist, and charge Popery upon him, for holding such plain Scripture-Truths,
relating to the new Birth, and Justification by Grace received, not excluding
the Merit or Deserving and Dignity of Christ in his Suffering, Death and
Sacrifice for Mankind, as an obtaining and procuring Cause thereof, for all
truly believing in him: But also our Adversary shows himself offended at the
King's Lenity toward Peaceable Dissenting Protestants, nothing less will
satisfy him, than to have the Priests exalted, and their Designs carried on
over all, by the secular Magistrate, that they may be atop, and both Kings,
Princes and Subjects subservient to them, which has been always a Popish
design; and to this purpose this Priest, in his very Title Page, has given us a
Citation which is very grateful to the Popish Clergy, (viz.) Neque enim aliunde
haereses obortae sunt, aut nata sunt schismata, quam inde quod sacerdoti Dei
non obtemparatur; Divus Cyprianus libro primo, Epistola tertia: i.e. For
neither from any thing else, Heresies have risen, nor Schisms bred, but hence,
that Obedience is not yielded to God's Priest. So that its Obedience to the
Priests our Adversary chiefly aims at, as the chief Obligation to prevent
Heresy and Schism, and that the Security both of Church and State, Kings and
Princes may center in the Priests in all being obedient to them; if by such
Insinuation they (of this mind) could get the Miter set above the Crown, their
Princes not obeying such Priests, nor siding with their Selfish Interest, may
be liable to be Condemned (if not Deposed) as Heretics. This our Adversary
greatly endeavors to incense the King and Government to Severity or
Persecution against the despised People called Quakers, using such Expressions
as these, Is it not high time for the King's Sacred Majesty to arise and judge?
page 5. and surely, It Is high time for the King's Majesty, the Defender of the
Faith, to gird on his Sword; comparing the Quakers to stinging Snakes in the
Bosom of Indulgence; calling the Quakers Meeting or Church, an Unlawful
Conventicle, the Congregation of Evildoers, page 43. and not only accusing the
Quaker with being no Loyal Subject, but also with Treason and Rebellion: His
Out rage being chiefly because Hat and Knee Honor, and such Worldly Outside
Complements and Earthly Honor cannot be complied with by the Plain,
Simple-hearted, Impartial Quaker, who being in the Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, has an Eye to that Honor which comes from God only, and not that which
is from below, earthly, and must all be laid in the Dust. Thus this Adversary
has not only reflected on the King's Indulgence, and sought to instigate him
against his Peaceable Protestant Subjects, but also like a Popish Incendiary to
divide and weaken the real Protestant Interest, and animate the Papists, and
introduce Popery and Arbitrary Government in Church and State, which with
Persecution and Coertion to uphold it, is Popery in the highest; and therefore,
whilst this Clergyman makes a great Noise against Papists and Popery, he is but
under a Disguise, to cover his own Popish Rigid Persecuting Arbitrary
Self-Willed Spirit, and therein carrying on the Design of Popery; and not only
in this of Persecution, but also in his very Language, Doctrine and manner of
Arguing, where instead of Rationally Confuting the Quaker, he cries up the
Faith and Authority of the Church, as having the King and Bishops or outward
Powers on his side therein; like as if he should impose upon us, that we must
be of the Faith of that Church that has a Coercive Power to maintain her; and
what Interest will not this serve? And where he frequently calls the Virgin
Mary the Mother of God, he shows himself greatly offended at the Quaker for
deeming the Phrase Popish and Unscriptural, page 26, 27. As also his saying,
that the Bread broken (that is in the Sacrament) is the Body of Christ, page
78. Thus this pretended Anti-papist has his Work intermixed with such Popish
Language and Stuff, and yet he would be thought a Real Protestant, while he is
unjustly branding the Quaker with Popery. There are two sorts of Clergymen
(whereof this seems to be one) that are very liable and fit to introduce Popery
at unawares (even under Pretense of the Church of England) among the Simple and
Ignorant People in this Nation, to the vitiating and corrupting of their Minds,
and that is, the Temporizing Clergymen, and the Debauched Drunken Clergy men,
which our Nation is too much filled with, God knows? for neither of them are
either Tender or Conscientious about Religion, but so corrupted, hardened and
debauched in their Consciences, that they have lost their Zeal for the
Protestant Cause, Religion and Interest, only fit to comply with such Interests
as may most serve their own Ends and Turns, which is the very way to introduce
Popery, Idolatry and Arbitrary Rule and Imposition, both in Affairs
Ecclesiastical and Civil; it is apparent, that as Hypocrisy, Looseness and
Debauchery do harden and sear Peoples Consciences, and make them Irreligious
and Atheistical, so these things are not only privious to Popery, but In lets
and Encouragements thereto; for what Religion can be more grateful to the
Flesh, than that which is most Indulgent to it in its corrupt Ways? as for men
daily to commit Sin, and then believe that Priests have a Dispensation from the
Pope or Sea of Rome to indulge and pardon them, and that though they live in
many gross Sins and Enormities all their days (as they that plead for Sin and
Imperfection to continue all their Life time) yet the worst and final
Punishment for them is but a Purgatory hereafter for some term of Years, as
their Priests for their own Ends make them believe; What can be more easy and
grateful to Fleshly Minds, than such a Religion as this? and how near a kin to
this is our present Adversary's pleading and contending for Sin term of Life?
and which is worse, charging the best of men with sinning daily, so long as
they live; let the serious Reader Judge, when he reads the Controversy
hereafter. And though this our Adversary has concealed his Name, and would go
Hoodwinked, I have some Account (out of the County of Durham) who he is, and
what he is, as to his Conversation among his Neighbors in these words, viz.
There being a Pamphlet lately put forth against Friends, entitled, The Papists
Younger Brother, or the Vileness of Quakerism Detected, by Misoplanes and
Philalethes, in which Gotation out of Friends Books are taken, and Wickedly and
Enviously paraphrased upon, to render Truth Odious and Friends Obnoxious, to
expose them to Persecution; Friends here about Darlington can give a sufficient
Account of him, as being a very great Persecutor, by whom our Friends of
Darlington Meeting have suffered very much: His Name is Leonard Wastall, Priest
at a Town called Harworth, about two Miles from Darlington, where he has been
Priest both in Oliver 's days and in these; his Envy and Wicked Carriage is
sufficiently known; his Name is in the Record of the Sufferings of Darlington,
with many Circumstances of his many inhumane and wicked Actings against
Friends: if thou or any other may see any service of having an Account of him,
or his Conversation or Carriage, Envy and Wicked Proceedings against Truth,
Friends here at Darlington can return you it, with many Remarkable
Circumstance. [Thus far the Account (from a Person of Credit) bearing date the
7th of the 3d Month, 1679.]

For a more evident Discovery of our Antagonist, the Reader is desired (by the
way) to observe this Certificate, which lately came to hand, viz.

These are to certify, that whereas there is an Abusive Book put forth against
the People of God (in Scorn) called Quakers, entitled, The Papists Younger
Brother, etc. and no real Name at it, but instead thereof two Fained Names,
viz. Misoplanes and Philalerhes, which Book was believed to be put forth by
Leonard Wastall Priest of Harworth, a Man well known in this Country to be
Maliciously bent against the same People, and a great Persecutor of the same;
yet for certain satisfaction hereof, I did ask the same Leonard Wastal, if he
owned himself to be the Author of that Book, entitled, The Papists Younger
Brother, etc. and subscribed by Misoplanes and Philalethes? and he did own
himself to be the Author of that Book so entitled in the Presence of Richard
Scaife Merchant of Darlington, Robert Johnson of Bernard-Castle Attorney,
Robert Lin of Blackwell Yeoman, Men of good Credit.

Edward Tonstall.

It Is also very remarkable, what a great height the Priest's Envy and Malice is
gotten to, in his falsely representing the Quaker as being the Papists Younger
Brother, both contrary to the general sense of all moderate true English Men
and Protestants, and the public Resentment and Cognizance that both the
Commons of England assembled in the late long Parliament, and in the last
Parliament, received and had concerning the People called Quakers, as when
Motion was made in the House of Commons, for their Relief from those Laws made
in Q. Elizabeth's days against Popish Reousants, and the Case committed and
publicly examined and heard, and our Declaration against Popery accepted (in a
Great and Public Committee assembled in the Commons House) as a sufficient
Test to distinguish us (the People called Quakers) from Popish Recusants [Thus
far in the late long Parliament] And in the last Parliament, the Remembrance of
that Resentment of the former was so much alive, that the House of Commons past
a Bill against Popery, wherein there was a Clause provided for our Relief, with
other Dissenting Protestants, from Laws made against Popish Recusants; the Copy
of our Declaration aforesaid, that was delivered to the Committee of Parliament
(only a little more briefly contracted, and as it was delivered in Print to the
Member, of the last Parliament) is as follows.

A Protestation or Declaration to Distinguish Protestant-Dissenters from Popish
Recusants.
I A. B. do in the Presence of Almighty God solemnly profess, and in good
Conscience declare, It is my real Judgment, That the Church of Rome is not the
Church of Christ, nor the Pope or Bishop of Rome Christ's Vicar; and that his
or her Doctrines Of Deposing Heretical Princes, and Absolving their Subjects of
their Obedience; of Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead; Of Indulgences and
Worshipping of Images; Of Adoring and Praying to the Virgin Mary and other
Saints deceased; And of Transubstantiation, or changing the Elements of Bread
and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ at or after the Consecration thereof
by any Person whatsoever, are False, Erroneous and Contrary to the Truth of God
declared in the Holy Scriptures: And therefore the Communion of the said Church
is Superstitious and Idolatrous.

And I do likewise sincerely testify and declare, that I do from the bottom of
my Heart detest and abhor all Plots and Conspiracies, that are or may be
contrived against the King, Parliament or People of this Realm: And I do hereby
Faithfully Promise, with God's Help, to live a Sober and Peaceable Life, as
becomes a good Christian and Protestant to do. And all this I do Acknowledge,
Intend, Declare and Subscribe without any Equivocation or mental Reservation,
according to the true Plainness, Simplicity and usual signification of the
Words.

Witness my Hand.

Thus, serious Reader, I have plainly Introduced our Case, in order to manifest
our Clearness from our Adversary's unjust Imputations and Calumnies, as it is
more fully evinced in the ensuing Treatise.

Dated London, the 22d of the 9th Month, 1679, G. W.

THE Real Quaker A Real Protestant.
OUR Adversary having appeared so very gross and shameful in his Abuses, I
shall cite his own words in Paragraphs, that most concern us to answer, and
then our Vindication in Answer to each particular Abuse and Falsehood will be
the more evident, and the Method plain, as in the ensuing Controversy.

. I.] Priest, page 1. My present Design is not to trouble this delicate People;
to prevent this, I shall only give them their own Meat, cook't by themselves,
in their own Dish.

Page 3. I shall only transcribe their own Books to serve as a Looking-Glass.

Ibid. I shall not Wyr-draw one Line in their Books, to speak more than their
own words will bear.

Answer. Now if it appear that this Adversary has done more against us, than
only giving us our own Meat (as he calls it) cook't by our selves in our own
Dish, and than only transcribing our own Books, and that he has made false
Constructions upon them, then he is an apparent Breaker of his own Promise,
perfidious and false to his own Words and Engagement before cited.

But that it will so appear, and that to his Shame, take a view of some of his
own Gross and Vilifying Reflections, Abuses, Aspersions and Revilings, Scoffing
and Railery against us, and Blasphemous Expressions against the Light within,
in his own Terms, as follows, viz.

The Quakers lamentable Brats -- My Design is only to remedy that Flatus or
Windy Spirit that troubles them -- Their Enthusiastic Follies -- Their silly
Quakerism, [Epist to the Reader.]

The Quakers Fondling, the Light within, page 7, 34. The Quakers Light within
burnt dim in his Sockot, page 8. The Light within is at unawares singing the
old Cuckoes Song, page 14. The Quakers Ignis Fatuus, page 14. What a blind
pitiful Elf is the Quakers Light within? page 14. Quakers Ill-fighted Light
within, page 18 Quaking Lines, [frequently.] Socinianizing Quaker, Papal
Quaker, page 17. Canting. Quaker, page 21. Brainsick Quakers, page 22. A Pope
in their Bellies. This pitiful Quaker, page 22. Quaking Ramble, page 25. Wants
a Dose for his Perecranium, page 27. The Quakers Idol the Light within, page
33. Babel Quakers, page 51. Rare Quaking stuff, page 56. This Quaking Holy Man
of God, page 59. Another Quaker Atheist, page 61. Has not this Man Quaked to
purpose? page 65. Melancholy Quakers, page 73. Lawless Quakers, page 93. More
of this Quakers stinking stuff, page 98. Quaking Freedom from Sin, page 102. O
Quaking Perfection, page 104. A great Quaking Heat, page 114. Quakeriz'd Unity,
page 117. These Quaking Unities, page 117. Quaking Inspiration, page 127.
Quaking Zelote, page 132. Quaking Bishop, page 137. Rebel and Traitorous
Quaker, page 138. Traiterly Quaker, page 140.
Much more of such like Scurrility, Blasphemous and False Aspersions, both
against the Light within and against us, has our Adversary stufft his Large
Pamphlet and Libellous Book withal. From all which it follows directly, that he
has broke his own Promise and violated his Engagement. For this Impious
Atheistical Stuff before cited is his own Cookery, not ours; he has herein
done more than only transcribed our Books. See, what an unconscionable
Antagonist we have to deal withal! This is the Man, that promised only to
Transcribe our own Books, only to give us our own Meat, cook't by our selves,
etc. Contrary whereunto he has here taught People to Scoff, Traduce, give
Names of Reproach, and Vilify both us as a People, and the Light within,
professed by us; which is no other than that True Light, which lights every man
coming into the World, testified of in John 1.4, 9.

And this Adversary is the man, that has pretended Kindness of Love to
undeceive the Quakers (p. 3.) But the Kindness he shows and Course he has taken
to undeceive us, is, to Rail, Scoff, Jeer, Vilify and Reproach us, as his
Language bespeaks. Whereby also his gross Hypocrisy in pretending such
Kindness to us, is very obvious, and his Abominable Malice and Envy, as well as
Falsehood will further appear on many Particulars, before we have done.

Pr. Page 1. Their Quakerism is a Compound of False Doctrine newly brought to
Light, several Old Errors new vamp't; Antichristian Popery put forth in a New
Dress.

Answ. What he calls Quakerism, is no such Compound of either False Doctrines,
Errors or Popery; we have only his Ipse dixit, or Say so, no Proof, but what
will make against himself, as one Guilty of Popery both in Spirit and
Principle, a Persecutor, and therefore Popish, if not a Papist: A Spightful
Incendiary against an Innocent People, who has acted the part of a Popish
Incendiary.

Pr. Page 2. My Design is only to remedy that Flatus or windy Spirit that
troubles them.

Answ. We own no such Physicians as he, who is thus possessed with a Scornful
Spirit and Diabolical Flatus, or Inspiration of Satan, which cannot trouble nor
hurt us, as we attend on God in his Divine Breath or Spirit of Life given us.

Pr. Let not the Quakers nor any others believe that (by Answering Books
according to their Folly) I do write one Syllable against the holy Ghost, or
that I have scoffed the Quakers as being the Servants of God; I know very well
Pietas non Patitur Ludum, page 2.

Answ. It appears, he is Conscious to himself of Scoffing the Quakers however,
and the Spirit by which they are led; but not as being Servants of God, or as
led by his Spirit: How then? As Poor Deluded Quakers, led by an Erroneous
Spirit. Is this his Kindness of Love to Undeceive us, or his Pity toward us
thus to Scoff and Scorn, as he has frequently and most shamefully done against
us? O Insolency! How has he answered, what he says, that Pietas non patitur
Ludum, Godliness admits not of Sporting with, it is not to be played with; and
therefore the Impiety of this Mocking Agent about Religious Matters and about
the Spirit is the Greater. The Proverb he here makes use of is like that Ludere
cum sacris Sanctis miscere profana, which the Pious and Serious minded could
never allow of.

Pr. Their silly Quakerism. Their Praters -- by their Followers are fondly
doted on, p. 2.

Answ. He Mocks on still, Rails and Reviles, but Reasons not as a man of any
Piety or Religion.

Pr. Ibid. Mahomet's Pigeon and the Quakers Spirit are both alike.

Answ. This Comparison only suits an Atheist, and a Scornful, Fleshly Mind,
that is void of the true Spirit's Guidance, which the Quakers believe and own.

Pr. p. 3. I look for hard measure from my Neighbor Quakers for this Kindness
of Love to undeceive them.

Answ. He may very well expect some dislike from his Neighbor Quakers for his
Scoffing and Railing against them, and showing his Malicious, Persecuting
Spirit, while he most Falsely and Hypocritically pretends Kindness of Love to
Undeceive them.

Pr. Ibid. I have already been sufficiently, without any just Cause, black
marked by them, a Judas, a Persecutor of God's People, a black Devil, a Porter
of Hell, etc.

Answ. If his Neighbors know him to be a Persecutor, yet he will not own, that
it is the People of God he persecutes; he can easily equivocate here and say,
It Is the Deluded Quakers that I have appeared against, and not Gods People: but
if he persecute, or use them hardly, where is his Pity and his Kindness of Love
to the poor Deluded Quakers? as he deems them. But if any has compared him to a
Judas, a black Devil, a Porter of Hell, doubtless 'twas not without some great
Cause, the concerned Persons can give account and remind him.

Pr. Ibid. I am not in the least induced to retaliate.

Answ. To retaliate what? Ill Language or black Marks; and such he has
plentifully retaliated. O Gross Hypocrisy!

Pr. Ibid. The Readers Patience will be sore put to it to read such
Impertinent, Rude, Ignorant, Blasphemous, Corrupt stuff.

Answ. Such stuff has this Adversary frequently uttered, as will further appear
to his great shame.

Pr. p. 5. Is it not high time for the King's Sacred Majesty to arise and Judge?

Answ. Here he smells of a Popish, Persecuting Spirit, that would incense the
King against us; but it is an Implicit Reflection upon the King, as if he knew
not his time, when and what to judge, without the Priests Instigation.

. II.] Pr. Ibid. W. P 's false Spirit does put him upon writing in good Earnest
against Christ God-man, a Distinct Person without us.

Answ. This man's Lying Spirit has put him upon a Slander against W. Penn, who
has not written against Christ as Godman without us, but demanded Scripture
only for the Terms, Distinct Person without us, which yet he has not produced.
Take W. P 's own Explication in the Case, viz.

It Is granted, Christ is a Distinct Being from the Saints; we never said, that
Christ was not as well without us as within us; we never set any Limitations to
Christ's Presence. This our Adversary has quoted, and yet renders W.P. as
denying the thing intended, i.e. Christ, God-man; which is a gross abuse!

Pr. p. 5. The Quakers Light within is not of God, for it prompts them to write
dishonourably of God the Son.

Answ. Our Light within is Christ's Light, we own no other; and it cannot
prompt us to any such thing against himself.

Pr. p. 6. The Quaker ushers in his Pestilent Discourse with some Truth
concerning the Scriptures, which serves as a Blind for Fools.

Answ. Pestilent Discourse is a Slander charged upon us, but not proved: The
Truth of the Scriptures we have always desired through God's Assistance
sincerely to improve in Principle and Practice, in Obedience to the Spirit of
Truth, which leads into all Truth, and enables both to the Understanding,
Belief and Practice of those Truths recorded in Scripture.

Pr. Ibid. That the Spirit of Truth does alone give true discerning; that the
Light within ought to be the Rule of Faith and Practice; this is the Real
Quakers Vpstart, Rotten Doctrine, this Quaking Dotage is not yet Thirty Years
old. This is the Real Quakers Golden Image, before which all (if they are so
silly) should fall down and Worship.

Answ. First, True discerning is a Gift of the Spirit of Truth, whether of
Spirits or States. Secondly, Every one that does Truth comes to the Light,
that his Deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God, John 3.21.
And Christ says, Believe in the Light, that ye may be the Children of the
Light. And therefore Christ's Light within ought to be the Rule of Faith and
Practice; it is the Convincing and Discovering Rule and Guide. And this is no
Rotten Doctrine, no Quaking Dotage, or Golden Image, as this Dark Priest both
Scornfully and Blasphemously words it to his great shame, like a Dark Rebel
against the Light, who knows not the ways of it, because he has not abode in
the Paths of it.

Pr. p. 7. That this Quaking Fondling, the Light within them, may be set up for
the Rule of Faith and Practice.

Answ. There is no true Faith and Practice without divine Illumination,
enlightening the Eyes of the Understanding, how ever he scoff and abuse the
Light within: His Envy is so great against the Quakers, that he will not so
much as assent to the Divine Principle of Light in man, which flows from the
Life in the Eternal Word: In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of men.

. 3.] Pr. Ibid. W. P's best Reason, assisted with his Light within is Fondly at
work to prove, that the Light and Spirit, and not the Scriptures, were the Rule
of their Faith, that gave forth the Scriptures.

Answ. Seeing he deridingly opposes this, we must take him as believing or
speaking the contrary, viz. That not the Light and Spirit of Truth within, but
the Scriptures were the Rule of their Faith, that gave them forth: Gross
Ignorance! as if the Scriptures were the Primary Dictater and Revealer of
Scriptures, and not the Light and Spirit of God within: Contrary to plain
Scripture; Holy Men of God spoke, as they were moved by the Spirit of God.
Surely, the Scriptures could not be the Rule, before they were; but the Holy
Spirit was both the Mover, Rule and Guide in giving them forth.

Pr. Ibid. Its matter of Lamentation, that the Quakers false Light, and their
lying Spirit do counterfeit the true Light and holy Spirit, to decry the
Scriptures from being the Rule of Faith and Life.

Answ. Its matter of Lamentation, that such blind Guides as this, should keep
People in Darkness, from the true Light and holy Spirit, under pretense of the
Scriptures being the Rule of Faith and Life: Which though this be a main
Article of his Faith, yet for this very Point he has not produced any plain
Scripture, that says, the Scriptures are the Rule of Faith and Life: Which if
he cannot produce such proof for, they are not that only Rule, but rather a
Rule or Instruction subordinate to the true Light and holy Spirit as directing
to it.

Pr. p. 8. Surely, this Quakers Light within burnt dim in his Socket: the Light
within is no such Infallible Teacher as the Quakers brag of, like the Papists
infallible Judge, its not without its gross Mistakes.

Answ. See, how again he blasphemously scoffs against the Light within, in his
Comparing it with the Papists pretended Infallible Judge, wherein he is grossly
mistaken, but so is not that Divine Light of Christ within, which we profess,
believe and own; In him was Life, and that Life was the Light of men: Though
men may Err, yet this Light cannot.

. 4.] Pr. Ibid. The real Quaker is for, Go teach, baptizing with the holy Ghost
and with Fire -- If this be not to turn People from Light to Darkness, from God
to the Power of Satan, let the sober-minded Reader judge.

Answ. The true Ministry and Preaching of the Gospel in Spirit and Power,
wherewith Christ's Ministers were and are endued, was for the Conversion and
turning People from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power to the Power of
God; which does no whit fall short of a Spiritual Baptism or dipping into the
Name, Power and Life of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. Go teach, baptizing
them into the Name, etc. was a Commission by divine Power and Authority, and in
the same was fulfilled, by Christ's presence with his Ministers. Lo, I am with
you always, even unto the End, said he; and therefore it was by virtue of
Christ's Presence with them, that they were made Instrumental in baptizing with
the Spirit. And this was not to turn them from Light to Darkness, as most
ignorantly is alleged by this Priest.

Pr. Page 9. Surely, W. Penn was as Oxford to Lick Glass-Windows.

Answ. A scornful Detraction which shows the Pride of the Priest's Heart.

Pr. Ibid. It is the Judgment of a real Quaker that Water Baptism is none of
Christ's Institutions, and that Paul was of the same mind, which is a most
gross mistake.

Answ. No Mistake at all, that Christ sent not Paul to Baptize, but to Preach
the Gospel, as he himself expressly says, 1 Cor. 1. And this he gave as his
most general Reason, why he Baptized no more of them, than he did. And surely,
his Commission was not short of the rest of the Apostles: Wherefore
Water Baptism was not included in it.

[. V.] Pr Ibid. That the real Quaker confesses himself guilty of a base
Doctrine, viz. That ^ustification by that Righteousness which Christ fulfilled
WHOLLY without us, is a Sin pleasing Notion.

Answ. No such Confession of Guilt by the Real Quaker, who confesses to
Christ's Righteousness, both without and within, as it is received by Faith unto
Justification, or making men Righteous: for he cannot own, that men can truly
be reckoned Righteous or Just, while they have none of Christ's Righteousness
within them, or while his Image is not at all renewed in them, nor they in any
Degree sanctified. None are justified without living Faith in Christ Jesus;
Therefore none are justified in an unsanctified State; so not wholly without
them, especially if Christ's living Faith be the instrumental Cause of our
Justification, or Causa sine qua non, without which there is no real
Justification; he that believes not, is condemned already, though Christ (who
is the Author of Faith) be the Principal Cause of Good to us.

Pr. Ibid. The Papists call it a Putative Righteousness. This Justification by
Christ's Righteousness imputed by Faith, which is a comfortable Doctrine, is
basely murdered betwixt these two Thieves.

Answ. He has here maliciously as well as basely slandered us called Quakers,
in his Comparison; for we never denied Christ's Righteousness as imputed or
reckoned to us by Faith, taken in the Real Scripture Sense. But some Professors
reckoning of it to men in an Unbelieving, Unconverted and Unsanctified State,
or when no Good is wrought in them; in which State, I suppose, he dare not
directly say, Men are justified; for without Faith its impossible to please
God: and yet he says little or no less, if he tell us, that men are justified
and acquitted before God by a Righteousness of C^aist WHOLLY without them; for
that leaves no room for Christ's Righteousness to have any place within them
for their Justification: And is not this a Sin-pleasing Notion?

I would ask, what that Righteousness, that Christ fulfilled wholly without
them was? Did it not consist in his Obedience to the Father, and fulfilled in
his Sufferings and Death? If this, then has completed Justification wholly
without men, then it must be completed for all Mankind, for whom he dyed. And
he dyed for all men, tasted Death for every man, for the whole World: What
then? are all men, yea, the whole World, that lies in Sin, completely
justified? by this Priest's Doctrine they must, if it be effected wholly
without them. See now what Sin-pleasing Work our Adversary's run into! whereas
Christ dyed for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification. Therefore 'twas
not wholly accomplished by his Death.

Pr. page 10. We are accounted Righteous before God ONLY for the Merit of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ by Faith. That we are JUSTIFIED by Faith only, is
a most wholesome Doctrine.

Answ. Here he joins Faith to the Merit of our Lord in the Matter of
Imputation, but then says, We are justified by Faith only. Well, to make the
best on it, it is granted, that by Christ's Merit and true Faith in him we are
Justified. Whence it therefore follows, that our Justification is not fulfilled
wholly without us, unless our Faith must be wholly excluded, or shut out, as
wholly without us.

Pr. Ibid. The Case is sad, that IMPARTED Righteousness may not be retained,
but Imputed Righteousness, like Ishmael, must be c^st forth, yea, LOATHED, as a
Sin-pleasing Notion; rejected, as that, which is Horrible Wicked.

Answ. Here is an Abusive Insinuation suggested against us: We do not cast
forth nor loath any Righteousness, that God for Christ's sake imputes to us, or
reckons ours, through true and living Faith: We do not set Imparted
Righteousness in Opposition to what is truly Imputed to us, because it is not
truly Imputed, unless Imparted. As that of Faith, which was reckoned to
Abraham, and is still to his Children, who are of Faith, and walk in his steps.
But it is here granted, that there must be Imparted Righteousness, and that it
must be retained; and therefore Imputed Righteousness not cast out, nor
rejected. If not cast out nor rejected, then it must be retained within. So on
the other hand I may justly argue, that it is sad, that Imputed Righteousness
may not be retained, but Imparted Righteousness must be cast forth and loathed,
as Popery. Or that we should be reckoned, as denying Christ's Merits or
Deservings, while we are also asserting his inward Work, Righteousness and
Obedience of Faith unto Justification; for these are not inconsistent.

Qr. To William Penn's affirming, that Christ's Work was twofold, 1st, To
remit, forgive or justify from the Imputation of Sins past, such as truly
repent and believe.

2dly, By his Power and Spirit working in the Hearts of such to destroy and
remove the very nature of Sin, to make an end of it, to finish Transgression,
etc.

Pr. [To this the Priest answers, p. 11.] viz. With this Distinction he does
only play the Mountebank's part -- This Counterfeit Balsom -- he Juggles --
like the Devil; this real Quaker has the Knack to deliver some Truth according
to Scripture, that he may the better manage his Devilish Design to put off his
bad Wares.

Answ. It Is no Mountebanks Part or Juggle, to deliver Truth according to
Scripture, nor has the Real Quaker any Devilish Design therein; this
Foul-mouthed Slanderer is far louder in his Charge than in his Proof: the
Distinction is honest and just; in the first, the Merit, Dignity and Interest
of our Lord Jesus Christ is confessed: In the second, is his Power and Work of
Grace in the Heart unto Sanctification and Justification asserted, which does
not oppose, but effectually speaks forth his Dignity and Merit for man's
eternal good.

Pr. Ibid. The first part of this Quaking Distinction is very lame, the latter
part full of false Doctrine to make Justification -- by Christ's Righteousness
without us a Counterfeit Doctrine, and Justification by Inherent Righteousness
only -- Thus the Papists and Quakers are in a great measure Hail Fellow, well
met; only the Quaker has the Honor to be the more perfect Dotard of the Two.

Answ. Here is no Confutation, but Scorn and Perversion, which shows himself
rather the Perverse Dotard: For Christ's Righteousness and Merit, as in himself
(or as it was without us) is not excluded Remission or Justification from the
Charge of Sins past, on Repentance and Faith. Nor is Justification wholly
placed upon the inherent or inward Righteousness of Christ; but both are
concerned in man's absolute Justification. Only the Doctrine of Imputation to
exclude or reject Christ's Inherent Righteousness in Justification of the
Unrighteous, Unconverted or Wicked; this we oppose as unsound.

. VI.] And further, there is no such Correspondency between the Papists and
Quakers in the point; for the Papists place the Merit of Justification and
Salvation upon their own Works after the first Justification by Christ's
Merits, thereby rendering God indebted to them for their Good Works, Acts of
Charity, etc. though done by his Grace.

The Quaker distinguishes between Merit in the strict sense (as used by the
Papists) and obtaining Acceptance with God upon the Faithful Improvement of his
Grace and Obedience of Faith: God accepts us in and for Christ's sake in our
Obedience to his free Grace; but we do not thereby Merit, Buy or Purchase
Salvation to our selves, as making God a Debtor to us in the Papists sense. For
'twas of his free Grace, that we are what we are, and that we obey and practice
what is our Duty; For by Grace through Faith we are saved, not of our selves,
its the Gift of God, to whom we must render the Praise of all.

Qr. Ibid. To William Penn's granting, such as Repent and believe, receive
Remission or a Justifying from former sins through the Righteousness of God
declared in and by Jesus Christ. But Complete Justification is a making
inwardly Just through a purging out of Iniquity, mortifying of Corruption, and
bringing in Christ's Everlasting Righteousness.

Pr. [To this the Priest gives his Answer, viz.] Here (...) have the Real
Quaker a downright Papist; he is professedly gone into the Tents of Rome; he
is become a stout Champion under the Popes Banner. Behold this Real Quaker
dabling in gross Popery.

Answ. This is all a Slanderous and manifest Perversion; it is no Popery, but
Scripture-Testimony to assert, That Complete Justification is a making inwardly
Just, through a purging out Iniquity, mortifying Corruption, making the Soul to
partake of Christ's Everlasting Righteousness, seeing that according to his
Mercy he saved us by the washing of Regeneration and Renewing of the holy
Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, Tit. 3.
And this is not a meriting Salvation by our own Works, in the Papists sense.
For it is placed upon the Kindness of God in Christ, and washing of Regeneration.

Pr. Ibid. Acccording to the Tenor of his words, Complete Justification is a
MAKING INWARDLY JUST, through a purging out of Iniquity, mortifying of
Corruption, and bringing in Christ's Everlasting Righteousness.

Answ. And this Adversary has said nothing in Confutation of this; he only
recites and reviles our words, and rails at us, but Reasons not to our
Conviction or Confutation. If to Justify be Justum facere, to make Just (as
some of his own Coat have confessed, and that on the place cited, Tit. 3.4, 5, 6,
7.) then this must be inwardly effected through a purging out Iniquity, and a
bringing in Christ's Everlasting Righteousness, even through the washing of
Regeneration. But see what the Priest offers to confute us in the Sequel.

Pr. p. 12. Thus the Doctrine of the Church of England is trampled under foot,
etc.

Answ. He thinks he has gotten a strong hold in the Church of England, there is
his Castle and Garrison to Consute the Quakers, by telling them, Thus the
Doctrine of the Church of England is trampled under foot: but tells us not what
that Doctrine is. But it seems, it is a Doctrine, that does not allow, that
Complete Justification is a making inwardly Just through a purging out
Iniquity, mortifying of Corruption, and bringing in of Christ's Everlasting
Righteousness. As if he should tell us, That the Doctrine of the Church of
England is contrary to this before-cited, i. e. That Complete Justification is
not a making inwardly Just, nor a purging out of Iniquity or Mortifying of
Corruption, etc. but that Justification is Wholy fulfilled and completed
without men: they are completely Justified by Christ's Merits, while inwardly
Unjust, and their Iniquities unpurg'd out, their Corruption unmortified, and
Christ's Everlasting Righteousness excluded, or wholly shut out of them. At
this rate this Person may reckon himself one completely Justified, whilst a
Persecuting, Malicious, Scornful Spirit remains in him, whilst he is a Railer,
a Persecutor, a Scorner and Oppressor, etc. but herein he is highly guilty of
that Abomination, which he that justifies the Wicked, and he that condemns
the Just are guilty of. As also, I must tell him, He has in this matter
apparently wronged the Doctrine of the Church of England, and several of the
Eminent Doctors thereof, who have not only in their Prayers but Preaching
called for and urged a Real Righteousness both Inherent and Practical to
constitute men Just and Righteous, and Acceptable to God, and have flatly
opposed the Imputarians, Calvinists and Antianomins in their asserting Persons
imputatively Righteous and Justified, while actually Unjust, Immoral, etc.

. VII.] Pr. Ibid. But the worst is yet behind [And what is it?] W.P.
If not, then to exclude this, and yet conclude men completely justified, by
what Christ has done wholly without, is a Doctrine of Devils, for it leaves
men in an Impure state, and allows the Devils Kingdom to continue in Being.

Pr. [Priest Answers] p. 12. These Quaking Lines, according to this Quakers
base words in Print, the Church of England does hold fast that, which is a
Doctrine of Devils, etc. a base Aspersion cast on that Church, which is
beautiful in the Eyes of all sober Christians.

Answ. He wrongs the Church of England again: he would bring in his
Antinomianism, and father it upon the Church of England, as if it were
Authentic in the Church of England to exclude Christ's Everlasting
Righteousness, and deny inward Purging and Mortification in the point of
Justification; and as if to conclude men completely Justified, by what Christ
has done wholly without, while they are both Unjust, Unpurg'd, Unmortified,
Corrupt and Wicked, were good Profound Doctrine in the Church of England; or to
conclude men completely Justified, while the Devils Kingdom is in being in
them: For opposing this he balls and clamours most Hideously against W. Penn,
crying up the Doctrine of the Church of England, the Church of England against
him, but has most shamefully abused that Church with his Antinomianism.

Pr. Ibid. Christ's Righteousness wholly without.

Iibid. Made our's by Faith, a Doctrine of Devils. How base is the Light within
W. P!

Answ. If Christ's Righteousness be made ours by Faith, then it is not wholly
without. This Priest is inconsistent here, One while it is wholly without,
another while it is made ours by Faith; the latter is true: No Doctrine of
Devils, as most wickedly he has charged the Light within. For true Faith and
Christ's Everlasting Righteousness are Inseparable. This Faith has its
Righteousness from Christ, and is attended with true Obedience, good Works and
^oly Conversation. It Is a Heart-purifying Faith, a Justifying Faith, a Faith by
which we see him who is Invisible, and bring forth Fruits to him: Let Us see if
our Adversary dare deny this.

. VIII.] Pr. Ibid. Surely, it is high time for the Kings Majesty the Defender
of the Faith, to gird on his Sword; those that make so bold with this and other
Truths, are but like stinging Snakes in the bosom of Indulgence.

Answ. Here this Incendiary would instigate the King in defense of his
Antinomianism of Justifying men in their sinful and corrupt state, and to
Persecute the Quakers for asserting that Christ's Righteousness, wherein the
Saints are Justified, is not wholly without them, but they are inwardly
Partakers of it by Faith, and through a Purging out Iniquity, Mortifying of
Corruption, bringing in Christ's Everlasting Righteousness; otherwise to deny or
exclude this, says the Quaker, and yet conclude men completely Justified
wholly without, is a Doctrine of Devils, leaving men in an Impure state, and
allowing the Devils Kingdom to continue. Because of this the Persecuting
Clergyman would have the King's Majesty to gird on his Sword; and what for?
but to cut down this Quaker, that is for asserting a Real Righteousness of
Christ within, and against the wrong Imputation of the old Antinomian. He is
angry, that such are Indulged, that cannot favor the Devils Kingdom; he counts
the King very faulty, and charges him highly, as preserving stinging Snakes in
the Bosom of Indulgence, though doubtless he wanted Indulgence before he
Temporized. But now this Popish persecuting Spirit in the Clergyman wants to
have the Miter set above the Crown; all that are not for his Turn, he would
have them punished. He can assume the boldness to publish to the Nation, that
the King harbors stinging Snakes in the Bosom of Indulgence. You have heard
his Charge and his matter before, and what Refuges he flees to to maintain his
Antinomian, Sin-pleasing Doctrines, and revile them that oppose him: he would
fain have the Church of England and the Kings Sword to maintain him in that
which is plain Repugnant and Abusive to the Church of England. Thus like a
Temporizing Mercenary Hector and Popish Agent he has managed his Work, as will
further appear to his shame, as a Hectoring Bravado, a scornful, proud,
disdainful Person.

. XI.] See what follows about a Book of mine, Entitled, The Nature of
Christianity.

Pr. p. 13. [Upon my Confessing to Christ Jesus his Manhood and Divinity, the
Priest says, viz.] Here Is a parcel of good Words to gull unwary Readers -- the
Devil to promote Errors, has always used to dress himself, his Agents in the
Garb of Truth -- The Quaker will anon show us his Horns, we shall ere long know
him to be no tame Beast -- His ill inspiring Spirit will appear; you may
certainly expect from this Quaking Pamphlet most base pitiful Stuff.

Answ. Behold how he Boasts, Vapors, Infults, Hector, Scoff, Jeers and
Contemns! but the frothiness, falseness and silliness thereof will more
evidently appear in the Progress of our Controversy. It is not for any weight
in his Words, that I cite them, but to let the serious Reader see the Image or
Character of his proud and scornful Spirit.

Ibid. Touching my Opposing R. G's affirming a Justification and Redemption of
Men, even while no good is wrought in them by any Light or Spirit whatsoever,
and when no qualification is wrought in man by any Spirit whatsoever. [All this
Passage the Priest leaves out, and only falls upon my latter Words concerning
my calling in question R. G's Terms, viz. That God-man purchased and completed
Reconciliation, Justification, etc. with God at once without us (which I could
not own to be a Scripture Phrase or good Sense) Hereupon instead of any
Convincing Confutation the Priest flies out in Railery and Reviling at his
wonted rate. [ Pr. viz.] That God purchased of God, an old Socinian Cavil. Thus
the Light within is at unawares singing the old Cuckoes Song: Thus the Quakers
Ignis Fatuus, etc. What a blind pitiful Elf is this Quakers Light within, that
it cannot discern Redemption by Christ God-man, as purchase made without us!

Answ. Though he has herein reviled me with Socinianism and a Cuckoes Song, and
shamefully blasphemed the Light within, as an Ignis Fatuus, a blind, pitiful
Elf, etc. This makes nothing to my Conviction, but shows that this Proud man
glories in his Shame, Blindness, Scorn and Blasphemy, which is no convincing
Argument. Let him call it what he will, I am not yet convinced, that the
Phrase, viz. God-man purchased and completed Justification with God at once
without us, is either Scripture Language or good Sense; why does he not produce
us Scripture for it: for it renders God in the first place, as the Agent
purchasing or buying Justification, etc. of God himself, and so over-looks and
confounds or mis-placeth his Mediators Office, which as Man through God's Help
he performed, as God has said, In a Day of Salvation have I helped thee: he
was made lower than the Angels in respect of his Sufferings; yet God the Father
helped and supported him even in his Sufferings for Mankind.

Again, If the Father's Kindness to Mankind was no whit inseriour to the Son's
Kindness, or that they were both alike kind to Man (as it is not to be doubted)
then it was in the freeness of the Father's Love that Christ came to redeem or
purchase lost Man to God. It was by the Grace of God that he tasted Death for
every man, and became a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling Savor to God. But where
the Priest says, God-Man purchased our Redemption of God; this supposes him as
God to be the chief Agent in purchasing Redemption of God: Can this mean any
otherwise than that either God did so purchase or buy this of himself? or else,
that Christ, as a God inseriour to the Most High God, did buy it of him? which
so much borders on Socinianism, denying the Deity of the Son of God, or that he
is the Most High God, that I cannot be thus Socinianiz'd. For though Jesus
Christ be both God and Man, in absolute and wonderful Union, yet those Works
and Sufferings of his in the Flesh, which concerned Man's Reconciliation,
Eternal Redemption and Salvation, with Respect to his Merit and Dignity
therein, they all related to Christ, as Mediator between God and Man; and as
such he is called the Man Christ Jesus, and in these Considerations he is made
inferior to the Father, as he said, My Father is greater than I: We have one
Mediator between God and Men, even the Man Christ Jesus. It was as Man that he
dyed, and gave himself a Ransom for all, and it was by this One Man Jesus
Christ that the Grace and Gift of God has abounded unto many; as by man came
Death, so by man came the Resurrection of the Dead; this is Scripture Language:
and accordingly Redemption by Christ [as his giving himself for us, to Redeem
us from ALL Iniquity, from the Vain Conversation, from the Earth, etc.] is
truly owned by us.

Pr. page 14. God the Son made Man, purchasing our Redemption of God the Father
by the price of his own Blood, as God Int^rnate.

Answ. Now he has mended the matter; it is as he was made Man that he purchased,
or rather obtained our Redemption. By his own Blood he entered once into the
Holy Place, heb. 9.12.
having obtained eternal Redemption for us. And this Redemption that he
obtained for us, was our Deliverance and Freedom from under Sin, Death and
Condemnation, as the following words clear it. For if the Blood of Bulls and
Goats sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the Flesh; how
MUCH MORE shall the Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit offered
himself without Spot to God, Furge your Conscience from Dead Works to serve the
Living God. Hence it most clearly follows, that that Eternal Redemption, which
Christ obtained for us by his Blood and Sacrifice without us, must be partaken
of and enjoyed within us, by a real purging and sanctifying of our Conscience,
as before. And since Remission of Sins, Redemption and Justification are
attributed to the Blood of Christ, as Means or Cause thereof through Faith; it
follows, that though these were obtained by the Sacrifice of Christ without us,
they are effected and completed by him within us, for our absolute discharge
from the Guilt of Sin, Condemnation and Curse, by a real Purging our
Consciences, and Purifying of our Hearts by a true Faith in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, whereby we partake of the Effects and Benefits both of his
Merit and Sufferings outward, and his effectual Work inward to our Salvation
from Sin, and the sad Effects thereof.

He has obtained Eternal Redemption for us, he has gotten the Power thereof
for us, that we might have it and enjoy it, through his effectual Work in us,
in setting us free from the Bondage of Sin and Corruption: and this allows not,
that men are completely justified and redeemed while no Good, no Qualification
is wrought in them by any Light or Spirit whatsoever, as R. G. affirmed, and
whose Cause this Priest has espoused, and therefore it is Chargeable upon him:
wherein they have at once justified the Unclean, the Wicked, the Unbelievers,
the Unconverted, the Impenitent, etc. and excluded the Light and Spirit of
Christ, Faith, Repentance, Conversion, Sanctification, Humility, Sincerity,
etc. (which are Inward Qualifications, and Fruits of the holy Spirit) from
being conterned in this great Work and State of Justification and Redemption,
contrary to Christ's own Testimony, Except I wash thee, thou have no part with
me.

Pr. page 15. This Quaking Proteus turned into a Socinian shape -- Its still no
less than unscriptural, that God-man has purchased all of God without --
Farewell to the received Doctrine of the Church of England.

Answ. Quaking Proteus, a Fabulous Flout and Falsehood. The Quakers greatly
differ from the Socinians; both touching the Deity of Christ, and his divine
Light in man; and Perfection in this Life, as owned by Quakers, not by
Socinians. The Doctrine of the Church of England allows of no such Doctrine, as
that Persons are completely justified while no good is wrought in them by the
Spirit of Christ, and that under the Pretense of God-Man having purchased all
of God without. For even E. Still. Treat. page 270.
Stilling fleet, in his discourse of the Sufferings of Christ (against Socin.
and Crel.) counts it an Opinion which few, who have considered these things, do
maintain; and none need to think themselves obliged to do it, which is, that
Christ paid a Proper and Ridgid Satisfaction Let my Adversar: reconcile his
Doctrine to this of Christ's Satisfaction, as held by the Presbyterians, where
he says, That Satisfastion made by Christ, God-Man, to God the rathers
Justice, is a precious Gospel Truth. Is not this such a Notion as Edw.
Stillingfleet here opposes?
for the Sins of Men, considered under the Notion of Debt; and that he paid the
very same which we ought to have done, etc.

And further says, If the very same had been paid in the strict sense, Ibid.
p. 271.
there would have followed a Deliverance, Ipso Facto; for the Release
immediately follows the Payment of the same, etc. But we see, that Faith and
Repentance, and the Consequences of those two, are made Conditions on our parts
in order to the enjoying the Benefit of what Christ has procured.

And he further argues, and says, We are to consider, that these very Persons
assert that Christ Paid all for us, Ibid. p. 272.
and in our Name and stead, etc. But above all things, it is impossible to
reconcile the Freeness of Remission with the full Payment of the very same. It
is impossible the same Debt should be fully paid and freely forgiven. And he
counts, that they give the Church's Adversaries too great Advantage, who hold
this Opinion built upon a Mistake, that Satisfaction must be such a strict
Payment. However, let it be noted, That seeing Faith and Repentance, and the
Consequences of both, are made Conditions on our parts in order to the enjoying
the Benefit of what Christ has procured. It follows, that Justification and
Redemption are not completed wholly without us, or that men are justified and
redeemed, while no Good no Qualification is wrought in them by the Spirit and
Light of Christ; for Faith and Repentance are some Good wrought in us thereby.

Pr. Ibid. No such thing discoverable by the Light within any Quaker, as that
the Godhead and Manhood were joined in one Person, who suffered, was dead and
buried to reconcile his Father to us, and to be a Sacrifice not only for
Original Guilt, but also for all Actual Sins of Men. Ibid. The Quakers deny
Christ to be God-Man in one Person.

Answ. 'Twas discoverable by the Spirit of Christ in the Prophets, that Christ
should be called the Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9.6. as also by the same Spirit and ^ight of
it they did soresee his Sufferings as Man, and the Glory that should follow;
and that thereby as a Sacrifice he should make a Reconciliation for Iniquity,
and also that he should bring in Everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9. And
accordingly God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself: and it is as in
Christ, who is truly God and truly Man inseparable, that God and Men are
reconciled and in Union, but not so out of Christ, in their Unbelief, Sin and
Transgressions.

. X.] Pr. Ibid. If this with his Fellow-Quakers were enjoined by the King's
Majesty, the Defender of the true Faith, to subscribe to the Thirty Nine
Articles, then by their declaring their unfeigned Assent and Consent but to the
two first Articles thereof, their False Christian Paint would soon fall off
these Saints, Seed, People.

Answ. This man's Hypocritical Paint is greatly defaced by his Scoffing and
Flouting, and shamefully Belying us therewith: We hope to approve our selves
True Christians, Saints and People of God, when he and such Temporizing
Hypocrites and Scorners shall be had in universal Contempt for their
Wickedness. As to the two first Articles, if that will either quiet him, or he
thinks it may make for him, I can assent and subscribe to the substance of the
two first, that is, To the One, Living and True God, infinite in Power, Wisdom
and Goodness, the Maker and Preserver of all things; and the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, as of one Substance, Power and Eternity.

And to the Son, his being the Word, the very Eternal God, of One Substance,
and that he took Man's Nature in the Virgin Mary, and that so he is one Christ,
perfect God and Man, who as Man truly suffered, was crucified, dead and buried,
and so became a Sacrifice for Reconciliation between the Father and us.

This, without any Equivocal or Reserved Sense, I can freely consent to, let my
Adversary make what he can of it.

Qr. G.W. Now if Professors come not to feel and experience these Things or
Works of Christ (viz. Reconciliation, Redemption, Salvation, Justification)
fulfilled within them, they are but mere empty Professors and Talkers of them,
without the true Life and Power of Christianity and true Religion.

[Priest answers, p. 16.] They are Quakers in Heart, ill principled in
Christianity, who do not see plainly, how this Quaker 's Spirit has put him
upon playing the Sophister, as well as an Ignoramus in it.

Answ. Here he counts us Ill principl'd in Christianity, Sophisters and
Ignoramus's, for asserting, that Reconciliation, Redemption, Salvation,
Justification, must be fulfilled within, as much as to tell us, that Professors
possess the true Life and Power of Christianity without having these Works of
Christ fulfilled within them, as if they were all wholly completed without
them, without respect to the Work of Christ within them. This is still his old
Antinomian Notion, which he would father upon the Church of England; but how
contrary not only to Scripture, but also to the Seventeenth Article of the
Bishops, concerning those who are Chosen in Christ, let the serious Reader
judge. The words in the said Article are these, viz.

Wherefore they which be endued with so excellent a Benefit of God, be called
according to God's Purpose, by his Spirit working in due season, they through
Grace obey the Calling, they be justified freely, they be made Sons of God by
Adoption, they be made like the Image of his Only Begotten Son Jesus Christ,
they walk Religiously in good Works, and at length by God's Mercy they attain
to Everlasting Felicity.

Here is as much said for me, as I can desire, to this Adversary's Confutation;
discovering not only his Abuse of the Quakers, but of his own Church, in his
pleading for a Justification of men wholly without them, so wholly excluding
the Works of Christ from within, leaving them under the Dominion of Sin and
Satan. But this is not all, but also in the said 17th Article there are these
words, viz.

And such as feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ mortifying
the Works of the Flesh and their Earthly Members, and drawing up their Minds to
High and Heavenly Things -- fervently kindle their Love toward God.

How plain is it that here is Confession to the working of God's Spirit, even
to the feeling if it within, Obedience to his Calling, being made Sons of God,
conformable to the Image of his Son, etc. included in the State of
Justification, contrary to our Adversary's WHOLLY WITHOUT. By which it is still
evident, how he has contradicted the Church of England in this Point.

Pr. There is not one Syllable of Redemption by Purchase to be found in it, p.
16.

Answ. He intends this of my sense of certain Scriptureterms relating to Christ
and his Work, page 8, 9. of my Book, Nature of Christianity; but herein he has
shamefully belyed me. For Redemption is found, and thus explained in it, viz. A
Ransoming, Buying again, a Rescuing, or Recovering such as were under Bondage,
etc.

Pr. p. 17. Not only ignorantly, but basely explained -- they must be all felt
and experimentally fulfilled within Professors.

Answ. No base Explanation to feel and Experience Justification, Salvation,
etc. the Works of Christ fulfilled within. But this man shows his Baseness in
contemning this, and his Contrapiction to the Bishops Article before cited;
else, what mean those words therein, viz. Such as feel in themselves the
working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the Works of the Flesh, etc.

Pr. Ibid. Justification is altogether Popishly explained; a plain Instance,
that the Quakers Light within is from Rome, below, and not from Heaven above.

This is an Abuse again, it is not Popishly explained by us. For though the
Papists place the first Justification of men through the Means and Merits of
Christ to be, when God finds no good Works to Reward, but Sins to Pardon --
unto such as have Faith in him, yet they hold a second Justification and
Salvation through the Merits of their own Works by the Assistance and
Cooperation of God's Spirit Vide Rhemists Annot. in Nov. Test. on Romans 2, 3,
4, 9, and 10. Chapters, and on 2 Timothy 4. Chap. Verse. 8. where they say, That
all good Works done by God's Grace after the first Justification, be truly and
properly Meritorious, and fully worthy of Everlasting Life, and that thereupon
Heaven is the due and just Stipend Crown or Recompense, which God by his
Justice owes to the Persons so working by his Grace.
by which Merit or Meritoriousness of their own Works; they do not mean in a
mild sense an obtaining acceptance with God, as by doing their Duty; but in a
strict sense, that they have so deserved their Hire or Reward at God's hand, as
that they reckon God as a Debtor to them.

Whereas we place the Merit, Deserving or Dignity wholly upon Christ, both in
his obtaining Redemption for us, and his working in us that which is
well-pleasing to the Father, and his enabling us to do those things that please
him; wherein our Acceptance is wholly in him, both with respect to his
Suffering for us, and his working in us, and his working by us; and what good
we do by his Assistance, it is but our Duty, not our Merit; it is that wherein we
obtain Acceptance through the Assistance of his free Grace; and not that
whereby we can be said strictly to merit, buy or purchase Salvation to our
selves. For what is of Grace, is not of Debt, as from God to us; we are Debtors
to him for Christ's sake, but he is no Debtor to us in his Gracious Rewards:
For we have all that is good, Root and Branch from him, who has ordained Peace
for us, having wrought all our works in us; and we are bound to give thanks to
God always for what we have and are, even by his Grace and Goodness in Christ
to us.

. XI.] Pr. Page 19. To believe and wait for the Life Everlasting after Death,
is no Article of this Quakers Faith; this is a putting Salvation at a great
Distance.

Answ. This is a foul Perversion, as if I did not believe Life Everlasting
after Death; whereas I only detected R. G. his Mistake on Heb. 9.28. his making
the Believers looking for Christ and his Appearance the second time without Sin
to Salvation, to be a hoping and waiting for Salvation after the Bodily Death;
whereas I intended a Salvation from Sin, and consequently from Wrath, that this
Salvation ought not to be put off till the Life to come. For all that truly
know this Appearance of Christ for this end, experience him to save them from
Sin, and can truly say, Now is come Salvation and Strength, and the Kingdom of
our God and the Power of his Christ, Rev. 12.

Pr. p. 20. To affirm, that the Salvation of Sinners, yea, of the whole World,
should be completely finished by Christ's Death upon the Cross above Sixteen
Hundred Years since, this is strange Doctrine to this Ill principl'd Quaker.

Answ. If the Salvation of the whole World was completely finished by Christ's
Death on the Cross so long since, what should hinder any man of Salvation? And
if so completely finished, there is none like to miss of it; let them be as
Corrupt as they will in themselves, there is no exception of Condition on Man's
part. But if Salvation was so long since completely finished for Sinners, yea,
for the whole World, why does this Priest so Rail against me and the Quakers?
He should think by his own Rule, that we are completely saved as well as he.
But if he says, that we want Faith, Christianity and sound Principles, and
therefore are not saved, this still confutes himself, and grants an inward work
of Christ to produce Faith, Christianity, etc. for the completing our
Salvation, although Christ dyed for all men.

Pr. Ibid. You see clearly, its no part of this Quakers Faith to believe, that
Christ is the Son of the Virgin Mary.

Answ. This is an apparent Lie and gross Perversion; we have always believed
the Scriptures, even in this very matter of Christ's being born of the Virgin.

Pr. Ibid. This Quaker is bold to say to this Purpose, If any man believes,
that Christ shall come at the last day to judge the quick and the dead, to
adjudge the Righteous to Heaven, to condemn the Wicked to Hell, then he may
look till his Eyes drop out, etc.

Answ. A Notorious Perversion again; I said nothing to this purpose against
Christ's coming to judge the quick and dead at the Last Day, but against my
Opposer's putting off Salvation till after the Bodily Death, in reference to
that Appearance of Christ without Sin to Salvation to them that look for him,
and this on Heb. 9.28. Upon which I said, It Is strange, that Salvation of
Sinners, yea, of the whole World, should be completed at once above sixteen
hundred Years since, and yet to be so long after Death looked for, how long, is
not known to thee, etc. Not. Christ. p. 29. Here is not one word in opposition
to Christ's coming to Judgment. But what was argued by me in this Case, was in
respect to the Salvation of Sinners, and Christ's Appearance to save from Sin.
For but in page before I mentioned his Saving us by the Washing of Regeneration
and Renewing of the holy Ghost on Tit. 3.4, 5, 6.

Pr. p. 21. As for Christ's Righteousness without us made ours by Faith, this
is the Doctrine which is disowned by this Papal Quaker.

Answ. This is False again: for whilst we own a Life and Living by the Faith of
the Son of God, how can we disown his Righteousness that is made our's by
Faith? When it is made ours, we partake of it, though it was without us in him,
before it was in us by him.

. XII.] Pr. Ibid. In this Quaking Account of Justification, what has this
Quaker said more, which the Council of Trent has not determined to his hand?
viz. Council. Trid. Cap. 3. Sess 6. Cum ea renascentia per meritu passionis
ejus, gratia, qua justifiunt, illis tribuatur (Which he thus Englisheth)
Together with the New Birth through the Merit of Christ's Passion, Grace,
whereby they are made Righteous, is imparted to them. Cap. 7. Sess. 6.
Justificatio est and Sanctificatio and Renovatio interioris hominis per
voluntariam susceptionem gratiae (As he interprets) Justification is both the
Sanctification and Renovation of the inward man by Grace received. [He should
have said, By the willing or free receiving of Grace.]

Answ. And what does our Adversary infer from hence, but that Quakers and
Papists agree together in the point of Justification by inherent Righteousness?
And yet he cannot deny, but the Merit of Christ's Passion is confessed to in the
point. But it seems he would not have the New Birth concerned in the case, or
that Grace that makes us Righteous should be imparted to us (and so included
and joined with the Merit of Christ's Passion in this great point of
Justification) or that Justification should be both the Sanctification and
Renovation of the inward man by Grace received. If these be not offensive to
him, why does he clamor against the Quaker for agreeing with the Council of
Trent in this point? as if his citing the Council of Trent, having determined a
point to the Quakers hand, or which Quakers own (though they never received it
themselves) and which he himself does not at all consute, were enough to knock
down the Quakers at one Blow. Whence it follows, that where the Council of
Trent grants the Merit of Christ's Passion, which the Papists place men's first
Justification upon without Works, Christ's Merit or deserving herein must be
opposed, because the Council of Trent and Papists hold it. Is not this learned
Logic? Thus our Adversary has attempted to knock down the Quaker, because the
Council of Trent and Papists hold diverse Errors (but Papists render their own
good Works after the first Justification strictly meritorious of Heaven, which
the Quakers do not) therefore we must not hold any Truths, which they intermix
among their Errors, but be branded and derided for Papists, Papal Quakers; such
kind of arguing savours more of an Atheistical Spirit than of a Christian. And
such measure have we from our Adversary. But his main Design is, to oppose the
Saints being made Righteous by Grace imparted to them through Christ, and to
impose upon us a Justification, or rather his false Imputation thereof without
either Sanctification or Renovation of the inward man by Grace received, seeing
he has espoused the Cause of such as affirm Justification and Redemption of
men, while no good is wrought in them, and that these are fulfilled or
completed WHOLLY WITHOUT THEM. And yet to his own Confutation has granted,
that Righteousness must be imparted and retained (in his 10th page) but here
because the Council of Trent has confessed unto the New Birth; and that the Grace
that makes Righteous, must be imparted to them (rendering the Merit of Christ's
Passion as a means thereof (which is an Undeniable Truth) I must be reviled as
a Papal Quaker, and this Inherent Righteousness in the New Birth, though
wrought by the Grace of God opposed, as to our Justification. Thus my Adversary
has not only Absurdly argued against me, but Atheistically set himself against
the Work of Christ inward, by invalidating of it, reckoning Persons justified
Wholly without (which must be) whilst they are wholly Unjust and Poluted
within, or when no good is wrought in them; else what does all his Quarrel
against us amount to? But he sillily goes on in his Comparison between Quaker
and Papist, as follows.

Pr. Ibid. They do both disclaim the works of the Law before Grace received.

Ibid. Works not done in Christ the Seed do not justify, says the Canting
Quaker.

Ibid. Justification is the Sanctifying of the inner man by Grace received, say
the Papists.

Ibid. The Righteousness by Faith is when the Law is performed in us by the
Works of the Spirit, says the Quaker.

Ibid. By Grace received in the New Birth, are we made Righteous, say the
Papists. Thus the Light within, which guides the Quaker to Scribble concerning
Justification, is nothing else but TRENT POPERY, infused into them by subtle
Popish Priests.

Answ. We have nothing but his Comparison and Reviling here for Confutation.
The matter is answered before: I would ask this man, First, If he does not
disclaim the Works of the Law before Grace received? Secondly, If works not
done in Christ do Justify or render any Just? If he says, No, why does he
Scoff and Cry out, Canting Quaker, so saying, they do not? Thirdly, Whether any
do partake of the Righteousness by Faith without Christ's fulfilling the
Righteousness of the Law in them, according to Romans 8.4. For its them that are
in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit, to whom
there is no Condemnation, and In whom the Righteousness of the Law is
fulfilled. And this does not make void Christ's Passion or Suffering for man,
and fulfilling the Law in his Person without us; for therein he was not only a
Perfect Pattern of Righteousness, but also came to condemn sin in the flesh,
and by his Sacrifice to make an Atonement and Pacification to stop the Wrath,
and suspend the severe Execution of the Law (which man had incurred) and to
make way for Remission to us, that we might be the more engaged to him to
follow him in Spirit, and come under the New Covenant terms. But the Priest
concludes with a notorious Falsehood about what we write of Justification, as
being infused by Popish Priests. This is a Wicked Slander, for the work of the
New Birth Being made inwardly Righteous by Grace received in Christ, the
sanctifying and renewing the inner man by the holy Spirit; these we never
learned of the Popish Priests, nor ever were we discipled by them, but by the
blessed operation of the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, through Faith in his
Name, according to the Testimony of himself and holy Apostles most plainly
intimated in these Scriptures, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God. Except a man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3.3, 5. And, If I wash thee not, thou have
no part with me, said Christ to Peter, John 13.8. And, According to his Mercy
he saved us by the Washing of Regeneration, etc. Tit. 3.5, 6. And also, see 1
Cor. 6.11. where both Washing, Sanctification and Justification are said to be
in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. And even Erasmus
in his Paraphrase, on Acts 13.38, 39. says expressly, Through this same Jesus
each man, without respect of any Person, or else offense, has Righteousness or
Justification and Innocence profferred unto him, so that he believe the
Promises of the Gospel. Note, Surely then these are profferred to be received.
Therefore this Adversary's saying, That the Quakers have a P^pe in their
Bellies, and that the Quaker his Lines are hammered out upon his Popish Anvil,
as in page 22, 24. These are some of his Abominable Scurrilous Slanders; such
Temporizers as he are more like to have a Pope in their Bellies, that for their
Bellies can Temporize, Change and Turn their Coat in Religious matters. And how
like a Popish Incendiary has he acted, in rendering the People called Quakers so
guilty of Popery, as if he had a Design to carry on for the Popish Interest,
either by endeavoring the Quakers Destruction, because of their opposition to
Popery, or else by increasing the Number of Papists by adding the Quakers
thereto; or rather falsely rendering the Popish Interest far bigger than it is.
Besides, he grossly mistakes, as well as shallowly argues about Popery, in his
rendering some Truths, which the Council of Trent held to be Popery; whereas
Popery is the Gross, Erroneous, Idolatrous and Superstitious part of their
Doctrine and Religion, and not any Scripture-Truths that they hold. But this
man, it seems, where they hold the New Birth and the Renovation of the inner
man, etc. as necessary to our Justification, this he will deem Popery, because
held by the Council of Trent.

But further, Though Christ dyed for all, all are not Partakers of the blessed
Ends and Benefit thereof, but those to whom it is communicated; for, unless in
Adam they were fallen and degenerate, so as to dye (in their own Injustice) unto
Righteousness, they should not be unjust; so unless they be regenerate in
Christ, they should never be justified and live to him.

Council of Trent, chap. 3. Sess. 6. Unless they were born again, in Christ
they should never be justified [Then it follows] because that Regeneration is
given to them by the Merit of his Suffering, by Grace received, whereby they
are made Righteous.

What Protestant ever denied this? that only the Regenerate had the Benefit of
Christ's Sufferings, and that Regeneration was given freely, and that thereby
they were made Right ous, or Sanctified, or Repentance wrought in them, and
Newnes, of Life?

By Grace we are saved (says Paul) through Faith, and that not of our selves,
it is the Gift of God.

This Man appears in this Point an Adversary to the Papists and Protestants,
that are not Libertines. And the Charge is true against him, that the Papists
untruly bring against the Protestants (viz.) of Libertinism.

And at this rate he may as well invalidate much of the Doctrine of the Church
of England, so much applauded by him, for that she holds the same Truths, which
in diverse things the Church of Rome holds; and both have recourse in many
things to the same Authors and Fathers for their Assertions. And in this very
Case of Justification inwardly, the Rhemists in their Annot. on Romans 3.22. cite
St. Augustine speaking thus, The Grace of Christ does work our Illumination and
Justification inwardly also. De Pec. Mer. l. 1. c. 9, 10.
And again, He gives to the Faithful the most secret Grace of his Spirit,
which secretly he pours into Infants also. And again, They are justi^^ed in
Christ that believe in him, through the secret Communication and Inspiration of
spiritual Grace, whereby every one leans to our Lord. And again, He makes
just, renewing by the Spirit and Regeneration by Grace.

And also, a Person of note, who lately wrote the Book, entitled, The Middle
Way of Perfection, with indifferency between the Orthodox and the Quaker; he
vindicates us in this very Point of Justification as it is, from the Charge of
the Law and the Charge of the Gospel, confessing, That our Faith and Repentance
is our Righteousness in regard to the Gospel; but Pardon of Sin, together with
this Righteousness, so both into universal Justification, p. 5. And also pleads
for God's justifying us by this Righteousness that is by Faith, and Evangelical
Obedience. And farther (says he) I do not find that the Scripture does
denominate or pronounce any one Righteous, or a Just Man, from one end to
another, upon any other account then his doing Righteousness. As also says,
That calm Protestants grant the Constitution of a real true Righteousness,
according to the Covenant of Grace, page 15, 16. And grants A having the
Righteousness of a perfect Heart for Justification, and yet no man justified
but by the Grace of God through the Redemption which we have in Christ Jesus,
page 26. And also consesseth, That we have their Divines on the blind side, and
that the Orthodox are quite out, that will have any justified without a
Righteousness that is perfect, according to the Law, that justifies him, i. e.
the Law of Grace, page 26. And confesses also on St. Augustine, Aug de Spir.
et Lit.
That it is possible for a Man to attainto such a perfection, as to live without
Sin by Grace, or the special Assistance of God's Spirit; granting it also to be
our Duty.

But our Adversary tells us, That it is an old Popish Trick to assert
Justification by Works of the Spirit, p. 23.

Thus he still persists in his Antinomian, Libertine, Sin-pleasing Principle,
to shut out the Work of the Spirit from Justification, that Impure and Poluted
Persons may be deemed Just and Righteous under the Notion of Imputation;
contrary to the most Moderate and Learned of all sorts, both Protestants and
others, and contrary to what is before-cited out of their 17th Article, for the
Spirit's working in due season, and mortifying the Works of the Flesh (And I
would know, where ever any Protestant Writers of note did charge the Council of
Trent with Popery on the two Passages before cited out of the said Council
against us) As also contrary to many Passages in the Common Prayer or Service
Book, as in their Absolution to be pronounced by the Priest, viz. That Almighty
God has given Power to his Ministers to declare and pronounce to his People,
being penitent; the Absolution and Remission of their Sius, he pardons and
absolves all them which truly repent and unfeignedly believe, etc. Wherefore we
beseech him to grant us true Repentance, and his Holy Spirit, that those things
may please him which we do at this present, and that the rest of our Life
hereafter may be Holy.

But with what Heart or Faith can our Adversary thus pronounce or pray, when he
neither believes a Pureness of Life, nor grants Repentance and such unfeigned
Belief to concern our Justification, while he shuts out the Works of the Spirit
there, as he has done? surely he pronounces and prays what he believes not
but from the Teeth outward.

And also let it be noted, how Inconsistent our present Adversary is with the
Sermon preached before the Lords in Parliament upon the Fast day, February 4.
1673. by Herbert Bishop of Hereford, where after he has exclaimed against the
Vice Debauchery, Pride and Luxury, the abominable Lust, Excess and
Superfluities of our Times, he earnestly presses and urges upon their
Consciences For Humiliation, Weeping, Mourning, Fasting, mortifying their
Carnal Bestial Lust, that so God from his Mercy-seat might look down with
Compassion upon them, and pardon all their Crying Sins; and then God would
Bless them, etc. Here he did not preach Pardon, Peace, Blessing or
Justification to them, if they continued in Sin. And further plainly says, Now
that Sin is more hateful unto Christ than any Sufferings is evident, because he
endures all these to take away Sin. Christ could endure the greatest Torment
in the World, but cannot endure the least Sin; for Sin is not only hateful, but
a flat Contradiction unto God: for God is Holiness. Can we be such ungrateful
Beasts, such savage Wolves, such cruel Tigers, such bloody Monsters, as yet to
crucify him afresh, and put him again to open shame? God forbid! But let us
rather scourge and crucify the old Man, that hater of this our blessed
Savior. Thus sar the said-Bishop, with much more of this kind of his Sermon
aforesaid.

I am persuaded, if the Bishops did see and rightly consider much of my
Adversaries writing, and what Sin-pleasing, Antinomian Notions he would father
upon the Church of England, they would conclude, that he had need to preach a
Recantation Sermon, or otherwise, that he deserves to be degraded and
Excommunicated. I have quoted the more against him of matter owned by the
Protestants and Church of England, because he brags so much of that Church, as
if she would shelter him in all his Deceits and Abuses.

. XIII.] Pr. p. 25. In this Quaking Ramble we find too much abominable
Doctrine, viz. 1. No Hosanna due to Christ as the he Son of M ary, no existing
Bodily without us.

2. Jesus the Son of Mary is not God our Savior.

3. That Jesus Christ is not the Son of the Substance of the Father.

Answ. In all these this Envious Priest has most shamefully abused and
perverted my Words, as may apparently be seen in the Book, Entitled, The
Nature of Christianity, etc. page 40, and 41.

As First, About No Hosanna; a falsehood. For I confessed that the multitude
cried, Hosanna to the Son of David, Matthew. 21.9. And asked, if Hosanna be not,
Save now, I beseech thee? only I showed R. G. his mistake, that it was the
Multitudes, that cried Hosanna to the Son of David, which he placed upon his
Apostles and all his Ministers in all Ages; whereas they all confessed his
Deity as well as his Manhood, his being the Son of God, and the Root (as well
as the Offspring) of David. Yet I condemn not their Hosanna to the Son of
David, who in simplicity of Heart cried so. But yet that there is an higher
Expression of Honor to him with respect to his Deity, and as the Eternal Son
of God, and David's Lord, according to his own Testimony, when he questioned
the Pharisees and Scribes, who called him the Son of David, viz. What think ye
of Christ, whose Son is he? They said unto him, The Son of David: He said unto
them, How then does David in Spirit call him Lord, saying, The Lord said unto
my Lord, Sit thou on my Right Hand, till I make thine Enemies thy Footstool?
If David then call him Lord, how is he his Son? And no man was able to answer
him a Word, neither durst any man (from that day forth) ask any more Questions,
Mat. 22. and Mark 12.35, 36, 37. Did Christ herein deny himself to be the Son
of David, or of his Seed according to the Flesh? no sure; no more have we. What
I writ as before was in relation to the Honor due to Christ, as the Eternal
Son of God, which the Pharisees allowed not of, though they confessed him to be
the Son of David, but were offended at his owning himself to be the Son of God,
John 10.36. and 19.7. The Jews charged him with Blasphemy, and said, He ought
to dye because thereof.

Secondly, The Priest has most shamefully belyed me, by inferring upon me a
denial of the Deity of Jesus Christ, as if I denied him to be God our Savior,
which is a gross Lie; for I have in plain words confessed, that the holy
Prophets, Apostles and Ministers pointed and testified unto Jesus Christ both
as Man born of the Virgin, to his coming in the Flesh, Not. Chri. page 40.
and unto his Divinity and manifestation in Spirit.

Thirdly, The Priest has abominably belyed me in charging this Doctrine upon
me, that Jesus Christ is not the Son of the Substance of the Father Which also
he sets down in his 10th Article as the Quakers belief, p. 147.
whenas I have plainly confessed his Divinity, and the main drift of my Discourse
is, that he may be chiefly honored and worshipped, as in respect to his Deity,
Divine Power and Glory, as the Eternal Son of God. For that Hosanna, and
Adoration and Claim of Salvation, which some pretend only to Christ as the Son
of Mary, or to him as the Son of Mary only, this I was not satisfied with,
because it excludes his Divinity from that honor chiefly due thereto. And it
was hereupon that I asked R. G. the Question; If he had so considered Christ to
be God the Savior, or the Son from the Substance of the Father? Which I asked
not to deny him in either of these, 'twas far from my thoughts; but only to
show my Opposer his mistake in attributing all to him only as the Son of Mary.
Thus far was I from denying the Deity of the Son of God, or his being of the
Substance of the Father from everlasting, before the World was. As also I
showed, Mark 6.3.
that they who called Christ the Carpenter; the Son of Mary, (and were offended
at him) did not show that honor and respect to him, that Peter did, who said,
Not. Christ. p. 51.
Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, though this can be no Denial of his
outward Birth of the Virgin.

Pr. page 26. They deny, that the Son of Mary is to be worshipped as God.

Answ. We do not divide Christ, though we distinguish between his Godhead and
Manhood, viz. That though he be perfect God and perfect Man, yet inferior to
the Father, touching his Manhood, as is confessed in the Liturgy. And if any of
us have denied, that merely considered as the Son of Mary, he is to be
worshipped as God, I think, we should not be rendered Offenders, nor yet Deniers
of his Manhood on this occasion: for men more Wise and Learned than our
Adversary, have been of the same Judgment, Vide Pressed. Life Eternal page 44, 45.
see what D. Jo. Preston says in this very point, viz. How should we conceive
of God in Prayer, seeing he is a Spirit, and a Spirit we never saw? What
conceit and Apprehension of God should we have then, when we come to call upon
his Name? We may not conceive him under any Corporal Shape, for he is a Spirit,
and therefore they that think, they may Worship the Humanity of Christ
dis-joyned, are deceived: We are not to Worship it as separated from his Diety.
[Thus far Preston.]

Pr. Ibid. To call Mary the Mother of God, is a Popish saying, not
Scripture Language: In this Quaking Discourse the Learned may observe many old
Heresies revived -- This Quaker's ugly Doctrine.

Answ. This is the man, that has been upbrading the Quakers so much with
Popery, who himself now so much embraces their Language and Doctrine, that he
is offended at me for saying, It is not Scripture Language. But instead of
proving that it is, the man belches and rages and scoffs against me, and takes
it heinously, that I should Oppose or Question such a saying, as Mary the
Mother of God. He has it over and over, as if it stuck upon his Stomach. He has
it up as an Article of the Quakers unsound Faith, to say, That Mary is not the
Mother of God, and that it is Popery to call Mary the Mother of God (in his Art.
10. p. 147.) and counts the Quakers Light within to be very DVLL-SIGHTED, that
it cannot discern Mary to be the MOTHER OF GOD, p. 26. But whence has he this
Saying or Article of his Faith? Surely the Scripture is not his Rule for it;
but it is probable, he believes herein as the Church believes. That it is a
frequent phrase among the Papists to call Mary the Mother of God, we need not
search Authors to prove it: And the English College of Doway in their Annot.
on Prove. 31. ca^ her, The most Excellent and Immaculate Virgin, Mother of God.
That Mary is called, The Mother of my Lord by Elizabeth; and the Young Child
Jesus, his Mother, or the Mother of Jesus, in Scripture (which relates to him
as man) I deny not; but no where in Scripture can I find, that she is called
the Mother of God: Let him produce plain Scripture for it, and ends the
Controversy.

Pr. p. 27. Its against his Light within, it must be in his Eye, Popery to call
Christ the Son of Mary, and Mary the Mother of God -- Nay, it is Popery, which
is commonly counted Anti-christianism, to call Mary the Mother of God --
Deluded Quakers -- The Papists not so grossly deceived.

Answ. The first part of this Passage is a frequent reiterated Falsehood, to
say, It Is against my Light within, or in my Eye Popery, to call Jesus Christ
the Son of Mary, according to the Flesh; for he was Miraculously conceived by
the holy Ghost overshadowing her, and born of her. But I must confess, I like
not the phrase, Mary the Mother of God; nor do I think it would be seasonable
or effectual so to preach the Eternal God (that made all Things) to Indians and
Heathens under such a Character, as having a Woman whom he made, to be his
Mother: How many Turks or Infidels will they convince or convert to
Christianity, by telling them of the Mother of God? Nay, do they not hereby
rather lay a stumbling block in their way? I do not think, that the Papists
themselves would have more reviled and ranted against us, than this Priest has
done, for but saying, to be sure, it is not Scripture Language, to call Mary
the MOTHER of God, crying out, Deluded Quakers, the Papists not so grossly
deceived. Now he is wheeled about to the Papists, other while Ranting and
Tearing against them, like a Whifling Brash and Boaster. Before, he would beat
us down, as no better then rank Papists, for holding something determined in
the Council of Tront about Justification and Renovation of the inner man, as if
he needed no other Argument to knock us down, but the Council of Trent holds
it, viz. The New Birth, Sanctification, Renewing the inner man, by Grace
received, as necessary to our Justification, or constituting of us truly
Righteous in Christ. And why may not this Priest rather be deemed a Papist, or
one as ready for their Ave-Maria, as he was for the Common Prayer when he
turned his Coat, whilst he is so fiercely contending for their Unscriptural
Phrase before-cited? But then to mend the matter, he limits Mary's being the
Mother of God to the Son, according to his Manhood, page 26. We may see here
that there was need of this Amendment; If he would impose upon us (...) from
some Fathers by a Communication of properties, because Mary was the Mother of
him that was (...), God-man. Then it follows, That it is not a proper
Expression however.
whereas the Manhood was not God; he was inferior to God the Father touching
his Manhood, as in their Quicunque vult, etc. To his concluding this Passage
with this scornful flout, viz. Tremulus naviget ad Anticyras: This pitiful
Quaker wants a Doss for his Pericranium. I may rather, conclude this Priest is
hastening toward Rome. He wants some Preferment, Power and Aid from the Pope
to condemn Conscientious dissenting Protestants to Fire and Faggot; for he
appears offended at the King's Indulgence; he counts him too slow for his turn,
or not severe enough: Such Temporizing, Persecuting Priests are ready for Rome,
to have the Miter set above the Crown, and the Temporal Magistrates subject to
them, to do their Drudgery of Cruel Persecution, would be very grateful to
them; for whatsoever they may pretend against Popery, they are fitted for it;
the very Spirit of it, i. e. of Envy, Persecution and Pride has deep Root in
their Hearts; they smell very strong of the Old Whores Cup, which they have
deeply drunk of: It Is not their Pretenses against the Word Popery that will
excuse them, whilst they are in the very Spirit and Life of the thing Popery,
Persecution, Pride of Heart, seeking Dominion over men's Faith and Properties
also, striving to be Lord's over God's Heritage, who in his own Time will,
without doubt, Debase their Pride, their Lofty and Revengeful Spirits.

. XIV.] The Priest's next Quarrel is against a little Book, called, A Primmer,
by S. Crisp and George Fox the Younger, in which he proceeds as follows.

Pr. p. 28. The Mischievous Design of this pitiful Primmer is to Poison them
with Quakerism in their Minority.

Answ. A false Insinuation; no such Design in it, as to Poison any, but to
direct them to the Light of Christ within.

Pr. To diffuse Quakerism throughout the whole Body of the Nation, a
Mischievous Design, if not timely prevented by his Sacred Majesty.

Answ. He would employ the King in his Drudgery still: but what way the King
should prevent the spreading of that he calls Quakerism, he has not told us;
very likely it is by some severe means, as Hanging the Quakers and Burning their
Books (this Priest has Malice enough for both) as if that would prevail more
to the safety of Souls from Error then all the Priests Preaching or Arguments.
It Is evident, how little Interest they have in men's Consciences. But then this
course would honor the Quakers with Martyrdom, and raise greater enquiry after
their Religion; and then it will be time for Persecuting Clergymen to be
silent.

Pr. Ibid. Books not so dangerous as this is have been burnt by the hand of the
common Hangman.

Answ. He smells still strong of the old Where Is Cup, Envy and Persecution. But
the Impartial Readers will see that his Book is more fit for such Execution,
it is so filled with Scorn and Blasphemy against the Light of Christ Jesus
within.

Pr. Ibid. The Author is gone to his Judge, so this Book deserves a black mark
for his sake, and its Pestilent Doctrine.

Answ. Malicious and Blind Presumption, thus finally to condemn the Author as
he has the Book; as if he were infallibly sure, that he is gone to utter
Damnation. But see his Ignorance and Falsehood in his proofs.

Pr. Ibid. This Quaking Primmer begins with a Lie to corrupt Children's Minds
[the Light within] which is no express Scripture phrase, is indeed a mere
Fancy, the Real Quaker's Idol.

Answ. Gross Ignorance and Blasphemy! the Light within is no Fancy nor Idol;
it is the Light of Christ within, God's inshining in our Hearts, that we
profess, that men's Minds may be turned from Darkness that is within them, to the
Light of Christ within. That God has shined in our Hearts, is express
Scripture.

Pr. p. 28. Its false Doctrine to make the Light within to be the Teacher of
the Fear of God.

Answ. The Light of Christ within teaches to depart from Evil, and to do good,
to speak and practice Truth; and therefore the Fear of God is taught by it.

Pr. Ibid. In this Quaking Primmer little Children are taught to take heed to
the Light within them, that the Scripture -- the more sure Word of Prophecy may
not be regarded by them as their Guide or Rule of their Lives.

Answ. The more sure Word of Prophecy mentioned 2 Pet. 1.19. is explained in
the same place, what it is, Whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto A
LIGHT that shines in a dark place, until the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise
in your Hearts. And therefore it is a Light of Christ within, which directs and
guides unto his inward Appearance, who is the bright and morning Star: It could
not be the Scriptures of the Prophets, that was intended by this more sure
Word; for they could not be more sure than that Voice, which Peter, James and
John heard from the Excellent Glory, when they were with Christ in the Mount:
Nor yet more sure than the Apostles Testimony. Wherein then lies the
Comparison? but in that Divine Word or Light of the Son of God being more
general and more near to them, than that Voice, though both true: This Word
does shine in many dark Hearts, that never heard that Voice.

Pr. page 29. Gross Popery; here is Deliverance from Condemnation, not by Faith
in Christ's Merits, but by obeying the Light within, their worst Guide.

Answ. Here is gross Ignorance and Blasphemy against the Light of Christ within
still: Christ did not oppose his own Merit, Deserving or Dignity by exhorting
his Hearers to believe in the Light, that they might become Children of the
Light; and if we walk in the Light, as he (i. e. God) is in the Light, we have
Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
all Sin, 1 John 1.7. and this in relation to the Divine Light; for God is
Light, verse. 5. Therefore this Light within is that whereby men may know the
Benefit of Christ's Blood and Merit. But this Priest has here branded Christ's
and his Apostles Testimonies herein with gross Popery.

Pr. Ibid. Quakerism serves as a Stepping-stone for Popery in this Church and
Kingdom.

Answ. If Papists had not greater Hopes of making many of you Clergymen
swallow down Popery for Preferments and Self Ends, than they have of the
Quakers, they would not be so confident in their Attempts. It Is easy for them
to suppose, that a Temporizing Clergy man (whose Conscience is benumbed, either
by Avarice or Covenant Breaking) is a fit Agent to introduce Popery gradually,
under some hidden Disguise or Cloak; as this Adversary can cry up the Church of
England, and cry down Popery, while he looks and steers his course directly
toward Rome, both in his Rage against dissenting Protestants, and asserting
diverse Popish Doctrines.

Ibid. Qr. Primmer, p. 13, 14. Hearken not to the Deceivers, who keep you from
the Light of Christ Jesus, believe them not that turn you from the Light; for
they are not the Ministers of Christ.

(Pr. answers.) Here you may observe, how this Quaking Primmer is mainly
designed to foist these new Vessels by this bad Liquor put into them. Other
Teachers, whether Archbishops or Bishops, Priests or Deacons, are but
Deceivers, no Ministers of Christ, to whom little Children are here taught not
to hearken nor believe them.

Answ. How plain is it here, that by his making the Application to the
Archbishops, Bishops, Priestsor Deacons, he has granted them to be such
Teachers as keep Persons from the Light of Christ Jesus, and turn them from the
Light; for such are they that little Children are taught not to hearken to nor
believe, viz Hearken not to the Deceivers, who keep you from the Light of
Christ Jesus, etc.

Pr. page 30. Abominable False Doctrine, that the holy Scriptures are not the
Way to know the Truth.

Ibid. God's Ministers teach, that the Scriptures are the way to know the Truth.

Answ. Christ says, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life; and the Spirit of
Truth shall guide you into all Truth. Where do the Scriptures say, They are the
Way? Surely, they are not Christ nor the Spirit, but testify of both; which is
no decrying of the holy Scriptures to allow the Spirit the Preference.

Pr. Ibid. These Quakers are strangely fond of the Light within, so as to cry
down the Light of God's own Word -- This Quaking Dotage.

Answ. No Fondness nor Dotage in crying up the Light of God's living Word
within, which is nigh in the Heart (which is not to cry down the Scripture, as
is falsely supposed.) I have hid thy Word in mine Heart, that I might not sin
against thee: it is a Light unto my Paths, and a Lanthorn to my Feet, says
David.

Qr. Primmer, p. 16. Such are Deceivers, who preach for Money and Tithes; such
cannot lead you out of Transgression; for they are in Transgression themselves:
for Christ said to his, Freely ye have received, freely give; and Paul made not
the Gospel Chargeable: but these Priests, that preach for filthy Lucre, deceive
people.

Pr. The Priest answers, page 30. In this Quaking Primmer here is a base Charge
drawn against all the Ministering Priests of the Church of England. Here these
Quakers have fired their Beacon, that the Youth of this Church -- may have
timely notice to beware of their best Soul-Friends. Here the silly Sheep are
slightly counseled against their Keepers, that the Quaking Wolves may the
better prey upon them.

Answ. Here the Priest rages and rails, but defends not himself and his
Brethren from the Charge of such being Deceivers as preach for Money and
Tithes, and who being in Transgression not able to lead others out of it; only,
he says, It Is a base Charge against all the Ministering Priests of the Church
of England: as if he had told us, all the Ministering Priests of the Church of
England do preach for Money and Tithes; and then cries out, Quaking Wolves, as
if that were enough to clear him and his Brethren, and to be a deadly Blow to
the Quakers. Who is it cannot see such Impertinency, Malice and Railery!

He tells us, They are God's Priests and Ambassadors, by whom God does beseech
his Rebel-Subjects to be reconcited; but proves it not; we have only his
Say-so: He should have proved his own and their Call to the Ministry. We deny
that they are immediately called of God, either to be his Priests, Ambassadors
or Mouth: How should they be so Called that deny Immediate Teaching and
Inspiration, and especially such, who scoff at the Light within, and the
Spirit's Teaching, as this Adversary does? And for a mediate Call, I deny that
they have it from the holy Apostles or primitive Church of Christ in their
days.

Pr. page 31. Here little Children are taught to look upon all Teaching Priests
as so many Deceivers, as those Hirelings that preach for Money and Tithes,
which is a Lying Slander.

Answ. No; this is mis-stated; for they are taught to look upon all such as
preach for Money and Tithes, to be Deceivers, Hirelings, etc.

Pr. Ibid. According to the baseness of these Quaking Lines its a shame for the
King's sacred Majesty, the Defender of the true Faith, that such base Priests
should be owned by him.

Answ. Here for a shelter he would make the King a Patronizer of the Priests
Cause, how Base soever any of them are in Preaching for Hire, and Cruel in
Persecuting and Imprisoning People for Tithes: he thinks he argues stoutly in
their Defense, to tell us, The King's sacred Majesty owns them; when, alas! his
Majesty knows not a tenth part of their Baseness and Cruelty, who are guilty of
persecuting his peaceable Subjects for their Bellies and filthy Lucre. And
rather than not have their Covetous Ends answered, they will throw a Man in Goal
for the Value of a Tythe-Pig; they are so cruel and hard-hearted, many of them,
that they value a few Tythe-Piggs more than they do Men's Liberties or Lives. I
am persuaded such Priests will bring no Honor to the King.

Pr. Ibid. Devilish Lessons, that the Scripture is not the Word of God.

Answ. No where does the Scripture call it self the Word; but in the Beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, etc. and his Name is called The Word
of God, John 1. Rev. 19.13. Yet what the Scriptures call themselves, we call
them so and own them to be.

Pr. page 32. To say, that God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost,
are Three Persons, but One God; this is to speak we know not what, etc.

Ibid. To say with the Church of England, In the Unity of this Godhead there be
Three Persons of One S^^s^ance, Power and Eternity, the Father, the Son and H.
Ghost, is in this Quaker 's Account the Doctrine of the World.

Answ. That in the Unity of the Godhead there is Father, Son and Holy Spirit of
One Substance, Power and Eternity, we do own and confess, according to the
Scripture; but that these are Three distinct or separate Persons (as some have
called them) we have no Scripture Proof for these Terms. Why does not this man
bring us plain Scripture Proof in this Case? seeing he professes it to be his
only Rule of Faith? Has he not given here great Advantage to the Papists, to
tell him, that the Church is his Rule, and not the Scripture, in this great
Article of his and their Faith?

Pr. page 33. To prepare little Children to slight them (i. e. the Scriptures)
as being unable to bring them to know God and Christ, and the Spirit of Truth;
according to these Quaking Lines, St. Paul was mistaken, when he said, that the
Scripture was profitable for Doctrine.

Answ. It Is no preparing any to slight the Scriptures to testify of Christ,
his Light and Spirit of Truth, as being the Way to know God, whom no man knows
but by the Son's revealing him. And God, who commanded Light to shine out of
Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give us the Light of the Knowledge of
the Glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus. This is not said of the
Scriptures, though as given by Inspiration of God, they are profitable for
Doctrine, for Reproof, for Instruction, that the Man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto every good Work. Herein Paul was not mistaken; for the
Man of God is Divinely Inspired unto the right Understanding and Use of the
Scriptures: Therefore this Inspiration is the Ground of Divine Knowledge: The
Scriptures are profitable by the help of this; through the Blessing of God
hereby have we found Profit and Comfort in reading the Scriptures, which no man
can without the BLESSING of GOD by his Spirit.

Pr. Ibid. To Exalt the Quakers Idol, the Light within, little Children are
here taught to slight the holy Scriptures, as a Du^^ Book.

Answ. Here is both horrid Blasphemy against the Light of Christ within and a
gross Lie, that little Children are so taught to slight the holy Scriptures;
for they are told in the very words cited by this Priest, That the Scriptures
of Truth do declare of God, Christ and the Spirit of Truth: and this is not to
slight the Scriptures, thus to own their Testimony on the behalf of God, his
Christ and the holy Spirit. The holy Scriptures may be made instrumental for
our Profit and Confirmation through the Divine and Gracious Assistance of the
holy Spirit, but not of themselves or without it.

His Comparison between Popish Catechisms and ours, and his telling us of Papal
Quakers, that make their Followers twofold more the Children of Hell, are both
False, Infamous and Slanderous, and nothing like any rational Proof urged by
him, but a continued persisting in his Abusive Railery and Reviling; for which
the Lord rebuke him.

. X V.] The Priest's next Quarrel and Railery is against William Smith's two
Treatises, Primmer and Catechism.

Pr. page 33. Both Primmer and Catechism are the fittest for Smithfield, to
receive the Hang-man's Imprimatur.

Answ. This same Envious Spirit, that is still finding Work for the Hangman,
to burn such Books, for testifying of the Light of Christ within, would no
doubt both Hang and Burn us, if it had but Power: but God be thanked for
putting a Limit to it.

Pr. page 34. The Light Within, this Quaker 's Fondling, is the Child's only
Tutor to help him to know God, his Way and Truth.

Answ. You may see, his Rage is still against the Light Within, which neither
he nor the Devil shall ever be able to suppress, if they had Power to employ
the Hangman against us. I would ask him and his Brethren, if they think. that
any can know God, his Way or Truth, without the help of Divine Light? surely
they cannot by continuing in Darkness.

Pr. Ibid. As for the Scripture, which is given by Inspiration of God, as St.
Paul says, is able to make wise to Salvation.

Answ. Paul's words are these; And that from a Child thou have known the holy
Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation THROUGH FAITH,
WHICH IS IN CHRIST JESUS. But these words, [Through Faith which is in Christ
Jesus] the Priest has disingenuously left out, as if the Scriptures of
themselves without either. Faith in Christ or Light from him could make wise to
Salvation; whereas this was writ to Timothy, a man of God, a man in the Faith
and Knowledge of God, a man that was partaker of the Gift of the holy Ghost in
him, to whom it was said, Neglect not the Gift that is in thee, the Unfeigned
Faith that is in thee; stir up the Gift of God which is in thee, etc. So that
the Scriptures alone without Divine Assistance and Faith in Christ Jesus, could
not make him wise to Salvation (but the holy Spirit alone could) nor be of that
profit and advantage to him, but as he partook of that Faith which is in Christ
Jesus. For Christ himself was the principal and chief cause of saving Wisdom
and Knowledge, in whom all the Treasures thereof are.

Quakers Primmer, page 5. Such as are not Christ's Ministers have their Power
and Authority from Man, and each man a place of settlement, called a Parish: In
that Parish they have Tithes, and a Law made by man to compel it? and if any
for Conscience sake cannot give it them, then they Sue and Imprison them, and
Spoil their Goods: and these are Wolves Child, that are let loose among the
Lambs to rend and tear them, etc.

Pr. The Priest Answers, p. 35. By this Quaking Father the Children of this
Church and Kingdom are basely taught in a ridiculous manner to despise all Gods
Ministers of what degree soever, throughout this whole Kingdom, from the Kings
Chapel to the meanest Congregation we are all alike, none of Christ's
Ministers, like Jeroboams Priests or Baals Prophets ( this Quaker says) we
derive our Authority from Man. The Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops,
the Ordinantion of Priests and Deacons is no more but an Humane Invention, for
they have their Power and Authority from Man.

Answ. I shall need say little to these Passages, until he gives us a better
Consutation to clear himself and his Brethren, than only are-citation of our
Friends words, or his bare telling us, that they are God's Ministers. I deny
that the Children are here taught to despise Gods Ministers, when they are
taught to deny such Priests, as Preach for Hire and Divine for Money, and
Persecute, Oppress, Imprison and spoil People in their goods for Tithes; I deny
that such derive their Authority from God, or that the Consecration and
Ordination of the Bishops, who are called Lord Bishops (who by their Office are
made Great and Rich in the Earth, and their Parish Priests can show any higher
Power and Authority, then what is Human or of man, whether they be set up by
Pope or Prince; and many Thousands are of the same mind with me, as being
dissatisfied concerning them. Let them therefore show us any Divine Authority
or Power for their Consecration, Ordination and Commission, that we may be
convinced thereof according to the holy Scriptures: Otherwise its but a pitiful
begging the Question for this Priest to cry themselves up as Gods Ministers,
Ministers of Gods Word, or Gods Priests, and to boast of the Kings Power on
their side, and the Kings Chapel, and the Archbishops and Bishops, as if that
were sufficient to prove that they are Divinely authorized and empowered, while
this is his great Refuge, he has the King and Bishops on his side, and they own
the Priests; therefore the Consecration and Ordination, Power and Authority is
not Human or of Man, but Divine. What Real Christian or Rational man will own
such Arguing as this, to prove the Commission Divine? And verily this is the
best Logic and strongest Argument I can ^ather or naturally infer from this
Priests Method to prove his Call, Power or Authority to preach in the Name of
Christ.

Pr. Ibid. An Hourglass measures the time of their Preaching, which their Eyes
are often upon -- In this Qu^kers Eye they are no better than so many Hourglass
Preachers.

Answ. It Is strange this Man should cite this passage against the Priests
practice, and give us no better proof for it, then only the Recital of the
Charge, and telling us, It Is a silly scandalous Charge, and that it is a shame
that such base things should not signally be taken notice of; as if to incense
the Magistrates to punish us, for saying, The Priest Preaches by an Hourglass,
were Confutation enough for us, and proof sufficient for such a Practice. But
what Scripture has he for preaching by an Hourglass? Come Priest, bring us
plain Scripture for this your practice, or else never pretend the Scripture to
be thy Rule of Faith and Practice.

Quakers Prim. p. 10. The Scriptures are a true Testimony, of what the Saints
are made Witnesses of; but the Spirit is the Rule unto them that gave forth the
Scriptures.

The Priest Answers, p. 36. The Youth are taught by this Quaking Father, that
the Scriptures are not the Rule of Faith and Obedience.

Answ. Come Priest, seeing it is an Article of thy Faith, that the Scriptures
are the Rule of Faith and Obedience, and not the Spirit, as appears by the
Tenor of thy Writing, let us have plain Scripture to prove this great Article
of thy Faith, to wit, that the Scriptures are the Rule of Faith and Obedience:
If thou have not plain Scripture for this, then it follows, not only that the
Scripture is not the Rule of thy Faith and Practice, but also that thy Position
or Article in this case is unsound, as well as Unscriptural, and inconsistent
with it self, that the Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith, etc. and yet no
Scripture to prove they are so. But that they testify of Christ as the Way,
the Truth, the Life, the Light, and that the Spirit of Truth is that which
guides into all Truth; this is Scriptural. And further, it is very Uncharitable
to condemn all Nations that have not the Scriptures, and that is the
consequence of placing the Rule of Faith, Knowledge of God and Salvation only
upon the Scripture, and not upon the Light of Christ within.

Pr. Ibid. Unto the Law and the Testimony, is no Rule for Children to walk by.

Page 65. By no means the Law and the Testimony, mentioned by the Prophet
Isaiah, may now be our Rule -- Has not this man Quaked to purpose?

Answ. He still wrongs and abusively derides the Quaker; for children are not
so taught, that the Law and the Testimony is No Rule for them to walk by,
whether it relate to the Law and Testimony of God, as outward in Scripture, or
inward in the Heart; whether to the Law and Testimony of God by Moses as in
Tables of Stone, or to the Law and Testimony of Christ as in fleshly Tables of
the Heart, we cannot say of either, that it is no Rule at all; for every Command
or Precept from God or Christ, whether it be upon outward or inward Record, is
a Rule in it self, for Instruction by the Spirit's Assistance. The Law and
Testimony, as given by Moses, and as in Tables of Stone were a Rule to Israel
after the Flesh (yet not to exclude the Word nigh them, even in their Hearts,
or their hearkening to the Voice of God, for that was through all
Dispensations) The Law and Testimony of the New Covenant, written in the Hearts
of spiritual Christians, under the Guidance of the holy Spirit, must needs be
their Rule now, who Worship God in Spirit. And further, the Commandment which
is a Lamp, and the Law which is Light, and the Testimony of Jesus which is the
Spirit of Prophecy, are not only the Principal Rule in the Hearts of Spiritual
Christians (who are the Evangelical Israel and Inward Jews) but also of more
Universal extent as to Nations then the Scriptures are. For when even those
Gentiles who have not the Law (and yet) do by Nature the things contained in
the Law; these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, which show the
work of the Law written in their Hearts, Romans 2.14, 15. So that the Scripture
could not be their Rule who had it not, but the Law and Light of God and his
Christ in their Hearts. And the Law and the Testimony within contain the
Substance and Truth of what is written in Scripture, and will the more clearly
and livingly appear, and be read in the Heart, as the Vail of Darkness, Sin and
Corruption in man is removed and taken away in his Conversion and coming into
the New Covenant Dispensation. On the words, To the Law and to the Testimony: I
would Query, If this Testimony could be the Books of the New Testament, which
this Prophet Isaiah referred them then to? No sure; how could they, when those
Books were not then written? Yet whoever obey and follow the Law and Testimony
of the SPIRIT of Life in Christ Jesus within, such cannot Oppose, Slight nor
Invalidate any thing of holy Scripture, but have real Union therewith, and be
in the Life, Practice and Fulfilling thereof.

Pr. Ibid. The Spirit that does infatuate the Quakers, is the foolish Guide,
whom this Quaking Father would have his Child to follow.

Answ. What Blasphemous Folly is this against the Spirit of Truth, which the
Quaker would have the Child, yea, and all Men to follow? which it is Horrid
Blasphemy to charge with being an Infatuating or Foolish Guide; whereby he has
also abused and slighted Christ's Testimony and the Scriptures, which testify
of the Spirit of Truth to guide into all Truth.

Pr. Ibid. This Quakers Faith -- to undermine the Scriptures, to render them
good for nothing; for, says he, the Spirit alone is to be minded in all
things; therefore the Scriptures to be minded in nothing.

Answ. He has herein abominably belied the Quaker and perverted his words,
though he himself has cited but a few Lines before, in the same page 36. viz.
The Scriptures are a true Testimony of what the Saints were made Witnesses of:
This is no undermining nor rendering them good for nothing. Again, from minding
the Spirit alone in all things, it follows not, that the Scriptures are to be
minded in nothing. He might as well have said, that nothing else upon any
account is to be minded but the Spirit alone; howbeit, that the Spirit alone is
to be minded in all things, as the Principal and most Eminent Rule, is true;
yea, it is to be minded even in the reading Scriptures, or else they cannot be
rightly understood.

Pr. p. 37. The Quakers ill Spirit is to be minded in all things; this alone is
the true Discerner betwixt Truth and Falsehood; but pity those poor Children
that have no better guide to follow.

Answ. When the Quakers speak of the Spirit of Truth, this Priest will have it
the Quakers Ill Spirit: thus he Blasphemously perverts still. But that the
Spirit of Truth is both the true Discerner and Giver of true Discerning betwixt
Truth and Falsehood, I suppose he dare not deny.

S. XVI.] Pr. page 38. As for those Priests, that do warrantably use the Common
Prayer Book either in the King's Chapel or elsewhere (to speak this Quakers
mind or sense) they are a company of dull Ignoramusses, they cannot pray at
all; a sad Case, except it be in the Quakers Dumb Meeting, or amongst those
that are acted by the Spirit of the Hat.

Answ. The Quaker so called, was speaking of such Priests and Teachers as pray
not with the Spirit nor with Understanding, and of some, that cannot pray at
all, but as they have Made Prayers by others in a Book to read; and such it
seems, he renders those Priests in the King's Chapel and elsewhere, so dull
as that they cannot pray without Book; for he has made the Application with
such a Reflection.

As for our Meeting, which he Scornfully terms Dumb; we therein wait upon God
in his holy Fear, and have regard to the Motions of his good Spirit in his
Worship and Service, both in our inward Attention, Meditation, Souls breathings
unto God, Preaching, Praying to, and Praising our God, who is a Spirit and to
be Worshipped in Spirit and Truth. I take his telling of the Spirit of the Hat
also to be in Scorn and Contempt, and nothing at all of any serious Sense or
Argument in it; he should have explained himself therein.

Pr. p. 39. According to this Quaking Rant, is not the King's Majesty basely
reflected on? Has he not a dull Clergy to minister in his Presence?

Is not this Church, whereof he is a Nursing-Father, in a bad Cafe?

Answ. I think this Priest has Reflected on the King and his Clergy to
purpose, while he has rendered them such, as do not pray with the Spirit, or as
cannot pray without Book; for such was our Friend writing of, about which this
Priest takes all this occasion. And why does he call the King a Nursing-Father
of the Church? He rather means, as he would have him, the Nursing-Father of the
Clergy, that they may feed upon the Fat, live upon Tithes and Forced
Maintenance, Imprison and Spoil many Innocent Subjects, that the Lofty,
Domineering Priests may live in Pride and Fullness; which thing, doubtless, can
be no Delight nor Advantage to the King, that the Priests should thus harrass
and destroy his Subjects, considering his diverse Declarations for Liberty of
Conscience and Toleration. But if the King should grant and cause a Law to be
made to leave People free to their Consciences and Persuasions in that Case of
Payment or Non-payment of Tithes, then I suppose this Priest would not so
readily cry up the King as the Churches Nursing-Father. What the Prophet says,
That Kings shall be thy Nursing-Fathers, and their Queens thy Nursing-Mothers,
relates not at all to any Persecuting Church or Priesthood, but to God's own
afflicted People, Zion, or Church of Christ in the Restoration and Gathering of
the Gentiles thereunto, to whom he says, Thy Destroyers, and they that made
thee Waste, shall go forth of thee, Isa. 49.17. So that when such Persecutors
and Destroyers (as many of the Priests are) come to be removed, and the Hearts
of Kings and Princesses come to be made tender by the Invisible Power of God,
they shall be a Comfort as Nourishers and Relievers of God's afflicted People
from their Oppressions, when the Beast shall hate the Whore and lay her
Desolate, that she may no longer persecute nor drink the Blood of the Saints.
So that this Prophecy of Isaiah, Chap. 49.23. does not appertain to a
Persecuting and Oppressing Priesthood or Church, but to the Afflicted and
Oppressed Zion and People of God in the Day of his Churches Restoration and
increase, even among the Gentiles.

Pr. p. 39. Our Singing of Psalms in the Time of Divine Service, is as bad as
our Preaching and Praying.

Answ. Praises are not comely in the Mouth of the Wicked, their Prayers and
Sacrifices God regards not; If I regard Iniquity in mine Heart, God will not
regard my Prayers: You sing what you experience not in David's Psalms, Prayers,
Complaints, Lamentations, etc. You falsely personate David in Conditions that
are none of your own.

Pr. Ibid. The Quakers, to the shame of true Christianity, are they only, who
sing with the Spirit and Understanding.

Answ. We do not say, that Quakers only sing with the Spirit and Understanding,
but that the true singing is therewith. If this Priest pretends to sing with
the Spirit, then I hope he will own the Spirit's Guidance in this point, and so
to sing and pray without Book by the Spirit's Motion and Guidance: if he owns
this to be concerned in true Christianity, then why does he Revile the Quakers,
so called, for owning the Spirit's Rule and Guidance? If he owns it not, then
no Injury to tell him his Defect, wherein his Brethren are generally concerned.

Pr. p. 39, 40. To mount the Baseness of Quakerism aloft, the singing of Psalms
at Court in the King's Chapel, in the City and Country, in Cathedrals and
Parish Churches, is a very profane piece of Service.

Answ. Their being sung at Court in the King's Chapel and in Cathedrals, etc.
does not make the Service one bit better; it is not the Places, but the Hearts
of men, that God looks at; if the Hearts be bad and wicked at Court, in the
City or Country, in Cathedrals or Parish Churches (so called) God will never a
whit regard their pretended Services for the sake of the Places; for he is no
Respecter of Persons, he regards not the Face of Princes: It is not the Kings
Palace that will excuse men in offering Prayers or Praises from a poluted
Heart; Iniquity at Court is Reproveable in God's sight, as well as in City or
Country; it is Truth in the inward parts God requires.

Pr. Qr. Prim. p. 36. Christ did not ordain sprinkling Water in a Child's Face.

Answ. If he did, let us have Scripture proof for it, wherever Christ did
ordain or command Infants to be sprinkled, or called that the Baptism: I am apt
to be more than confident, that he has no Scripture to be his Rule in this
Practice.

Pr. Priest answers. page 40. We have quite lost Baptism, and the Lord's Supper
in the Church of England -- This Quaker does buldly say, They rose from the
Pope's Invention.

Answ. The true and real Baptism and Lord's Supper, both in the Type and
Antitype, did not rise from the Pope's Invention; but dipping or sprinkling
Infants, and calling that Baptism, was imposed by Popes: I challenge him to
produce plain Scripture Proof for sprinkling Infants, if he can.

Pr. page 41. Who can but laugh this Baal 's Prophet to Scorn! or rather, who
can but pity his great Ignorance!

Answ. This Person is given more to Laughter and Scorn, than he is to Pity; but
his Laughter and Scorn are but like the Crackling of Thorns under a Pot; for he
laughs and scorns at such as truly own the Light and Spirit of Christ within to
be their Guide and Teacher.

Pr. Ibid. Let this be noted, that the Quakers own no other Baptism, but that
which is in the Spirit, which certainly is NO SCRIPTURE-BAPTISM.

Answ. The One Baptism, which the Quakers own, is the Baptism of the Spirit,
testified of in Scripture: There is one Faith, one Baptism; Ephesians. 4. We are
all Baptized by one Spirit into one Body: and, As many as are Baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ. For this man to say, This is no Scripture-Baptism,
shows his great Ignorance as well as Error.

Pr. page 42. Alas, poor despised Church of England! What Is become of thy Two
Sacraments, which are generally necessary to Salvation?

Answ. Where is his Scripture for this Passage, for the word Sacraments, and
for the Two Sacraments necessary to Salvation? If he cannot produce plain
Scripture Proof herein, then the Scripture is not his Rule; but the Church is
his Rule, as the Papists say. His Railing and crying out, The Ugly Face of
these Quaking Lines! is no Proof for his Positions, but Reviling still.

Pr. page 4 3. Who knows not, that a Material Church is a Place made by Men,
and not by Angels?

Answ. Where is his Scripture for a Material Church made by Men? or that a
Steeple-house, or old Mass-house is the Church? He distinguishes not between
Ecclesia and Templum here.

Pr. Ibid. As for that Church which this Quaker calls a Living Thing, it is an
Unlawful Conventicle, Eccles^a Malignantium, the Congregation of Evildoers,
with which this Church and Kingdom is too much pestered.

Answ. That Church, which the Quakers call a living Church, is built up of
Living Stones, whereof Christ is the Head and Chief Cornerstone, no Unlawful
Conventicle. He now talk; like a Malicious and Popish Informer, that would
incense the Magistrates to Persecution against us.

Pr. Page 44. Not the King's Majesty on the Throne, nor the Peers of this Realm
-- do escape this Quaker 's Lash.

Answ. Neither the King on the Throne, nor the Peers of the Realm will be able
to excuse this Priest in the great Day of God from his Hypocrisy, False
Doctrine and Persecution.

. XVII.] Pr. page 45. This Quaker 's Spirit is very blind, that did not help
him to discern betwixt seeking Honor one of another, and giving Civil Honor
one to another.

Answ. Christ's words are plain, John 5.44. How can ye believe, which Receive
Honor one of another, and Seek not the Honor that comes from God only? Their
Receiving, as well as Seeking Honor one from another, is condemned by Christ,
as proceeding from Unbelief: but the Honor he pleads for, he explains, viz.

Pr. page 46. To have the Hat put off, and Body to bow, or the Feet to scrape,
this is Honor below, which this Quaker 's Power of God seeks not; Men scraping
with their Feet, Women Courtesying and drooping -- are by this rude Man
censured, as being Apostatizing Christians.

Answ. Why does he not produce Scripture for his Rule in these Postures, to
prove, that they are that Honor that proceeds from above, and comes from God
only? They are from below, if not from above. If the Scripture be his Rule,
where is his Proof? These feigned Postures of Bowing, Scraping, Drooping,
putting off the Hat, etc. to our Fellow Creatures, do not gratify an Humble
Christian Spirit, but the contrary.

Pr. Ibid. Till the poor deluded Quakers came on the Stage of this World, no
man was so silly as to tax Hat and Knee Honor.

Answ. This is more than he knows; other Conscientious Persons have scrupled
that kind of Complement: and Mordecai could not bow to proud Haman.

Pr. Ibid. According to these Quaking Lines, at Court it is not lawful to Kneel
before the King, etc.

Answ. To Kneel, Scrape or Bow before the King, make; it never a whit more
lawful in God's sight, nor any proof of being the Honor which comes from God
only.

Qr. p. 47. True Honor is from the Heart, and not from the Hat -- the Lord
requires it not, but the Pride of Man seeks it ( viz. to be honored with the
Hat, etc.)

(Priest answers.) In these Lines this Quaking Father has delivered abominable
Doctrine against the King, the Lord's Anointed, etc.

Answ. Why abominable Doctrine against the King? Is it against the King to
honor and respect him as King and Supreme Magistrate from the Heart, and not
with the Hat, as Men-pleasers? or to say, that it is the Pride of Man that seeks
it? He would debase the King very low, as if he seeks such out side Complement,
or insisted so much upon it. Thus this Priest, like a feigned Temporizer, would
incense the King about a mere Complement.

Pr. Ibid. For neither Hat nor Knee-honour do belong to the King; Thou King
Charles has too often been used by some Rude Quakers.

Answ. Was it Rudeness in the Prophets and the Apostles to use the same
Language, as Thou to a King? or for this Man to use it to God in his Prayers?
or is it improper in it self? What a shameful Trifler is this Priest, who for
the word THOU calls us Babel-Quakers! p. 51.

Pr. page 48. The Chief Magistrate the Fountain of Honor.

Answ. God is the Fountain of all true Honor. Ye seek not the Honor that
comes from God only.

Pr. Ibid. The King's Majesty is outwardly Honored by all Courtiers -- with
Heads bare, with Knees bowing in his Presence.

Answ. Is this like a Minister of Christ's Work, to teach people
Court-Complements? Let all serious Readers judge of this man's silly
Insinuations.

Pr. page 49. Plain Charles is Honor enough for the King.

Answ. That Is False, and Contradictory to what he has said before, viz. Thou
King Charles; which is more than only Charles.

Pr. Ibid. This Quakers Spirit has a Lie put into his Pen; for the Lord does
no where require, that we should Honor all men in him.

Answ. I know no true Honor we can give out of him, if all true Honor come
from him only.

Pr. Ibid. I hope I may write without Offense, that here are Treason and
Rebellion taught against our Sovereign -- Suppose the King were a Proud, Heady,
High minded Man -- this Quaker says, there is no Honor due to him -- without
Goodness, no true Honor due to the King's Greatness -- Abominable Stuff.

Answ. The Reader may see, that this Cruel Priest's Malice and implacable Envy
is great enough to Hang us, if he had power; but I never heard of such Treason
and Rebellion against our Sovereign before, as either to say, that unto a
proud, heady, high-minded Man (that is, merely as a Person, abstract from all
Dignities) though great in the World, there is no Honor due, that is, none of
that true and real Honor which comes from God only: for God honors not such;
but will debase them. Or to say, that the Lord requires not the Honor that is
from the Hat, but the Pride of Man seeks it; true Honor being from the Heart.
Where did you ever read of such Treason and Rebellion against the King before?
It seems, this Priest would have us Hanged for Traitors and Rebels, because we
cannot give the Hat-Honour, Bow and Scrape to any great man's Person. Or
because that unto a proud, heady, high-minded Man, though great in the World,
there is none of that Honor due, that comes from God only (the Honor, says
W. S. is given as due unto the Power) which is spoken in general, without any
particular Reflection upon the King's Person or Authority, as this Priest
unjustly strains our Friend's words. Yet though we cannot Respect men's Persons
with Hat and Knee-Honour, we respect their Places of Office or Dignity where
God has set them, and regard them therein, as the King's Authority, that God
has given him, and him as King we truly show our honest and Christian Respect
and Real Honor to (wishing also well to his Person) both as men fearing God,
and eschewing Vice and Wickedness, being subject to the Power for Conscience
sake.

Pr. page 50. This Quaker 's Doctrine tends directly to lay the Kings Honor in
the Dust, to strike the Crown from his Majesty's Head.

Answ. A malicious and slanderous Insinuation, to render us obnoxious to the
Government, for testifying against that Honor (of the Hat, etc.) which is from
below, and against Pride and High-mindedness that seeks it. We meddle not with
the King or his Crown, or any real Honor or Respect that is due to him from
Christian Subjects; our peaceable Conversations clear us herein.

. XVIII.] Pr. Ibid. It may be truly said, Beware of the Quakers; for, like the
Jesuited Papists, they are not in Truth the King's Loyal Subjects.

Answ. Thou love Lying, rather than to speak Righteousness; thou love all
devouring words: O thou Deceitful Tongue! God shall likewise destroy thee
forever; he shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy Dewlling Place and
root thee out of the Land of the Living, Psalm 52.3, 4, 5. O thou Lying Priest!
O thou Malicious Incendiary! Thou art the Person that love Devouring Words:
Consider thy End from the forecited Scripture: If thou Repentest not, God will
Debase thee to thy Shame. Why do thou hunt after the Blood and Lives of a
peaceable People? Thou have wickedly compared us to the Jesuited Papists. We
have approved our selves better Protestants, and more peaceable Subjects, than
such Temporizing Priests and Malicious Incendiaries. Let Shame cover thy Face,
whoever thou art, thou Scornful Malicious Person, thou Unconscionable,
Mercenary, Wolvish Priest, that make Lies thy Refuge: I have Matter against
thee, and where-withal to answer thee with a good Conscience, and therefore I
charge thee home, who for thy own Fame and Advantage seek'st the Destruction of
others, flatterest and daubest with Men in Power for thy own Ends, have men's
Persons in Admiration for Advantage; a Raging Wave of the Sea, that foamest out
thy own shame: Thy Abusive, Persecuting, Deceitful Work will redound to thy own
perpetual Infamy and Reproach.

Pr. page 51. To mount this Quakers Folly to its full height, to say to the
King's Majesty, May it please your Majesty; to any Peer of the Realm, Your
Grace, Your Honor; to any great Man, Your Excellency, Your Worship, etc. these
are according to this Quaker such Expressions of Civil Honor, as were never
spoken by any holy men of God.

Answ. Thus the flattering Temporizer goes on to ingratiate himself; but where
any Holy men ^n Scripture did use these Complemental Titles and Terms of
Honor, as Your Grace, your Honor, your Excellency, your Worship, etc. he
shows us not, but only Reviles the Quaker for his plainness and simplicity in
standing out of these outside Complements, calling him Rude Quaker, p. 54
whose Discourse serves to beclown all Courtiers, that do honor the King in
their Words and Gestures. Thus he would make us believe, he were highly
Courtified and very expert in Court-Complements; but I tell him plainly, that
the plain honest Quaker is more acceptable at Court among Noble Men (who are
men of Parts and Moderation) then an Hundred such flattering, creeping,
Temporizing Priests, such as he, who can Flatter, Creep, Cringe and Daub for
their own ends, and have men's Persons in Admiration for Advantage, especially,
if they want an Augmentation or fat Benefice, to creep, beg, flatter and
complement for, with Your Grace, Your Honor, Your Excellency, Your Worship,
Your Humble Servant Sir. But what he means by Your Worship after his pleading
for the Hat and Knee-honour, Scraping and Titles, he explains not: If all this
outside Honor of his result in the Worship of a Creature (as it seems to do)
then we may see whither it tends, that it is both to Honor and Worship men's
Persons, which is to have them in high Admiration for Advantage, to set them in
the place of God and Christ, to whom Worship only belongs. As in the case of
Mordecai; the reason he renders for his not bowing to proud Haman in his solemn
Appeal to God, as we have it in the 13th of Esther (in Apoc.) his words are
these; Thou know all things, and thou know Lord, that it was neither of
Malice nor Presumption, nor for any desire of Glory, that I did this, and not
bow down to proud Haman; For I would have been content with good will for the
Salvation of Israel to have kissed the Soles of his Feet, but I did it because
I would not prefer the Honor of a Man above the Glory of God, and would not
worship any but only thee my Lord: And this have I not done of Pride (ver. 12,
13, 14.)

Whereby it is evident that this Bowing the Knee was (as now the putting off the
Hat in Prayer to God is) a Token of Homage, Honor and Worship due and
performed among the Jews to the Lord God, and so they esteemed it. As Peter
said to Cornelius, Stand up, for even I my self am a Man, Acts 10.26 (as much
as to say, This Bowing or Homage belongs not to me, but to God) Its said in
Esther the third, All the King's Servants that were at the King's Gate bowed
their Knees, and Reverenced Haman; for the King had so commanded concerning
him. But Mordecai bowed not the Knee, neither did Reverence (v. 2.) And when
Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not the Knee unto him, nor did Reverence unto
him, then Haman was full of Wrath. Though the Persians manner was to kneel down
and Reverence their Kings, and such as they appointed in chief Authority; yet
Mordecai would not do it to this Ambitious and Proud Man (see the Margin on the
place) which if our Adversary had been in that Court, it is probable he would
have taken Proud Haman's part, and Accused and Vilified Mordecai, as he has
done the Quakers, and have said unto Mordecai as the Kings Servants did, Why
transgressest thou the King's Commandment? But it is not bowing the Knee only
unto a Proud, Heady High-minded Man (as the Priest supposes of the King) that
will satisfy this our Adversary; but he must have flattering Titles and
Complements, as Your Grace, Your Honor, Your Excellency, Your Worship, Your
Humble Servant Sir, etc. He is forgetful of that Serious saying of Elihu, viz.
Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's Person, neither let me give flattering
Titles unto man: For I know not to give flattering Titles, in so doing my Maker
would soon take me away, Job 32.21, 22. The Lord shall cut off all flattering
Lips, and the Tongue that speaks proud things, Psalm. 12.3.

And this I have further to say of Hat-Honour, Bowing, Kneeling, Scraping to
persons, Titles of Honor, flattering Titles, etc. that no humble-minded
Christian can take any delight in them, nor desire or expect them. And as for
the Proud and Lofty, who seek or look for such Honor and Complements, it is
really matter of Conscience to us, as well as 'twas in Mordecai, not to
gratify them, or answer that proud Spirit in these Vain and Heathenish
Customs, knowing that God will debase and stain the ^ride of all Flesh that has
a Life in them.

. XIX.] Pr. p. 55. All Swearing is condemned by this Quaker, as that Sin which
reaches to the Damnation of Hell.

Answ. It Is no otherwise Condemned by the Quaker then by Christ Jesus, Mat.
5.34, 35, 36, 37. And his Apostle James, James 5.12. But above all things my
Brethren, Swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by ANY
OTHER OATH: but let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into
Condemnation. Yet we distinguish in the Case: It Is more Condemnable (in such as
know Christ's Doctrine and Prohibition in the Case) to Swear, than in such as
are Ignorant of it, though not excusable in either.

Pr. Ibid. All the King's Subjects, who have taken the Oaths of Suprem. and
Alleg. by taking these Oaths, have done that, which comes of Evil, (...), of
the Devil, the Evil one.

P. 56: Which of the King's sworn Subjects have minded the Spirit of Truth,
when they took those Oaths? have they not done that which comes of the Evil
one? Is not this ^are Quaking stuff?

Answ. Here the Priest makes an Objection against all the King's Subjects,
which he himself cannot Answer, but only asks, If it be not rare Quaking
stuff: He argues neither as a Christian, nor like a rational or sober Man, as
if he would bear us down from a Practice or Custom among many of the King's
Subjects, and thereupon Argue, That because many of the Kings Subjects Swear by
a Law of Man, therefore Christ's prohibition is thereby abolisht, and
Whatsoever is more than Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay comes not of the Evil one; its but
Quaking stuff, to say as Christ says, that it so comes of Evil or of the Evil
one, as the Priest himself has given the Interpretation of Christ's words,
(...): And yet opposes and derides the thing, where conscientiously obeyed by
us, not with Disrespect to King or Government, but with respect to Christ's
Command not to Swear.

Pr. Ibid. St. Paul might have known this new Light Doctrine, that Christ ended
the Dispensation of Oaths, where Strife was; if this be not Abominable Doctrine
delivered by this Quaker, let the wise Readers judge.

Answ. What knows he but Paul knew this Doctrine, that Christ ended the
Dispensation of Oaths among his Followers, the true Christians. He does not
say, that an Oath for Confirmation is an End of Strife among Christians, but
among MEN, and such Men were the Jews under the Law, that were in the Strife,
which was the occasion of Oaths and Swearing. And however, where Strife and the
Nature of it is removed and ended by Christ Jesus, there need no Swearing to
end it among such Men and Christians.

But that Solemn Oaths (as he calls them) are as bad now, as Vain Oaths, are
none of our words, but the Priests unnatural Inferrence: for there is a
difference between an Oath taken solemnly (though under a misguided Conscience
or Judgment) and Oaths used vainly and frequently by Profane Persons, who
therein often sin against manifest Conviction of Conscience. Yet that Swearing
was lawful under the old Dispensation, but unlawful now, as is inferred upon
us, I grant; and this the Priest has not removed: he has made more Objections
for us in this case, than he either does or is able to Answer. And seeing he
has handled the point so very shallowly against us, I refer him and the Reader
to a Book, Entitled, The Case of the Quakers concerning Oaths Defended as
Evangolical; and another Book more large and full, Entitled, A Treatise of
Oaths; wherein both by Scripture, Reason, Authorities of many Authors, our Case
is defended in our not Swearing.

. XX.] Qr. p. 46, 57. If thou observest a Day, observe it to the Lord -- The
Name Sunday is from the Heathens, who Celebrated that Day to the Sun, and
called it Sunday.

Pr. p. 57. When the King and Parliament made the late Act for the better
Observation of the Lord's Day, then they did nothing but make a Law to
establish Will Worship, according to this Quaker.

Answ. We do not Reflect upon King or Parliament for making such an Act, nor
judge their Intention or Design to be to establish Will Worship therein. Here
the Priest still persists in his old Course of Hectoring to incense the Powers
against us, which is no Rational Argument nor Christian Confutation, but still
shows, that his Religion and Worship have their Dependence upon men. He is for
that Way, Method and Religion that is the uppermost, imposed by the Magistrate,
and that is his chief Argument. But what is this to Confute our Friend's saying,
The Name Sunday is from the Heathens, who Celebrated that Day to the Sun? And
dare he deny this, or say, that the Name Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
etc. did not spring from the Heathen, in Relation to their Gods whom they
Worshipped? And did not the Primitive Christians call that the first day of the
Week, which you professed Christians call Sunday after the Heathens Example?
And in our Meeting on the First Day of the Week, as the Primitive Christians
did, we do not superstitiously observe the Day, or place an Esteem or Sanctity
upon that day, simply considered, more than others, but observe it to the Lord.
The Apostle did not impose the Observation of Days upon the Primitive
Christians, nor were they to judge one another in that matter. One man
esteems one day above another; another esteems every day alike: Let every
man be fully persuaded in his own mind: He that regards the day regards it
unto the Lord, etc. see Romans 14.4, 5, 6.

Pr. p. 58. Does not this Quaker's Ignorance in effect count all holy Days
Apostatical? Are not these the Festival Days, etc?

P. 59. Real Quakers do not observe holy days, as this Church appoints.

Answ. The Real Quaker owns the Apostle's Doctrine, Col. 2.16. Let no man judge
you in Meat or in Drink, or in respect of an holy Day, or of the New Moon or
Sabbath Days, which are a Shadow of things to come; but the Body is of Christ.
Certainly Christ is the Substance and End of the Shadow. But this Priest is now
for Festival Days and Holy Days, as the Church appoints. Observe how like a
Churchman of Rome he here talks, as if he were directly steering his Course to
Rome. The Church is his Rule here, and not Christ nor the Scriptures; he is for
Festivals and Holy Days, as the Church commands, that is, He is for the
Observation of Saints and Angels Days, and doubtless for Mass-Days too; which
if he would have us observe, he should plainly tell us, whence the Observation
of such days sprung, and whether they are not enjoined in the Mass Book, and
from Rome.

Pr. Ibid. Whither do the Quakers come, when they are gotten over the
Observation of Days? for my part I cannot tell.

Answ. Seeing he cannot tell whither we are or do come, he should have let us
alone, and not reviled nor abused us, as men in such deep Ignorance, because we
can neither keep up the Names of Heathen Gods in Days, nor Popishly observe
Festival Days, Holy Days, Mass Days, etc. So here I must leave him in this
point with his Face toward Rome, not toward Zion nor New Jerusalem.

. XXI.] The Priest's next Quarrel is against James Parnel on the Collection of
his Writings. He is offended to hear, That they are given forth from the Spirit
of the Lord, or that James Parnel should be counted a Servant of God, as in the
Title of the said Collection: and therefore proceeds as follows.

Pr. Ibid. This Quaking holy Man of God was in the Quakers Account, no less
inspired by the holy Ghost, than the holy Penmen of Scripture.

Answ. We make no such Comparison of his being inspired; yet though we do not
equalize him with those holy Penmen, he was in some degree inspired by the
same holy Spirit, and bore a Faithful Testimony in his Day and in his Suffering
against the Corruptions of those Times, both of the then Persecuting Priests,
Rulers and People.

Pr. Ibid. The Quakers are not a little Flie-blown with Spiritual Pride.

Answ. That Is thy own state, Proud and Scornful Man; Spiritual Pride and
Conceit puffs thee up.

Qr. J. P's Trial of Faith, You believe you shall never overcome your sins so
long as you are here -- Here you show, your Faith is not built upon Christ, who
came to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to cleanse from all sins.

Page 60. Priest Answers, This is the Corrupt Testimony of this Quaking Martyr,
that they are no sound Believers, whose Faith does not cleanse them from all
their Sins; that the Faith of Christians is not built upon Christ, if it does
not make them free from their Sins.

Answ. That which the Priest calls the Corrupt Testimony, is according to
Christ and his holy Apostles Testimony. Christ came to Wash and Cleanse true
Believers from Sin, that they might be Clean every whit: he gave himself for
his Church, that he might Wash it by Water, through the Word, that he might
present it holy without Spot, etc. By Faith he purifies their Hearts; he
destroys the Work of the Devil: the Blood of Christ cleanses them, that walk
in the Light, from all Sin. And Faith in him overcomes the World, it was and is
the Saints Victory. These are plain and Scriptural Testimonies, how ignorant
soever this unsanctified Priest shows himself wholly a stranger to the washing
of Regeneration.

Pr. Ibid. A sinless state reserved, for the Kingdom of Heaven, is no true
Divinity in the Quakers School.

Answ. How is a sinless state reserved for that Kingdom, if not attainable in
this Life?

Pr. Ibid. If we say, that we have no sin (which the Quakers usually do) we
deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us.

Answ. An Untruth against the Quakers; where or when do they usually or ever
say, they have no sin? but that though there is a time of having sin, there is a
time of confessing and forsaking sin; and if we walk in the Light, as he is in
the Light, we have fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ
his Son cleanses us from ALL SIN, 1 John 1.7, 9. And says he, My little
Children, these things write I unto you, that you SIN NOT, Chap. 2.1. What John
writes relates to several states.

Pr. Ibid. This Quaker is certainly for a more holy Faith than God himself did
ever require. Its not the Ruling Power, but the being of sin, which this
Quaker's Faith makes free from: without doubt, this is to be Righteous over
much in this World.

Answ. The Priest is grossly Erroneous here; the Quaker is for that holy Faith,
which is the Gift of God, whereby he purifies the Heart, and which Faith
overcomes, and is the Saints Victory over the World. And to have the being of
sin destroyed by Christ, is not to be Righteous overmuch in this World; for
it is for this End, that Christ is made manifest to take away our sins, and to
destroy the Works of the Devil, 1 John 3. Christ destroying the Works of the
Devil, is to destroy the being of Sin, that it may neither Rule nor be in true
Believers. And this work of Christ is effected by degrees, as he is obeyed and
truly followed; whose Work of destroying Sin this Priest has apparently
opposed, lest he should be Righteous over much in this World, so that his Faith
will carry his sins with him into the next World, if he relinquish it not, and
where he will get rid of them there, he tells us not; but by his Opinion, he
must expect a Purgatory or place of Purgation after Death, seeing he
confesses, A sinless state is reserved for the Kingdom of Heaven. Observe
here, how near of Kin he is to the Papists, and how nearly he has bordered upon
the Doctrine of Purgatory; only they exceed him in believing that their
Canonized Saints and Martyrs shall escape Purgatory, and go directly to Heaven.

Pr. Ibid. If the Ill Spirit of the old Catheri was not gotten into this Young
Quaker -- The Quakers Idolized Perfection.

Answ. If by his word Catheri, he means the Puritans, or those called Old
Puritans ((...), i, i. e. Puri) then I must tell him, that many of the Old
Puritans were more Conscientious, Sincere and Religious to what they knew, then
himself is or ever was; Hist. Eccl. Eusebius. Pam. Lib. 6. C. 42.
for they were not such Temporizers and Opposers of the Light and Work of
Christ, they durst not call either an Idol, as he has done. And whatever
Novatus was (who called his Sect Cartharous, that is, Puritans) I matter not,
there were many Honest people in England and other parts of those called
Puritans.

Pr. p. 61. By this false Doctrine he has concluded the Church of England at
home, all Reformed Churches abroad under Unbelief, for being of this right
sound Mind, that they shall never be made free from all their sins, as long as
they are here.

Answ. Here he counts it a right sound Mind, that they shall never be made free
from all their sins, so long as they are here; but when and where they shall be
freed, he tells us not: I am sure, it is not the Mind of Christ, that men
should live in sin all their days. And I think, this Priest has wronged the
Church of England, if the Church of England means as she speaks and professes,
viz. in promising, to forsake the Devil and all his Works, etc. And in praying,
O God make clean our Hearts within us, and take not thine holy Spirit from us:
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this Day without Sin, with many other passages to
this purpose, in the Morning-Prayer and Service Book. And what has this Priest
done less then charged the Church of England with Dissimulation and Hypocrisy,
as being of a contrary mind, then what is here expressed? As also Edw.
Stillingfleet in his Sermon preached before the King, March 13. 1666. he
strongly argues and pleads against that Opinion of God's laying Impossible Laws
upon the Sons of Men, and puts the Question thus, Ed. Still. 6. Sermon. 1669.
page 69, 70.
For what is it, that God requires of men, as the Condition of their future
Happiness, which in its own nature is judged impossible? Is it for men to live
Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this World? For that was the End of Christian
Religion, to persuade men to do so.

. XXII.] Qr. The Scripture was spoken from the Light, but is not the Light, the
Word, the Life, the Judge, the Rule, the Guide, nor the Tryer of Spirits; for
all this belongs to Christ.

Pr. p. 61. I must truly say, this is none of Abel his Language, nor a faithful
Testimony for God; except another Qr. Atheist, or Anti-scripturist, none would
have laid such base things to the charge of the holy Scriptures.

Answ. Here is one of his base Abuses. For to say, The Scripture was spoken
from the Light, but is not the Light, the Life, the Judge, etc. is only as much
as to say, The Scripture proceeds from Christ, but is not Christ; for he is
the Light, the Life, the Word, the Judge, the Guide of all his true Followers.
And why may not he be called the Rule, as well as the Way, the Truth, etc?

Pr. Ibid. This Qr. is guilty of Weak Reasoning; because Christ is the Word,
the Light, the Life, therefore the Scripture is not a Light, the Word of Life,
a Judge, a Guide, a Tryer of Spirits -- rare Quaking Logic!

Answ. He grants the Qrs. Assertion, that Christ is the Word, the Light, the
Life; wherein he has weakened his own Cause: but his Inference upon the Quaker
I deny, for that the Qr. does not argue in the Terms he does. For the Priest
cunningly puts in A Light, A Guide, A Judge, A Tryer of Spirits, as applicable
to the Scriptures; wherein he greatly varies the Terms from The Light, The
Guide, etc. to A Light, A Guide. But that the Scriptures of themselves
abstractly are these without Divine Assistance, he proves not, if he dare
affert it; muchless, that the Scriptures are the Word of Life, or the Living
Word; let him prove that: I deny his Position; for Christ is the Living Word.

Pr. page 62. At this Door has been brought in all the Filth that has been
east upon the holy Scripture. The Scripture is not the Light? What is it then?
Darkness, says one Qr. not to be minded in any thing, says another.

Answ. There is no Filth cast upon the holy Scripture by asserting Christ to be
the Word of Life, the Light, the Judge, the Guide, etc. Again, I am confident,
that he has wronged two Qrs. so called, in his dark Accusation, not telling us
what Qr. would call the holy Scripture Darkness, or what Qr. did say, it is not
to be minded in any thing? This is a blind Story, I am apt to think, of his own
forging; for no real Qr. would speak so slightily of the holy Scriptures.
Though there are Parables, that are called dark Sayings, in the Scriptures,
which yet cannot properly be called Darkness.

Pr. Ibid. The Scripture is become like a Dung-Cart, to receive what Filth the
Qrs. and Papists have to throw into it.

Answ. This is an abominable and slanderous Comparison against the Qrs. who
have fully expressed their Reverend Esteem of the holy Scriptures both in
Doctrine and Conversation.

Pr. page 64. Are not those Streams, which make glad the City of God basely
foulled by him?

Answ. He counts the Scriptures those Streams, and thereby sets them in the
place of Christ, who is that Man, that shall be as an Hiding Place, and is
compared to Rivers of Water in a dry place, Isa. 32.2. And there the glorious
Lord will be unto us a place of broad Rivers and Streams, Chap. 33.21. And this
was in Zion, the City of our Solemnities, and in Jerusalem a quiet Habitation,
Verse. 20. It Is these Streams of the Water of Life, that make glad the City of
God, whereof the Scriptures testify.

Pr. Ibid. The Scripture (says this Qr.) is the Idol of all Gospel Ministers
to get Money by.

Page 67. They count the Holy Scripture an Idol.

Answ. A plain Perversion and Falsehood again; the Qr. says no such thing, nor
so accounts of the Scripture; but that your Leaders cause you to err for their
own Ends, and of the Scripture they MAKE an Idol to get Money by. He does not
call the Scriptures the Idol; but that such Make an Idol thereof, to get Money
by: and these are no Gospel Ministers. Those Priests who make a Trade of
Scripture, and exalt it in the place of Christ, make an Idol of it; but it is
not so in it self.

Pr. That the Scripture is not the Word, nor a Light unto our Feet, nor the
Rule, Guide, Teacher or Judge, because Christ is so. An Oracle from this Qrs.
Lying Spirit, p. 65.

Answ. By way of Eminency we own Christ to be the Word, also the Light, the
Rule, the Guide, the Teacher, the Judge, the Lawgiver; the Lord is our Judge,
the Lord is our Lawgiver, Isa. 33.22. Yet we don't hereby deny the Scriptures
to be a Rule, or to contain Words of God.

Pr. Ibid. That the sure Word of Prophecy is no Light shining in a Dark place.

Answ. Yes, the more sure Word of Prophecy is a Light shining in a Dark place,
in many Dark Hearts, whereunto men do well to take heed, until the Day dawn and
the Day Star arise in their Hearts. This Word was before the Scripture was
writ. The Priest calls the Scripture, the sure Word of Prophecy, but tells us
not what Scripture, nor wherein the Comparison is of its being the more Sure
Word of Prophecy.

Concerning the Judge and the Light within, and Benefit of Christ's coming, see
what John Preston says, in his Book, Entitled, The Doctrine of the Saints
Infirmities, page 106. (viz.) The Office (I say) of Christ is to teach men
Judgment, and this he does with much Tenderness, Compassion and Gentleness: 1.
To teach men the Just and Righteous Ways of God; so the Word is taken in the
Old Testament, to ENLIGHTEN men to judge of the Ways of God -- Christ is often
compared to a Shepherd that feeds his Flock. Page 107. And he is also called
the true Light which lightneth the World. If Christ had not come into the
World, there would not have been one spark of God's Image left in man; neither
Adam nor his Posterity should have known any thing, but a Cloud of Darkness
should have seized on men's Minds. But now by Christ's coming, every one, even
the Wicked, have this benefit, that they have seen common Light. Christ
lights every one that comes into the World, in some sort; teaches them so
much as shall make them inexcusable. And page 111. If Christ were not God and
Man (that is) If he were not patient, in an Infinite manner, he could not bear
with us, etc.

Observe how contrary to this of Christ's teaching men Judgment, and being that
true Light which lightneth every man, etc. our Adversary has proceeded against
the Light of Christ within, both before and after these passages, and how he
has opposed the benefit of Christ toward us, both as God and Man, contrary to
J. Preston's account, who was a man doubtless of better Fame, Religion and
Learning in his Day than our Adversary.

Pr. Ibid. Surely it is matter of Lamentation, that a false Christ, the Light
within, who is not God and Man in one Person, must by the Qrs. be thus exalted,
to lay the honor of the Scripture in the Dust.

Page 67. How fond the Qrs. are of their Light within, to exalt this Idol?

Answ. No such Design in the Quakers in exalting the Light within, as to lay
the honor of the Scripture in the Dust. It Is no dishonor to Scripture, to
exalt the Light of Christ within; and however, this Priest might have given the
Light of Christ a better Epithete than a False Christ, or this Idol; especially
since he has given us this Concession to the Light, viz. That no Priests of
the Church of England, or elsewhere, did ever deny, that God might not be
known by the Light of Nature within them, page 120. See how manifestly the
Priest has Contradicted himself here! Did ye ever read, that God might be known
by a False Christ, or by an Idol, or by an ELF before? as he calls the Light
within. Whether by Elf he means a Fairy, Nymph or Dwarf, his Term is very
Irreverent and Blasphemous.


Pr. page 68. It is a confessed Truth among us, that all those do hold the
Truth in Unrighteousness, that do not live according to it

Answ. Many such Professors there are among you, that do not live according to
Truth; we wish your Repentance and Amendment of Life, that you may through the
Grace of God live answerable to Scripture.

Pr. Ibid. But it is no false Light in any of us to profess the Scripture to be
our Rule -- By God's own appointment the Scripture is the Rule of Faith and
Life.

Answ. The cripture is not your Rule, if you walk contrary, and hold Truth in
Unrighteousness, and live a sinful Life; the Scripture is not the Rule of such
a Life, to be sure: And if ye know it to be a Rule and profitable to you, it
must be through God's Assistance and his divine Illumination, else ye cannot
understand it. But where by Gods own appointment the Scripture is called the
Rule of Faith and ^ife, he shows us not by Scripture.

Pr. Ibid. It Is folly to think, that the sinfulness of any man's Life can make
the Scripture to cease to be the Rule of Life, as God has declared it to be.

Answ. He shows us not where God has declared the Scripture or Writing to be
the Rule of Life, or the Rule of Faith and Life; we have only his Say-so for
it, no Scripture Proof for this Article of his Faith; And then where is the
Foundation of his Faith, which he pretends the Scripture to be the Rule of? he
is not content with its being a Rule Subordinate to the holy Spirits Guidance
and Illumination of the understanding but by way of Emphasis he must have these
Epithetes placed upon the Scripture (which signifies Writing) viz. The Rule of
Faith and Life? which yet he brings us no Scripture Proof for, that ever God
has declared it so to be, much less the Word of Life, the Judge, the Tryer of
Spirits, those streams which make glad the City of God. Wherein he might as
well plainly have told us, that the Scripture is God, Christ, the Spirit, the
Life, the Light, and what not?

. XXIII.] Pr. Ibid. Without doubt, it is a false Light in any Quaker which
guides him to say, that the Scripture is not the Rule of Life without the Light
within to guide him.

Answ. Here the Priest renders the Scripture the Rule of Life without the Light
within to guide; as if Men could know the benefit of the Scripture, while in
their Darkness, without the Guidance of the Light. The man is quite out here:
How should any rightly understand, use or improve the Scripture without divine
Illumination or Inspiration to open their Understandings? seeing that there is
a Spirit in Man, but the Inspiration of the Almighty gives him understanding;
The Spirit of God is sufficient to instruct men in those Nations where they
have not (or cannot read) Scripture; But the Scripture of it self cannot guide
any men, nor be of any real profit to them so much as a Rule of Life without
the Spirit and its inward divine Illumination. For what can dark minds, and
Earthly Corrupt Hearts, or Natural men by their own Wisdom truly understand of
holy Scripture? it is as a sealed Book unto them. And therefore the Psalmist
applied himself to the Lord in Prayer in this wise, Teach me thy Statutes, make
me to understand the Way of thy Precepts; so shall I talk of thy wondrous
Works. Remove from me the way of Lying, and grant me thy Law graciously; I will
run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my Heart. Teach me, O
Lord, the Way of thy Statutes, and I shall keep it unto the End. Give me
Understanding, and I shall keep thy Law, yea, I shall observe it with my whole
Heart: With many more such passages in Psalm. 119. Of whom did he seek this
Teaching, Understanding and Help, but of the Lord? Could then the Scripture of
it self do all this? no sure: Consider of it; and let all serious Readers take
notice, how blind Opposers of the Light of Christ within stumble and fall in
the dark.

. XXIV.] In the next place, the Priest appears greatly vex't at James Parnel's
Book, called, The Trumpet of the Lord blown; or, A Blast against Pride and
Oppression. About which the Priest greatly abuses the Author, and the people
called Qrs. most shamefully perverting his Testimony against Pride and
Oppression, as may plainly appear in a few Instances. As:

Whereas James Parnel says, Woe unto you, that are called Lords and Ladies,
Knights, etc. in respect to your Persons, who are Exalted in the Earth, who are
Proud, High and Lofty, etc. With other passages, Threatening and Warning of them
for their Pride, Wantonness, Voluptuousness, etc. instancing Dives, Haman,
Pharaoh, etc.

Pr. Hereupon the Priest says, According to this Qr. the last End of all the
aforesaid Persons, without exception, is to be destroyed, p. 70. And that
according to this Quaking Scrible, all that are called Lords, Ladies, Knights,
Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, Master, Mistress, Madam, shall every one of them,
unless they turn Quakers, be damned forever; they shall without any Exception
be cast into Hell, p. 71.

Answ. The Priests horrid and gross Abuse in these Passages, in saying, that
without any Exception they shall be all cast into Hell. Here he makes the
Threat Absolute, as if because they are called Lords and Ladies, etc. they must
all be damned in the Qrs. sense; which is a most Sordid Perversion and Knavery,
leaving out much that concerns their Destructive Ways and States, and the very
Principal Condition or Matter which J. P. inserted in those Threats and
Warnings of his: and yet for all this the Priest puts in or Forges a Condition
or Exception in his own Terms, That unless they turn Qrs. they shall be damned
forever. These are none of J.P's words, and yet a forged Exception enough to
render the Priest Contradictory to himself.

And it is to be noted, that this Priest in his Citation, page 71. out of James
Parnel's Book, page 31, 32, 33. which he takes together, he has left out the
most Materal Passages, both relating to those Ways and States that are
Destructive, and to those Conditions that tend to Salvation. As for Instance:
After the Words, Rising up to Play, the Priest leaves out, and live in Pride
and Covetousness. And after the words, The blind eads the blind into the Ditch,
he leaves out, and so you lead your Lives, and spend your Time here, and think
to be saved hereafter: No, no. And after the words, We is coming upon you all,
he leaves out, who are Proud; you must all give an Account before the Lord God
of Heaven and Earth, who is Terrible to the Wicked. Behold, the Day of the Lord
comes, which will burn as an Oven, and all that are Proud, and all that do
Wickedly, shall be as Stubble. Thus far J.P. And next after these words; The
Lord abhors all your Profession and your Hypocrisy, the Priest leaves out
these, viz. It is not Profession that he seeks for; it is Practice: it is not
the Sayer, but the Doer that shall inherit: it is not all that say, Lord, Lord,
that shall inherit; but he that does the Will of my Father -- The Lord looks
for Fruits, etc. And next after these words, You serve the Devil with your
Hearts and Actions, the Priest leaves out, who is King of Pride; and here you
are in the broad and casie Way, in the first Nature, which is in the Fall,
separated from God, whose Kingdom is not of this World. Thus far J. P.

See now, how plain it is that J. Parnel does not threaten them with
Destruction or Hell without Exception, or merely for being called, Lords,
Ladies, Knights, Gentlemen, Gemlewomen, Madam, etc. but plainly shows them the
Destruction and Misery that those Evil Courses, Ways and Practices (which too
many live in) lead to; and that they that live or continue in Pride and
Covetousness, cannot escape Destruction, is Evident: For without Conversion
there is no Salvation. Again, how plain that J.P. proposes the Conditions,
that God requires in order to a Reformation, and consequently the Salvation of
the same persons, whom he Warns in these words, viz. The Lord abhors your
Hypocrisy; it is not Profession that he seeks for, it is Practice: it is not the
Sayer, but the Doer that shall inherit -- The Lord looks for Fruits (as before
cited.)

Again, the Priest, p. 73. in his Citation out of James Parnel's Book, p. 34,
35, 36. he leaves out, Let your Mouths be stopped, all you who act in
Unrighteousness. And next after the words, Away with all your Profession, he
leaves out, and now Repent; and then follows, Tremble before the Lord: and then
he also leaves out, Come down, all you High and Lofty Ones: and then follows,
Howl in Sackcloth and Ashes.

And after the words (p. 34.) Who are for the Fire, the Priest leaves out
these, viz. For Fruit he is come to seek for. Therefore profess him no longer
in words, but now Repent and Return from all your Unrighteousness: for know you
not, that no Unrighteous Person shall inherit the Kingdom of God, No Vain
Person, nor Drunkards, Swearers, no Liar, no Proud, no Covetous ones, none who
delight in Pleasures, Sporting, Rioting, Chambering and Wantonness, no Unholy,
Unclean Thing must enter. Thus far James Parnel.

Now let all serious Readers judge, how basely and fallaciously the Priest has
dealt with J. Parnel and the Qrs. on his Account, to render him as Pronouncing
Absolute Sentence of Damnation for evermore upon all that are called, Page 74.
Lords, Ladies, Knights, Gentlemen, etc. Page 75.
as dooming them all without Exception to the Fire of Hell, page 75. And not
only so, but the Priest has forged this as an Article of the Qrs. Faith, viz.

Article 45. We Qrs. do believe, That all that are called Lords, Ladies,
Knights, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, Master, Mistress, Madam, are all accursed
of God, and shall be cast into Hell; and that they are no better, nor shall
fare better then Lucifer, Dives, Haman, Pharaoh, Herod, and the rest of their
Forefathers, page 154.

And to this very purpose he has forged Three Lying Articles in the Qrs. Name,
viz. his 45th, 46th and 47th Article. Wherefore I testify against this Priest,
as an Arrant Forger, and one that has dealt most Basely and Knavishly with our
deceased Friend's Testimony herein. For in the reading of his Books he could
not be Ignorant, First, That it was the state of Dives, Haman, etc. and those
that continued therein, that were liable to their End, to wit, Destruction; and
that they that live in these Evils, Pride, Covetousness, Oppression, Excess,
etc. do incur Destruction.

Secondly, That our Friend warned them all (to wit, the Great Ones, with the
Priests and People) to Repent and to Return from all their Unrighteousness,
etc. But this the Priest was willing to leave out and take no notice of, that
he might render the Qrs. more Odious, and incense the great Ones against them
as guilty of great Incharitableness, Religious Foolery, Melancholy, etc. and
says, because they are not Trembling Qrs they must all to Hell, Mind this
Melancholy Qr. how he has packt them up for Hell, page 73. We may rather say,
Mind this Deceitful, Scornful Priest, that has thus forged and played the
Knave, and fordidly abused the plain Testimonies and serious Warnings of a
deceased Servant of the Lord; and then Scoff, at Trembling. But the Day will
come, that the Fearfulness and Horror, that will surprise such Hypocrites,
Atheistical Spirits and Abusers of Truth and Religion, will cause him to
Tremble and Quake, and his Reward will be according to his Works, and the
Glorying of such in Wickedness will be their shame. Its time for this
Hypocritical Scornful Priest to Repent: J. Parnel's plain Testimonies and
Warnings, both to High and Low, without respect of Persons, shall rise up in
Judgment against this Temporizing, Daubing, Flattering Priest, that has so
foully and shamefully abused and perverted them, to incense the Powers against
us, like one of Jeroboam's Priests against the Lord's Prophet; see Amos 7.10,
13. even in as great Envy as Amaziah showed against Amos to Instigate the King
against him: Has this Priest shown himself against us for warning the great
Ones? He may see that J. Parnel was not such a Minister as could Daub and
Flatter great Persons for a fat Benefice or Augmentation, nor such an one as
could have their Persons in Admiration for Advantage, like those Covetous,
Temporizing Priests that can renounce and break their Covenan^, Turn from the
Directory to the Common Prayer, Wheel about with the Times, Sail with every
Wind to save their Livings, or procure fat Places or Benefices, Creep, Cringe,
Complement and Flatter great Persons, Page 95.
and give their Flattering Titles, of Your Excellency, Your Grace, Your Honor,
Your Lordship, Your Worship, Your Humble Servant Sir, etc. (as this Priest has
taught) and all for their own Ends and Advantages.

XXV.] Whereas the Priest is offended at J. Parnel distinguishing between the
Letter and the Life, as between the Shadow and the Substance, p. 70, 71. The
Priest hereupon says; That the Scripture by this Quaker is unjustly termed the
Letter, p. 76.

Whereupon I ask him, if the Apostle does not distinguish between the Letter
and the Spirit in these Scriptures, Romans 7.6. That we should serve in Newness
of the Spirit, and not in the Oldness of the Letter. And 2 Cor. 3.6. Who also
made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter but of the
Spirit. And whether the words Carnal Commandment, and Carnal Ordinances related
to no part of Scripture, Heb. 7.16, and 9, 10. And whether no part of the
Scripture or Writing of Moses or any else, was intended in this term Letter?
But consider all Scripture as it signifies Writing, ought there not to be a
distinction made not only between the Writing and the matter written, but much
more between the Writing and the Spirit, Life or Substance declared of in the
Writing?

Concerning Baptism he defends his practice very poorly (whilst he intends
Baptizing or rather Sprinkling young Children) in his telling us, That the
Church of England is grossly mistaken; this Quakers Doctrine has Quaked the
Doctrine of the Church of England into a mere delusion, p. 78. And why so? but
because the Quaker says, The Baptism we own, is the Baptism of Christ: there
is but one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, from Matthew. 3.11. Ephesians. 4.5, 6.
Collect. J. P. p. 67. Now this Priest proves not that Baptizing with Water,
muchless, that Sprinkling Infants is this one Baptism; we have only his Say so
or his Belief for it; or that Sprinkling Infants is a sign of Regeneration,
whereby as an Instrument the baptized are grafted into the Church, p. 78. He
produces us no Scripture Proof for it.

Pr. page 78. This Quaker has very mean Thoughts of the Lords Supper; he
counts it but the Worlds Communion -- As for the Bread broken, which is the
Body of Christ, this Quaker calls it, the Bread which the World breaks: he
speaks abominably of this Bread blessed and broken, calling it Carnal, Natural,
that it passes out of the Body, etc. Bread and Wine but the Husk and Shadow
without, p. 79.

Answ. It appears by this, that he deems their Bread and Wine Spiritual,
Supernatural, the Substance, the Bread, the Body of Christ: and then by this
the Wine must be the Blood of Christ, when blessed or consecrated by the Priest:
Which is rank Popery, all one with the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, as the
Rhemists in their Annot. on Matthew. 26. affirm a Consecrating the several
Elements of Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, the Bread into
his Body a part, as betrayed, broken and given for us; the Wine into his Blood
a part, as shed out of his Body for remission of Sins and Dedication of the New
Testament. Which is their professed Transubstantiation or changing the
Substance of Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, according as our
Adversary tells us, That the Bread broken is the Body of Christ. He has left
the Doctrine of the Ancient Protestants and Protestant-Martyrs, who did not own
any such Change of the Elements of Bread and Wine; but only, that as a Sign or
Figure of the Body of Christ crucified, they were received as a grateful
Comemoration of Christ's Death, and Sacrifice for mankind. But this Adversary
is offended that the Bread and Wine should be counted Natural; nothing it
seems, will serve him short of their being the Body and Blood of Christ,
according as the Rhemists also on Luke 22.19. say: Although sense tell thee
it is Bread, yet it is the Body; let Faith confirm thee, judge not by Sense;
after the words of our Lord let no doubt rise in thy mind of the Verity of
Flesh and Blood there is no place to doubt, etc. See how exactly our Adversary
agrees with these Papists, in saying, The Bread broken is the Body of Christ,
as before. By which he has now more fully manifested his Popish Spirit
(especially if he means as he spoke) as both repugnant to the Faith of all true
Protestants, who either look upon these outward Elements to remain the same in
themselves in Substance, both at and after the words of Consecration, and no
more than Signs, Shadows or outward Mementos at most: or look upon them as a
Figure or Shadow of the Spiritual receiving of Christ's Body and Blood in the
Mystery, to eat his Flesh and drink his Blood by Faith, as he is the living
Bread, that comes down from Heaven, who gave his Flesh for the Life of the
World. For there is an Inward and Spiritual Supper of the Lord, as well as
there was an outward, which they partake of who hear the Voice of the Son of
God, and open the Door of their Heart unto him, that he may come in and Sup
with them and they with him, according to his Testimony in Rev. 3.20. Yet we
acknowledge the Sign and Figure in its place and day, but the Mystery or thing
signified is greater and more Excellent.

Pr. The Letter or the Scripture is Dust, the Serpents Meat, which they food
upon.

Answ. This he falsely infers and casts upon J. Parn. whenas there is no such
passage in J. P's words, but that, Those who pretend to study Divinity, and go
among Ignorant People, and sell that which they have studied and got into the
Brain, and those who receive it, get it into the Brain; and so they live upon
Dust, which is the Serpents Meat, Collect. J. P. p. 78, 79. Hence its evident,
that he did not term the Scripture Dust, but the Hireling Priests studied
Brain-Notions or Knowledge.

Whereas the Priest appears in a great Rage and in Cruel Mockery against J.
Fernel, for his plain dealing with the Magistrates, Heads and Priests of
England; as where J. P. says, For the Testimony of this true Ministry some of
us are Imprisoned, some Stoned, some Stocked, Whipped, and shamefully entreated
as Vagabonds, Deluders, Wanderers, Raisers of Sedition, etc. and esteemed not
worthy to live in the Nation both by Priest and Rulers, who are out of the
Commands of God, and are Vagabonds and Fugitives from God, who go in the Way of
Cain and Envy, and murder the Innocent, Collect. J. P. page 80.

As also where he says, We own Magistracy in its place; for whilst there is
Transgression, there must be a Law, and while the Devil has Power over Man,
there will be Transgression. The Law was given forth to curb Evildoers, etc.
And true Government according to the Law of God is Serviceable in its place;
and all Magistrates, who fear God, and hate Covetousness, and are guided by the
Light of God in the Conscience, and execute the Law in its place without
partiality and respect of Persons, such are serviceable in their place, and
this we own and honor, and are subject for Consciencesake, J. P. Collect. p.
81, 82.

These Passages the Priest has left out in his Citation, except the first Line;
and then goes on citing, viz. They neither know how to rule or govern, who are
guided by their own Wills, such rule with partiality and respect of Persons,
and give forth Laws in their own Wills, Persecute the Righteous, encourage the
Heathen, etc. Upon these and such passages before cited the Priest shamefully
inveighs against and belies the Quakers thus, viz.

Pr. There are neither Heads of England nor Ministers, whom the Quakers own;
both the Magistrates and known Ministry of England are absolutely denied by all
through-paced Quakers, p. 81. And that this Quaker gives us plainly to
understand, that the real Quakers are none of the Kings Loyal Subjects; for
they own no Magistrates, but such as are Quakers like themselves.

Answ. All which are invective, malicious and abominable Slanders and false
Inferences, showing a very Cruel and Bloody mind in this Priest. Be it noted
still, that J. Parn plainly testified against the Corruption, Partiallity and
Persecution, that was among the then Rulers and Heads in England, who were
highly guilty of Persecuting the Innocent in those days, and that this was in
the time of the former Powers, in Cromwell's time, before the King's Return.
For it is above Twenty Years ago since J. Parnel dyed in Prison in Colchester
Castle for his Conscience and Testimony. Therefore, be it now observed, that
this Malicious Priest shows himself mad against those Testimonies which were
really given forth in Reproof to those Corrupt, Persecuting Rulers, who acted
in O. Cromwell's Name and by his Authority. As also that this Priest has
perverted those Testimonies, to render the Qrs. none of the King's Loyal
Subjects, and Denyers of Magistrates, except such as are Qrs. Which are foul
Aspersions and gross Untruths. How like a Revengeful Temporizer has this Priest
shown himself to incense the Present Government against us, for such plain
Testimonies against the Corruption of O. Cromwell's Government and Magistrates,
as if the King and present Government must be stirred up to persecute us to
avenge their Enemies Quarrel upon us, for our Plainness and Sincerity in
Testifying against their Persecutions and Oppressions. Thus the Priest has
over-shot himself in his Envy, Cruelty and Outrage. But I would yet ask him,
If it be not possible for Princes and Rulers to commit any Offenses against
God? And if his Servants may not be called to Reprehend and Warn them?

And therefore, seeing he has argued so meanly and pitifully against us, and
has used so many Citations abusively, instead of giving us any Christian or
Rational Answer, I shall here present the Reader with a Catalogue of some more
of his Lies, most Malicious and Devilish Slanders and Falsehoods (being Thirty
Five in Number) for brevity's sake, as follows, viz.

. XXVI.] 1. That no Magistrates, no Government, no Laws without Quakerism
stamped on them, are either owned or honored by any Qrs. p. 92. This is a
Malicious Lie.

2. That the Qrs. are Lawless (as well as none of the King's Loyal) Subjects,
p. 92, 93. A Persecuting Slander.

3. That King and Parliament, Magistrates, Laws, Government of this Kingdom are
very little either owned or honored by any Qrs. p. 93. A Lie also.

4. That they proclaim our Magistrates to be men of Blood, Bloody Magistrates,
p. 93. A Gross Lie.

5. That its no Qrs. Duty to be Subject to the Higher Powers, p. 85. A Lying
Forgery.

6. That all Qrs. with their false Christ, the Light within them, are in Print
a Lawless Generation of People, professed Opposers of the Government of this
Kingdom, Ibid. A Blasphemous and Malicious Lie and Slander.

7. That Vnquakerized Magistrates are no Terror to Evil doers, p. 86. A Gross
Lie still.

8. That the King's Majesty upon the Throne, the Peers with their Nobility and
high Honor, the Knights with their Worship, the Gentlemen, etc. are as bad and
miserable as the Devil, p. 89. A Most Abominable and Shameful Slander.

9. That any Peasant Qr. is more Honorable than the King's Sacred Majesty. A
Ridiculous Lie.

10. That the Qr. is boldly base, says in Print, there is no Honor belongs to
the Kings of England, who are born Heirs of the Crown, p. 91. A Lie still.

11. That the Qrs. are basely Destructive to the King's Majesty, to all
Superiority, Nobility and Honor, etc. A base Falsehood.

12. That the Qrs. do not give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, nor
Fear unto whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor is due, etc. p. 93. A Falsehood also.

13. That he looks upon them that do not Thou one another, or are You Would by
others, as so many Tyrants, worse then Turks, p. 95. A Shameful Lie.

14. That according to this Qr. the King as Supreme Head of this Kingdom has
that degree of Honor above all his Subjects which is made by the Devil, p. 99,
100.

Observe, Those Cruel Slanders and Devouring Words appear to be designedly
forged to render us Odious to the King, Parliament and Rulers, to incense them
against us to destroy us. Thus like a Raging Wave and one of Cain's Race has
this Priest attempted Mischief against the Innocent; plainly evincing how he
serves the Devil, who is the Father of Lies and Liars.

15. That Gospel Truths are by this Qr. said to be told men by the Devil: and
God's Ministers the Devil's Mouth, p. 102. Evident Lies also.

16. That Qrs. dare affirm, that all those Ministers of the Cospel are the
Devils Mouth, in saying, that Christ dyed for all, Ibid. A Notorious Lie.

17. That the Belief or Pleading for a Perfect Freedom from sin in this Life
makes the Qrs. miserably Proud in their own Eyes, and is an Haughty, Over-holy
Dotage of this Qr. p. 103. These are Lies also.

18. That according to this Qr. there has been no true Christianity, nothing
but Ant-christianism, cruel Darkness and Ignorance, and Estrangedness from the
Lord in all Ages of the Christian Church, ever since the Apostles Days, p.
107. A Lying Inferrence.

19. That ( according to the Qrs. Mind) ever since the Apostles Days they were
only vain Believers, who said, they believed, that that was the Christ that
dyed at Jerusalem, rose again, sits at the right hand of God, etc. Ibid. A
Perverse Lie.

20. That by this Qr. believing in Christ that dyed, is slighted, Ibid. A
Notorious Lie.

21. That there has not been one jot of Christianity in any part of the World
for many Hundreds of Years last past, ever since the Apostles Days; all
Christians in the World have not known the Lord Jesus Christ their Redeemer, p.
111. Shameful Lies.

22. That as for this Church and Kingdom, there is nothing but Antichrist, and
what is Antichristian to be found in them, p. 112. A Manifest and Gross Lie.

23. That like G. Fox, the old Qr. they are all equal with God himself, p. 116.
A Horrid Lie.

24. That Parnel affirms, That all Qrs. are Partakers of Christ's Divine Nature:
and hence, that Women, as well as Men Qrs are no less the Eternal Sons of God,
than Christ himself is, p. 116. Notorious Lies.

25. That all Real Qrs. are in their own vain Imaginations Godded with God, and
Christed with Christ; no less God incarnate than our Savior, p. 117. Malicious
and Shameful Lies.

26. That the Leaven of that little Book Theologia Germanica, has sowred the
Qrs. whole Lump, Ibid. A Falsehood.

27. That for the sake of this Quaking Blasphemy the Qrs. may well be ashamed
of their Light within, Ibid.

[Which Basphemy he charges upon those who affirm a being made Partakers of
Christ's Divine Nature, Observation.
by which they are made Christians, as in p. 115, 116. And so he has in effect
charged the Apostle Peter with Blasphemy herein; see 2 Pet. 1.4.]

28. That in these Qrs. account, the Ministers of the Gospel are no more but
Ministers of the Letter, and Persecuters of the Spirit, p. 123. This is also
False.

29. That it is the Qrs. Mind, that Christ's Body did vanish at his Ascension,
p. 124. A Gross Falsehood.

30. That the Quaking account of the Resurrection of the Saints is, that no
particular Saint shall rise with particular Bodies from Death to Life again,
Ibid. A Manifest Falsehood.

31. That a Qr. calls the Lords Table the Table of Devils, an Idol, and the
Fellowship thereat very Wicked, p. 126. Falsehoods also.

32. That all Qrs. are become so many Infallible Popes in their own account, p.
127. A Scornful Lie.

33. That Qrs. give forth Papers and Books full of old Errors, Abominable
Blasphemy, etc. And that all these are pretended to be from the Immediate
Eternal Spirit, Ibid. Abusive Lies.

34. That in this Qrs. Account, both the Worship of God and his Ordinances are
nothing else but a Mocking of God, p. 130. [Which is a Gross Lie also; for he
speaks this not of the Worship or Ordinance of God, Note.
but of your Hypocritical, Carnal Worship, Traditional Ordinances and
Observances, p. 129.

Note, that the Sum (or most) of these our Adversary's Horrid Lies, before
cited, (with many more) are answered in this Treatise.

. XXVII.] Pr. 35. That a Qrs. Light within him can act the part of Dis-loyalty,
Rebellion and High Treason against the King's Sacred Majesty, p. 140. [This is
a most Malicious and Cruel Slander.]

Note, that the occasion the Priest takes thus to charge the Qrs. Light within,
Observation.
is upon a Book of Warnings and Letters sent to Oliver and Richard Cromwell by
G. Bishop in the Year 1655. wherein the Priests deadly Malice is not only
against the Dead, but against the Living: This is to put an Odium upon the Qrs.
in general and the Light within, from some Passages in the Letters of one
deceased, so long ago writ, which it is not my business to Vindicate all that is
contained in them, relating to the Powers and Revolutions of Government; yet
however, where any Passage in any of them may seem Disgustful to any in Power,
this Priest has made but an Uncharitable and Unchristian use thereof, to render
a whole Body of People Odious and Obnoxious to the King and present Government,
wherein he has more than a little manifestly affronted and violated the King's
favor in the Act of Indemnity, and shown a manifest Contempt and Breach
thereof (though G. B. has now no need of that to be sure) But supposing the
Passages he takes Occasion at, to be as Offensive, as with any Color of Reason
he can make or render them (making the worst he can of them) You may see what
Loyalty this Priest shows to the King and present Government, in going about to
render a People, (who are freeborn English men, and peaceable Subjects)
Obnoxious to the Government, Disloyal and Rebellious on such a particular
occasion, telling us, Page 138, 139.
that their tender Consciences had no feeling of Rebellion and Treason, and now
charging the Qrs Light within with acting the part of Disloyalty, Rebellion and
high Treason against the King's Sacred Majesty. Also in his writing against
Edw. Buroughs for reproving the Oppressing Priests and Rulers that were in O.
Cromwell's Day, and for telling them, the Lord would cut them off (wherein he
truly foretold their Downfall) This also the Priest takes notice of, both in
his 132, 133, and 134th pages, and also makes it an Article of the Qrs. Faith,
Art. 90. to render us Odious to the present Rulers; for he is not so honest as
to tell them it concerned Cromwell (when Protector) and his Greatures or Agents
(not to excuse any Corrupt Rulers now) Thus like a most Envious Forger and
Perverter the Priest has treated us. And supposing he had real occasion against
something in G. B's Warnings or Letters aforesaid, yet how manifestly has he
Violated the Act of Indemnity, and herein shown himself most Uncharitable and
Unchristian; and yet he is the man that pretends to so much Charity and
Christianity. He counts it Uncharitable to put black Names (as he calls them)
upon Persons, and says, that Christian Charity thinks no Evil, and
Christianity speaks Evil of no man, page 113. But he has shown himself so much
void both of this Charity and this Christianity, that he both thinks Evil,
speaks Evil and acts Wickedly against many in his writing thus maliciously, not
only against particular Persons, but against the People called Qrs. and the
Light within. Also that in pursuance of his Malicious purpose to render them
Disloyal and Rebellious, he forges Five Articles in the Qrs. Name, as their
Belief concerning O. Cromwell, and the late King and the Powers, etc. as in his
Articles 91, 92, 93, 94, 95. which he forges on the said G. B's Letters
aforesaid, on purpose to render the Qrs. as odious and offensive as possibly he
can (somewhat like Jeroboam's Priest, saying, Amos has conspired against
thee, Amos 7.10.) to incense the present Government against them. As for
instance, Art. 91. this Priest thus proceeds in his Forgery, viz.

Pr. We Qrs. do believe, that O. Cromwell was one of our Friends, etc. And

Art. 92. We Qrs. do believe, that O. Cromwell was no Rebel, nor Usurper, nor
Traitor.

Observe. Thus the cruel Priest our Adversary has most maliciously and most
Knavishly Forged these things in the Quakers Name, as Articles of their Faith:
which were never so made, much less agreed upon by the Quakers as Articles of
their Faith. Besides G. B. plainly testified against Oliver Cromwell (even when
Protector) and so did Edward Buroughs whom this Priest quotes and upbraids for
Reproving the Rulers of England for their Covetousness and Corruption, and
telling them the Lord will cut them off, etc. whereupon the Priest Exclaims
against E. Buroughs, crying out, brainsick Quaker, blacking the Magistrates
of England, Lying Vision. As if the Priest designed to Incense the present
Rulers against the Quakers on this occasion; whereas E. B's Book quoted by him,
was Printed in the Year 1654, as he confesses, which was in Cromwells days:
So that this Priest is offended at those Testimonies that struck at Cromwell
and his Corrupt Magistrates. How abominably has this Priest played the Knave
and abused us in a most sordid manner, both in these two cited Articles and in
many others, which with the assistance of a Diabolical Inspiration he has
contrived and forged in the Pit of Darkness and Habitation of Cruelty, where
his Spirit is conversant among the unclean lying Spirits, who further manifests
his Folly and Ignorance in his Discant or Paraphrase upon Nicholas Knights
Book, Entitled, A Comparison between the true and false Ministers, Printed
1675. After this Priest has told us, that in this Quaking Book the false
Ministers of England are thus described; and after several Descriptions given
of them, the Priest cites these following in his page 142. which I recite
directly as he has done, viz.

Tithes are only claimed by false Teachers. (I ask him where did true Ones, or
Christ's Ministers ever claim them?)

They deny the Doctrine of Christ enlightening every one with a saving Light
[and that truly, for it is a Quaking falsehood.]

They deny the manifestation of the Spirit in all, they reproach the true
Ministers of the Light [and justly, because of their Folly.]

They are Persecutors of the Children of Light [but the Quakers have no Truth
nor Righteousness to be persecuted for.]

They deny that any are made Perfect from all Sin in this Life [which they
ought to do.]

Observation. Observe that these Words within the Crotchets are the Priest, own
very words, wherein first he has blasphemously charged the Light of Christ,
who is that true Light which lights every man that comes into the World, John
1.9. 2dly, He has reproached the true Ministers of the Light in directly
charging them with Folly. 3dly, He has slandered the Quakers in saying, They
have no Truth nor Righteousness. 4thly, He counts it a Duty to deny that any
are made Perfect from all Sin in this Life, and herein he has justified the
false Teachers against Christ's Doctirne and Work, who taught his to be Perfect,
and is come thoroughly to purge his Floor, to sanctify, wash and cleanse his
Church and People, that there may be no spot in his Spouse. But this work of
Christ the false Teacher denies; he says, they ought to deny it: The Lord
deliver People from such blind Guides!

. XXVIII.] Pr. p. 101. You see that the Quakers are accused justly for
asserting a perfect freedom from all Sin on Earth; of this false Doctrine this
Quaker is a sorry Champion.

Answ. Such a freedom from Sin must be on Earth or never; there is no Purgatory
after Death; and no unclean thing shall enter into Gods Kingdom; If we walk in
the Light, as he is in the Light, we have fellowship one with another, and the
Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin, 1 John 1.7. Unto him
that loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, Rev. 1.5. Blessed
are the Undefiled in the way, who walk in the Law of the Lord, Psalm. 119.1.
They also do no Iniquity, ver. 3. And this was on Earth; therefore no false
Doctrine.

Pr. Ibid. Nothing less than a perfect freedom from all Sin on Earth was the
End and Aim of Redemption by Jesus Christ; to deny a perfect. Freedom from all
Sin in this Life is (according to this Quaker) to make Christ only a part of a
Redeemer, and to establish a middle way betwixt Earth and Heaven, in which to
be made free from Sin.

Answ. Our Savior Jesus Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from ALL Iniquity, and Purify unto himself a peculiar People, Zealous of good
Works, Tit. 2.14. By one Offering he has perfected forever them that are
Sanctified, Heb. 10.14. This was the End and Aim of Redemption by Jesus Christ,
who therefore is not only a Redeemer in part, but wholly, wherefore to deny
such freedom from all Sin in this Life is to suppose Christ only a Redeemer in
part, some middle place to be freed from Sin in after Death.

Pr. Ibid. To assert this great Truth, that there is no perfect freedom from
Sin to be attained to in this Life, is (as the Quaker does basely speak) a
great Delusion of the Devil.

Answ. It Is a great delusion of the Devil, to assert that there is no perfect
freedom from all Sin to be attained in this Life, and contrary to
Scripture-Testimonies before cited.

Pr. p. 102. That if they lay hold on him by Faith, their Sins shall not be
imputed to them, though they Sin daily, that the Righteous man sins seven times
a day.

Answ. Here he has accused true Believers and the Righteous man without
exception, both with sinning daily, and sinning seven times a day, such a
Champion is this Priest, for Satan's Kingdom against the Righteous, for which he
has no rule in Scripture, that we know, that says, The Righteous man sins
seven times a day, but that a Just man falls seven times, and rises up again,
Prove. 24.16. Here Is neither sinning nor day mentioned, he may fall so often
into Trouble, Affliction and Suffering, Psalm. 56.1.
and not into Sin, and rise up again out of his Troubles; The Lord knows the
days of the Upright, and their Inheritance shall be forever, Psalm. 37.18. Also
in Zachariah's Prophecy of Christ and his Salvation, he says, That we being
delivered out of the Hands of our Enemies, might serve him without fear, in
Holiness and Righteousness before him all the days of our Life, Luke 1.74, 75.
And thy Testimonies are very sure; Holiness becomes thine House, O Lord,
forever, or to length of days, Psalm. 93.5.

Pr. Ibid. That their Sins shall not be imputed to them that believe in Christ,
though they sin daily.

Answ. Sinning daily is neither consistent with true Faith in Christ, nor with
the estate of the Righteous and blessed of the Lord, to whom Sin shall not be
Imputed; see Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven,
whose Sin is covered. Blessed is the Man unto whom the Lord imputes not
Iniquity, and in whose Spirit there is NO GVILE; unto which the Apostle refers,
Romans 4.6, 7, 8.

Pr. Ibid. That the Righteous man does sin often in one day -- that the Holy
men of God have sinned, that do deny a perfect freedom from all Sin attainable
in this Life.

Answ. His Charge against the Righteous man without exception is refuted
before, as contrary to Scripture, and indeed it is Antichristian, Sin pleasing
and Impious, thus to plead for Sin against the Righteous, and it is a great
aggravation of this Impiety to accuse the Holy men of God with denying a
perfect freedom from all Sin to be attainable in this Life. Come Priest, thou
that say, The Scripture is thy only Rule: produce us plain Scripture to
prove this thy Charge, which is general against the Holy men of God, where ever
they denied such a freedom from all Sin to be attainable in this Life; either
bring us Scripture Proof for this, or else forever be silent, and deceive the
People no longer.

Pr. Ibid. To speak this Quaker's mind, without being perfectly cleansed from
all Sin, no man can witness Christ to be his Redeemer, nor that he is come to
destroy the Works of the Devil; nor can he witness that Christ is come to
redeem him.

Answ. The Priest has here uttered his own mistake, and not the Quaker's mind.
For every true Believer in Christ can witness that Christ is come to destroy
the Works of the Devil, and to redeem him from under his Power, before this
saving Work of Christ be effected or completed; from the very first appearance
of Christ and work of his Grace in the Heart, through Faith, (which he is the
Author of) there is a real Belief, Sense, Expectation and Hope, that he who has
begun a good Work will perfect it in his own due time; he that has begun to
Cleanse, to Purify, to work out Sin, to engage the Soul in a Spiritual Warfare
against it, will in his own time, even in this Life, perfect this Work of
Cleansing and Redeeming the Creature from all Sin; so that he is known to be a
Redeemer by that effectual Progress which he makes in his Work in Man, in the
gradual carrying on of it unto Perfection, there is a time of Washing and
Cleansing, and a time of being Washed and Cleansed from Sin; there is a time of
Warring, and a time of Conquering, as also a being made more then Conquerors,
through him that loved us.

Pr. page 103. Its no marvail, that the Qrs. do ignorantly plead for a perfect
Freedom from all Sin in this Life; for this is their Top-gallant Error, which
makes them reign like Kings above the World, Death, Hell and the Devil.

Answ. See here how mad against Perfection this Priest is; he likes not to hear
of perfect Freedom from all Sin in this Life, he calls it, The Quakers
Top-gallant Error; his Clamor against us on this occasion he reiterates over
and over, and therefore I recite his words, that the Reader may see how earnest
he is for Satan's Kingdom; he has done no less herein than Blasphemed the Work
and Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles (which was against all Sin, and for a
perfect Freedom from it in this Life) as being a Top-gallant Error; thus he has
shown himself an Industrious Agent for Satan's Kingdom.

Pr. Ibid. By this Quaking Doctrine of Perfection this Quaker says, that the
Children of God and the Children of the Devil are made manifest. Behold, in
this Qrs. account they are manifestly the Children of the Devil, who do not
hold a perfect Freedom from Sin on Earth.

Answ. That which here he scornfully calls Quaking Doctrine, is according to
plain Scripture, which he has flatly opposed; see 1 John 3.9, 10. Whosoever is
born of God, does not commit sin; for his Seed remains in him: and he cannot
sin, because he is born of God. In this the Children of God are manifest, and
the Children of the Devil: Whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God,
neither he that loves not his Brother.

Pr. Ibid. Thus this Idolized Perfection of the Qrs. serves to Unchristian all
but themselves.

Answ. Manifest Scorn and Falsehood; we do not idolize Christ's Work of
Perfection, nor unchristian any by vindicating of it; but seek to bring them to
true Christianity, that they may know Christ, his Image and divine Nature
formed and brought forth in them by the Operation of his Spirit and Power.

Pr. Ibid. In vain does this Qr. tell us, that they who dwell in the
Righteousness of Christ, sin not; for the Scripture records no such Over-holy
Inhabitants.

Answ. The Scripture does record such Holy Inhabitants in Christ as sin not. Ye
know that He was manifested to take away Our Sins; and in him is No Sin;
whosoever abides in him, sins not, 1 John 3.5, 6. But this the Priest
counts Overholy; that is, with him it is Over-holy to abide in Christ, and not
to sin; whereas Christ said, Abide in me, and I in you.

Pr. Ibid. Its true, its the Devil who pleads for Sin; and let that man's Mouth
be stopped forever that does so.

Answ. Then Priest, to be sure, thy Mouth ought to be stopped; for much of thy
work here, is pleading, striving and contending for Sin; reiterating the same
sinful Doctrine of thine against Perfection and Freedom from Sin in this Life
over and over, frequently; and therefore thou art therein the Devil's Mouth,
and not the Mouth of God nor Christ: The Devil pleads for Sin, and so do
thou; thou and the Devil are manifestly united together against Christ and all
his Followers in this matter: and therefore stop thy Mouth for shame, thou
Flattering, Sin-pleasing Priest, who strengthenest the hands of Evildoers,
that they may not forsake their sins (like the false Prophets of old) promising
them Life, Justification, Peace and Salvation in a sinful state.

Pr. Ibid. But to affirm the In-being and Dwelling of Sin in the best of men in
this World, is no siding with the Devil in the same Plea.

Answ. Here the Priest has accused the best of men in this World, with the
In-being and Dwelling of Sin; and is not this a pleading for Sin and a siding
with the Devil against Christ's Manifestation and Work, which is, to take away
Sin, to destroy the Work of the Devil? and if to Destroy it, then not to let it
have a Being or Dwelling in any true Believers. The best of men are free from
consenting to the In-being of sin, much more from pleading or contending for
it; for being made free from Sin, and become Servants to God, such have their
Fruit unto Holiness, and the End Everlasting Life, Romans 6.22.

Pr. Ibid. Ministers of the Gospel, who teach, that none can be Perfectly
cleansed from all Sin in this Life.

Answ. They that teach, that none can be perfectly cleansed from all Sin in
this Life, preach another Gospel than the holy Apostles preached, whose
Preaching and Work of the Ministry was to present Believers Perfect in Christ,
and for the Perfecting of the Saints: But such Ministers as teach, that none
can be cleansed from all Sin in this Life, are like or of kin to such as hold a
Purgatory or place of Purgation to cleanse in after Death; only they fall short
of the Papists in this, that they will allow none, no, not the best of men on
Earth, to be perfectly cleansed from all sin in this Life; whereas the Papists
do grant, that their Canonized Saints and Martyrs escape Purgatory, and go
directly to Heaven when they dye; but yet they will imagine a Purgatory for the
greatest part of their People, to give them ease in their Sins, and get Money
and Gifts of the Richer sort, to mitigate and shorten their pains in Purgatory.
Thus Satan has diverse ways to sooth up Sinners, and to maintain his own
Kingdom against Christ, his Work and Kingdom.

Pr. page 104. O Quaking Perfection from all Sin in this Life! O Brainsick
Whimsy! To what Extravigant Assertions, to what Devilish Expressions have thou
transported this Poor Deluded Quaker! -- This Quaking Error.

Answ. Thus the Priest Hectors, Rants, Vapors, Vilifies and Reproaches the
Quaker, for pleading against the Devil's Work, which is Sin, and for Christ's
Work and Service, which is Perfection and perfect Freedom. But the Priest in
his pleading for Sin, and therein siding with the Devil, Rants it at a high
Rate; he thinks he has paid it off, and run down the Qr. and the Doctrine of
Perfection, with his Hectoring, Insulting, Scoffing and Deriding; and yet he
would have People believe he does not plead for Sin; for he says, It Is the
Devil that pleads for Sin, and let that man's Mouth be stopped forever that does
so: A plain Confession, which shall rise up against him to his own
Condemnation, that out of his own Mouth he may be judged.

Pr. Ibid. This Qr. was not rightly instructed to distinguish well betwixt the
Being and ruling Power of Sin.

Answ. He is here mistaken still concerning the Quak^r; for he is so far
instructed in Christ's School, as to know that the same Seed which bruiseth the
Serpent's Head, breaks his strength and power, subdues and destroys his
Kingdom, does in due time both remove and destroy the very being of Sin, in all
who receive, believe and abide in Christ Jesus, the promised Seed, for granting
that the ruling Power of Sin is taken away and removed by Christ; what sincere
Soul or upright Follower of Christ Jesus (who thus far feels his Power to
bruise the Serpent's Head, and break his strength, to the subduing of sin) will
yet suffer the Being and In-dwelling of Sin all his Life time to remain in him
(seeing he that is begotten of God, keeps himself that the Wicked one touches
him not, 1 John 5.18.) when he faithfully follows the Conduct of such a
powerful and victorious Prince, Captain and Conqueror, as our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is able to do the Work that God has sent him to do, and even to
save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him, who also is he that is
greater in us than he that is in the World; and as the Author to the Hebrews
prayed, Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus,
that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting
Covenant, make you PERFECT in every good Work to do his Will, working IN you
that which is well-pleasing in his sight through Jesus Christ; te whom be Glory
forever and ever, Heb. 13.20, 21.

. XXIX.] Pr. page 108. As for Infant Baptism used in all Ages of the Christian
Church (this Qr. like an Anabaptist, says) there is no Scripture nor Example
for it.

Answ. That Infant Baptism, or rather Sprinkling, was used in all Ages of the
Christian Church, I plainly deny, and it remains for this Priest to prove, or
else confess his Ignorance or false Assertion in this point; as also, since he
upbraids the Qr. for saying, there is no Scripture Example for it; why does not
he produce Scripture or Example thence for it? that would end the Controversy.
And that it was imposed or settled by any general Council in the Christian
Churches before Popery entered, or before there was a Pope or Universal Bishop
(so called) at Rome, it remains for him to prove. And since the Church of Rome
pleads for Infant Baptism, and imposes it upon the account of Tradition, and
not Scripture, as its said of Claudius Espontius a Popish Bishop, at a Council
at Pysoy in France, 1500. That he ordained that Infants Baptism should be
received by Tradition, because it could not be proved a Command from the
Scriptures. The Question hereupon is, Whether this Tradition he derived from
the Church of Rome, and so intended, or from the Primitive Church in the
Apostles Days? For its being imposed by the Church of Rome cannot be binding
to us Protestants because thereof. And if they pretend Authority from the
Primitive Christian Church in the Apostles Days, then they should show us this
from Scripture, especially these who are our present Opposers, who profess the
Scripture to be their Rule, and not the Church of Rome. For in vain is their
Worship, who teach for Doctrine the Traditions of men, and whose fear toward
God is taught by men's Precepts.

[Notes by another hand on this Subject.]

It Is recorded, that about the Year 248. Fidus, Cyprian.
who willed People to Baptize Young Children, according to the manner of
Circumcision: About which Thing Cyprian, with Sixty six Bishops and Elders
gathered together, ordained, That Children should timely be baptized, as well
before as after the 8th day. It seems the Doctrine of Fidus concerning Dipping
or Sprinkling of Children was New, and seemed strange to Cyprian, seeing he
would not ratify nor confirm the same without the Sentence and Advice of Sixty
Six Bishops. Had it been commanded by Christ, practiced by the Apostles, and
continued in matter and manner to Cyprian's days, there had not been a
necessity for the Concourse of so many Bishops concerning the same: And though
Cyprian here enjoined Baptizing of Children, yet a few Years before he was for
the Dipping or Sprinkling of aged People; see his Epistle to Magnus.

Cassander, in his Book, de Infantum Baptismo, says, Cassander. Pado-Baptisms
rise.
That Baptism of Infants came to be much used by the Fathers, who lived some
three hundred Years after the Apostles. He excludes it from being Christ's
Command, or practiced by the Apostles.

Johannes Bohemius says, That Baptism of old was administered to none (unless
upon urgent necessity) but to such as were before instructed in the Faith and
catechized; but when it came to be judged necessary to Everlasting Life, it was
ordained, that Infants should be baptized, and that they should have
Godfathers and Godmothers, who should be Sureties for Infants, and should
renounce the Devil in their behalfs. It grew to this in the
Roman-Catholick-Church, that at the Baptizing of a Child, the Priest, First,
Blows three times in the Infants Face: Secondly, He anoints his Eyes, Ears and
Nostrils with Earth moistened with his Spittle: Thirdly, He Names him, and Marks
him with the Sign of the Cross upon his Breast and Back with Hallowed Oil:
Fourthly, He dips him into the Water, or pours Water upon him three times in
the form of a Cross: Fifthly, Dipping his Thumb in the holy Chrism (as they
call it) he signs the Child's Forehead with the sign of the Cross: Sixthly, He
covers him with a White Garment: Seventhly, He puts into his hand a burning
Candle, Lib. 2. de Gentium Moribus. For a farther Information about Baptisms, I
refer the Reader to Thomas Lawson's Treatise, Entitled, APTISALOGIA, Or a
TREATISE Concerning BAPTISMS.

Pr. p. 113. Behold, is this the Chirstian Charity that thinks no Evil? Is this
the Christianity that speaks Evil of no man?

Answ. Well, this shall remain as Universal a Testimony against much of this
man's Malicious and Scurrilous Work in this Pamphlet of his, as his confessing,
that its the Devil who pleads for Sin, and let that Mouth be stopped forever that
does so: If he had well observed, That Christian Charity thinks no Evil; and
that Christianity speaks Evil of no man, he had not brought forth this large
Uncharitable Pamphlet, against the People called Quakers; nor yet pleaded for
Sin's Continuance in the best of men in this Life, as he has done.

. XXX.] Page 115. Qr. And are made Partakers of the Divine Nature of Christ, by
which they are made Christians.

Pr. The Priest Answers, In these few words this Qr. has given a most
Blasphemous account of all Qrs. for he says, that they are made Partakers of
Christ's Divine Nature; that they are Christians thus made.

Answ. His telling of a Blasphemous account of All Qrs. is a Falsehood to abuse
us; for the matter here opposed by him, as it is in James Parnel's Book, p.
176, 177. Collect. is not placed in these words, as that All Qrs. are made
Partakers of Christ's Divine Nature; but the words are more general, relating
to the Church of Christ and his Members, who live by the Faith of the Son of
God, who are New Creatures in Christ Jesus, set free by the Law of the Spirit
of Life, and are made Partakers of the Divine Nature of Christ, by which they
are made Christians; and such now witness the effect of the Blood of Christ
wrought within them, and the End of his Coming, and the Benefit of his Death,
who are dead with him, etc. [Thus far J. Parnel.]

Observe well here, that I shall not let this Priest pass, as only making
Exception against all the Qrs. being made Partakers of Christ's Divine Nature,
but also I must take him as opposing the thing it self, that his Quarrel is not
only against the Persons Quakers, but against the thing, i. e. the partaking of
Christ's divine Nature, wherein his gross Ignorance both of Christianity and
Scripture will farther appear in what follows.

Pr. p. 116. Behold, here is our Saviors Godhead shared amongst the Quakers;
behold, here are the Quakers made more than Coheirs with Jesus Christ, no less
God than himself is.

Answ. Behold, here the Priest has not only shown his lamentable Ignorance,
but his false as well as blasphemous Inference: for us to own a being made
partakers of Christ's Divine Nature. He counts this not only a sharing of our
Saviors Godhead among us, but also a making our selves no less than God
himself, which is a sad and most Ignorant Inference, that new Creatures in
Christ and his Members may not partake of his Divine Nature, unless they be God
and Christ himself! What sad and miserable blindness and Irrational Work is
this! As if the Member of a Body must not partake of the Nature of the Body,
unless that Member could be the whole Body: Heb. 3.14.
We are Members of Christ in particular, joined to him, partakers of Christ,
having his Spirit and Life manifest in us, as all real Saints and true
Christians have. And can all this be? can any be so nearly related and joined
to Christ, and not Partakers of his Divine Nature? Can they be Partakers of
Christ, of his Power, Heb. 3.14. Romans 11.16, 17.
Spirit, Virtue, Life, Faith, Divine Image, Holiness, and have him therein
formed in them, and yet not be Partakers of Christ's Divine Nature? What
strange Inconsistency is this! Though the Priest will not own this of the Qrs.
we impose it not so upon him; yet will he own it of any of Christ's Members?
No: See what follows, as his Consequence on the Assertion, and farther Evidence
of his great Blindness and Ignorance both of Scripture and Christian Experience.

pr. Ibid. Every Real Qr. is truly Godded with God, and Christed with Christ
(according to this Abominable Quaking Assertion) they are all Partakers of that
same Divine Nature, which Christ has -- Quaking Blasphemy -- Intolerable
Blasphemy.

Answ. See now how it is, the Assertion itself, that this Priest opposes, viz.
The Partaking of the Divine Nature, which Christ has; this he puts these black
Characters, Quaking Blasphemy, Intolerable Blasphemy upon: We will not contend,
whether all called Qrs. partake thereof or no; for I don't affirm it, because
its possible for some to be Unfaithful under that Profession, and may hold the
Truth in Unrighteousness; but whether any Saints, Members of Christ, or New
Creatures be Partakers of the Divine Nature of Christ, I affirm, they are, as
every true Branch that is grafted in the true Root, partaketh of the Root and
Fatness of the Olive Tree, Romans 11.17. And says Christ, I am the true Vine,
and ye are the Branches, he that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings
forth much Fruit; for without me (or severed from me) ye can do nothing, John
15. Now does not every such Branch partake of the Nature and Virtue of the
Vine? Did you ever hear of a Branch in any Vine that bears Fruit without
partaking of the Nature, Virtue or Sap of the Vine? But it seems, here is a
Priest, a Teacher, that would be counted a Member of Christ, a Christian, a
Believer, a True and Fruitful Branch (no doubt and yet altogether Void and
Destitute of the Nature, Virtue and Life of the true Vine, which can be neither
true in Spirituals nor in Temporals.

And for a Final Confutation of his folly in this Great Point, take one
Scripture more, 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. According as his Divine Power has given unto us
all things that portain unto Life and Godliness, through the Knowledge of him
that has called us to Glory and Virtue, whereby are given unto us exceeding
great and precious Promises, that by these you might be PARTAKERS of the DIVINE
NATURE, having escaped the Corruption of the World, which is through Lust.

Mark here, how plain it is, that the Apostle did confess, how they were
Partakers of the Divine Nature, which our Adversary has counted such an
Abominable Assertion and Intolerable Blasphemy. Thus he has Reproached and
Blasphemed the Primitive Christian Doctrine, and Attainment in and by Christ
his Divine Power and Nature, which the Saints were made Partakers of.

Qr. page 117. Here is the true Church, where there is but One Teacher, One
Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, One Light, One Life, One Way, One Shepherd and
One Sheepfold, One Priest over the Household of God, One Hope, One Language, One
Family, One God and Father of all.

Pr. To this the Priest Answers, viz. In these Quaking Lines we have such an
account given of the true Church of God as was never heard nor read of till
within these Thirty Years by past, such an account as no Age of the Primitive
Church can render the like, except in a Qrs. Conventicle, this true Church is
not to be found on Earth.

Answ. What a stranger to the true Church and the Unity thereof, has our
Adversary shown himself to be! He has here such an Account of the true Church
of God as it seems he never heard nor read of, before he knew the People called
Quakers. But he falsely presumes in saying, that no Age of the Primitive Church
can tender the like, and that this true Church is not to be found on Earth; by
which he has rendered his own Church no such true Church.

But why is it such a strange Account of the true Church? Is it strange, that
there should be one Head, Christ, one Teacher, one Lord, one Lawgiver, one
Faith, one Baptism, one Light, one Life, one Way, one Shepherd and one
Sheepfold, one Priest over the Household of God, one Hope, one Family, one God
and Father of all in this true Church? This is not strange to the Church of
Christ, which is Constituted of true and living Members of one Body, who live
by the Faith of the Son of God, and are new Creatures in Christ Jesus, who are
gathered and baptized by one Spirit into one Light, Life and Power, and so into
one Body, according to Scripture, seeing the Priest is so ignorant of these
things, I desire him to read these Scriptures at leisure, Isa. 33.22. Jer.
31.31, 32, 33, 34. Heb. 8.8, 9, 10, 11. John 6.45. Isa. 54.13. 1 Cor. 12.13.
[see also Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. which is directly to our purpose for this Unity
and Perfection in the true Church, so much condemned and derided by our
Unchristian and Atheistical Adversary.

. XXXI.] Pr. Ibid. The true Church is now only to be found among the Poor
Deluded Qrs. Most of these Unities heaped together by this Qr. must be
understood according to the Notorious false Principles of all Qrs. -- A
Quakerized Unity.

Answ. We do not say, this true Church is only to be found amongst the Poor
Quakers, or this Unity, as relating only to a Visible Society among us; it is of
more Universal extent than any Visible Society of Persons, but that there is an
Invisible and Spiritual Union known to all the faithful among us; and that as
we are a People gathered by the Power and Spirit of Christ, we are Members of
that Church, which he is Head of, and that his Power has more manifestly
appeared with us in our Testimony for him, and in upholding us cheerfully to
suffer for the same, than with other Societies in our Day (as also to keep a
Conscience void of Offense toward God and Man, this we are satisfied in) and
that the Lord's Power has more Eminently appeared among us in our Societies and
Assemblies, than among other Professions, Societies or Assemblies in our day,
else we should not keep together in a Society, we should not be a Church, nor
in such an Union, nor Assemble together, if we did not really believe, and were
sati^fied, that the Lord owns us, and is with us, as we are a People.

And let this Caution be taken by the way, That whoever go out from us,
separate themselves and turn into Emnity, Malice or Wickedness, after they have
seen and tasted of the great Power and Work of the Lord among us, they fall
into a worse and more dangerous state than thousands are in, who never had this
Knowledge (Wilfully to sin against such Knowledge is far worse than to be in
the time of Ignorance, wherein God winked) their latter End is worse with them
than the beginning; it had been better for them not to have known the Way of
Righte^usness, than after they have known it to turn aside from the holy
Commandment. Turks and Indians who confess and adore an Eternal Deity, and live
honestly, according to what they believe and know, are more acceptable to God,
yea, and the most ignorant among them shall sooner find Mercy and Salvation
with him, than either the Rebellious Back-slider, the Hypocrite, Careless and
Unfaithful, under the Profession of Christianity, among what People soever.

And though we do not Exclude all, who are not yet gathered into an outward
Society with us, from having any share in that inward and invisible Life,
Spirit, Faith, Union or Salvation, which we are made partakers of. For there
are those that Wish well to Zion, that have a love to her, and a drawing
toward her, that God has regard to them, and will prosper in their honest
Desires. And there are those that are Not against us, that are for us, Luke
9.50. And God has a regard to Inward Sincerity and honesty of Heart, though
clouded under various Forms and Professions. There are those that have a
Simplicity and Innocence in their Heart toward God, and are free from Enmity
against his People, that yet are not come to have their Understandings so
clear, as to come into an outward Society and compliance in all things with the
gathered and chosen of the Lord, that yet have a secret breathing unto him in
Spirit, whom he will in his own time gather unto himself; as Christ says,
Other Sheep I have, which are not of this Fold, them also I must bring, and
they shall hear my Voice, and there shall be one Fold and one Shepherd, John
10.16.

However, I would not be mistaken, though all are not come to that visible
Society and open Testimony, which God has gathered us into, and brought forth
publicly among us through many deep Sufferings and Reproaches, yet I do not
own nor believe Salvation by any other Christ, Gospel, Light, Spirit or Power,
than that which we have received from God and ^eat Witness unto through his Son
Christ Jesus. The Way of Life and Salvation is but one, Truth is but one, the
Light of the Lord, of the Lamb, and of his holy City is but one, wherein the
Nations of them that are saved shall walk, and the holy fear of God and working
Righteousness, which in every Nation they that experience are accepted, springs
from this one Divine Principle of Life, Light and Truth in the inward parts,
which God has given to mankind, wherein Christ is spiritually and effectually
received to Salvation, and which is but one in all, though different in degrees
of Discoveries and Knowledge thereof among the Sons of men.

Howbeit thus far there is an Universal Union among all People saved of the
Lord, when in the way of Salvation, that there is not an Envy nor an evil mind
in one against another, but a certain degree of Innocence, Love and good Will;
all which springs from that one, universal and divine Principle of Life, Light
and Grace in the Hearts which we testify of.

Pr. p. 118. This Quaking Unity belonging to the true Church of God has no
Scripture-bottome to stand on, no Christian Writers of any Century did ever
describe the true Church of God after this Canting rate.

Answ. The Unity belonging to the true Church, and the description thereof I
have sufficiently proved by H. Scripture, and according to true Christian
Experience and Testimony; and therefore this Adversary may be ashamed of his
scornful Taunting, and Idle, Atheistical and Impious Triffling Reflections on
these serious Occasions, and remember the Proverb cited by himself, Piet as non
patitur ludum: he will find one day, that he has an heavy Account to give for
his acting the part of a Mountebank and Stage Player, Gamer and Sporter about
Pious and Religious matters, his casting his Scurrilous terms upon us, and
calling that Canting which he is not able to Confute; This will not excuse his
Profaneness, Levity, Scorn and Contempt, which God will rebuke.

As for his slighty Reflection upon James Parnel's Books, that in reading them
over he found Cramben his Coctam, he might have forborne this for shame in this
case. For as for Reiterations, Repetitions and Tautologies of worse stuff than
Colewort twice boild, I never read any that surpassed him, especially any of
his Coat, that stuffed up a Book so big as his, with so much Scoffing, Jeering,
trifling and impious Reiterations with so little show of Reason, as he has
done; which shows, after what an Ungodly rate he has spent his Time and Study,
and how therein he has been attended and prompted with a Diabolical Spirit to
inveigh, like one mad with Envy, against the Light of Christ within,
Perfection, partaking of the Divine Nature, and Unity of the true Church.

. XXXII.] Pr. page 122. Take heed to the Light of God within you; this is only
a Whim of the Qrs. Brain, which has no Foundation in any Apostolical Writings:
In Scripture we find mention made often of Christ the Light, and sometimes of
Christ in you. But -- take heed to the Light of God within you; this is only
the Quakers false Doctrine.

Answ. Look here, he can scarce write a Paragraph without scoffing at the Qrs.
Thus he inveighs against taking heed to the Light of God within; he says, It
has no Foundation in any Apostolical Writings: But see the man's Contradiction,
as well as his Ignorance herein. He confesses, that in Scripture we find often
mention made of Christ the Light, and sometimes of Christ in you; and has this
no Foundation in the Apostles Writings? If Christ be the Light, and Christ
within, must not he be taken heed unto and followed, as he is manifest within,
even in them that believe in his Light, as he has taught? but if God, who
commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give us
the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2
Cor. 4.6. Must we not then take heed unto his Inshining Light in our Hearts,
when he shines in our Hearts, to give us such Knowledge? I had not repeated so
much of this Man's reiterated, trifling and scornful Contradiction and
Opposition to Truth, but that his Folly may the more be seen, and remain on
record against him.

^r. Ibid. To be one -- in the Eternal Unity smells strong of Parnel 's
Partakers of Christ's Divine Nature, that God is with us, manifested in the
Flesh; all which is Ab^^inable ^lasphemy.

Answ. As for Eternal Unity among Christ's Followers, did not he pray for it?
John 17.21. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee,
that they also may be one in us. And this partaking of Christ's Divine Nature
offends the Priest still, but his Folly therein is sufficiently detected
before, which now he greatly adds to in accounting it Abominable Blasphemy to
say, God is with us, etc. How then is Christ called Immanuel, God with us? And
has not God promised, to dwell and walk in his People? And were not the true
Believers given up to suffer with Christ, and to be delivered up to Death for
his sake, that the Life also of Jesus might be manifest in their mortal Flesh?
And does not the Spirit of Christ dwell in true Believers, and quicken their
mortal Body, to yield their Members as Instruments of Righteousness to God,
that Christ may dwell in their Hearts by Faith, that they might know the Love
of Christ, and be filled with all the Fullness of God. For which End Paul bowed
his Knees unto the Fathers of our Lord Jesus Christ; see Ephesians. 3.14. to the
end.

Pr. p. 124. Christ Jesus his Body is one, which is his Church; behold, except
the Church, which is Christ's Mystical Body, our Savior has no other Body.

Answ. The Priest takes occasion for these words from a Passage he cites out of
a Book, called, Truth's Defense; which (as he cites it) is, That the Body of
Christ is but one; and he is the Head of the Body, which is the Church: Whence
he infers, our Savior has no other Body; which is but his own Narrow
Construction. For it follows not from saying, the Body of Christ or his Church
is but one, that Christ has no Spiritual or Glorious Body peculiar to and of
himself, whereof the Church contains Members. For what is more plain, than where
its said, For as the Body is one, and has many Members, and all the Members of
that one Body being many, are one Body, so also is Christ, 1 Cor. 12.20. Then
that all those many Members, and that one Body of Christ, whereof they are
Members make upone Body collectively and jointly in Christ and that the Church
and Members of Christ, as joined to him and his Body, to make up one Body in
universal Union and Fullness of Christ Jesus; so as all are joined to him, and
Members of his Body, of his Flesh and of his Bone; this makes us one Body,
where there is likewise one Christ, who takes in and comprehends with him both
his own Glorious Body (like unto which the Body of the Saints Lowness was to be
fashioned. Phil. 3.21.) and all the Members thereof, who are joined to him in
that Mysterious Union, that is between Christ and his Church, as he is the true
Vine, and they the Branches. And granting still that Christ has a Glorious Body
most near and proper to himself, above and more excellent than all our Earthly
Bodies, like unto which he will change our Low and Humble Body, it is not
improper to say, The Body is one, and has many Members; and all the Members of
that one Body, being many, are one Body. Now are there many Members, yet but
one Body, 1 Corinthians. 12.20. And there is one Body and one Spirit, Ephesians. 4.4.
Therefore a plurality of Bodies and Members may be truly called one Body in
that Mystical or hidden Union, that is between Christ and his Church; for any
Collective Body, consisting of many People, may be called one Body, though this
be far inferior to the heavenly Union between Christ, his Body and Church.
Lastly, How can true Believers (who are many) be said to be One Bread from
their eating of that one Bread which is Christ, even of his Flesh (which he
gave for the Life of the World) or be said to be Members of his Body, of his
Flesh and of his Bone from their Union with him, or his Church be said not only
to be his Body, but the Fullness of him that fills all in all; if in this
Bread, his Flesh, Body and Fullness, Christ's own Body, be not so included, and
his Church therewith so nearly united, as All comprehensively to make up One
universal Body in the Fullness of Christ? for how should his particular Body be
excluded out of his Fullness? and yet there are those who discern not the Lord's
Body, who eat and drink unworthily, and so eat and drink their own Damnation.

But this Priest still proceeds in his Envious Attempts, telling us, That to
speak the Qrs. Mind more fully, two of his Neighbor Qrs. told him, That
Christ's Body did vanish at his Ascension; and that now he has no other Flesh
or Body, but the Flesh or Body of his People, p. 124.

To which I answer, That the first is a palpable Untruth; I deny it to be the
Qrs mind, that Christ's Body did vanish (so as to be annihilated) at his
Ascension. 'Twas changed and more glorified, but not vanished. To the last part,
accusing two of his Neighbor Qrs. with telling him so, this is very
questionable and suspicious; the man's Credit is at such a low ebb with me,
because of so many Lies cast upon the Qrs. that I do greatly suspect this Story
against two of his Neighbors. And I am also satisfied, that none in their
right Understanding or Sense would give him any such mistaken Answer or Account
concerning the Body of Christ, that it so vanished as to become annihilated.
Though some Adversaries have been apt to be too Curious in their Enquiries
about that Point, obtruding Unlearned Questions more than are necessary to
Salvation. We are satisfied, that the same Christ that humbled himself to the
Death of the Cross, is highly Exalted, and has a Name and Authority given unto
him, unto which every Knee must bow, and every Tongue confess; and the Mouths
of Gainsayers shall be stopped in the Day of his Power, which is dawned in our
Age; Glory to God and to the Lamb forever.

AN APPENDIX IN Vindication of the Soundness of the QVAKERS Faith from the said
Adversary's Fictitious Creed, Unsound Faith, and most Knavish Forgeries and
Sordid Abuses, as stated by him in the Quakers Name.
SInce that instead of an Index, our Adversary the Priest has added an
Appendix of Ninety Eight Articles in number, which he would have the Reader to
look upon as the Quakers Unsound Faith, and which he is bold to set down as the
Quakers Belief, and that with reference to what he has in the foregoing
Discourse, taken out of their own Books, and all which he promises to do either
in their own words, or according to the true Meaning of them. By the Letter Q.
is meant Quakers, page 144, 145.

By all which the Reader may observe, that all these Ninety Eight Articles,
which he has framed in the Qrs. Name, he would have the Reader look upon them
as the Qrs. unsound Faith. Whence it follows, that none of them are according
to his Faith: let this be remarked by the way. And therefore I shall give the
Reader a few Instances out of the aforesaid Articles.

1st, To show that many of them are neither set down in the Quakers own words,
nor in the true Meaning of them; and therefore that the Priest is a manifest
Forger therein.

2dly, That there are many Truths set down in many of the Articles, which are
not according to this Priests Faith, because he has given them all the Title of
the Qrs. Unsound Faith. Which things premised to be observed, I proceed:

Pr. Art. 1. We Q. do believe, as W. P. does write, that Jesus Christ is not a
distinct Person without us, and that there is not one place of Scripture to
prove him to be so; nor do we believe Christ to be God-Man, for it is no
Scripture Phrase.

Answ. This is a Forgery and Perversion, as from a Denial of the Terms to a
Denial of the Thing. Jesus Christ is owned to be a Distinct Intelligent Being
without us, but not as wholly excluded and limited only as a Circumscribed
Person without us; he is within us also spiritually. As also to say, We do not
believe Christ to be God-man, is a down right Slander; for we have fully
declared him to be both God and Man; see Section 2.

Pr. Art. 2. We Qrs. do believe that the Scripture is not a Rule directing our
Understandings or Lives.

Answ. False again; we have granted the Holy Scripture to be a Rule, but not
the Only, the Primary or Chiefest Rule: The Holy Spirit and Divine Light has
the Preeminency and Preference as a higher and more universal Rule, even where
the Writing comes not.. 2, and 3.

Pr. Art. 5. We Q. do believe, that the Justification of a Sinner is not by
Christ's Righteousness imputed; that Justification by Christ's imputed
Righteousness is a Dangerous Sin-pleasing Notion.

Answ. False again: Christ's Righteousness, as imputed or reckoned by himself
to true Believers, we believe, and never opposed it: but the Imputation or
Reckoning of it to Persons wholly unsanctified by Sin-pleasing Teachers, we do
oppose.. 5, 6, ^.

Pr. Art. 6. We Q. do believe, that Christ God-Man did never purchase the
Redemption of any Sinners by the Price of his own Blood.

Answ. A gross Perversion: We do believe, that Christ as Mediator has obtained
Eternal Redemption for us, and that by his own Blood, that we might be
sanctified and redeemed from all Iniquity, for which End he gave himself for
us. But not that he, as God-Man, did strictly purchase or buy Redemption of God
the Father in a way of rigid or strict Payment and in the Offenders stead, to
acquit and clear the Wicked or Guilty, in whom no Good is wrought, that they
may live and dye in Sin, and yet be esteemed the Redeemed and Justified of the
Lord. This is the plain Case, and this we cannot believe. But that Christ gave
himself a Ransom for all, to redeem and purchase lost Man to God, out of the
Fall, and out of Transgression.. 9, 10. see also. 5, 6, 7.

Pr. Art. 7. We Q. do believe, that there is no Salvation to be hoped for,
after this Life is ended, by any faithful Christians; and that there is no
Resurrection of the Body from the Grave unto Life Everlasting.

Answ. Manifest Falsehoods: We believe both Everlasting Salvation, Resurrection
and Everlasting Life from the Dead, according to holy Scripture; but that the
Appearance of Christ unto Salvation is not to be put off, nor Salvation from
Sin deferred till after Death. And this also answers his Forgery reiterated and
enlarged in his eighth Article. But only his saying, That there is no Coming of
Christ as Judge at the Last Day, is also a forged Falsehood. See. 11.

Pr. Art. 9. We Q. do believe, as the Papists do, that true Justification is
only by Inherent Righteousness.

Answ. Here Is a Perversion again: for we do not place a second or complete
Justification, Salvation or Heaven upon the Merit or Deserving of our own Works
of Charity, etc. as the Papists do, rendering God a Debtor to them for those
Works after the first Grace received: Herein we manifestly differ from them.
And we do not place Justification wholly upon the Inherent Righteousness of
Christ, but also upon his Merit and Dignity in procuring or obtaining Eternal
Redemption for us by his Blood, Suffering and Sacrifice. Yet that absolute
Justification is not completed without the Inherent or Inward Righteousness of
Christ through Faith and Sanctification we must confess.. 6, 7, 10, and 12.

Pr. Art. 10. We Q. do believe, that Jesus our Savior is not the Son of Mary,
nor the Son of the Substance of the Father.

Answ. These are both Gross Lies, the point is cleared before: We never denied,
(but always believed) Jesus our Savior as Miraculously conceived by the holy
Ghost overshadowing the Virgin Mary, and born of her: As also, we never denied,
but ever believed him, as he is the Eternal Son of God, to be of his Fathers
Substance.. 13.

Pr. Art. Ibid. That Mary is not the Mother of God; its Popery to call Mary the
Mother of God.

Answ. This he has set down, as part of the Qrs. Unsound Faith; and therefore
his Faith is, That Mary is the Mother of God; and it is not Popery to call Mary
the Mother of God. The rest of the Forgeries in this Article are answered
before.. 13.

Pr. Art. 12. We Q. do believe, that Deliverance from Condemnation is not by
believing in Christ, who dyed to save Sinners by his Blood, but by obeying the
Light within.

Answ. This is a Gross Perversion and Forgery again: Christ and his Light
within are not to be divided in the matter of Faith or Salvation. We never
opposed Christ who dyed for Sinners, or Faith in his Name by believing or in
obeying his Light within. For he that believes and walks in his Light, believes
in his Name, and thereby partakes of the Fruit of his Death and Blood to
cleanse from all Sin.. 14.

Pr. Art. 14. We Q. do believe, that there is no Knowledge of any Truth to be
gotten by the Scripture.

Answ. Here is a Falsehood and Perversion again; for we do believe, that a
Knowledge of some Truths may be gotten by the Scripture, and more especially
through the Blessing of God enlightening the Understanding in the serious
reading the Scripture; but no saving Knowledge is gotten by the Scripture
alone, without the Blessing of God, by his Spirit enlightening the
Understanding.. 14, 15.

Pr. Art. 29, 30. We Q. do believe, that there is no outward Civil Honor due
to the King, to Magistrates and Men in Authority, or any others.

Answ. False again; 'twas never an Article of the Qrs. Faith; we have fully
expressed the contrary, even upon outward and Civil Accounts, as in paying our
Taxes, Customs and Duties, and actually submitting to Authority as Christians,
in all cases consistent with the Peace of our Consciences; and passively, in
suffering in cases wherein we could not be active for Conscience sake. But it
is the Hat and Knee Honor, Bowing, Creeping and Cringing, Flattering Titles
and Complements, which this Priest is doting upon; it is not the substantial
Honor, Dignity, Estimation or Reverence that his Contest is for, but what is
merely Complemental and pleasing to the fleshly Mind and Pride of Man.. 17.

Pr. Art. 47. We Q. do believe, that all Lords, Ladies, Knight^, Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen -- Young and Old, Rich and Poor, etc. who are no Qrs. are the
Children of the Devil, Fruitless Trees, for the Fire, to be cast into the Lake,
that there they must lie for evermore, etc.

Answ. His Falsehood and Knavery herein is sufficiently detected before in his
leaving out the general Conditions of Mercy and Salvation proposed to the
Wicked, viz. Repentance, Fersaking their Iniquities, etc. without which they
are liable to Destruction and Misery, which are in their way; see Sect. 24.
It Is a plain Lying Forgery, to make their being No Qrs. the Condition of their
Destruction; as if we should condemn all to utter Destruction who are not
formally Qrs. so called: We never went about thus to confine the Mercy of God.
For there are both Thousands of Infants that dye Innocent, as also many
Thousands of Persons that have a Degree of Innocence, being free from Envy and
Malice against us and others; and many in Dark Times and Dispensations, that
having a Secret Sincerity in their Hearts to God, who never were Reputed
Quakers, nor formally gathered into an outward Society with us, that yet may
and do find Mercy, and partake of the common Salvation, tendered in Christ Jesus
to Mankind. But No Fallen, Sinful or Poluted Man or Woman can find Salvation
without Repentance or Inward Conversion by the Grace of God, that has appeared
to all men, that they may be taught to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts.. 31.

But now more briefly to sum up and recite some more of the Priests Lies,
Wicked Forgeries and Falsehoods in others of his Articles, I shall thus proceed.

Art. 54. That there are no Right Magistrates, but Qrs. and such Quaking
Magistrates, etc. This is a Knavish and Idle Forgery.. 25, 26.

Art. 54. That not Thouing one another, is a Damning Sin, is a Lying Forgery
again.. 17, and 26.

Ibid. That all Superiority, Nobility, Honor, Breeding, etc. are under the
Curse of God, is a Perverse Lie.

Ibid. That there is no true Nobility, true Gentility, but in us Qrs. that
Honor is only due to us Qrs. These are Knavish Forgeries still.. 26.

Ibid. That any of us despised Qrs. is more Noble, than either King or any
Nobles after the Flesh, because of the Noble Seed in us. No Article of the Qrs.
Faith, but the Priests Forgery.

Ibid. That all Noble men, Gentlemen, Superiors, Men of Honor, Breeding, etc.
are Bastards. An Odious Forgery to render us Odious. See. 17, 18.

Art. 58. We Q. do believe, that it is the Devil, who tells men, that Christ
dyed for all. This is a Horrid Lie, Wicked Slander and Most Abominable Forgery;
for that Christ dyed for all men, we have always believed and owned, as
testified by his Spirit in his holy Apostles and Scriptures.. 9, 10.

Art. 59. That they who said, they believed, that that was the Christ who dyed
at Jerusalem, and that he dyed for their Sins, and rose again, and sits at
the Right Hand of God, were no Christians in Truth. This again is a Wicked
Perversion and Falsehood, and also a Curtailing of J. Parnel's words (as the
Priest has more at large cited them, page 105, 106.) as if the Qr. denied these
things relating to Christ, whereas it is spoken of such false Christians as had
the History or Profession of Christ, but were not in the true Knowledge of God
or Christ, but under Anti-christ's Reign, yet under a Gospel Profession,
looking at God as a God afar off only, and sotting up Idols Temples, False
Teachers, Hirelings, etc.. 26.

Art. 66. That to know God according to the Scripture, is no true Knowledge of
him. This is a gross Lie and Forgery again; for truly to know God by the
Revelation of his Son, is according to Scripture, though given by Christ.. 14,
15.

Art. 72. That all true Quakers have the same Gift of the H. Ghost, or gift of
Miracles, that the Apostles had: The last is a gros; Lie; for though true
Quakers confess and own a partaking of the Gift of the holy Ghost, yet pretend
not the same as to Miracles, or to equalize themselves therein with the
Apostles; though God has wrought Wonders and Miracles among them, and by some
as Instruments in his hand.

Art. 78. That to redeem and make free from Sin, is done with the Body of
Christ which we have told you, is the Church. A Perversion still, as if the
Church only did redeem and free it self, whereas it is Christ, in and with his
own Body, that redeems his Church, which is that Body of his, whereof he is
Head. Though he has an entire, peculiar and glorious Body, yet the Church as
united to him and Members of his Body, comprehensively make up one Indivisible
Body in the complete and mysterious Union and Fullness of himself.. 32.

Art. 81. That that man looks upon Christ with a Carnal Eye, that looks upon
him to have a true Body: Which is a lying Forgery still. Christ has a true and
Spiritual glorious Body, whereof the Saints are Members in the spiritual and
mysterious union wi^h himself.. 32.

Art. 83. That Fellowship at the Lords Table is very wicked. Is also a perverse
falsehood; for ye cannot eat at the Table of the Lord and the Table of Devils.
Covetous Priests and Wicked People though they have the Sign or Shadow, yet are
short of the Lord's Table, and partake not of the Flesh and Blood of Christ nor
of his Supper, while they shut him out of their Hearts.. 16. and 25.

Art. 89. That Vnquakeriz'd Christians do worship an unknown God. A Forgery
still, none of our Terms or Creed; but false and fleshly Christians do so
Worship.. 31.

There are diverse more Forgeries, Perversions and Falsehoods in the Priests
Articles, which for brevity's sake I omit; and shall now give the Reader an
Account according to my second Proposition before stated of some Truths set
down in the Priests Articles, which are not according to his Faith, he having
given them all the Title of the Quakers Unsound Faith. And thus I proceed, viz.

Pr. Art. 2, 3. Now we Quakers do believe that the Spirit alone does give true
discerning, that the Light within ought to be the Rule of our Faith and
Practice.

Answ. We do believe that the Spirit of Truth is all-sufficient (for those Ends
it is given for) and leads into all Truth, that true discerning of Spirits is
a Gift of this Spirit, and that we ought to walk in the Light of Christ Jesus,
and his Spirit as the chief Rule of our Faith and Practice; which things it
seems this Priest does not believe; he believes not that the Spirit alone does
give true Discerning, or that the Divine Light thereof ought to be his Rule; He
believes the Scripture to be the Rule of Life without the Light within, as he
has told us, p. 120.. 14, 15.

Pr. Art. 21. We Q. believe, that we are to mind the Spirit alone in all things.

Answ. We do believe, we ought to mind the Spirit of Truth in all things, both
in reading Scripture for a true understanding thereof, and in our Words and
Actions; but this Priest does not believe he ought to be so mindful of the
Spirit, his mind is more upon Flesh than Spirit.. 14, 15, 23.

Pr. Art. 34. We Q. do believe that the Name Sunday is Heathenish, that every
day is the Lord's day.

Answ. Then this Priest does not believe, the Name Sunday is Heathenish, or
proceeded from Heathens, or that every day is the Lords; thus ignorant he has
shown himself.. 20.

Pr. Art. 35. We Q. believe, that they are no truly faithful Christians, who
deny, that there is a perfect freedom from all manner of Sin to be had in this
Life; that their Faith is not the true Faith, if it does not cleanse them from
all their Sins.

Answ. This Priest therefore believes, that they are truly faithful Christians
and in the true Faith, who deny a Perfect freedom from Sin in this Life, and
whose Faith does not cleanse them from their Sins: which is contrary to the
Belief and Faith of truly faithful Christians, who know the Heart-purifying
Faith, and the Blood of Christ to cleanse them from all Sin; and such could
say, He has washed us from our Sins in his own Blood. But it is not done in
this Life, says the Priest. When then? In the Life to come it must be. But
Where? must it be in a Purgatory between Heaven and Hell? That Is Popish
Doctrine.. 21. and 28.

Pr. Art. 36. We Q. do believe that the Scripture is not the Light, nor the
Word, nor the Life, nor the Judge, nor the Rule, nor the Guide, nor the Tryer
of Spirits.

Answ. This being also included in the Qrs. unsound Faith by the Priest, we
must take it for granted, that he believes the Scripture is the Light, the
Life, the Judge Contrary to Psalm. 50.6. Isa. 33 22. Acts 10.42. Heb. 12.23.
James 5.9.
the Rule, the Guide, the Tryer of Spirits: which Terms by way of Eminency most
properly belonging to God, to Christ, to the holy Spirit, to the divine Light;
John 1 c 11.25. c. 14.6.
might not the Priest as well have told us, that the Scripture is God and
Christ?. 22, 23, and. 14, 15.

Pr. Art. 37. We Q. do believe that the People and Teachers are Ignorant of
Christ, who seek Life in the Scripture, where it is not to be found.

Answ. So then this Priest therefore believes, that Eternal Life is to be sound
in the Scriptures; and they who seek it in the Scripture do know and find
Christ the Light and Life Eternal therein, which is contrary to Christ's own
Testimony, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye THINK ye have
Eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me; but ye will not come to
me, that ye might have Life.. 22, 23. and. 14, 15.

Pr. Art. 50. We Q. do believe, That they are all Heathens and no Christians,
who are so baptized (i. e. with Water) and cannot witness the other Baptism (i.
e. the Baptism of Christ.)

Answ. This Priest then believes, that they all are no Heathens, but
Christians, who are Baptized or Sprinkled with Water, when Infants, though they
cannot witness the Baptism of Christ: at such an easy rate can he make
Christians; contrary to Christ's own Testimony, If I do not wash thee, thou have
no part in me: and except a man be born of Water and of the Spirit he cannot
enter the Kingdom of God.. 16. and 25. and 29.

Pr. Art. 51. We Q. do believe, that Sacramental Bread (so called) is Natural,
that the Cup is such like, and that which they call the Lords Supper is a
Shadow.

Answ. This being also included in the Qrs. Unsound Faith, we may take it for
granted, that the Priest does not believe, that the Bread and the Cup, which
they call Sacramental and the Lords Supper are Natural, Carnal or Shadow; What
then? that they are Supernatural, Spiritual, the Substance, the Body and Blood
of Christ, yea, That the Bread broken is the Body of Christ, as he has plainly
declared, page 78. Which is directly according to the Popish Doctrine of
Transubstantiation.. 25.

Pr. Art. 52. We Q. do believe, that the Priests of England (who Trade with the
Form, get human Learning, pretend to study Divinity, get certain Wage, and sell
that which they have studied) -- their Ministry only has the Form, and denies
the Power; that they come by the Will of Man, and not by the Will of God; that
their Call and Ministry is a formal Imitation of Man, etc.

Answ. Seeing the Priest does not believe this, it being so repugnant to his
Gain and Interest, it seems he believes, that these Priests are come by the
Will of God, and not by the Will of Man; and that their Call and Ministry is
not Formal, nor of Man, but of God, and that their Ministry has the Power with
it: He herein believes them to be better then the Qr does. But yet we have but
his Belief that they have their Call and Ministry from God, and not from Man;
and till he produce better proof for his Belief, than yet he has done, we have
no Reason to believe as he does, without good Evidence and Conviction. Which we
are the more apt to despair of, while few of them do believe or own an
Immediate Call or Mission from Heaven in these Days.. 15.

Pr. Art. 54. We Q. believe -- that the Pharaoh- like Magistrate God will
Plague and Confound.

Answ. But this Temporizing Priest owns not this Belief, that God will Plague
and Confound the Pharaoh-like, Heard-hearted, Oppressing Magistrate; he is
rather for Flattering and Crying Peace to the Wicked, contrary to the Belief
and Testimony of all God's holy Prophets and Witnesses, who testified against
Oppressors, both King's, Rulers and others.. 16, 24, and 25.

Pr. Art. 55. We Q. still believe, that the Devil is the Head of Man, who would
be Honored.

Answ. This still thwarts the Priests Belief, who it seems believes not, that
the Devil is the Head of Proud Man, that is ambitious or desirous of Worldly
Honor: Surely he cannot reasonably think, that Christ is the Head of such
Unbelievers, as are seeking that Honor which is from beneath.. 17, 18.

Pr. Art. 58. We Q. believe, that it is the Devil and his Ministers who tell
men, That the Righteous man sins seven times a day; that to deny a sinless
Perfection in this Life, is that Doctrine which maintains the Devils Kingdom,
that Doctrine whereby the Devil carries on People in an Easy Delightsom Way to
the Flesh, a Doctrine which heals them up in their Sins with a feigned Faith.

Answ. But this the Priest will not at all believe; he cannot entertain such
mean and hard Thoughts of that Doctrine, which denies or opposes a Sinless
Perfection in this Life. He does not believe, that to argue for the Being of
Sin in all Men Term of Life, does either maintain the Devils Kingdom, or that
it is an Easy Delightsom way to the Flesh; whenas it must needs be more
grateful and pleasing to Corrupt Flesh, to have Sin remaining all its Days, in
false hopes of Happiness hereafter, than to be crucified and mortified unto sin
in this Life; without which I believe and testify, men cannot be Happy
hereafter, whatever the Priest's Belief is to please Corrupt Flesh; as his
belief, That Believers in Christ sin daily; and that the Righteous man sins
seven times a day: We are neither of his belief herein, nor yet that any of
Christ's Ministers did ever teach or persuade people into such a Faith for Sins
Continuance, or thus to accuse the Believers and Righteous with sinning daily,
and seven times a day; herein he has wronged the Scripture. For though it is
said, For a Just man falls seven times, Prove. 24.16.
and rises up again, yet it is neither said, that he sins seven times a day,
nor that he sins daily. Neither does it appear, that this Just Man's falling
seven times, is a falling into Sin, but rather a falling into Affliction and
Trouble: as it is said, He shall deliver thee in six Troubles; yea, in seven
there shall no Evil touch thee, Job 5.19. Its evident, that the Just Man's
falling seven times, and rising up again ( Prove. 24.16.) is opposed to the
Wicked's falling into Mischief; and Verse. 15. its said, Lay not in wait, O
Wicked man, against the Dwelling of the Righteous, spoil not his Resting place;
for a Just man falls seven times, and rises up again; which makes it more
clear, that this intends the Just Man's falling into Trouble and Suffering, by
reason of the Wicked laying in wait against him. And to this purpose see Psalm.
37.23, 24. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in
his Way; though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord
upholdeth him with his hand.. 21. and 28.

Pr. Art. eod. We Q. do believe still, that they who dwell in the Righteousness
of Christ, sin not.

Answ. This is contrary to the Priests Faith still: he believes, that they who
abide in the Righteousness of Christ sin daily, sin seven times a day, sin all
their Lifetime, which is contrary to plain Scripture, 1 John 3.6. Whosoever
abides in him (that is, in Christ) sins not: And see Chap. 2.1. But seeing
this Priest believes not, that he that abides in Christ sins not, but that
he sins seven times a day, he believes not his own Prayer in the Lyturgy, viz.
Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin: And a little after
(Minister) O God, make clean our Hearts within us: Answ. And take not thy holy
Spirit from us. And Almighty Father, Collect. on Tu. in Easter Week.
which have given thine only Son to dye for our Sins, and to rise again for our
Justification, grant us so to put away the Leaven of Malice and Wickedness,
that we may always serve thee in pureness of Living and Truth, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Surely this Priest does not present these Prayers to God
either in Faith or Reality, but only in pretense and show from the Teeth
outward.. 28. See also. 7. and 11.

Pr. Art. 59. We Q. do believe, that they set up Infant Baptism, for which
there is no Scripture. That they have no Scripture for the word Sacrament.

Answ. If this be a part of the Qrs. unsound Faith, as the Priest renders it,
then he believes, that there is Scripture for baptizing or sprinkling Infants,
and that they have Scripture for the word Sacrament. He should do well to show
us those Scriptures for Sprinkling Insants and the word Sacrament, in any of
the holy men's Writings, that were the Penmen of Scripture, that he might
convince the Qrs. of the unsoundness of their Faith in this Point. See ^. 16,
and 25.

Pr. Art. 62. We Q. do believe (as our Friend James Parnel has writ) that we
are Partakers of the Divine Nature of Christ, by which we are made Christians;
and that God is with us, manifested in the Flesh.

Answ. But this the Priest believes not, either of us or any people else; for
he counts it a high base Doctrine, intolerable Blasphemy, an abominable Quaking
Assertion, and all one as to say, that they are no less God than himself is,
Godded with God, and Christed with Christ. Thus he has exploded such a
Doctrine, as the Saints partaking of the Divine Nature of Christ, as an
Abominable Quaking Assertion, as his words are more at large aggravated in his
116th page, whereby he has discovered his gross Darkness, Blasphemy and
Ignorance of the Scripture, and Testimony of holy Apostles; see 2 Pet 1.3, 4.
According as his Divine Power has given unto us all things that pertain unto
Life and Godliness, through the Knowledge of him that has called us to Glory
and Virtue: whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious Promises,
that by these ye might be PARTAKERS OF THE DIVINE NATURE, having escaped the
Corruption, that is in the World through Lust. But this partaking of the Divine
Nature the Priest counts an Abominable Quaking Assertion, Quaking Blasphemy,
etc. see now what an Ignorant, Blasphemous Person he has shown himself, one
that neither knows the Scriptures nor the Power of God. See. 30.

Pr. Art 63. We Q. do believe, that the true Church is, where there is one
Lord, one Light, one Life, one Priest over the Household of God, one Hope, one
Baptism, one God and Father of all.. 30.

Answ. Yes, we must believe this, whether the Priest will believe it or no; and
if he will not believe it, he will not believe as the Scripture faith; There
should be One Shepherd, and One Sheep fold; there is One Body and One Spirit,
even as ye are called by One Hope of your Calling, One Lord, One Faith, One
Baptism; all which the true Chutch partaketh of.

Pr. Art. 64. We Q. do believe (as G. F. writes) that the Priests of England
are going mad in preaching for Rewards and Gifts, in Cursing, Excommunicating
and Imprisoning, so that Balaam 's Ass may reprove them all.

Answ. And we have no Cause to believe, that the Priests of England are going
Wise in Preaching for Rewards and Gifts in Cursing, Excommunicating and
Imprisoning such as do not put into their Mouths. But it seems, this Priest
believes, they are Wise Priests that preach for Rewards, and take these harsh
and severe Courses of Cursing, Excommunicating and Imprisoning them that cannot
put into their Mouths (But did not Paul confess he was Exceeding Mad when he
persecuted?) For he counts what G. F. has written in this Case, one of the
Articles of the Qrs. Unsound Faith.

Pr. Art. 75. We Q. do believe, that there is a Way to go through Moses, and
through the Prophets and through John to come to Christ; that when a man has
gone this strange Way, then he may see, that the Light is but one.

Answ. This is a Strange Way to our Adversary the Priest, and to all that are
alive without the Law; but 'twas not a Strange Way to the Apostle Paul, nor to
any true Christian, who have traversed those steps of Judgments, and through
Death and Condemnation, under the spiritual Administration of the Law, under
which the Offenders Mouth is stopped, and all the World become guilty before God,
and the Righteousness of God is witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, Romans 3.
And I had not known Sin, but by the Law, says Paul, Chap. 7.7. And we know
that the Law is Spiritual, Verse. 14. And says Paul, I through the Law am dead
to the Law, that I might live unto God. I am crucified with Christ;
nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the Life which I
now live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.19, 20.
And therefore he did spiritually pass through the Law. And see what Christ
says, Matthew. 5.17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the
Prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. Again, he says; Therefore
all things, whatsoever you would that men should do to you, do even so to them;
for this is the Law and the Prophets, Matthew. 7.12. Luke 6.31. And this is no
strange Way to any true Christian.

Pr. Art. 77. We Q. do believe, that Jesus Christ remains in Heaven; that the
same that did descend, did ascend.

Answ. This is also rank't in among his Articles of the Quakers Unsound Faith,
which plainly reflects upon the Apostle Paul's Testimony, Ephesians. 4.10. He that
descended, is the same also that ascended up far above all Heavens, that he
might fill all things.

Pr. Art. 79. We Q. do believe, that Christ lives in that Body which is the
Church.

Answ. And must this needs be an Unsound Faith too? Does not Christ live in his
Church? To deny this, how contrary is it to Christ's and his Apostles
Testimonies! see John 17.23. I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made
perfect in one. And did not he walk in the midst of the seven Golden
Candlesticks, which were the seven Churches of Asia? Rev. 1.13, 20. And his
being in the Heavens and living in his Church, are not inconsistent, Hebr. 8.1,
2. We have an High Priest, who is set on the Right Hand of the Throne of the
Majesty in the Heavens, a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true
Tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man. And where was this Sanctuary
and true Tabernacle, but in his Church? where he lives and ministers to the
Edification of all those, in whose Hearts Christ dwells by Faith.

Pr. Art. 97. We Q. do believe, that all the Teachers of England -- who are not
sent, who have no Commission from God, who go forth only in the Will of Man,
that they are no Ministers of Christ, that their Doctrine is not from Heaven,
but men below: they teach for Doctrine the Traditions of Men.

Answ. And how should we believe otherwise of them, who have no Commission from
God, but go forth in the Will of Man, how should we believe that they are
Ministers of Christ, or that they receive their Doctrine or Commission from
Heaven?. 15.
If our Adversary will still believe, that such unsent Teachers, as have no
Divine Commission from Heaven, are Christ's Ministers, he may believe so long
enough, before the QVAKERS will be of his Faith.

There are several more things in his Ninety Eight Articles, wherein his
Ignorance as well as his Falsehood appears. But I think I have given Instances
sufficient to evince both to any impartial and unbyassed Readers; as also to
Vindicate Truth from his Malicious, Perverse and Knavish Attempts; for which I
leave him to the Just God, to Reckon with, Judge and Reward him according to
his Works.


