To all those that Worship in Temples made with Hands, but more especially to
them of PAVLS, as a Warning to them to Repent.
THis Testimony have I to bear for the true and living God, against all the
Idolatrous Worship that is now set up in this Nation of England; but more
especially is this Message, and Warning, and Visitation from God sent amongst
those people who often meet at Paul's, against whom, and against their Worship
the Lord God commanded me to go and cry with a loud Voice, and cry, Woe
against you Worshipers of Images and dumb Idols, the Lord God is arising to
confound and to throw down all the Idolatrous Worship that is now standing, and
to break the Images to pieces, and to destroy the Worshipers of them, if they
repent not: And woe from the Lord God of vengeance is gone forth against all
Idolatry, and against all Idolatrous Worships and Worshipers; God is now come
to set up and establish his own Way and Worship, which is in the Spirit, and in
the Truth; and the day is now come, and is known, wherein the living and true
God is worshipped again in the Spirit, and in the Truth: Although there has
been a time of darkness and ignorance, wherein the Veil of darkness has been
spread over the Nations, and in that time a Worship has been pretended unto
God, whilst they have been scattered upon the barren Mountains as Sheep having
no Shepherd; but now in this day of the breaking forth of the Glory of God, is
the Shepherd of Israel come to lead home again unto the fold of everlasting
rest, all that will hear his Voice, and obey his Call; and unto all he says,
Come, drink freely of the living Water, and feed upon the living Bread which
comes down from God, and feed no longer upon husks with the Swine, neither
spend your money, nor your precious time any longer for that which is not
bread, that cannot satisfy. Therefore come out of Babylon, which is in
confusion, for God is risen to destroy her, and her builders, who are daubing
with untempered Mortar; God will lay her desolate, and not one stone of her
building shall stand upon another, but all shall be thrown down and scattered
by the Whirlwind of the Lord God, whose day is come and broken forth, and by
the Light thereof we are come to see the darkness, and the thick darkness that
has been over the Nations, notwithstanding they have been professing God, and
Christ, and a Form of Worship, whilst they have been alienated and strangers
from God, and such have Worshipped upon the barren Mountains: But the day is
come, and now is, wherein the Father will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, and
no more at Jerusalem, nor no more in the Mountains; but God is gathering all
Nations home to within, to know Truth set up in their inward parts, and to
establish his own righteousness in the hearts of the children of men, and all
people must come unto the true Light of Life which God has placed in them,
which Light has a long time shined in the darkness, but now is broken forth
out of obscurity, and the day star is arising, unto whose Light the Nations
must be gathered; and this is the day wherein the free love of God is sounded
forth, that all may hear the Voice and Call of the true Shepherd, that their
souls may come to live: So that which gives the knowledge and Glory of God in
the face of his Son, is the Light, which is the Way unto eternal life; so
Christ is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; and this is the foundation of God
which is laid in people, the Light which Christ has enlightened them withal;
so him has God given for a Light unto the Gentiles, and to be his salvation
unto the ends of the earth: And this is the Leader of all that are saved, they
must walk in the Light of the Lord, he leads into all Truth, and all that are
led by the Spirit of truth, they come to worship God aright; and none else can
worship the true God, but they who know him in the Truth, for God is Truth, and
he is Light, and in him is no darkness at all.

So all people, try your ways, and search your hearts by the Candle of God,
which is the Light of his Son, and see whether or no you are led by the Spirit
of Truth, which leads into all Truth; but all who are not here are out of the
Way and Worship of God, and so are without, crying, Lord, Lord, and so come not
to enter into the Kingdom of Gods Glory, wherein is Life, and Peace, and Joy
in the holy spirit. So this is unto all you who are yet without God living in
the World: I say, it is the Warning of God, and the Visitation of his Love in
this the day of his power and appearance, wherein he is risen in his glory and
in his brightness, for the gathering home of his Sons and Daughters from the
ends of the Earth, that they may come to lie down in the fold of everlasting
Rest, and to know Christ the true Shepherd set over them; for God is bringing
all into one Fold, and to know the one Shepherd, which is Christ the living
Minister, the Bishop of the souls, the High Priest of God: and God is gathering
people from the Shepherds of the World, and from the deceiving Priests, and God
is bringing them unto the High Priest, the everlasting Prophet, which Moses
prophesied of, saying, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up like unto me,
him shall you hear in all things; and whosoever will not hear this Prophet, is
to be cut off from amongst the people. So in this day God has poured forth his
Spirit according to his promise, and his Sons and his Daughters, his Servants
and his Handmaids are come to prophecy, and such are sent to cry against all
Idolatry, and to preach Repentance unto the people, that they may come out of
their ignorance and blindness, that they may come to see the Light of the day
of God, which Abraham saw, who was blessed, who was just, whose Faith justified
him, and was accounted unto him for righteousness: So the living Faith purifies
the heart, and this is the living Hope, and all that have this Hope purify
themselves, as God is pure; such are made clear by the Word, such walk in the
Way of Life: And the same Word of Faith we now contend for earnestly, because
we know the Truth, and the Truth makes free. So this is one tender Visitation
of God sent amongst you all, and unto all people whose eyes are yet blind. So
this is to be sent in and amongst the people who meet at Paul's, as the Warning
of God in Bowels of love, from the movings of the Holy Spirit in one who
fears the Lord.

From the Counter Prison in Wood-street, the 24. of the first Month, 1662.
Dorothy White.


