A Summary of Occurrences, Relating to the Miraculous Preservation Of our late
Sovereign Lord King CHARLES II. After the Defeat of his Army at Worcester in
the Year 1651. Faithfully taken from the express Personal Testimony of those
two worthy Roman Catholics, Thomas Whitgrave of Moseley, in the County of
Stafford Esquire; and Mr. John Hudleston Priest, of the holy Order of St. Bennet;
the eminent Instruments under God of the same Preservation.

Permissu Superiorum.



LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel; And are sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Black-Friars. 1688.

A Summary of Occurrences relating to the miraculous Preservation of our late
Sovereign Lord King CHARLES II. after the Defeat of his Army at Worcester in
the Year 1651.
Faithfully taken from the express personal Testimony of those two worthy Roman
Catholics, Thomas Whitgrave of Moseley, in the County of Stafford Esquire, and
Mr. John Hudleston Priest, of the Holy Order of St. Bennet; the Eminent
Instruments under God of the same Preservation.
TO the end future Ages may be rightly informed, and duly sensible of the
mercies and blessings of the Almighty bestowed upon our late Sovereign Lord of
happy Memory King Charles II. and in him, upon the whole Nation, by the signal
preservation of his Sacred Life and Person, from the Hands of the Rebels after
the defeat of his Army at Worcester. We shall here, to the Glory of God the
Protector of Princes, briefly set forth with all plainness and sincerity, such
particular Passages and Circumstances as occurred immediately before, or during
the time of the refuge and safety he found in his greatest danger and exigence
at Mr. Whitgraves House at Moseley.

Please therefore to know, That His Majesty's Army being on Wednesday the third
of September (51.) wholly defeated at Worcester; his Friends dispersed; and
Enemies in full pursuit of their Victory; The King conducted by Colonel
Charles Gyfford, and accompanied with the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of
Shrewsbury, Earl of Derby, Lord Wilmot, Mr. Peter Street, and others, retired
on Thursday Morning to a House called White-Ladies, then appertaining to
Mistress Cotton Widow, and now the Inheritance of her Son-in-Law Basil
Fitz-herbert Esquire, in Staffordshire. There His Majesty changed his Habit,
cut his Hair, and transformed himself into the dress of a Country Peasant; thus
disguised, he dismissed all his Retinue, and committed his Person to the
Fidelity of the Pendrells, poor Catholics, and laboring men, at, or about
White-Ladies; with one of these Pendrels, named Richard, the King spent the
rest of the day in a Neighboring Wood, and at night attended only by the same
Richard, set forwards his Journey toward Madeley in Shropshire, with intention
to pass over the River Severn into Wales, for the Recruit of his Army; but
arriving near to the River side, he was informed by Mr. Wolf a Catholic at
Madeley, that all the Fords and Passages were so strongly guarded and
obstructed, there was no possibility of effecting his design; so that in this
extremity, he was forced after having absconded all Friday in a certain Barn of
the said Mr. Wolfes to come back the next Night, and regain his former Asylum
at another House of Mr. Fitzherberts, called Boscobel, Tenanted by William
Pendrel, Brother to Richard, and adjoining to White-Ladies. During this
interval, those Persons of Quality whom the King had dismissed from
White-Ladies, endeavored each one the best he could to provide for his own
safety.

Amongst others, the Lord Wilmot conjecturing the open ways least obnoxious to
suspicion, departed the same Thursday in the forenoon from White-Ladies, and
took along with him John another Brother of the Pendrels, as a Guide into the
common Road between York and London, but he soon perceived himself disappointed
of his expectations herein, for the whole Country was Alarmed; The Enemy every
where in pursuit; The Avenues on all sides blocked up, and searches redoubled
by a promised Reward of One thousand pounds to any one who would discover the
King. Wherefore my Lord justly despairing of success that way, took refuge in
the House of one Mr. Hunthatch of Brinford, near Moseley, about four Miles from
White-Laides, and sheltered his Horses in a ruined Barn of a poor Cottager not
far from thence. But this place affording him little or no hopes of rest or
safety, he sent his Guide John to Wolverhampton, in quest of some more secure
Receptacle. Here also John miscarrying, and frustrated wholly of all Relief; in
his return to my Lord, by the singular conduct of Divine Providence, met with
Mr. Hudleston at a Place called Northcore, John knew both the Person, Religion,
and Character of Mr. Hudleston, and therefore with an assured Considence
related unto him; how the day before the Kings Army had been utterly routed at
Worcester; how that very Morning the King himself with other great Persons had
come in Private to White-Ladies, how the King had been there disguised, had
dismissed his Followers, and was retired he knew not whither with his Brother
Richard. How he had endeavored to help a brave Person toward his escape into
York and London Road, but not being able to compass it, nor get any Harbor for
him either at Hampton or elsewhere, he had left him at Mr. Huntbatch's at
Brinford near Moseley, where he would be most certainly discovered, unless Mr.
Hudleston could prevail with his Landlord (Mr. Whitgrave) to receive him, and
conceal him in his House. Hereupon Mr. Hudleston carried John to his Chamber,
imparted the Affair to Mr. Whitgrave, who touched with a sense of compassion
and Generosity, willingly undertook the care (however dangerous to himself) of
the distressed Lord's Concealment and Protection; accordingly Mr. Whitgrave
without farther delay waited upon my Lord at Brinford, comforted and encouraged
him by his promised Assistance, and in fine, ordered matters so, that at ten a
Clock in the Night my Lord was safely brought to his retirement at Moseley; the
only difficulty remaining was how to dispose of my Lords two Horses; a thing
not to be disregarded, both because they would be necessary for my Lords
farther Progress, as also for that either standing as they did exposed in an
open Barn, or being brought to Mr. Whitgraves Stables adjoining and obvious to
the common Street, their being detected, would occasion a disclosing of the
whole grcret; To remedy this Mr. Whitgrave sent a trusty Person to Colonel
Lane at Bently, about three miles from Moseley, acquainted him with my Lords
arrival, and desired him for some little time to secure my Lords Horses. The
Colonel who had formerly served under my Lord in the Wars, not only readily
complied herein, but the same Night gave my Lord a private Visit, and kindly
invited him to his House, as the more secure place, adding, That his Sister
Mistress Jane Lane, had procured a Pass from the Governor of Stafford, for her
self and a Servant to go to Bristow, by virtue of which Pass, he might as his
Sisters Servant, get clear out of the Country. My Lord thanked him for his
Civility, but said, he was well satisfied with his present Quarters; Yet withal
entreated the Colonel he would keep the Opportunity of his Sisters Pass, and
retain his Horses till he heard from him again. Thus they took leave of each
other, and the Colonel returned home.

The next day being Friday, his Lordship sent John Pendrel to learn what was
become of the King, and what had passed at White-Ladies: John returning the
same Night, brought word, That the King went the night before with his Brother
Richard toward Severn, designing to pass over into Wales. Upon this
information, my Lord resolved to accept of the proffered benefit of Mistress
Lanes Pass, and accordingly next Morning being Saturday, he desired Mr.
Whitgrave to send to Colonel Lanes for his Horses. He dismissed John in the
afternoon home to White-Ladies; and the Horses arriving at a certain Place and
time appointed, about Midnight he took leave of Mr. Whitgrave with all due
expressions of Gratitude and kindness, and so departed to Bently.

Saturday, And now my Lord being gone, Mr. Whitgrave and Mr. Hudleston
entertained themselves with thoughts and sollicitudes concerning the King; They
had heard nothing of him all that day. The last intelligence brought by John
from White-Ladies on Friday was, That the King was gone the night before with
Richard toward Severn, for Wales; but what success he had, or what was become
of him since, they knew not, wherefore anxious between hopes and fears for his
Majesty's safety, they resolved to go the next day being Sunday to White-Ladies
for their farther satisfaction; whilst they were thus determined, and walking
together very early on the backside of the Orchard on Sunday Morning; They were
surprised to see John Pendrel unexpectedly coming toward them, and approaching
them with a frightful Countenance, and much impetuosity asked, where is my
Lord? They told him, His Lordship was gone; Then (says the poor man in great
consternation) we are all undone; For the King finding the Passages over Severn
all guarded with Soldiers, and no possibility of getting into Wales, is come
back to Boscobel; And we know not what to do with him, or how to dispose of
him. He has been for the most part since his Return concealed in a Tree (now
called the Royal Oak) with Colonel Carloes in Boscobel Wood, but searches are
every where made, and the King is much dejected, having no hopes or prospect of
redress, wherefore understanding from me I had left my Lord Wilmot here, he
has sent me to him with orders he should take some speedy course for his
removal and security with him. Upon this sad relation of John's, Mr. Whitgrave
and Mr. Hudleston deeply moved at the Kings danger and Calamity, having first
offered to God their Sunday Duty for his Majesty's safety, accompanied John to
my Lord at Bentley, where being admitted to his Lordship, it was upon mature
deliberation Resolved. That my Lord should come back about Eleven at Night to
Moseley, in order to the waiting upon the King there. That John should return
to Boscobel, and from thence conduct his Majesty to a certain appointed Station
near Mr. Whitgraves House, where Mr. Hudleston was to attend and receive him.

And what was thus designed, was accordingly executed; My Lord came, and was
conducted by Mr. Whitgrave to his Chamber; And some few hours after, the King
attended by John, and two or three more of the Pendrel Brothers, arrived on a
Mill Horse near Mr. Hudleston's Station, where Mr. Whitgrave and Mr. Hudleston
both waited for him; Upon his arrival he was immediately conducted to my Lord,
who with some impatience expected him in his Chamber. The King being thus by
Gods blessing safely introduced into the House, after some private discourse
had between him and my Lord, His Lordship addressing himself to Mr. Whitgrave
and Mr. Hudleston, said, Gentlemen, the Person whom you see here under this
Disguise, is both your Master and mine, and the Master to whom we all owe our
Duty and Allegiance; upon which they both kneeling down, His Majesty admitted
them to the honor of kissing his Hand; Then bidding them arise, told them, He
had received from my Lord so good a Character of their Loyalty, and readiness
to serve, and assist him, and his Friends in those dangers, that he would never
be unmindful of them, nor theirs. Immediately after he asked, where is the
private Place my Lord speaks of? They then showed him the place of his retreat
for avoiding surprisals, which having seen, entered into, and much approved of,
he returned to his Chamber. He then sat him down on his Bedside, and Mr.
Whitgrave presented him with a little Biscake Bread, and a Glass of Sack, which
he took; whilst he thus sat, his Nose bled; at this accident Mr. Hudleston
seemed concerned, but His Majesty said it was usual with him; then taking out
of his Pocket an old course Clout which the Pendrels had given him instead of a
Handkerchief, he received the Blood into it, Mr. Hudleston then presented him
with a fair Handkerchief, and kept the bloody Clout to himself. After this the
King went to the Fireside, sat down in a Chair, and gave Mr. Hudleston leave to
pull off his Stockings and Shoes, stuffed within with White Paper, but yet so
uneasy, wet, and full of Gravel, they had extremely enflamed and galled his
Feet.

Here it may not be unpleasant to some, if we briefly describe part of the
Rustic Habit under which the King was disguised, he had on a long white
Steeple crowned Hat, without other ^^^ming than Grease, both sides of the Brim
so doubled with handling, they looked like two Spouts; a Leather Doublet full
of holes, and half black with Grease above the Sleeves, Collan, and Wast. An
old green Woodriffs Coat threadbare, and patched in most places, with a pair of
Breeches of the same Cloth, and in the same condition, the slops hanging down
loose to the middle of his Leg; Hose and Shoes of different Parishes; The Hose
were gray, Stirrups much derned, and clouted, especially about the knees, under
which he had a pair of Flannel riding Stockings of his own, with the tops cut
off; His Shoes had been cobled with Leather patches both on the Soals and
Seams, and the Upperleathers so cut and slashed to adapt them to his Feet, they
could no longer defend him either from Water or Dirt. This exotic and deformed
Dress added to his short Hair cut of by the Ears, his Face colored brown with
Walnut-tree-leaves, and a rough crooked-Thorn-Stick in his Hand, had so
metamorphosed him, he became scarce discernable who he was, even to those that
had been before acquainted with his Person, and conversant with him.

Mr. Hudleston having cleansed and dried his Feet with warm Cloths, put on new
Linen and Worsted Stockings, and accommodated him with Slippers, and other
things necessary for his ease, His Majesty became thereby much refreshed and
cheerful, saying, He was now fit for a new March; adding also, If it should
ever please God to bless him with Ten or Twelve thousand Loyal and resolute
Men, he doubted not but to drive these Traitors out of his Kingdom. After an
hour or two's discourse with my Lord Wilmot, in deliberation of what seemed
most expedient in the present conjuncture, it being now about five in the
Morning, His Majesty desired to repose on his Bed, and the Pendrels, all but
John, were dismissed home.

Monday, Upon the Kings first change of Apparel at White-Ladies, they had put
him on a course patched harden Shirt, which by its roughness extremely
incommoded him, and hindered his rest. This Mr. Hudleston observing, prevailed
with him to accept of a new Holland Shirt of his own, and reserved for a
Memorial the course one to himself.

For the better security of his Majesty's Retreat, Mr. Whitgrave sent forth all
his Servants betimes in the Morning, each to their several Employments abroad,
except one Cook Maid a Catholic, who dressed their Diet; And it was farther
pretended, Mr. Hudleston had a Cavalier Friend, or Relation, newly escaped from
Worcester, who lay privately in his Chamber unwilling to be seen. So that this
grand secret was imparted to none in the House, but Mr. Whitgrave, Mr.
Hudleston, and Mr. Whitgraves Mother, whom my Lord Wilmot presented to the
King; And whom his Majesty graciously Saluted, and confided in.

At that time Mr. Hudleston had with him at Moseley under his Tuition, young
Sir John Preston, and two other Youths, Mr. Thomas Palin, and Mr. Francis
Reynolds, Nephews to Mr. Whitgrave, these he placed at several Windows in the
Garrets from whence they had a prospect of all the Passages from all parts to
the House, with strict charge given them to bring timely notice of any, whether
Soldiers or others that came near the House, and herein the Boys were as exact
and vigilant as any Sentinel could be on his Guard. It is now Monday in the
Forenoon, and John is ordered to go to Bentley, with directions to Colonel
Lane to send my Lords Horses at Night to Moseley to convey his Lordship back to
Bentley. His Majesty eat constantly in Mr. Hudlestons Chamber: Mr. Whitgrave
himself handing up all the Dishes from below Stairs to Mr. Hudleston's Chamber
door. And Mr. Hudleston placing them on the Table; when all things were brought
up, old Mistress Whitgrave was called in, and commanded to sit down and Carve,
whilst Mr. Whitgrave and Mr. Hudleston waited behind the King.

This day His Majesty spent partly in reposing and refreshing himself from the
Fatigues of his former Journeys and hardships, and partly in recapitulating the
late Transactions; and taking a View of the present posture of Affairs. He
recounted his proceedings in Scotland, and described the methods of his March
from thence to Worcester. He inquired how the Gentlemen of the Country were
affected toward him, and sent Mr. Whitgrave to Wolverhampton to get
intelligence of Affairs; sometimes he entertained himself at a Window opening
to the common Street, from whence he had the deplorable sight of diverse of his
own poor Soldiers, even of those whom he knew of his own Regiment, the sad
remains of Worcester Fight; some of these had in their Hands Pease in the
Straw, gathered from the Field-sides as they came along, others were eating
Cabbage-Stalks and Leaves which were thrown out of Gardens into the Highways,
not daring so much as to beg for Food. Others again wounded and maimed, sought
for Relief at the Door, whose Sores Mistress Whitgrave with great tenderness and
Charity dressed.

At Night my Lord Wilmot's Horses arrived as was appointed from Bentley,
whither his Lordship accordingly returned with farther directions, That
Colonel Lane should the next Night following, himself bring the Horses back to
Moseley, in order to the Conveyance of his Majesty to Bentley. The King
intending to take the benefit proffered to my Lord Wilmot of Mistress Jane Lane's
forementioned Pass, to quit the Country.

The next day, viz. Tuesday, the King conversed for the most part with Mr.
Hudleston; Mr. Whitgrave, and his Mother, being employed in the discharge of
their several duties toward his Majesty's accommodation, and safeguard below
stairs. He was pleased to enquire how Roman Catholics lived under the present
Usurped Government; Mr. Hudleston told him they were Persecuted on account both
of their Religion and Loyalty; yet his Majesty should see they did not neglect
the Duties of their Church; hereupon he carried him up Stairs, and showed him
the Chapel, little, but neat and decent. The King looking respectfully upon
the Altar, and regarding the Crucifix and Candlesticks upon it, said; He had an
Altar, Crucifix and Silver Candlesticks of his own, till my Lord of Holland
brake them, which (added the King) he has now paid for. His Majesty spent
likewise sometime in perusing Mr. Hudleston's Books, amongst which attentively
reading a short Manuscript writ by Mr. Richard Hudleston, a Benedictine Monk,
Entitled, A Short and Plain Way to the Faith and Church; He expressed his
Sentiments of it in these positive Words. I have not seen any thing more plain
and clear upon this Subject. The Arguments here drawn from Succession, are so
conclusive; I do not conceive how they can be denied. He also took a view of
Mr. Turbervill's Catechism, and said, it was a pretty Book, and he would take
it along with him.

This afternoon a Party of the Rebels unexpectedly came to search Moseley for
Mr. Whitgrave; their approach was timely discovered, and a Servant came running
up Stairs toward the Chamber where the King lay, and cried out Soldiers,
Soldiers are coming; upon this Alarm the King was immediately conveyed by Mr.
Whitgrave into the Private place, or Receptacle before mentioned, which always
stood open and ready in case of contingencies for his Majesty's Retreat. And
Mr. Whitgrave to prevent farther search, and thereby to secure the King from
hazard of Discovery, generously went down, and exposed himself to the sight and
sury of the Soldiers, who violently seized upon him, and would have hurried him
to Prison, as a Person engaged for the King in Worcester Fight; but he assured
them he had been a long time sick and infirm at home, and called in the
Neighbors to attest the same, wherefore after much dispute, they at length let
him go and departed. When they had quitted the Town and not before, Mr.
Whitgrave returned, and with Mr. Hudleston, helped the King out of his
Confinement, and attended him in his Chamber. Mr. Hudleston knew the King was
acquainted with his Character and Function, and consequently also of his being
obnoctious to the Sanguinary Laws, and therefore said, Your Majesty is in some
sort in the same condition with me now, liable to dangers and perils, but I
hope God that brought you hither, will preserve you here. And that You will be
as safe in this place, as in any Castle of Your Dominions.

The King addressing himself both to Mr. Whitgrave and Mr. Hudleston, Replied,
If it please God I come to my Crown, both you, and all of your Persuasion,
shall have as much liberty as any of my Subjects.

It is now Tuesday Night, and the hour of His Majesty's departure from Moseley
approaches. At twelve a Clock Mr. Whitgrave informed his Majesty that Colonel
Lane attended at the place appointed, with the Horses to conduct him to
Bentley. His Majesty then with all the resentments of Kindness and Gratitude
for their Fidelity, and indefatigable care, day and night in his Service, bid
adieu to Mr. Whitgrave, his Mother, and Mr. Hudleston; they kneeling down,
begged his Majesty's pardon for any mi^takes they might have committed through
ignorance or inadvertency in discharge of their Duty. And thus accompanied by
Mr. Whitgrave and Mr. Hudleston, the King went down to the corner of the
Orchard, where the Colonel expected with the Horses, Mr. Hudleston reflecting
on the coldness of the season, and thinness of his Majesty's Disguise, humbly
implored he would vouchsafe to accept of his Cloak for a Protection from the
severity of the Weather. The King put it on; Then again they all making their
Obeisance, and with tears imploring the Divine Goodness for his Majesty's
safeguard, the King mounted, and came that Night to Bentley. From whence by
means of the above mentioned Pass of Mistress Lane, he escaped under the notion
of her Servant out of the Country and Nation, remaining b^yond the Seas till
the time of hi^ no less wonderful Restoration.

This is the sum of the signal Preservation of the Sacred Life and Person of
our late Sovereign Lord King Charles II. at Moseley, wherein the Almighty Hand
of God is clearly manifest, not only in the Preservation it self, but also in
effecting the same by Means so weak, and disproportionable to the End. To him
be Honor and Glory for ever. Amen.

Thomas Whitgrave, John Hudleston.


FINIS.

