Truth further Defended, AND William Penn Vindicated;

BEING A REJOINDER TO A BOOK ENTITLED, A Brief and Modest Reply, to Mr. Penn
's Tedious, Scurrilous, and Unchristian Defense, against the Bishop of Cork.

Wherein that Author's Unfairness is Detected, his Arguments and Objections are
Answered.

By T. W. and N. H.

They are of those that Rebel against the Light, they know not the ways
thereof, nor abide in the Paths thereof. Job. 24. 13. -- In the Net which they
hid, is their own Foot taken. Psalm. 9. 15. Printed in the Year, 1700.

THE PREFACE.
FRIENDLY READER,
WE Can assure thee, it is not agreeable to our inclinations to concern our
selves in matters of Controversy, more especially in Print: But the defense of
Truth, the Vindication of our abused Principles and Friends in general, with
our Absent Friend in particular, etc. prevailed upon us, to undertake the
following Rejoinder, in Answer to a Book wrote in this City, Entitled: A Brief
and Modest Reply to Mr. Penn's Tedious, Scurrilous and Unchristian Defense
against the Bp. of Cork, etc. To which Book, tho the Author has not Subscribed
his Name, yet we conceive him to be Edward Wettenhall Late Bp. of Cork. (1st.)
Because we are certainly informed he ordered the Printing, and caused the same
to be Published. (2ly.) It is not only called and allowed by all to be his, (so
far as we have heard) but confirmed so to be, in Crying about the streets of
Dublin, and Cork. (3ly.) The Book it self puts it out of Question to be his, or
don by a person to whom he dictated, which is observable throughout the same,
and so particularly to be noted, in the very Introduction. Likewise in (p. 3.)
speaks of a Book of W. P's. then before him: These Reasons having induced us to
conclude him the Author, we have therefore in our following Discourse Styled
him so.

We observe the Bp. in the Title of his Book Applies, Brevity and Modesty to
his own account, but the blackning Epithets, of Tediousness, Scurrillity, and
Unchristianity to W. P's. To which we Answer, (1st.) That the Bp's. Reply is
brief we grant (as we have observed) and so Brief too, that we (shall not
determine, but) leave it to the Reader to judge, whether it deserves the Name of
a Reply. But if styling his Reply Brief, and W. P's. Defense Tedious, will
plead Excuse for its being so short of an Answer, we allow the Bp. has made an
advantage thereby. (2ly.) As to its Modesty, we will here give a few of the
many Instances we could bring, and let the Reader judge, If charging the
Quakers, with Slight, Cunning, Craftiness, Lying in Wait to deceive, (a
Character for the worst of men,) as in (p. 1st) If Calling the Testimony of our
Friends, to the Light of Christ Jesus within Men, according to Holy Scriptures,
The Poisonous Pill of their Light within, (Page 13.) Making W. P. a Diffuser of
Poison, (Page 18.) Charging the Quakers, (most uncharitably) with being so
intent upon minding worldly gain both Day and Night, as to pass most Days in
the Week without a Prayer to God, either in Public Assembly or Family, (page
21.) Suggesting that W. P. is Popishly Affected, or has a Kindness for Atheism,
because he is for a Free Gospel Ministry, and pleads against a Compelled or
Forced Maintenance for them, (Page 25.) If these Expressions, with abundance
more of the same kind, through his Reply, (too tedious to Mention here,) be
either Modest upon W. P. in particular, or the Quakers in general, we are to
learn what Modesty means. And if the Bp. (upon second consideration, shall
still) think them so, we may take leave to tell him, we are no more obliged to
him for his Modesty, then to his Charity, (3ly.) As to W. P's. being Scurrilous
and Unchristian in his Defense; we say, If bare charges were to pass for
Proofs, he might be thought guilty of both; but if demonstration be required
for Proofs, as well as charges, we appeal to the Reader, and let him be judge,
whether they will not rather fall upon the Bp. while we believe, he will find
no such scurrilous and Unchristian Treatment, in W. P's. Defense as are in the
Bp's. Reply.

We also observe, That although the Bp's. Reply is Dated, Cork, March, 21. School/9.
at which time, he was not removed hence, Yet we have no reason assigned
wherefore it was not Printed, or made Public till October, 1699. What Reasons,
the Bp. had for delaying its Publication, he best knows: But this we know, that
W. P. sailed for Pensilvania in September, and soon after out came the Bp's.
Reply. Had W. P. continued in England the delay had been no blame upon the Bp.
but since the Bp. had made several personal Reflections and Charges against W.
P. which none could Answer, so well as himself, we think he ought to have
Published his Reply, before W. P's. departure for America, (since he had time
enough for so doing) That so W. P. might have appeared in his own Vindication,
and which he could easily have done, had the Bp's, Reply, come out in due time:
But since the Bp. thought not fit so to do, whereby this Rejoinder has fallen
into the Hands of Persons, less skilful in the Defense of Truth then W. P. (as
we freely confess it has,) and not so qualified to Treat the Bp. as W. P. nor
perhaps, as the Bp. himself might expect. The Bp. may be pleased, or displeased
with himself, as he finds occasion, for depriving W. P. of that service, and
thereby (to be sure) himself of an Abler Opponent. But tho the Bp. should
dislike us for Opponents, yet we think he cannot (at least ought not) to blame
us, (since Reason and Justice allows us the Privilege) to appear in our Just
Vindication, when we find our Principles, as well as our Friends, so greatly
Abused, Misrepresented, and Reflected upon, as we believe will plainly appear
(to the Impartial Reader,) they are in the Bp's. Reply: However,
notwithstanding his Treatment, tho we may be plain, where the Nature of his
Charges extorts it from us, yet we hope the Reader will find, that we have not
only endeavored to carry our selves, with that Moderation toward him, which
becomes us both as Men and Christians too: But likewise as fair Opponents,
having designedly, neither Perverted his Words, nor Misrepresented his Sense,
so far as we understood them; and whether we have thus done on our Parts, or
the Bp. has done the contrarry by W. P. is left to the Impartial Reader.

To Conclude, The following Rejoinder was Writ last Winter, according to its
Date at the End, and as a Reason for its lying so long Unprinted, the Reader
may please to understand, That being advised by a Friend from Dublin, above
Eight Months past, he had sent One of the Bp's. Reply's, by way of Maryland to
W. P. it gave us some hopes of an Answer thereto, from himself, which we
greatly desired. But inasmuch, as some Letters, has been very lately received
from W. P. and that he makes no mention of that Reply, we now conclude it has
Miscarried; Therefore to the end we may no longer remain Silent, under the
Bp's. Charges and Reflections, etc. We have thought fit at last, (tho late,) to
make this Public, and the rather because we have heard, some have conceived an
Opinion, That the Bp's. Reply was Unanswerable.

Cork the 20th of the 7th Month, 1700. Thomas Wight. Nicholas Harris.


Advertisement.
REader, please to mind, that there are Two Impressions of W. P's. Defense
Extant: The Citations in this Discourse, respects the Second, very few of the
First being in Ireland. But the Bps. Citations, chiefly Respects the First.

A Rejoinder to a Book* Styled, A Brief and Modest Reply to Mr. Penn's, etc.
THE Bishop seems pleased with William Penn for Printing Gospel Truths,
together with his Testimony before his own Defense, and begins his Introduction
thus, (P. 1) The Bp. of Cork being to vindicate the Truth and Himself, thanks
Mr. P. for having Printed both his own Paper and the Bp's. Testimony against it
at length before his Book; for the Bp. believes that all sober and Reasonable
Christians who shall read those two over and consider them, will easily acquit
the Bp. from the first of Mr. P's. Imputations in his Preface, that he is a man
of a mind different from those, who would have strife among Christians abated,
and for discouraging Controversies in Religion.

Answ. Evident then it is, W. P. was careful to set the whole matter fairly
before his Reader, that so he might be able to make the better Judgment, and we
wish the Bp. had as well deserved thanks from W. P. for setting down the
Defense (though not at length yet) in its due strength, without suppressing so
considerable a part of it and perverting so much of the rest, as will be found
he has done. Next we are equally agreed to refer W. P's. Imputation to all
sober and reasonable Christians, believing they will not so easily acquit the
Bp. as he thinks, considering he was the only Person in Ireland, who broke out
into a Public Testimony against that Inoffensive Paper called Gospel Truths,
and therein greatly abused us, as W. P. has plainly shown in many Instances
from Page 22 to 26 of his Defense, but slipped over by the Bp. with saying, To
Omit things less Material; as if so egregiously to abuse and villifie a People,
as he is there charged by W. P. to have done, were a light matter with him. And
farther to speak our Sentiments (after the Bp's. way) Let W. P's. Defense and
the Bp's. Reply be read over and considered by all Sober and Impartial
Christians, and we cannot but believe they will be of our mind, for the sakes
of such only there was no need of this Rejoinder; that Defense being (as we
think) a sufficient Answer of it self to the most material parts of the Bp's.
Reply.

The Bp. proceeds thus. (ibid 1) the Bp. says a peaceable Testimony against the
slight of men, touching whom it is questionable, whether they be Christians or
not, and against their cunning craftiness who lie in wait to deceive, is no
moving strife or raising quarrels among Christians.

Answ. As to the peaceableness of the Bp's. Testimony his management therein,
does evidently show it, and which we leave to the Impartial Reader: But if
Misrepresenting, Abusing, and Calling us no Christians; if obtruding Principles
upon us as ours which we utterly disown and abhor; if drawing Consequences from
our Words and Writings, we never thought of, much less intended, and forcing
them upon us, tho we disclaim them; if curtailing our Writings, leaving out
what explained our meaning, and wilfuly overlooking our plain Sense, with much
more too tedious to mention, would make it questionable, whether we are
Christians or not, the Bp. is in the right: Nay we will go farther with him; it
would not only be questionable, but we had without all peradventure been
positively made no Christians; for it has been the constant practice of our
Adversaries (since we were a People) thus to deal by us, and amongst the rest,
we cannot excuse the Bp. from having a share in some of these things, which
shall be shown in their places. But blessed be God, it is not the Tongues or
Pens of all our Adversaries in the World, can make us no Christians; for we
have not only believed in the outward coming and appearance of our Lord Jesus
Christ in the Flesh with his Sufferings, Death, Resurrection, Assention and
Mediation, but in humility of Soul and to the praise of his Holy Name, we can
say we have witnessed his second coming in Spirit, according to his promise,
John 14. 17, 81. Chap. 15. 26. and 16. 13. to fit and prepare our Souls in
order to obtain the benefit of his outward death and sufferings for us. And
thus we are not only Christians by Notion and Tradition but such in reallity,
for which we have the evidence in our selves according to 1 John 5. 10. He that
believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself. And Romans 8. 16. The
Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirits, that we are the Children of
God. Here then is the double and agreeing record of true Religion, the
Illumination of the holy Ghost within, agreeing with the Testimony of the
Scriptures of Truth without, which we shall have farther occasion to speak to.
But here, that we may not be misunderstood, we do not mean so largely of all
such as some may call Quakers, but of such whose Lives and Conversations
influenced by the Holy Spirit bespeak them to be true Quakers and therefore
true Christians.

Next as to the Bp's. gross, (and to use his own Words) scurrilous and
unchristian charge of slight, cuning, craftinness, lying in wait to deceive,
which is brought as a confirming charge to his Testmony, in which he told us
and tells again (P. 9) he did not judge us: We say as to this charge, we shall
not at present say much, (reserving it to be considered with more of the same
kind) only tell the Bp. That as we know not how he will reconcile this to
modesty, so we hope he will not say again, he don't judge us, while if what he
says were true (whether it respect our Principles or our Morals) we think it is
plain he equally judges us to be the worst and basest of Men; the Bp. Proceeds,
(P. 1.) Mr. P. adds he gave his Paper to the Bp. in a private way, at a
friendly visit upon his own desire. This is what the Bp. Called writing in such
a way that is hard to know what is meant. If Mr. P. means that either he gave
the Paper to the Bp. upon the Bp's. Desire, or made that Visit upon the Bp's.
Desire, in both Senses the saying is utterly false, for both the Visit and the
Paper were a Surprise, and altogether unexpected by the Bp. Thus the Bp. (P. 1
and 2) Answ. 1st. As to the Paper, take the words as they lie in W. P's.
Preface (P. 1) which runs thus (Given him by me in a Private way at a Friendly
Visit upon his own desire.) Considering the Order of the words, we believe any
Impartial Reader will conclude the Bp's. desire was relative to the Visit, not
the Paper; but waving that, see but about ten lines farther and the matter will
be past doubt, where W. P. Speaks thus, I did Indeed, perceiving him conversant
in our Writings, and his Character moderation, casually present him with one of
these Papers. Again, at the end of the Preface W. P. speaking of the Paper says
given him. Now Reader judge in the matter, Can any thing be plainer, then that
the Paper was W. P's. Present, and not given at the Bp's. Desire. From whence
we conclude, that either the Bp's. over eager desire for an advantage against
the Quakers, made him fall into this mistake, or he thought it might pass with
his unwary Reader, as a Confirmation of his former Charge, about the Quakers
way of Writing. But now since the Bp. is so Critical about Words, may not we
with more reason and justice return the Charge upon himself, where he says,
This is what the Bp. called Writing in such a way that is hard to know what is
meant. Whereas what the Bp. said in his Testimony before, runs thus, You have
such a way of Writing and Speaking that it is very hard, in many matters of
Religion, to know what you mean; So that 'twas matters of Religion he then
spoke of; but that which he now applies, this way of Writing and Speaking to,
is not matter of Religion, but a mere circumstance of W. P's. visiting the Bp.
upon the Bp's. Desire, or not; so to put the best construction upon this
mistake, the Bp. forgot himself when he said, This is what the Bp. called
Writing in such a way, etc. But (2dly) Supposing we should let it go, as the
Bp. would have it, he will still be in no better a case, for the word [this,]
the Bp. makes to intend W. P's. Words in his Defense relating to the Paper and
Visit, and those words [what] and [called] respect the time past, and related
to what the Bp. has charged the Quakers withal in his Testimony about their way
of Writing, etc. How then, say we could any Words in the Bp's. Testimony be
relative to W. P's. Defense, which was writ afterward, and was an Answer to
that Yestimony. Thus, Reader, see how the Bp. falls into the same fault, he
would have charged upon W. P. and the Quakers. We had not thus troubled thee,
Reader, about Words, but the Bp. gave the occasion, and we were willing to let
thee see, how ready the Bp. is (amongst the rest of our Adversaries) to charge
and condemn us without ground, while the fault is in themselves, and yet this
is little to what will appear hereafter in the Bp. Next as to the Visit, the
Bp. denies he desired it, and charges W. P. with an utter falsehood; but he
would have done well to have Exhibited this, with others of his Personal
Charges and Reflections, before W. P. went for America, that so he might have
Answered for himself; However, as it happens, we can in this Case, say
something in the defense of W. P. and must say, we believe the Bp. to be
forgetful; for Amos Strettell of Dublin, being at Cork while W. P. was here,
and happening to be in company with him and Joseph Pike, at the House of the said
Pike, at a time, when G. R. came to visit W. P. they the said Strettell and
Pike, heard G. R. say to W. P. That the Bp. had a great desire to see him, and
desired him to bring him to his House, to which W. P. agreed, when a convenient
season offered. Thus much the said Strettell and Pike remembers, and are ready
to give under their Hands, if desired; and it is believed G. R. himself cannot
forget it, whom we know, and is known to be a Person of that Character and
Station, in the World, that would scorn to forge such a Story to W. P. However
it accidentally happened G. R. did not accompany him, as designed, in that Visit
occasioned by W. P's. dining at a House, which lay not far from the Bp's. He
thence took the opportunity of Visiting the Bp. in company with two other
Persons. We find the Bp. confesses, He had a little Curiosity, which might
pass for a Desire, to see W. P. (whom he jeeringly calls King of Pensilvania)
as he would have been desirous to see the Pope, or the Great Turk, or any other
great Man of Sin; This we find he remembers, and we may be so Charitable as to
believe he forgot the other. To conclude this point about the Visit: If the Bp.
has conceived any dislike against W. P. for putting it in Print, either because
it might be a Scandal to the Bp. in regard, W. P. is a Quaker, or that he
thought W. P. might thereby raise his Credit with the World, (which the Bp.
would have depressed) we say if either of these be the Case, we believe he may
be very easy in the matter; for without lessening to the Bp. he may know many
Persons of much greater note and station in the World then he (Ireland not
excepted) have desired to see and converse with W. P. which as we don't believe
he valued himself upon, less reason then had he to value himself upon the Bp's.
desire, and no other reason can we suppose W. P. had for Printing it, then to
demonstrate how unsuitable a return and course treatment the Bp. gave him for
his friendly Visit. As to the Bp's. suspicion of a design in W. P's. giving him
the Paper, as he tells us (though he leaves us in the dark as to what the design
could be.) We Answer, 'Twas needless thus to tell us now, since W. P. has told
the design in his Preface (which was to improve the Bp's. Temper in Moderation)
which the Bp. should have disproved, or told us what other design W. P. could
have in presenting him with the Paper.

(Ibid. 2) As to the Bp's. Jeers upon W. P. Calling him King of Pensilvania,
Reproaching him with a Spirit of Discerning, and slily Insinuating him among
the number of Great Men of Sin, we shall say the less here, in regard we shall
take notice thereof in another place; And as to his Margin Note, given him upon
Information, that W. P. should say he had a Kingdom of his own, which was
understod of Pensilvania. What if the Bp's. Informer misunderstood W. P; nay,
what if the whole Information was false, let the Reader judge whether it became
the gravity of a Person, in the Bp's. station thus to jeer upon Information.
(Ibid. 2) Says the Bp. And thus much as to Mr. P's. Preface.

Answ. But before we end we must take notice of the Bp's. shortness (not to say
unfairness) in not taking notice or answering what followed in the Preface,
which lies thus; Nor was it writ (namely Gospel Truths) for an exact and
complete account of our Belief; but occasionaly to prevent the prejudices, that
the attempts of a course and scurrilous Pen at Dublin just before might provoke
in some against us. As to the points touched upon in the Gospel Truths. Thus W.
P. Now Reader, we do not blame the Bp. barely for taking no notice of this
part, but we think it became him, either to have disproved what W. P. here
said, or not continued his Reflections now in his Reply, for the brevity of
that Paper, while he had not only the above notice, but had also Robert
Barclay's Apology, and the Rise and Progress of the People called Quakers,
which fully and clearly vindicates at large some of those Tenets, he (now
again) censures as short expressed in that Paper, as we shall show in their
places. But the Bp. proceeds thus,

(Ibid. 2) The first charge in his Book against the Bp. is, that he did not
prove such a Reader as he professed himself, Mr. P. would have had him such a
Reader that had rather they should be in the right then in the wrong; the Bp.
never professed himself such.

Answ. How will the Bp. be able to Reconcile this, to the Words, in his
Testimony, where he says in the beginning of it, Friends, I am such a Reader as
in your Paper you desire. This in Answer to Gospel Truths, which desired a
Sober Reader in these Words, If thou had rather we should be in the right
then in the wrong, etc. Manifest Contradiction.

But the Bp. to bring himself off, goes on thus,

(Ibid. 2) Mr. P. desires a strange partial Reader, who should have more
inclination and affection to the Quakers (that is his Adversaries) Opinion then
his own, or who would rather be in an Error himself then that his Adversaries
should be in any.

Answ. Is there no difference between desiring a People were in the Right then
in the Wrong, and between choosing rather that Himself were in the Wrong then
his Adversaries should be so; certainly a great deal, and it looks as if the
Bp. were hard put to it, when he thus argues, Did W. P. intend or desire such
a Reader as the Bp. stateth? No, but such an one that had rather we were in the
Right then in the Wrong, and explains it thus; One that thought it but
reasonable we should be Heard before Condemned, and that our Belief ought to be
taken from our own Mouths and not at theirs, that has prejudged our Cause. In
short it is very plain, he only desired an Impartial Reader, such as the Bp.
only pretended to be.

(Ibid. 2) The Bp. tells us, He neither had nor has any personal quarrel with
W. P. But, says the Bp. all he impleads him of (meaning W. P.) is his Doctrine,
by spreading and defending such Principles which tend to the Subverting
Christianity, at which no Bp. ought to connive.

Answ. As this is only a general as well as a false charge, so needs no other
Answer here but a positive denial, until we come to particulars, where we shall
see how well the Bp. will prove his Charge. As to his not conniving, to be sure
he is at his liberty to implead, but if he should do so again, we must desire
him to approve himself a fairer Adversary, then he has yet appeared, either in
his Testimony or now in his Reply.

(P. 2) Says the Bp. To omit things less material, (P. 24) He would insinuate
the Bp. Guilty of Insincerity in saying it was the first time he ever heard the
Quakers own the Necessity of Christ as a Propitiation in order to Remission of
Sins, and justifying them as Sinners from the guilt, and tells the Bp. where
possibly he might have read it. The Bp. makes Answer thus, Possibly the Bp. may
have Read more then either he did or now does actually remember, he never had
so much as many of the Quakers Books, much less has he them in his memory.

Answ. Here is first an Instance of the brevity of the Bp's. Reply, while he
takes a large stride from (P. 20) to (24) where W. P. Enumerates and Charges
the Bp. with unfair dealing by us, which the Bp. passes over without notice,
with saying, to omit things less Material; next as W. P. said, so say we, that
it is next to impossible it should be the first time, he so heard of the
Quakers, since he had read R. Barclays Apology, which largely treats of this
head: But the Bp. Confesses he possibly may have Read more then he Remembers,
which seems a tacit granting the matter. But suppose he did not actually
remember this point, can it be possible he should forget that he had Read any
of the Quakers Books since he told W. P. so very lately, he had Read Robert
Barclay, and his Book called the Rise and Progress of the Quakers; the former
largely, and the latter as fully as now in Gospel Truths, owning the Doctrine
of Justification. -- Whence it follows, if the Bp. had been an Impartial
Reader, as he pretended, and one that was unwilling to represent us wrong, or
render us defective in our Belief, he would certainly have first searched those
two Books before he had made this point a new discovery; so to the Impartial
Reader we refer the Bp's. sincerity or kindness to the Quakers herein, and
Proceed,

(Ibid. 3) The Bp. tells us, That he has a Book now before him, Entitled, The
second Part of the serious Apology for the Principles and Practices of the
People called Quakers, by W. P. Printed 1671. In which (P. 148.) are these
Words; This [namely Justification by the Righteousness which Christ has
fulfilled in his own Person for us in the Words before] We deny, and boldly
affirm it to be the Doctrine of Devils, and an Arm of the Sea of Corruption,
which does now deluge the whole World. (Then the Bp. adds) This the Bp. does
not understand to be owning Justification by Christ, he therefore now was glad
to find Mr. P. more Orthodox in School. Then he was in 1671.

Answ. We would have been also glad to have found the Bp. more fair and
ingenious, not to say worse (which it will bear), then to leave out the
Explanatory Part of W. P's. Words, which is as far Remote from a fair Adversary
as an Impartial Reader: Whereas had he been so just as to leave them in, though
they would not have suited the Bp's. purpose, yet (together with W. P's. plain
Sense in several following Arguments) would have made W. P. as Orthodox (to the
Impartial Reader) in 1671. As the Bp. allows him to be School. -- For next to the
Words (i e) His own Person for us, follow these Words (wholly without us) which
Words the Bp. has wholly left out, and instead of them has substituted these
Words [in the Words before] and the Bp. has not only thus done, but has as we
believe wilfuly overlooked (since the place was before him) W. P' s. plain
sense and meaning in his foregoing Words in the same Page, which are these, For
in him [namely in Christ] We have Life, and by Faith Atonement in his Blood.
And the like he has done in what followed in the Apology, which we shall
presently show; But. first we shall set down the entire Words as they lie in
that Apology (which the Bp. pretends to cite, and by which the Reader will see
the Bp's. great unfairness) which were at first the Words of an Adversary one
Jenner, and cited by W. P. with other Articles, thus (Page 148.) 5th. That we
deny Justification by the Righteousness which Christ has fulfilled in his own
Person for us (wholly without us) and therefore deny the Lord that Bought us:
To which W. P. gives his Adversary an Answer thus, And indeed this we deny, and
boldly affirm it in the Name of the Lord to be the Doctrine of Devils, and an
Arm of the Sea of Coruption, which does now deluge the whole World. Upon this
W. P. proceeds to vindicate his Negation; first saying, that his Friend and
Partner G. W. in writing that Apology had already irrefutably considered the
Doctrine of Justification, and therefore he will not insist so much upon this
Point as he had upon others, and only adds some short Arguments by which he
proves that Wicked and Ungodly Men (while so) are not in a state of
Justification and Acceptance with God, by the imputed Righetousness of Christ,
and confirms the same by several Scripture Arguments; and then on the other
hand shows that such only are truly justified, who are obedient unto the Spirit
of God, by which they become the Children of God, and bring forth fruits of
Holiness; and in confirmation hereof gives us these Scripture Texts. Gal. 6.
To. 8. Reve. 22. And after having shown, who are not, and who are in a state of
Justification and Acceptance with God, he is so far from denying Justification
by Christ, that he owns, ascribes, and asserts the same alone to him, which for
the Readers satisfaction we shall cite his Words as they lie in that Apology
following the above Arguments, p. 149. thus; We do believe in one holy God
Almighty, who is an Eternal Spirit, the Creator of all things, and in one Lord
Jesus Christ, his only Son and express Image, of his substance, who took upon
him Flesh, and was in the World, and in Life, Doctrine, Miracles, Death,
Resurection, Ascension, and Mediation, perfectly did and does continue to do
the will of God, to whose holy Life, Power, Mediation and Blood, we only
ascribe our Sanctification, Justification, Redemption, and perfect Salvation.

Now, Impartial Reader, judge between the Bp. and W. P. whether W. P. did deny
Justification by Christ, as the Bp. would insinuate; and whether the Bp. was
led by a Christian Spirit while he dealt so very unfairly, what if we say
unjustly by W. P. in misrepresenting his Sense to make him so intend (as we
have before noted.) Now as to the Doctrine of Justification we shall not be
large thereon, in regard many of our Friends have treated upon that head, and
particularly (besides W. P. in several Tracts of his) our deceased friend R.
Barclay in his Apology has writ excellently and fully thereof: As also that
the Bp. has allowed W. P. to be Orthodox in what is written in Gospel Truths
upon that Point; for these Reasons we shall be brief: yet as W. P. said in
1671. so say we now, that we cannot believe it other then a Sin-pleasing Notion
and a Doctrine of Devils (since all Men, as the Scriptures tell us, are to be
rewarded according to their deeds) to assert, That Wicked and Ungodly Men
(while they continue so) are in a state of Acceptance and Justification with
God by the righteousness which Christ has fulfilled in his own person, wholly
without them, which wholly excludes the Work of Sanctification wrought by the
Spirit of Christ, which was the Notion W. P. did briefly, and Geo. Whitehead
more largely, dispute against in that serious Apology, see (p. the 37 to 40)
and (p. 148) and agreeable to the Quakers sense and belief in this point are
these following Scriptures Mat. 7. 21, 22, 23. and so 1 John 3. 8, 10. Romans 6.
16. 2 Cor. 5. 10. James 1. 15. Heb. 10. 35. In short, although we firmly believe,
and which W. P. and G. W. has asserted, that only Jesus Christ is our
Justifier, yet we do not believe any are truly justified in the sight of God,
but such who yield obedience to the Spirit of Christ in themselves, by which
they come to do the will of God, and thereby come to obtain the benefit of what
Christ fulfilled in his own person without us; in concurrance whereunto we have
these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Titus 3. 5. Romans 8. 1, 2, 11, 13, 14. Heb. 5.
9. and 12. 14. Gal. 6. 7. 8. Now to draw toward a conclusion upon this head;
Having proved from that serious Apology in 1671. That W. P. did ascribe our
Justification only to Christ, and our Reconciliation with God to faith in his
blood; But grants the benefit of it only to such, who obey the Spirit of God in
themselves: Let us now see whether he be not of the same mind and has aserted
the same Doctrine in School. which the Bp. commends as Orthodox; Thus, Gospel
Truth. IV. That as we are only justified from the guilt of Sin, by Christ the
Propitiation, and not by works of Righteousness that we have done, so there is
an absolute necessity, that we receive and obey, to unfeigned repentance and
amendment of Life, the holy Light and Spirit of Jesus Christ, in order to
obtain that Remission and Justification from Sin; since no Man can be justified
by Christ, who walks not after the Spirit, but after the flesh, for whom he
sanctifies, them he also justifies; and if we walk in the Light as he is Light,
his precious Blood cleanses us from all Sin, as well from the pollution, as
guilt of Sin, Romans 3. 22. to 26. Chap. 8. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 John 1. 7. We will not
spend farther time to comment upon the matter, to show how agreeable W. P's.
Belief was in 1671. to what it was in School. being so very plain that it would
be but time lost so to do, and therefore we leave it with the Impartial Reader.
Again, the Bp,

But says W. P. if the Bp. commends their believing in Christ as a propitiation
for Sin, he ought not to have censured them as short in any fundamental Article
of Christian Religion; for that all the rest follow from, or are comprehended
in this; (p. 25. 26.) truly, says the Bp. he ought.

Answ. Here again we must charge the Bp. with unfairness in laying down words
directly as W. P's. in a Different Character, (the better to make them appear
to be his) and foisting in several that are none of his; the Bp. Cites, p. 25.
26. First Impression, for these words, and therefore we will lay down W. P's.
words in these two pages from whence the Bp. pretends to take them, and then
let the Reader judge in the matter, Thus W. P. (p. 28.) the 2 d. Impression, Who
ever believes in Christ as a Propitiation in order to remission of Sins and
justification of Sinners from the guilt of Sin, can hardly disbelieve any
fundamental Article of the Christian Religion. Then goes on to prove that such
a Believer must necessarily believe in God, because it is with him alone Man is
to be justified in Christ, because that is the very Proposition; and in the
holy Ghost, because he is the Author of his Conviction, Repentance, and Belief
etc. See that page, again. p. 28. Adds thus, So that acknowledging the
necessity of Christ as a Propitiation, in order to the remission of Sin,
comprehends the main Doctrine of Christian Religion, and as so many lines drawn
from the Circumference to the Center, they all meet and center in Christ, and
indeed it is as the Navel of Christianity and Characteristick of that Religion.
I would entreat him (meaning the Bp.) again to reflect well upon his own
acknowledgment and commendation of our Belief concerning the end and benefit of
Christ to mankind, and he cannot think us so deficient, much less under such
strong and dangerous delusions as he has been pleased to represent us. Thus W.
P. in these two pages which we would have our Reader to compare with what
the Bp. has laid down as his: And (1st.) see what just ground the Bp. could
have had to raise such contradiction had he taken W. P's. own words. (2ly.)
Whether the Bp. did well in Quoting these words directly as W. P's. without
giving notice he drevv them consequentially, which in justice he ought to have
done; But to be sure very unfair in him to add several words never spoke by W.
P. for besides packing the whole together (without any break) as W. P's.
which are none of his as they lie, he has added these [for all the rest
follovv from] But we now come to his Arguments deduced from the premises he
has made for W. P. Says the Bp. (meaning himself) He does not find the Quakers
to be so good at believing or drawing due consequences, or deducing and
discovering all the particulars comprehended in generals. To which we
answer in short that we do not vvonder he should tell us so, who so
strenuously endeavors to misrepresent us, not only in what is past, but in much
that follows.

(2) (Says the Bp.) It is not true that all the fundamentals of Christian
Religion follow from, or are comprehended in this Doctrine, Christ is our
Propitiation, some of them (particularly mentioned by Mr. P.) do not thence
follow, as that there is a holy Ghost, that he convinces Men of Sin, etc. Nay
not that (p. 34.) That Christ is ascended, for he might have been a
Propitiation and Sacrifice (as were those under the Law) and yet never have
ascended no nor rose again. Mind Reader the words [all] and [follow from] nor
the deduced words [does not thence follow] were not spoke by W. P. But leaving
that with thee we will now attend to justify W. P's. words: Then say we by the
same rule, That no Man can say Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Ghost, as
says the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 12. 3. Nor no Man understand or savingly believe
or know the things of God but by the Spirit of God, according to 1 Cor. 2. 10,
11, 12. (though we confess they may and do pretend to both traditionally) so
likewise no Man can truly and savingly believe Christ as a Propitiation in
order to the remission of Sin, but by the same Spirit, and as such, a true
Believer has the holy Ghost for the author of his saving conviction and
belief; so consequently he must believe there is a holy Ghost, as W. P. well
observes, and which convinces for Sin, according to John 16 18. But that we
may not be misunderstood, we do not here mean of such extraordinary
Revelations, as of the knowledge of the outward History of Christ's death and
sufferings, but as of the illumination of the holy Ghost in such agreeing with
the holy Scriptures. But as to such, from whom God has withheld the knowledge
of the Scriptures, or outward History, we shall speak of that in its place; in
the mean time we say he that believes as aforesaid, to give W. P's. own words,
Can hardly disbelieve any fundamental Article of Christian Religion, and
comprehends the main Doctrine of Christian Religion, and as so many lines drawn
from the Circumference to the Center, they all Center in Christ.

Then as to the Bp's. saying, Christ might have been a Propitiation and
Sacrifice (as were those under the Law) and yet never have ascended, no nor
rose again. To say nothing of the disproportion between the sacrifices under
the Law, and the one Sacrifice of Christ for the remission of Sins, we ask how
came the Bp. so greatly to ofrget himself, thus to assert both in contradiction
to the holy Scriptures, as well as his friend Geo Keith, (whom he quotes as a
close evidence against us) for to the owning of and belief in Christ as a
Propitiation for the remission of Sins (as W. P. has done)? It was no less
necessary to that end, that Christ should rise again, as that he should suffer:
See Romans 4. 25. (besides other Scriptures which for brevity we omit) Where
speaking of Christ, who was delivered for our Offenses and raised again for our
Justification, here the Apostle makes Christ's suffering and rising again
necessary to his being a Propitiation, contrary to the Bp. Next, G. Keith in
page. 26. of his first Narrative, says expressly thus, I say with them and all
Christendom that if Christ had died and not risen again he could not have been
an atonement for our Sins; this is so full and contrary to the Bp's.
Assertion, that we think 'twill both puzzle the Bp. and his Advocate G. K. to
reconcile the contradiction. But it may be hoped the Bp. will retract, rather
then have G. K. and (if he can believe G. K. as readily against himself as he
does against us) all Christendom against him.

Now to his third head, (says the Bp.) thus, To tell Mr. P. thus much as to
his Paper once for all, Implication of Faith is not a profession of Faith.

Answ. We allow it is not so in all cases as we shall find it in the Bp.
hereafter, particularly in pages 19, 20. of his Reply, and such strange sort of
Implications too as that we think no such consequence can possibly be deduced
from his premises, as he makes; but in our case it is otherwise, and had he
been an Impartial Reader, as he pretended, and had had but a grain of Charity
in him toward us, it would have saved all this work, while that Paper called
Gospel Truths was but a brief account (as it tells us) and the Bp. had R.
Barcla's Apology which states and vindicates most of our Principles largely,
as also W. P's. Rise and Progress of the Quakers does several of them briefly,
which, we should think, would have satisfied most or all of his Objections
if he were not resolved rather to represent us vvrong than right, which we
must needs say does but too much appear in his management toward us. But
farther, as to Implication of Faith: since the Bp. can produce no Confession of
Faith extant so complete and full, that nothing is left to be made out by
Implication he might have shevved so much candor, as to have given an equal
allowance (at least) to this short Declaration (which was not writ as W. P.
told him in the Preface to his Defense for an exact and complete account of our
Belief) as he would to any of those Creeds or Symbols of Faith, which himself
or the Church he is of embraces; which had he done, he could not have charged
our Confession touching the Being of God with imperfection, because there is
not in it a word of God's creating the present World, or supporting it by his
Providence, or concerning Himself about the inanimate part thereof, with a
multitude (he says) of other particulars; for in which we pray of all the
Creeds, which the Bp. holds Authentic, is this multitude of particulars
expressed, in the first Article touching the Being of God without implication?
If we look into that which bears the name of the Apostles Creed the first
Article is delivered thus. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of
Heaven and Earth; what one word is here of supporting the present world by his
providence, of concerning himself about the inanimate part of it, or of the
Bp's. multitude of other particulars? Are not all those to be made out by
implication, in this the most celebrated, and best Creed extent? Again, Is
there one word in that Creed concerning the Intercession or Mediation of Christ
for his People? It is said indeed, he ascended into Heaven, and sits on the
right hand of God the Father Almighty, and that from thence he shall come to
judge the Quick and the Dead: But that, sitting at the Right Hand of his Father,
he makes Intercession for his People (though it be certainly true Romans 8. 34.
Heb. 7. 25.) is not expressed in that Creed but left to be supplied by
implication. Yet again, the Attributes due to God, even those which the Bp.
says Christianity teaches of him, where are they in words expressed in that
Creed? Is there a word there, of his Omniscience, his Omnipresence, his
infinite Goodness and Love to Mankind, his Justice, Mercy, etc. Will the Bp.
allow these to be made out by implication, or would he have them left out and
disbelieved altogether? By these Instances the Bp. we hope, will see how much
his desire of a blow at W. P. and the Quakers made him mistake, when he said
(p. 4, 5.) What an easy prevention of all this Imperfection and uncertainty
had it been for W. P. and his party to have said, I believe in God the Father
Almighty maker of Heaven and Earth; since that, without the help of
Implication, falls very much short of delivering what he says Christianity
teaches of God; To which he adds, but this had been confessing an Article of
Faith in a way beneath their Light, we say no more but that, this is a Scoff
beneath the gravity which the Bp. pretends to, and was expected from him: But
we must take leave to tell him, that by his rejecting that Paper called Gospel
Truths, and unchristianing us for our shortness in not expressing in that Paper
all that Christianity teaches, and that is to be believed concerning God,
Christ, the Holy Ghost, and other Articles of Christian Religion, he has given
a deep wound to the common Creed (called the Apostles) and to all the Creeds in
the Christian World, and struck a very bold stroke toward unchristianing all
Christendom.

But in this we think the Bp. the more to be blamed, in as much as when he writ
this, he declares he had before him a Book of W. P's. Entitled, The second part
of the serious Apology for the principles and practices of the People called
Quakers, Printed in the Year 1671. in which he might, (and could scarce but)
see a more full Confession of Faith, concerning the Essentials of Religion,
God, Christ, and Holy Spirit: We say he could hardly miss seeing this, for he
took (and that most falsely, as we have showed before,) a quotation out of that
Book (in p. 148.) and this Confession which we now mention is in page, 149. and
the pages lie open together, so that both are alike exposed to the eye at the
same time. This Confession is in these words, We do believe in one only Holy
God Almighty, who is an eternal Spirit, the Creator of all things; We would
gladly know whether this be not as full, as express, as comprehensive, as the
first Article in that which is called the Apostles Creed, which says only, I
believe in God the Father Almighty maker of Heaven and Earth. It follows in
that Book of W. P's. And in one Lord Jesus Christ his only Son and express
Image of his substance, who took upon him flesh, and was in the World, and in
Life, Doctrine, Miracles, Death, Resurrection, Ascension and Mediation;
perfectly did and does continue to do the will of God; to whose Holy Life,
Power, Mediation and Blood we only ascribe our Sanctification, Justification,
Redemption and perfect Salvation: Here is a full Confession both to the
Divinity and Manhood of Christ, his Birth, Life, Doctrine, Miracles, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, and (which the common Creed mentions not) his
Mediation. Then for the Holy Spirit; whereas the Creed has only, I believe in
the Holy Ghost, W. P's. Confession is more full in these words, And we believe
in one Holy Spirit, that proceeds and breaths from the Father and the Son as
the life and virtue of both the Father and the Son, a measure of which is given
to all to profit with, and he that has one has all, for these three are one,
who is the Alpha, and Omega, the first, and last God over all, blessed for
ever, Amen. This we suppose the Bp. will acknowledge to be a more full and
plain Confession then that which is in the Common Creed. (called the Apostles)
with respect to the proceeding of the Holy Spirit, from the Father and the Son,
not touched in that, besides what is said in this, concerning the great mystery
of the Godhead, [one in three and three in one] commonly expressed by the word
(Trinity) of which that Creed (called the Apostles) is wholly silent. Now since
the Bp. acknowledges he had that Book of W. P's. then before him, out of which
we have recited this Confession, which in many material parts is so much fuller
and larger, then that the Bp. directs to, how unfair and how disingenious; how
uncharitable is the Bp. toward W. P. and us, to censure and unchristian us for
a pretended shortness in the wording of some of our Principles; and that too
after W. P. had told him in the Preface to his Defense, that that Paper, which
he gave the Bp. was not writ for an exact and complete account of our Belief;
and in the Defense. page. 25. to 28. had declared, that to believe in God is to
believe him, Omnipotent, Omniscient, and Omnipresent; and that in believing in
Christ as a propitiation in order to remission of Sins and justification of
Sinners from the guilt of Sin, was included not only believing in God, Christ,
and the Holy Spirit, but a belief of Heaven, Hell, Rewards and Punishments, and
consequently the Resurrection of the Just and Unjust; this one would think had
been enough to have satisfied the Bp. or any one else, that had not a mind to
misrepresent or cavil, which it may be feared the Bp. has.

As to what the Bp. says (p. 4) A great Man has told us of the Gentile world
and their belief in multiplicity of Gods, etc. It nothing concerns us, we are
not accountable for their, but our own, belief, and had W. P. been to present
some heathen Pontiff with our Confession of Faith concerning God and his
Attributes, no doubt he would have been more explicit and large, then what is
contained, not only in the Paper called Gospel Truths, but even in that Creed
called the Apostles: But while he intended that Paper for professed Christians,
he thought what was delivered therein concerning God, sufficient to satisfy
any who had not a mind to cavil. But so earnest is the Bp. in pursuit of W. P.
and the Quakers, that in seeking occasion against them, he plainly mistakes the
Scriptures, which we now come to show. Thus the Bp. (p. 4.) Mr. P. says that
Heb. 11. 6. seems expressed for a declaration of faith in God. The Bp. takes the
freedom to inform him, that it was not at all intended for a full confession of
Christian Faith, as to that Article thereof, touching the Being, Nature, and
Works of God, but only of such an initial or natural Faith which Men had or
might have without Revelation; for of the Faith of such, viz. Abell and Enoch,
and those who lived before the Flood without any Revelation that we read of, he
there discourses. Thus the Bp.

Answ. We answer for W. P. that he neither wants nor desires the Bp's.
Information, unless it were more agreeable to Scripture, then we shall find
this. -- The Bp's. words here does consist of two parts, the one, that the
Faith of Abell, Enoch, and those who lived before the Flood was initial and
natural, without any revelation that we read of: Next that Heb. 11. 6. was a
discourse of such a natural Faith; now if we prove the first was divine Faith
and the last was no discourse of natural Faith, it naturally follows the Bp.
has misrepresented the Scriptures; to which purpose we will begin with the
first verse in the Chapter. Heb. 11. 1. Now faith is the substance of things
hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. And that this Faith was not natural
but divine Faith according to Ephesians. 2. 8. appears very plainly from the context,
by the effects it produced; Verse. 2. By it the Elders obtained a good report.
Verse. 3. Through Faith we understand the worlds were made by the word of God.
Verse. 4. By Faith Abell offered unto God a more acceptable Sacrifice then Cain,
by which he obtained witness that he was righteous. Verse. 5. By Faith Enoch was
translated, that he should not see Death, for before his translation he had
this Testimony that he pleased God. Now to the 6. Verse. Which the Bp. says was
a discourse of natural and initial Faith. Verse. 6. But without Faith it is
impossible to please him; for he that comes to God, must believe that he is,
and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, (mind, Reader, the
last part of this Verse was a part of what was laid down in Gospel Truths for
our belief in God) Verse. 7. By Faith Noah being warned of God of things not
seen, as yet moved with fear, prepared an Ark to the saving of his house, by
which he condemned the World, and became heir of righteousness by Faith. So the
Apostle proceeds to the end of that Chapter (which is long) showing the great
and extraordinary effects of this divine Faith. The Bp. seems to restrain the
Text, Heb. 11. 6. Only to the Faith of those, who lived before the Flood: But
the Apostle passes on from Abel, Enoch, Noah, to Abraham and the rest of the
Patriarchs who lived between the Flood and the Law; nor does the Apostle put
any difference between the Faith of those before the Flood, between the Flood
and the Law, or under the Law, which the Bp. may do well to consider: as also
that Jude says expressly Enoch prophesied, see Verse. 14. Will he say he
prophesied without Revelation? But to shorten upon the first head; Those
Scriptures already cited do so plainly prove our point, that we need not
trouble the Reader with any more to show that it was not natural but
supernatural Faith (those holy Men were endued withal) by which (in
particular) Enoch prophesied and was translated, and Noah was warned to build
the Ark, which besides the rest are two such plain and extraordinary instances
of supernatural Faith by Revelation from God, that we cannot but admire the Bp.
should assert those who lived before the Flood had no Revelation that we read
of, but what was natural and initial: We leave it with the Reader and proceed
to the second part, in which the Bp. asserted that Heb. 11. 6. Was not at all
intended for a full confession of Christian Faith, touching the Being, Nature,
and Works of God, but of natural and initial Faith.

To which we answer (as has been already shown) they had divine Faith and
Revelation before the Flood; so consequently the Bp's. Arguments do fall in
course: However the Text it self, with the context very plainly intends
spiritual and divine Faith, not only with respect to those extraordinary
effects produced by true Faith, as well before as after the Flood, but also
seems expressed, (as W. P. has asserted) for Faith in God, (And) we say
(Christian Faith too, because the Apostle speaks in the present tense)
notwithstanding his Attributes be not there enumerated, no more then they were
by Moses in the word [I am] Instanced by W. P. but past over in silence by the
Bp. Now to that Verse. 6. We take leave to ask the Bp. what Faith it was they
were to come unto God by, and without which it was impossible to please him,
whether was it Natural and initial, or Spiritual and supernatural Faith; if he
answers (as he said before) Natural, we tell him that cannot be, since the
Scripture tells us, all were by nature Children of wrath, and that Man
naturally has nothing, nor can perform any thing acceptable to God; see these
Texts John 15. 5. Ephesians. 2. 3. Pro. 20. 24. 1 Cor. 2. 14. Besides many other
Scriptures; consequently then, that Faith mentioned Heb. 11. 6. intended no
other then divine and supernatural Faith as does most plainly appear, not only
from the Text, but also from the context, as we have shown. Thus, Reader, see
how the Bp. has mistaken plain Scripture, no wonder then if he mistake us, etc.
-- The Bp. proceeds,

P. 5. Again says the Bp. The acknowledging of future rewards and punishments,
no more infers the resurrection from the Dead or eternity of Torments to the
Damned, then any of the former points imply what W. P. would have comprehended
in them.

Answ. If they imply but as much we shall easily clear our selves from the
Bp's. suggestions of Heathenism or Sociniasm, for we think the other points are
plainly comprehended, as we have above shown; so by this rule there needs no
farther return to that, to an unbyassed Reader. -- However we will attend the
Bp's. Arguments who proceeds to tell us of one Synesius a Christian Philosopher
(to say no more) who professed he could not believe the resurrection of the Body;
and of Origin, and the merciful Doctors, who believed future rewards and
punishments, yet believed not eternal torments, it had been necessary therefore
says the Bp. for him (i. e. W. P.) and his Brethren explicitly to have
declared their belief of these main Articles, the Resurrection and eternal
Torments even among the Truths, chiefly believed by them, that we might have
known the Quakers to be neither Heathens nor Socinians in these points, which
herein it is plain they may be notwithstanding their belief that God is a
rewarder of them who seek him.

Answ. Synesius was not only a Christian Philosopher but a Bishop too which we
suppose the Bp. was willing to hide with his Parenthesis, (to say no more,) the
story we have in Evagrius Ecclesiastic History Lib. 1. C. 15. The old Edition,
tells us he could not believe the resurrection of the flesh, how stated to him
we have no account, but if in so gross a manner as some have done it in our
days we cannot wonder he did not receive it; However though he did not receive
the vulgar opinion, (for so we have it in Vallesius his notes in the new
Edition) Yet we find the Christians in those times (viz. about the Year, 412.)
persuaded him not only to be Baptized but to take upon him the Office of a
Bishop, and he did so; whence we observe that the vulgar opinion, or the
Doctrine of the resurrection of the Flesh was not then held so Essential to the
Christian Religion but that a Man might be both a Christian and a Bp. too, though
he neither did nor would believe it. But to proceed, what ever opinion in
reallity he held, or others did or do believe, is nothing to us, we are not
accountable for their Faith but our own. (1st. then) then. As to the
Resurrection from the Dead, we have always believed and owned it by word and
writing according to holy Scripture, and which was again fully owned by W. P.
in his Defense. p. 47. 48. Where he also shows, 'twas sufficiently employed in
Gospel Truths by future rewards and punishments: And so say we too, otherwise
we must disbelieve the immortality of the Soul, and, believe that it dies with
the body which we firmly deny. (2ly.) As to eternity of Torments to the Damned
we have (likewise) also steadfastly believed it, and W. P. in his Defense. p.
43, 44. has shown it is fully employed in Gospel Truths, which we will not
farther enlarge upon here because we will cut short and tell the Bp. though we
will not downright charge him with Insincerity (what ever it deserves) yet we
think we may safely with great partiality (to charge us with shortness in this
point) while he had in his possession (before his Testimony or Reply was writ)
a Book called the Rise and progress of the Quakers, which in (page the. 38.)
has these words. -- This leads us to the acknowledgment of Eternal Rewards and
Punishments, for else of all People certainly they (i. e. the Quakers) must be
most miserable, who for about forty years have been exceeding great sufferers
for their profession, etc. Now for the Bp. after this to make this objection
against us, looks indeed very strange, and to be sure like one that was
willing, as W. P. says, to represent us wrong rather then we should be in the
right. -- But farther, as to Eternal Torments though what is said before is
sufficient; yet we cannot but observe how unreasonable the Bp. is to Quarrel
with us, for not expressing that as an Article of Faith, which is not expressed
in his own Creed (if that called the Apostles be his); for what word in the
Creed is there of Eternal Torments, it is indeed said therein, I believe the
Life everlasting, but not a word of Punishments being everlasting: If the Bp.
say, that the reward of Life to the Righteous, being everlasting, implies the
punishment of the Damned shall be everlasting, may we not then with a great
deal of reason return his own words, ( p. 3.) and tell him, Thus much as to
that point once for all, Implication of Faith is not a profession of Faith, at
least ought not to be claimed by him, that will not allow it to others. Again,
How has the Bp. caught himself in his own Trap; for while his own Creed is
silent in so main a point as Eternal Punishments (as he tells us that is) which
way will the Bp. Extricate himself and his brethren (to give him his own
phrase) from being suspected to be either Heathens or Socinians in that point:
If he say that this which he calls a main Article is explicitly declared in
some other Creeds or Declarations of Faith, the Answer is, So are they also in
other Books and writings of ours; and if the Bp. would have given to others the
same measure he takes himself, he might have forborne this unnecessary wrangle.

The end of (p. 5. and most of p. 6.) is about the Trinity, in which point, we
find the Bp. still resolves to have us short, and imperfect, though it be by
telling of us again much of it word for word, as he did in his Testimony, Thus
1 John 5. 7. Is not (says he) the sum of what the holy Scriptures teaches,
nor a sufficient confession of Faith, of the holy Trinity. Then adds, He
[meaning W. P.] insinnuates (which is utterly false) that the Bp. slights that,
as a by passage or of little credit, upon which the Bp. appeals to his own
Paper; then tells us of the Nicene Creed, and Thirty Nine Articles; then to W.
P's. demand from the Bp. of the occasion of the Apostles speaking as he did, 1
John 5. 7. the Bp. returns thus; The Bp. answers out of Verse. 1. 5. It was to
prove that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and after some more to the same
purpose the Bp. concludes that paragraph, saying p. 6. This was his purpose (i.
e. John) viz. to settle the Believers Faith in Christ) and not fully there to
declare the Doctrine of the Trinity, which is no where done in any one text of
Scripture, but is to be gathered out of many.

Answ. Is it not strange, Reader, that the Bp. who so strangely condemned that
Paper (of Gospel Truths) as short and defective for not being more explicit,
and full in others as well as in this point, should now a second time, be so
very defective himself, as not to tell us, where those many Texts are, by which
the Trinity was to be proved? No, that he has not done, for a good reason too,
because in all the Scriptures a more full proof could not be found, then 1 John
5. 7. But the Bp. to help himself, tells us of the Thirty Nine Articles and
Nicene Creed. To which we answer, their foundation in that point ought to be
the Holy Scripture; if so, why had not the Bp. cited or referred us to those
Scriptures, but in stead of confirming the Trinity, we think he has rather
lessened the proof thereof, while he tells us the Apostles purpose was to prove
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God: for although the Apostles could not prove
the Trinity without proving Jesus Christ to be the Son of God; yet as the Bp.
assigns that Text. (by the context) chiefly to prove Christ was the Son of
God, we ask does he not thereby lessen the proof of the Trinity? while (as we
said above) we can no where find so full and plain a Text in all the Holy
Scriptures to prove the Trinity; we are sure we design not to strain, or
misrepresent the Bp's. sense, but what we have said, we think, naturally
follows from his own words, and far less then we could have said on the matter.
As to his appeal to his Paper, we agree in that point, provided W. P's. Defense
be compared with it, and there the Impartial Reader will see whether W. P. has
wronged the Bp's Sense or not, and whether the Bp. has not now confirmed W.
P's. asking, How came the Bp. to render it a by passage, and the Text it self
short, and otherwise intended by the Apostle, then an Article of Faith about
the Trinity? see. p. 33. of W. P's. Defense (in two places): and thus we end as
to what the Bp. has said about the Trinity.

P. 6, 7. The Bp. tells us we must give a more explicit confession of our Faith
if we expect to be accounted Christians, for other reasons then he has given;
especially (says he) this for one, that a great Person among them who
professes, as concerning their Principles, he was deceived by them, thinking
they had held sincerely the Principles, which by a more diligent search he
finds, they hold not.

Answ. George Keith being the person he means (as appears in the Margin) we
must take leave to say, the Bp. is greatly mistaken, for he is neither great
among us, nor indeed of us at all, having been denied by us some Years past;
and as to that Man, he must either have been a great Hypocrite formerly, or a
foul Apostate now from us, The former, if for about thirty Years he walked among
us, and defended our Principles by word and writing, and yet at the same time
was not convinced of the verity of them; an Apostate to be sure if being
convinced of our Principles, and from that persuasion defended them, while now
he retracts, and condemns some of the very same Principles he then defended.

The Bp. proceeds about G Keith (p. 7.) assures us (meaning G. K.) and has
Printed Testimonies out of their Books to prove they deny. --

Answ. As to G. Keith's confident assurance, we question not that, he having
given us sufficient proof thereof already, by plainly perverting and
misrepresenting our friends words and writings as well as contradicting, what
he has before writ, in defense of us and our principles: and did we only refer
back to our friends reitterated (as well as G. K's. own former writings) they
would sufficiently prove us Orthodox, as to the four following points brought
by the Bp. from G. K's. Third Narrative; however because the Bp. shall not have
occasion to say, we pass them over, we will briefly consider them: (1st.) That
they (i. e. the Quakers) deny Faith in Christ as he outwardly suffered at
Jerusalem, as he rose again, ascended, and now sits at the right hand of God to
be necessary to Salvation.

Answ. If G. K. does here mean that the Knowledge of the outward death and
suffering of Jesus Christ, is so necessary to salvation, as without the
knowledge of which all Men are damned and eternally lost; we answer, we dare not
be so uncharitable as to conclude, that the many millions of Men, who are and
have been in the World, and who never had, or heard of the outward history of
the sufferings and death of Christ etc. are so damned, provided they yield
obedience to the Spirit of God in them selves, and thereby from unholy become
Holy Men.

But if he mean with respect to the Quakers, and such who have had the knowledge
of the outward history, as recorded in Holy Scriptures, we hold it absolutely
necessary so to believe.

(2ly.) That we deny Justification by the Blood of Christ outwardly shed.

Answ. To this head we have spoken before, and the Bp. himself has allowed W.
P. Orthodox in what is written in Gospel Truth, so we need say no more of this
now.

(3ly.) That we deny the Resurrection of the Body that dies.

If he mean the same Numerical Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, which we have
here on Earth; we know not where he will find Scripture for that; But on the
contrary, he may find the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 36. calling such curious Body
Enquirers, Fools. Now as to us we fully own and truly believe the Resurrection
of the Body, according to the Holy Scripture, but are not so nice and
inquisitive as to enquire what sort of Body God will give us, leaving that to
his Divine Will, who will give us such a Body as pleases him; and this is
Scripture language and agreeable to, 1 Cor. 15. 36, 37, 38. and cited by W. P.
in his Defense, against the Bp's. Testimony; in which Book he has briefly, but
fully asserted our Belief in this point, which we do not find the Bp. makes any
return to in his Reply, (by which, as we take it, he tacitly allows him
Orthodox therein) notwithstanding he now brings up this of G. K. against us.

(4ly.) That we deny Christ's coming again without us in his glorified Body to
judge the Quick and the Dead.

Answ. This charge is false, because we own it in express words, and would G.
K. with the rest of our Adversaries, let our plain words and Sense mean what
they say, and import, there would be no room left for this malicious charge (as
well as many others) for many of our Friends have very often, publicly in
print asserted our Belief in this point, and W. P. in particular, whom I will
cite on this occasion, (besides in other of his writings) has fully owned the
same in Primitive Christianity revived; which because we shall find his name
presently mentioned in opposition to the Articles of the Creed, we will insert
at large as it lies in that Book, P. 85. Jesus Christ took our nature upon him,
and was like unto us in all things, sin excepted; that he was born of the
Virgin Mary, and suffered under Pontius Pilate, the Roman Governor, crucified,
dead and buried, in the Sepulcher of Joseph of Arimathea, rose again the third
day, and ascended into Heaven, and fits on the right hand of God, in the power
and Majesty of his Father, who will one day judge the World by him, Even that
blessed Man Christ Jesus, according to their works. -- We think we need not
farther enlarge upon this point, then to say as we did before, the charge is
wholly false.

Ibid. (7.) The Bp. proceeds farther about G. K. thus; Nay the same person (i.
e. G. K.) professes as the Bp. has seen under his hand, that he really thinks
he can prove W. P. holds not one of the Articles of the Christian Creed soundly
and entirely, and that none ever more plainly oppugned the Doctrine of the
Scriptures, then W. P. and his party, upon so close an evidence as this is; let
the World judge, if the Bp. be unreasonable in demanding a better confession of
Faith, then by mere Innuendo's as necessary to their being allowed Christians.
Thus the Bp.

Answ. That the Bp. has seen under G. K's. hand, we do believe, and it confirms
what we heard, viz. That he had writ to the Bp. offering to supply the Bp. with
some matters against W. P. and the Quakers, or at least against W. P. The use
we make thereof is only to observe how restless and implacable that Man is, who
will send over Sea and Land, where he does (though but vainly) hope to give a
helping hand against the Quakers: But as to what G. K. really thinks he can
prove against W. P. we must needs say, we think him very modest to what he used
to be, in that he has not been more positive, in any charge against him or the
Quakers, then really thinks, and it may be a certain indication to all
impartial Men who have been acquainted with his unjust perverting and
misrepresenting way of dealing by our Friends; that it is past his power by such
his foul, way it self to prove W. P. denied any one of the Truths, contained in
that Creed called the Apostles, much less that he did not hold one of them
soundly and entirely. And as to our oppugning the Doctrine of the Scriptures,
as he says, what shall we say of such a Man as G. K's. thoughts of others, who
(as it appears) knew not his own for so many Years; If he were to be measured
by his now writing against those things he so many Years defended. In short a
Malicious Adversary, and Apostate was never a good Evidence against the People
he deserted, and such to be sure is G. K. against the Quakers. And should we
ask the Bp. whether he will grant that a Deserter from, and an Enemy to, the
Church of England is a good Evidence against that Church, we belive he would
hardly allow it; with what reason then could the Bp. bring, G. K's. Evidence
against the Quakers: And as to the Scriptures, we assert for the Quakers
against either his really thinks, or other his more bold assertions, that no
people in the World, does more truly own the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures
then they do: Now as to the Bp's. demanding a better Confession of Faith then
by mere Innuendo's (by which we suppose he means Gospel Truths.) We answer him
(as we did before) if he had been an impartial Reader as he pretended, and had
esteemed that Paper too short expressed in some points, he would have searched R.
B's. Apology, where he would have found most, if not all those Points, (besides
others) largely and fully handled, before he would have so exposed us under a
false disguise to the World, as he did in his Testimony.

Ibid. (7.) (The Bp. tells us) Mr. Penn tells the World he and his Brethren
receive all the Articles of the Creed (called the Apostles,) but this may be
reckoned one of the good effects the Bp's. Paper has had to bring them to this
acknowledgment.

Answ. All things considered we think the Bp. has no reason to be highly
conceited of his Paper; for what ever good opinion he has of it himself, we
believe few, if any, impartial Men has the like; more especialy such, who have
read W. P's. Defense. If he could have told us and therewith proved W. P. and
his Brethren had ever disbelieved the Truths contained in that Creed (which W.
P. says we do believe) he might with more reason have told the World this, and
we tell him, if he had read only some of the several Tracts of W. P's. in
particular (not to mention many other of our Friends) he might have found him
owning all the Truths contained in that Creed, called the Apostles, and in
particular he cannot be ignorant of his owning the most essential, to wit,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (we think) as fully expressed in some parts, and
more fully in others then in that Creed, even in that serious Apology. (p.
149.) before observed, which lay before him, if he had never read any other of
his Works.

Ibid. (7.) Now the Bp. begins to forsake the road and instead of regularly
answering page by page, he fetches a large step (in his next charge) from (p.
30. to 104.) then backwards, other times forwards, then here, then there, and
sometimes no page at all; for which let us hear the Bp's. reason, or rather his
pretense he gives us for so doing. (p. 7.) It would be (says he) as endless as
needless, and besides would swell this Paper to too great a Bulk to follow Mr.
P. page by page to the end, replying to all his little Cavills and poor
Evasions: A more compendious way, (says the Bp.) therefore must be taken,
which shall be (first) by reducing Mr. P's. Answers and Arguments to some
common Heads or Figures of Speech, which he uses, so contemptible in
themselves, as that the instances of them are answered by being shown. And
(2ly) by singling out the more material points, wherein Mr. P. enlarges, and
setting them in their true light. Thus the Bp.

Answ. We confess the Bp. has not only found out a more compendious, but also
a new way to answer his Opponent; for in stead of answering W. P's. Answers and
Arguments in order, as they lay in his Defense, (like a fair Disputant,) he
undertakes to reduce them to some common heads or figures of Speech, and single
out (as he says) the more material points, etc. No doubt the Bp. understood
what he did, for by so doing he could the better drop the weight and force of
W. P's. Arguments and pass over those points, which pincht him most, and what
he found too hard for him to answer, under the Title of little Cavills and poor
Evasions, contemptible in themselves; it is more then probable the Bp. will come
under this Censure, and that this unusual way of dealing with an Opponent, will
be accounted (by fair Disputants) but a poor Evasion in himself, especially if
it be remembered, how the Bp. has already given us an instance of the like
kind, in passing over three or four pages of W. P's. Defense (in which W. P.
enumerated several instances, and charged the Bp. with unfair and abusive
dealing by us) with saying only, to omit things less material; See (. p. 9.)
Thus, Reader, having given thee this item we desire thy serious perusal of W.
P's. Defense, with the Bp's. Reply, and thy Judgment is free, whether so great
a part of that Book, which lies unanswered by the Bp's. taking such a
compendious way, is so poor, little, and contemptible as the Bp. would make it.
We now come to consider the several heads or figures of Speech, the Bp. in his
way has reduced W. P's. Arguments to.

Ibid. (7.) Manifest Impieties (says the Bp.) are, 1st. His falsifying the
Sense of Scripture, and then the words of it so plainly, that he cannot well
seem insensible of it himself; thus, Whereas our Lord said, John 3. 20. Every
one that does evil hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his
Deeds should be reproved: (which passage to make look favorable to his
purpose) he corrupts the 21. Verse. And reads it thus, He that Loves the Light,
brings his deeds to the Light, to see if they are wrought in God: Whereas the
plain meaning of the Text is no more, then they that do evil, seek to be hid
(1 These. 5. 7. They that are drunken, are drunken in the Night) they who do
well fear not to be seen; to which Sense every Nation has Proverbs. -- With
us Truth seeks no corners, with many more like. Thus the Bp.

Answ. To falsify the sense of Scripture knowingly and with design, is no
doubt great Impiety; but for the Bp. to tax W. P. as he has done in the
present Case, is very Uncharitable, if not Worse.

Now the Impiety, Falsifying, and Corrupting, (which the Bp. would Unjustly
sasten upon W. P.) consists only in saying Loves the Light, in stead of does
Truth: Pray, Reader, turn to W. P' s. Defense (p. 115.) and there thou will
find W. P's. intent was to show, that the Light of Christ was to be judge of the
deeds of Men, which these two Texts do plainly prove from Christ's own Words.
Now let us see what W. P. could gain by this alteration, which must be his end,
if true as the Bp. says (to make look favorable to his purpose) W. P. says,
Loves the Light, and the Scriptures, does Truth; Now Verse. 20. says, every one
that does evil hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his deeds
should be reproved: Surely then he that brings his deeds to the Light (as the
doer of Truth did) must certainly be a lover of the Light; So then he that does
truth loves the Light, and he that loves the Light does Truth, where then is
the falsifying the sense of Scripture; Nay rather, if there be any difference,
(we think) W. P. had the disadvantage, for though they do not differ in sense,
yet, we think, the words [Doth Truth] would rather have been more Emphetical in
that place then the words [Loves the Light;] Certainly had the Bp. been such a
Reader, as he promised in his Testimony, he would not, for this difference,
have made W. P. guilty of falsifying the sense of Scripture, and to aggravate
the matter, adds impiety and corruption; but on the other hand rather have
concluded, that either the Transcriber mist, or W. P's. mind ran with the
sense, and consequence of the foregoing Verse, which we believe was the Bp's.
own case, in his Reply, where in (p. 17.) he says Matt. 4. 11. which should be
Matt. 3. 11. Again (p. 22.) he cites, 1 Cor. 11. and so proceeds upon several
verses from that Chapter when we believe he intended 1 Cor. Chap. 2.

But did the Bp. consider while he thus vilifyed W. P. for the variation of
some words, which no way altered the sense, that his high charge of Impiety
would extend farther and strike higher then he was aware of, or we believe
would be willing it should; for not only Moses in writing the Decalogue in Deu.
5. varies from the express terms, wherein 'twas delivered in Exodus the 20. but
the Apostles often, yea and our Lord himself in reciting places of Scriptures
out of the old Testament vary in our common Translations from the verbal
expressions of the Scriptures they recite, and give the Sense in other words.
Numerous Instances could be given, which for brevity we omit, and will mention
but one, and refer to a few more: (thus), Have ye never read (says Christ in
Matt. 21. 16.) Out of the mouth of Babes and sucklings thou have perfected
praise; which words are referred in the Margin to Psalm. 8. 2. Out of the mouth
of Babes and Sucklings have thou ordained strength. Then Matt. 11. compared
with Mal. 3. 1. Again, Matt. 13. 14, 15. compared with Isa. 6. 9, 10. Again
Romans 10. verse. 11. compared with Isa. 28. 16. Not to spend more time we refer
the Reader to the Scriptures, where he will find, a multitude of Texts which in
our English Translation vary in express words, but agree in sense. If these
Instances do not convince the Bp. they may a more equal Reader, that in taxing
W. P. with manifest Impiety for giving some words of that Text John 3. 21. in
other words then the Translation has it, while the Sense was no way altered; he
has therein manifested his great uncharitablness and disingenuity. But before
we end we must tell the Bp. if W. P. was guilty of falsifying the sense of
Scripture (which we do not allow) he is much more in putting such gross and
carnal meanings upon the words of Jesus Christ, John 3. 20, 21. for whereas
Christ does there make the Light the judge and tryer of good and bad deeds, in
manifesting the good and reproving the bad, which no other Light can do but the
light of his own Spirit; and which appears plainly from the Context, see the
foregoing 16, 17, 18, 19. Verses Which light lights every Man and shines in
the heart, according to John 1. 4. 9. 2 Cor. 4. 6. Contrarily the Bp. will have
the meaning of these two Texts like unto proverbial sayings and therewith
compares, 1 These. 5. 7. But what if this Text were allowed a proverbial Speech,
what would this do for the Bp. as it would not be a parallel to John 3. 20, 21.
so neither do we think 'twill answer the Bp's. turn, while it is plain the 5.
Verse. compared with These. Verse. 7. makes it a Spiritual Night, and the Bp.
opposes, John 3. 20, 21. to a Spiritual Light, if we understand his meaning, by
comparing those Texts to proverbial sayings. But the Bp. has made a great noise
of W. P's. falsifying the sense of the Scripture about those two Texts (when we
think it is plain, it lies at his own door) and yet at the same time passes
over several Scripture Texts advanced by W. P. in that same place, to prove
that this divine Light or Illumination of the holy Spirit is a rule to
believing Christians, and that it, with the holy Scriptures, is the double and
agreeing Record of true Religion, and particularly cites John 14. 15, 16. Chap.
Gal. 6. 15. 16. 1 John 2. 20, 27. Romans Chap. 8. all which Scriptures the Bp.
passes over in silence as he does W. P. telling him those words, John 3. 20,
21. were spoken by Christ before the New Testament was in being, and therefore
a rule and judge of the Life and Deeds of Men. And though W. P. by way of
Interrogation does thereupon ask, What says the Bp. to this? Yet no answer from
the Bp. about their being so spoken, but at the same time taxes W. P. with
falsifying the sense of Ephesians. 5. 11, 12, 13. a Text not there mentioned by W. P.
nor does the Bp. refer us to any other place where we shall find it. Thus,
Reader, see the Bp's continued unfair dealing, and to this we may add another
instance of like nature out of W. P's. Defense (p. 52.) where he tells us the
Bp. (did to himself in Cork) read, John 1. 9. otherwise then it is rendered in
our versions, and that all the Translators, Critics and Comentators render
that verse about the Light as we do, except the followers of Socinus: Yet the
Bp. passes it over in Silence. -- But no more of this now; we proceed to the
Bp's. second head of Impiety.

(P. 8.) Says the Bp. his (meaning W. P's.) reproaching the holy Spirit in the
Apostles as to what they taught. -- Thus when he had no other way to answer the
Bp's. Arguments for the Divine Authority of Baptism by water, taken from Acts
10. 47, 48. he says plainly, in all which Peter seems more concerned to save
his own Credit, then to recommend or establish Water Baptism.

Answ. Reader, (1st.) We refer thee to W. P's. Defense, and there see in 17.
pages from 75. to 92. whether he has no other way to answer the Bp. about the
Divine Authority of Water Baptism; and whether on the other hand the Bp. has
not said very little to all the Arguments W. P. has there advanced against it.
And (2ly.) see where W. P. does reproach the holy Spirit in the Apostles, for
we deny it and say it is a false charge as well as a very uncharitable
suggestion: for by the same rule the Bp. may as well say, the Apostle Paul
reproached the holy Spirit in Peter, because he blamed him thus, Gal. 2. 11.
But when Peter was come to Antioch I withstood him to the face, because he was
to be blamed. Nay in the 13. Verse. terms it dissimulation. Paul here only
blames Peter and not the holy Spirit, in a case where 'twas plain he was
willing to save his Credit, we mean his Christian Credit, and Reputation as an
Apostle. And as to W. P. he is so far from reproaching the holy Spirit, or
blaming of Peter, that he only says, Peter seems more concerned to save his
own Credit, etc. then to recommend or establish Water Baptism. W. P. by the
words [own credit] intended Peter's Christian Reputation and Credit as an
Apostle and Minister of Christ, which he behoved to save as much as in him lay,
without offending the Jewish Zealots on the one hand, or the Converted
Gentiles, on the other: And thus we find Paul himself did, Acts. 21. while he
underwent legal (but abolished) Purifications by persuasion of others; and
because the Jewish Zealot's might not take offense at him and his Doctrine, and
so slight or reject his Ministry. Thus W. P. in. (p. 90.) discourses about
Peter, showing that the reason of Peter's saying, Acts 10. 47, 48. can any Man
forbid water, was the narrowness of his Country men's Spirits, lest his latitude
to the Gentiles might distaste them; But the Bp. according to his usual way of
leaving and taking what he pleased in his compendious way, has pict out what he
hoped to make some advantage of against W. P. Therefore, kind Reader, be
pleased to see that page at large, where it will very plainly appear, W. P.
intended no other, then that Peter seemed more concerned to save his Credit as
an Apostle and Minister of Jesus Christ, then to recommend or establish Water
Baptism (as people do in our days); while it is plain from Peter's own words
afterward, that he excludes it from having any part in Man's Salvation, by
saying this, 1 Pet. 3. 21. The like figure whereunto even Baptism does now also
save us, not the putting away the filth of the flesh, [which Elementary Water
only doth] But the answer of a good Conscience toward God, etc. Now, Reader,
judge whether Peter, or the holy Spirit in him, does hereby teach, recommend or
establish, a divine Authority for Water Baptism, as the Bp. suggests. The Bp.
ends this Paragraph thus; These for a taste, single instances under each head
must suffice: And say we they are a taste, but it is of the Bp's. great
unfairness to represent W. P. wrong (rather then of W P's. impiety) of which we
have had many tastes before, besides more that follows.

The Bp. goes on, P. 8. thus, Manifold arts of uncharitableness and
disingenuity, the Bp. accounts these that follow; (1st.) Calumnious and
Spiteful Insinuations, that he, the Bp. believes not the Thirty nine Arlicles.

Answ. A high charge for an imaginary crime, and whether W. P. be guilty or not
let the Reader judge by what follows: W. P. in his Defense (p. 33.) there
asserts, That no Text in all the Scripture is so full and plain to prove the
Doctrine of the Trinity as 1 John 4. 7. which the Bp. had faulted with
shortness; in answer to which W. P. says conditionaly thus. [I think is a bold
attempt if he believes the Thirty Nine Articles.] This, Reader, is the ground
of that high Charge of Spite and Calumny.

Again the Bp's False Imputations; he downright charges the Bp. with Levity and
Scorn, as to the Language, Thee and Thou.

Answ. The Bp's. Testimony as to the point runs thus. Would it not make a man's
stomach turn, etc. We ask what is this less then Levity and Scorn thus to treat
a People (especially without distinction) that are conscientious in using the
Scripture language of Thee and Thou to a single person, and for which many of
them have been great sufferers; but as to the use of that Language W. P. has
defended it by Arguments, which are unanswered by the Bp. in his Reply, though he
has again made reflections, which in their place we shall take notice of.

P. 9. The Bp. spends mostly to vindicate himself, and charging W. P. with
false Imputations, etc. For W. P's. saying the Bp. in his Testimony, judged and
censured the Quakers, which though the Bp. still denies, yet that he so did, and
that W. P's. charge was true. Observe Reader what follows: Thus in his
Testimony, he tells us, We are short and defective in that Confession, viz.
(Gospel Truths) to denominate us Christians, makes us deluded, by judging of us
under strong delusions; then with relation to our belief of the Light of Christ
within (so often repeated in holy Scripture) he says thus, For any persons to
yield themselves to such conduct, (besides or against holy Scripture) is
plainly to abandon themselves to the delusions of the Devil. Again says the
Bp. As you will answer all your secret arts and high pretentions, etc. Again, I
will not (says the Bp. here interpose making gain your godliness. These with
more, as to Spiritual matters in that Testimony; Now as to Temporals, which he
would insinuate we make Religion a cloak for, (which we affirm as W. P. has
said to be the worst construction, the most irreligious could make) Is it not
(says the Bp.) your main end and study by Pretended Mortifications, and
Renouncing the World, while there are no sort of Men alive, that more eagerly
pursue it, nor have more effectual wily and secret ways of getting wealth then
your selves, etc. Mind, Reader, our Mortifications pretended, and his positive
assertion of us, There are no sort of Men, etc. These with much more from the
Bp. in that Paper; and after all tells us, He does neither judge nor censure us,
and charges W. P. at a great rate for telling him he does, nay prays for him
upon it thus, God give Mr. Penn more charity and reason, etc. -- He does not
know, or will not attend, what judging as it means censoriousness is, etc. And
at the same time as a confirmation of his Testimony adds a new: Now in his
Reply. (p. 1.) Our slight, cunning craftiness, lying in wait to deceive, etc.
And likewise (p. 9.) we are now upon, charges us again as above with wily and
secret ways of getting wealth, etc. Again (p. 21.) thus. If minding worldly
gain, and being so intent upon it day and night, as to pass most days in the
week without prayer to God, either in public Assemblies or private Families;
if the slyest ways both to get money and to keep it, be worldlyness, he knows
no sort of people more given to these vices then the Quakers.

Answ. Candid Reader, we now refer it to thee in what we have above cited, out
of the Bp's. Testimony, whether the Bp. did judge and censure us or not; And
while he tells W. P. he does not know, what Judging and Censoriousness means,
we would sain know, what sort of Language it is, he would give the Quakers,
that he will allow to be Censuring of us. -- He has charged us in his Testimony
at a great rate about our secret and wily ways of getting wealth, and has
endeavored to confirm the same now in his Reply, as above cited, which we
brought together to the end we might not be troubled with answering in several
places to one and the same Charge: Now to this (to use the Bp's. own Phrase)
Scurrilous, Unchristian, and general charge without proof. We answer, As it is
far from modesty, (which he applys to the title of his Reply) so it is also a
contradiction to himself in his Testimony where he told us thus, I look upon
many of you as an honest and well meaning people. Now to be sure such secret
and wily ways of getting, etc. as he has charged upon us in his Testimony, and
now again in his Reply, with minding it to such a degree as to neglect prayer
to God, etc. is inconsistant with harmlessness, well meaning, and honesty: To
be short upon this point; we appeal from the Bp. our partial Judge, to our
impartial Neighbors, who know and are better acquainted with out way of
dealing then he; And now may we not with much more reason, return his charge of
worldliness upon himself, and that not without proof, as he has done by us:
what else made him leave his old Bishopric and Friends of Cork for a new one,
and strangers in the North of Ireland, was it not because the latter was worth
some hundreds per annum more then the former? and could he have assigned so
plain a proof as this (of our making Gain Godliness, as he suggests of us in
his Testimony) he might with more reason, and greater justice, have reiterated
his charge of worldliness upon us as he has done. But to proceed,

Ibid. (P. 9.) Says the Bp. against W. P's. Sly Jeers, I would have my Reader
reflect on this, though he were as big as a Bp.

Answ. Reader, look W. P's. Defense: p. 33. second Impression, from whence the
Bp. took this; there see W. P. requests any Reader (tho in as great a Quality
as a Bp.) to reflect upon that great and Essential Truth of Regeneration; but
with what Candor could the Bp. make this a fault in W. P, and at the same time
be guilty of much greater himself, viz. plain and open Jeering, such as calling
W. P. King of Pensilvania, insinuating him in the number of great men of Sin,
reproaching and jeering him with a spirit of discerning in a case that related
to matter of fact, and proveable as we have before observed: But the Bp. adds,
No Bp. in these three Kindoms has the big and Scornful look and deportment of
Mr. P. especially when he is in the humor of it.

Answ. Is this to suspend Censure, here is a harsh charge, and as he has not,
so he will never be able to prove it: As, 1st. we question whether the Bp. was
ever in W. P's. company above two or three times, and if his prejudice to him
made him think he had so big and scornful a look and deportment, (which those
who have conversed frequently with him never saw) Yet (2ly.) it is very
improbable he ever saw all the Bp's. in these three Kingdoms: But supposing he
did, we are sure it is as impossible as unlikely he could be sure none of them
had so big a look, etc. as W. P. since he could not be always with them, and
consequently not know, how big, etc. they looked at absent times, especially
when they were in the Humor of it. -- But to go on to more Jeers, (as the Bp.
terms them of W. P.) says the Bp. of W. P. the Bp's hell. -- He keeps the true
hell to himself (God deliver Mr. P. from it?) So say we of the Bp. and to be
sure W. P. too? But with what reason could the Bp. make this a Jeer look,
Reader, in W. P's. Defense? p. 44. where W. P. enumerates after the Bp's.
Testimony what Gospel Truths could mean of Hell, viz. whether the Grave, a
place of Temporal Punishment after this life, or a state of total Destruction,
etc. -- whereupon W. P. argues thus, What if we mean none of these, may we not
be in the right for all that? for what if none of these are the ancient common
and Scripture belief, what will the Bp. do then? one would think one of them is
the Bp's Hell, and either one of these is an Article of his Belief, or else he
keeps the true hell to himself, and was not so just as to include that in the
question with the rest, etc.

We have been the larger in this quotation to show how ready the Bp. is to take
an advantage against W. P. when he had really none. It Is plain W. P. meant (By
the Bp's hell,) that Notion which he received and holds of it; and by the words
(keeps the true Hell to himself,) he withholds and keeps back his own Notion
and Opinion of the True hell, and does not express it among the other Notions
he gave of it, so keeps it to himself, not for himself. -- But the Bp. goes on:

P: 10:) How could the Bp. more clearly have expressed Hell, then by the eternity
of Torments, the Term there used by the Bp. and declined by Mr: P. and his
brethren.

Answ. Remember, Reader, the Bp. would not allow W. P's. implication of Faith
for a profession of Faith, though he will take it himself; it is true he mentions
everlasting punishment of wicked men, but it is by way of Objection against
Gospel Truths, and not laid down by the Bp. as an Article of Faith; But how has
W. P. and his Brethren declined that term, while they acknowledge Everlasting
Rewards to those who fear God, and that those who feared him not should be
turned into Hell? which does imply Eternity of Torments, according to the
common acceptance, and received opinion of most Christians, as well as our
selves: But we must needs say, we could much easier pass by this Objection in
another, then in the Bp. because W. P. has owned Eternal Rewards and
Punishments in express words in the Rise and Progress of the Quakers. (P. 38.)
as we have before observed (which Book the Bp. had so lately in his pocket:)
But we think the reason is plain, for want of occasion he will rather make then
want one against the Quakers.

Ibid. (P: 10) The Bp. charges W. P. with wilfuly false constructions of and
overlooking the Bp's. Sense, Tergiversations, shifting, pitiful Evasions; for
instance, the Bp. had said they do not in their Paper own the Son of God to be
so much as Jesus (the great Savior who delivers from the wrath to come) or
the Christ, etc. (But says the Bp.) Mr. P. answers, they several times call him
Christ and admires at the Bp's. palpable mistake; (and goes on) does W. P. then
know no difference between Christ, and the Christ, betwixt calling a Person by
his Name, and acknowledging his Authority, Office and Benefits? Thus the Bp.

Answ. Suppose W. P. had only named him Christ, the Bp. may know, if he does
not already, that Christ is not strictly a proper name, but an apellative; it
denotes the Anointed, the Messiah, and applicable to none besides Christ, a
name not given him by his kindred or the Jews, read Mat. 2. 4. Chap. 16. 16.
Mark 12. 35. Luke 4. 41. Chap. 24. 26. 46. Joh. 4. 25. Chap. 7. 26. 27, 31, 41,
42. Chap. 9. 22. Chap. 12. 34. In these with many other places of Scripture,
'twil plainly appear, that it would be incongruous to understand the name
Christ otherwise then as an apellative, deciphering his Office and
Qualification, viz. the promised Messiah; and not a proper name, which Jesus
was, and common to him with others, but none was Christ but himself, so that
the very naming the Word Christ implies the anointed Savior and Redeemer, the
Messiah that was promised and came from God. But farther, What can be more
unfair and trifling then this of the Bp. thus to charge W. P. For first Gospel
Truths, besides calling him Christ no less then Nine times, does own several of
Christ's Offices proper only to the Christ. (If there were any room, as there is
not for the Bp. to suggest W. P. could possibly mean any other then the Christ
of God) and particularly, besides others, that he is the Propitiation for the
remission of Sins, and Justifyer from the guilt of Sin: and besides, that Paper
has several references to Scriptures concerning the Christ. And now as to W.
P's. Defense, pray, Reader, see from (p. 34. to. 39.) where W. P. fully again
owns the Christ, and Jesus Christ, the Word made Flesh, the beloved Son of God,
the only begotten of the Father, etc. And yet for all this the Bp. is so
unfair, as to continue this Objection, and pick out words from W. P's. Defense
to suit his turn, leaving out what explains them, but thereby his charge upon
W. P. must fall upon himself, viz. pitiful shifting Evasions, with wilfully
overlooking his Sense; certainly if this be fair dealing, we are to learn what
it means. But to the next,

(P. 10.) The Bp. goes on thus, Again the Bp. requires them to embrace and
profess the entire Christian Faith in the points wherein he has shown them
defective, that is, as he proved in above two thirds of the Creed. W. P. (says
the Bp.) Answers it would have become the Bp. to have told them what he would
have them believe, could the Bp. have spoke plainer then he does when he names
the Articles of the Creed, which Mr. P. says he holds, therefore knows. Thus
the Bp.

Answ. The Bp. who cried out against shortness and imperfection ought not to
have been guilty thereof himself, for we can find no such words in his
Testimony, as Creed or Articles of the Creed; but perhaps he will say they are
implied (a thing he will not allow in W. P.) when he says thus in his
Testimony, There is not One Article of our common Twelve you have owned
entirely, and Eight if not more of them you have totally suppressed or waved.

If this be not what the Bp. means by the Creed, we cannot find another like it
to his purpose in all his Paper. But W. P. says he holds the Creed, therefore
knows it, does he so? and the Bp's. Conscience, (we think) must know W. P. and
the Quakers owned Articles of Faith more largely worded then in that brief
Paper, since he had R. B's. Apology, and the Rise and Progress of the Quakers:
And therefore why should the Bp. censure, and raise objections to such
Articles. But now suppose W. P. should guess at what the Bp. meant by the
common Twelve; we suppose the Bp. will not say that Testimony was calculated
only for W. P. but the Quakers in general, (as well as others); why then might
not W. P. with a great deal of reason tell the Bp. it became him to be more
explicit, since no doubt, many thousands of People besides the Quakers did not
understand what the Bp. meant by the common Twelve, and therefore the Bp. who
would almost unchristian the Quakers, for not being more expressive, upon the
Articles of the Creed, ought not to have been so short himself, but according
to his Censuring the Quakers, instead of saying common Twelve, he should have
made the Creed into distinct Articles, and laid them down for us. But leaving
this we proceed to the next.

(Ibid. 10.) Inconsequent and trifling inferences, (says the Bp. of W. P.) such
are p. 31. we call him the beloved Son of God, the only begotten of the Father,
therefore conceived of the holy Ghost; Mr. P. knows Solomon was named Jedediah
[the Lords beloved.] David said to be his begotten Son, Psalm. 2. his first
born. Psalm. 89. 27. Yet neither conceived of the holy Ghost, nor born of a
Virgin. Thus the Bp.

Answ. Certainly we believe hardly ever came more trifling (...) matters (to
speak in his way) from a Man in the station of a Bp. Be pleased, Reader, to
read W. Ps'. Defense (from, p. 35. to 39.) where he answers the Bp. fully upon
this point of the manifestation of Christ Jesus in the flesh, and shows
plainly, that although the words [conceived of the Holy Ghost and born of the
Virgin] be not expressed in that brief Paper Gospel Truths, yet they are very
fully implied; and take but the above words, which the Bp. has picked out of the
Defense, and they imply no less; for who was the beloved Son of God and only
begotten of the Father, according to John 1. 14. Chap. 3. 16. but Jesus Christ
that was born of the Virgin: But says the Bp. Solomon was named Jedediah the
Lords beloved, what then, so was Daniel a Man greatly beloved of the Lord, and
many other servants of God too. But where was any of them called the Word made
Flesh, the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth, his beloved
Son, in whom he was well pleased, who tasted death for every Man, his office of
Justification, a Propitiation, named Jesus Christ, with all this and more of
the same kind, in Gospel Truths, and again repeated by W. P. in his Defense.
And now for the Bp. a second time to suggest such trifling (...) things we
should tell him it looks like trifling for trifling's sake, did we not find
some of it worse; and indeed it looks as if the Bp. would falsify the sense of
Scripture, rather then want proof to make W. P. guilty of trifling and
inconsequent Inferences; thus he has cited Psalm. 2. and Psalm. 89. 27. to make
the Scripture serve his turn against W. P. whereas it is undeniable, what is
said in the second Psalm. is spoken of Christ himself, which is fully confirmed
in the New Testament in these words, Acts 13: 33. God has raised up Jesus
again, as it is written in the second Psalm, Thou art my Son this day have I
begotten thee: Then as to Psalm. 89. 27. is it not very plain David does there
personate Christ; it runs thus, Also I will make him my first born higher then
the Kings of the Earth. We will not enlarge on the matter, only add, that if
the Bp. could have proved such gross falsifying the plain sense of Scripture as
this, we should (no doubt) have heard of it very loudly, while the Bp. made so
much ado about two words which altered not the sense, as we have before shown.
But no more of this now.

Ibid. 10. The Bp. quotes W. P. for another trifling instance. -- He that
confesses him made flesh, confesses him made flesh by God, and therefore made
holy flesh; does not all the World know (says the Bp.) that all flesh is made
by God, and do we hence conclude all flesh is holy, or conceived by the holy
Ghost, many more may be instanced.

Answ. Here Is Instances enough already and more then are consistant with the
Bp's. Credit, (as we have shown) and truly (we think) as little to the purpose
as most Men ever wrote, and indeed, we do begrudg the time we spend in
answering such trifling (if some of it be not unjust) matter, were it not for
the sake of Truth, and for those who may think there is more in the Bp's.
Arguments, then really there is; and had we at first only referred the Reader
to W. P's. Defense for answer to all these trifling Instances, it would have
fully answered them, and so fully too, that we must take W. P's. own words to
answer the Bp. again, because the Bp. has so unfairly picked out such as he
hoped to make some advantage of; and not only so, but in this instance has put
in a word of his own, and left out three of W. P's. without which he could not
have made good his charge against W. P. And to show that he has so done, we
here give W. P's. own words, as they lie in his Defense. p. 34. Thus. W. P. He
that confesses the word was made flesh, confesses him made flesh by God, and
therefore made holy flesh, which is found Doctrine, and agrees with John 1. 14.
The word was made flesh and dwelt among us, etc. Now instead of these words
[the Word was] the Bp. has only put in the Word [him] Again had not the Bp. so
unfairly left out three of W. P's. words, the distinction between Christ's
flesh and all other flesh, was plainly and fully implied by saying the Word was
made flesh; for who was the word made flesh, but Christ the beloved Son of God,
and only begotten of the Father, and so W. P. called him, but four lines before;
surely one would think, here was distinction enough, between Christ's flesh,
which was conceived by the holy Ghost, and all other sinful flesh, to satisfy
any, who had not a mind to Cavil or trifle for triflings sake. Now, Reader,
judge in the matter; Did the Bp. deal justly with W. P. in thus doing by him, to
answer his unfair purposes? but it is no news for the Quakers to be thus abused
and misrepresented by their Adversaries, as we noted in the beginning. And now
to the Bp. What is become of his trifling, and inconsequent inferences? where
is wilfuly false overlooking the plain Sense? where is manifold arts of
uncharitabelness and disingenuity? where is the falsifying and perverting plain
sense of Scripture, and consequently impiety, and corruption, we leave it with
the candid Reader, who they are fallen upon, whether the Bp. or W. P. And so we
proceed.

Ibid. 10. Says the Bp. of W. P. Contemptious and scornful Language such is
that reflection a weak head -- Which, Reader, observe W. P. alluded to himself,
in relation to the Bp's. Arguments, in case his instances were no better to the
purpose then the Bp's. upon that expression of the Bp's. stomach turning, we
will not call the Bp. a weak head, but we are sure, we should think our
Arguments weak, were they no more to the purpose, then the Bp's. are, in what is
past; but in regard the Bp. did not answer W. P's. Arguments about the Language
Thee and Thou to a single person, they remain yet in force against the Bp. And
as to his Reflections on our conscientious using that Language, calling it a
wicked kind of weakness, together with an abuse of Religion, not to be endured,
expressions (highly savouring of scorn and contempt) we pass by as the effect
of too much warmth.

P. 11. The Bp. tells us, that W. P's. Censures of him savours of nothing but
the height of Spiritual pride and uncharitableness, as that the Bp. feels no
share in Christ the glorious light of Men, that he wants acquaintance with the
Spirit of God in his Worship.

Answ. This Reflection of Spiritual pride and uncharitableness upon W. P. we
will pass by here, and refer the Reader to what follows; to judge whether it
will not thence appear true what W. P. has said of him. And (1st.) we begin
with what the Bp. says of the Light within, being one of the main points (as he
tells us) that threatens doing hurt in W. P's. whole Defense. And thus the Bp.
begins.

Ibid. 11. The Bp. did say, and stands to it, he knows not what to make of the
Quakers Light within.

Then say we, W. P's. opinion of the Bp's. feeling no share therein must be
true; nor will his calling of it the Quakers Light serve his turn, since the
Quakers never called it their Light, nor owned any Other Light then the Light
of Christ for their guide, and which the Scriptures so abundantly testify
unto, and W. P. has very plainly and fully shown. But the Bp. goes on,

But as to the True Divine Light or the holy Ghost convincing people, by the
holy Scripture applied to Conscience, of Sin, of Righteousness and of Judgment
to come, the Bp. acknowledges it and blesses God for his share thereof.

Answ. As we said before we never meant any other, then the true Divine Light
or holy Ghost, which we say, does inwardly convince of Sin, reproves for it and
by the discovery of which we savingly come to know the things of God, and is
the principal agent and foundation of our conviction, and by which the holy
Scriptures are made beneficial unto us: If the Bp. mean thus by the above words
we agree, but if he mean (as his words seem to us to import) that the Scripture
is the first Agent, and by which, as the cause we are convinced by the Light or
Spirit, we must dissent from the Bp. herein, and that the Bp's. meaning is
such, we are the more confirmed therein, by what he says in. (p. 23.) viz.
that people are now made holy by the use of outward means. That this Doctrine
is repugnanr to Scripture we shall plainly show in its place; we only brought
it here to compare and explain what the Bp. means by the convictions of the
Light and Spirit. Now to the above Argument; the Quakers do say, and the
Scriptures do abundantly prove, that it is by the holy Light and Spirit of
Christ within, by which as the first principal Cause and Agent we come savingly
to believe, and know the things of God; to which purpose we could cite a
multitude of Scriptures, but for brevity let these few suffice; Romans 1. 19.
That which may be known of God is manifest in them, God has showed it unto
them. 2 Cor. 4. 6. God who commanded light to shine out of darkness has shined
in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ. John 1. 4. In him (viz. Christ) was life and that life
was the light of Men. Verse. 9. He (viz. Christ) was the true Light, which
lights every Man that comes into the World. Again, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11, 12. But
God has revealed them, (viz. the things of God) unto us by his Spirit, for the
Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God, even so the things of
God knows no Man but the Spirit of God. Now we have received not the Spirit
of the World, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things
that are freely given us of God. Again, 1 John 2. 27. But the anointing which
ye have received of him abides in you, and ye need not that any Man teach you,
but as the same anointing teaches you of all things. Again even to the wicked
Pharisees, the worst of Christ's Enemies, he said, Luke 17. 21. Behold the
Kingdom of heaven is within you. Then Romans 8. 2, 11, 14, 16. 1 Cor. 3. 16. Ephesians.
4. 6. 1 John 5. 10 These Texts (besides many more we could cite) do
sufficiently prove our point that it is by the Light and Spirit of God inwardly
manifested, by which as the first and principal means we come to have a sight
of Sin and be convinced of it, and while the Bp. says it is by the use of
outward means people are made holy as in (p. 23.) we are (we think) by the same
rule to understand he means they are to be convinced of Sin, Righteousness and
of Judgment; If he thus intends it is worthy his consideration how contrary his
Assertion is to the Scriptures we have cited, and whether he has that share in
the Divine Light and Spirit of Christ as he pretends to: But that we may not be
misunderstood, as if we went about to undervalue the Holy Scriptures, far be it
from us, for we do declare for our selves, and the People called Quakers in
general, that we Love, Honor, and Esteem them above and beyond all the Books
and Writings in the whole World, and are thankful to the Lord for their
preservation, as having found great comfort and benefit by them, through the
illumination of the holy Spirit, and believe them to be, whatsoever they say of
themselves according to these or any other Scriptures, Romans 15. 4. 2 Timothy 3.
15, 16, 17. We shall not be altogether so full as to the Scriptures here as we
might, in regard we shall have farther occasion hereafter, where we shall be
more full upon this head; Yet here may be a fit place, to answer the Bp's.
demand (p. 13.) viz. What is become of Mr. P's. Double Record. We answer, here
it is, the Light, Grace, and Spirit of God, by its illumination giving us the
experimental knowledge of the things of God within (as we have shown) is one;
agreeing with and opening to us the Mysteries of the Holy Scriptures (without)
which is the other: And thus the Apostles made the Scriptures of the Old
Testament an agreeing Record with the openings and the illuminations of the
holy Ghost in them, while they cited numerous Texts and portions of Scripture
out of the Old Testament as an agreeing record, to what they imediatly
delivered by the Revelation of the Spirit; this (we think) is sufficient to
make good W. P's. assertion, that the Light and holy Spirit within, and the
Scriptures without, are the Double and agreeing Record of true Religion.

(Ibid. 11.) The Bp. goes on vilifying W. P. about the Light within, (to pass
by his twitting of him about his Learning) saying thus, He (i. e. the Bp.
himself) had made four the most rational constructions and conjectures he could
devise of what they (the Quakers) should mean thereby (p. 12.) Mr. P. rejects
all with scorn and vile insinuations.

Answ. Reader, be pleased to see W. P's. Defense from p. 52. to 65. and whether
what the Bp. says be true or not. And since the Bp. has not answered W. P's.
Arguments, but with reproachful words, breaking through and overlooking most of
the many Scripture proofs brought by W. P. to demonstrate what he and the
Quakers meant by the Light and Spirit of Christ within. We say since the Bp.
has so done, both W. P's. Arguments and such Scripture proofs lie at his door,
together with those we have added as a farther proof and demonstration of what
we mean by the Light and Spirit of Christ within, (not here to mention our own
experience of the virtue and efficacy thereof with the Blessed Effects which to
the Glory and Praise of God, we have found thereby) so that if after all that
has been said, the Bp. shall still declare his ignorance of what the Quakers
mean, by the Light within, it is but too evident a proof of the little share he
has in or acquaintance with it.

(P. 12. 13.) The Bp. brings in R. Barclay for a share, reproaching him also
with Banter and Cant about the Light within; in reading which we could not
without noted observation remember how ignorant the Bp. made himself in his
Testimony concerning the Quakers Principles, and how ready he was to charge,
and almost unchristian them for the brevity of Gospel Truths, notwithstanding
he had R. B's. Apology which fully handled some of those very points, he
pretended to make a new discovery of, and condemned in that Paper, as being
short expressed: Yet now from the same Book, he can nicely pick words here and
there, some of them many pages distant and put them together, in expectation
(by abusing R. B's. sense and making false constructions) to serve his turn
against the Quakers.

He tells us p. 12. No rational Man alive can make sense of what he [R. B.] has
writ thereon (i. e. Light within.)

Answ. The Bp. is here a great undertaker whilst (1st.) it is impossible for him
to be sure, all the rational Men alive, who have (or may read) R. B's. Apology
on that subject, are of the same mind with him. (2ly.) We tell him, another
Man's affirmative may be as good as his negative; and not to mention the most
rational Men, there are as rational Men as the Bp. (not to lessen him) who can
make sense of what R. B. has writ. But we the less wonder the Bp. should not
understand what R. B. and others have said of the Light within, since he
appears, so unexperienced about Spiritual matters, as to Revile R. B. with
being unintelligible, and guilty of Banter, not only concerning the Light, but
about Spiritual senses plainly proveable by Scripture, as we shall anon evince;
and in the mean time we shall consider the Bp's. next and greatest charge in
this page against R. B. which is as he says for perverting Scripture and adding
a new term (as he calls it) namely the word [Light [to the Text, John. 3. 16.
that he may (says the Bp.) prove Christ as a Light given to all. And yet at the
same time, he picks out this word, he takes no notice of the Multitude of
Scriptures, which R. B. has cited to prove the sufficiency and universality of
the Light; only he tells us he (R. B.) misapplies two or three Texts to prove
this Light universal, but not a word how or wherein. But to the word [Light]
it is so plain on R. B's. side, as having no such perverting intention, that we
cannot believe but the Bp's. Conscience must know he wronged R. B. in this case
as well as in what follows hereafter, which we shall show; only in the first
place let us take the Bp. in his own way about the Light; Then say we, if that
Text might have proved Christ, a Light given to all, had the word Light been
there, then certainly he is proved such, if we bring several Scriptures as full
to the point; thus, John 1. 4. In him was life, and the Life was the Light of
Men. Verse. 9. He was (viz. Christ) the true Light which lights every Man that
comes into the World. What can be more plain as to the universality of the
Light of Christ. Again Chap. 8. 12. I am (says Christ) the Light of the World,
he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the Light of
Life; which Texts sufficiently prove that Christ is a Light to all. And
certainly the Bp. sought for an occasion while he picked out that Word, to
Accuse R. B. though at the same time does not confute those Scriptures with
several others brought both by R. B. and W. P. to prove the Light of Christ
within, unless by falsifying the sense of those Texts noted before (p. 29.) Now
to the perversion and addition charged by the Bp. upon R. B. with much noise,
observe, Reader, the word [Light] is in the Thesis of R. B's. fifth Proposition
in his Apology, where he has no less then five Scripture Texts, and there is
not any one of all the five laid down in the exact and full words of Scripture,
some of them very short, as well as differing in words; and in particular this
very Text, John 3. 16. cited by the Bp. are neither the full, nor yet all of
them the exact words of that Text; Besides the word Light, and indeed the five
Texts, he there gave, were only a kind of References to Scriptures, which
proved the Argument he was upon, namely the universality of the love of God
through Christ Jesus, who was the Light of the World and Light of Men: Now we will
grant, if R. B. had laid down all these Texts as the entire words of Scripture,
and that he could not plainly prove Christ the Light of Men, then had he been
in the wrong and the Bp. in the right; but since the first are not so, and that
he as well as we have shown by plain Scripture Christ to be the Light of Men,
we think it is but too plain the Bp. wanted an occasion, while he made this one,
for in reading R. B's. Explanation and Defense of this Proposition, where in,
p. 81. We find the full and entire words of that Text laid down thus, John 3.
16. God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, that who so ever
believed in him, should not perish but have everlasting Life. Now, candid
Reader, judge in the matter, which is most obvious, the Bp's. partiality by
endeavoring to misrepresent R. B. or R. B's. intention to pervert and add a
new term to Scripture, when he had not the least need of it, and had several
other plain Scriptures to prove the point.

The rest of p. 12. and part of 13. is mostly a recital of picked words here and
there taken out of R. B's. Apology, and as we said before, some far distant
added together, upon some of which, the Bp. puts his own false constructions,
and yet in conclusion, we do not find he pretends to confute them by any other
Arguments then by his own Assertion, as p. 12. he tells us by the way he does
not think this Scripture Language; and p. 13. avers it is unintelligible, that
is Banter; so that we need take no further notice then only refer the Reader to
R. B's. Apology, where (if he be impartial) he will find full satisfaction:
However in regard the Bp. does greatly abuse R. Bp's. sense, we will take
notice and answer, such his recitalls.

Thus (p. 12.) the Bp. cites some words out of R. B's. Discourse on the sixth
Proposition of his Apology, where R. B. was proving that the seed, Light, or
Grace of God is no accident, but a real Spiritual substance. Then says the Bp.
of their feeling it, yea anon Tasting, Smelling, seeing it, and handling by
virtue of it the things of God, which yet (says the Bp.) are certainly all
Spiritual things. Again the Bp. goes on (p. 13.) that people should be able to
smell, and feel, and handle things, which being intellectual and immaterial can
no ways be incident to these Senses, nor are so much as ever Metaphorically
said to be smelt, or handled; the Bp. avers unintelligible, that is Banter:
Then he tells us he expects our Reply, that he is a carnally minded Man, to
whom all this seems strange, which he will answer anon.

Answ. First, the Bp. in this case, might as well have expected to be taxed
with great unfairness in wilfully abusing R. B's. sense, as that he is a
carnally minded Man, and that he is guilty of the first, and such a Man in the
last, we think nothing can well be plainer; while in the first he makes R. B.
to alsude to outward senses, whereas the Scope of his Arguments, as well as his
plain Words do prove the contrary: thus, p. 95. R. B's. Apology, (and the same
Section cited by the Bp. (which he makes, 16. but it should be Sect. 14.) We
come to have those Spiritual Senses raised, by which we are made capable of
Tasting, Smelling Seeing and Handling the things of God. And in plain
opposition to outward Senses, which the Bp. would insinuate, he intended, says
in the next words, for a Man cannot reach unto those things, by his natural
Spirit and Senses as is above declared: Pray, Reader, judge in the matter, can
there be a plainer abuse put upon a Man, while the Bp. opposes intellectual and
immaterial things, and Spiritual Senses, to what R. B. intended, when R. B's.
plain words intends Spiritual, in opposition to Natural Senses.

Next as to the Seed, Light, and Grace of God, which the Bp. cites. p. 12. and
which R. B. says is a real Spiritual Substance, which the Soul is able to feel
and apprehend, from which that real inward Spiritual birth in Believers arises,
called the New Creature, and New Man in the heart. Now for confirming R. B's.
expressions to be sound and Spiritual. both in this Citation, as also in
relation to Spiritual Senses, we ask the Bp. what New Creature the Apostle
meant. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 6. 15. And what that hidden Man of the heart was the
Apostle spoke of, 1 Pet. 3. 4. And what those Senses were, 1 John 1. 12. by
which the Apostle saw, felt, and handled the word of Life; Then what taste that
was Ps. 34. 8. O taste and see that the Lord is good; And what that sweet
savor was, 2 Cor. 2. 15. Sweet Smell, Cant. 4. 9, 11. Chap. 7. 13. Now,
Reader, judge in the matter, might not the Bp. with much reason, if he had
considered rightly, have expected to be termed a Carnaly minded Man by us,
while he rendered R. B. guilty of unintelligible Banter. P. 12. the Bp. tells
us R. B. will have this Light or Grace the purchase of Christ's Death for every
Man, lightning the hearts of all in a day, and subsists in the hearts of wicked
Men, even whilst they are in their wickedness, which the Bp. tells us he thinks
not Scripture Language.

Answ. That R. B. has fully and undeniably owned and asserted the Atonement
and Sacrifice of Jesus Christ in (p. 96.) of his Apology; as also in the
seventh Proposition about Justification, we suppose the Bp. will not deny, and
in the first does make an especial exception against being misunderstod in that
point, while he was treating of the necessity of obeying the Light and Grace of
Christ, in order to receive the benefits of his death and sufferings for us:
why then might not he say this Seed, Light Grace or Spirit of Christ, was the
purchase of his death, since it came by him; see John 1. 17. The Law came by
Moses but Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ. Again John 1. 4, 9. Romans 8. 9. John
16. 7. 13. And that it subsists in the Wicked, though in a far different manner
then in the Righteous (as R. B. excellently shows), see Luke 17. 21. The
Kingdom of Heaven within: The wicked Pharisees, Mat. 25. 25. The wicked servant
had a Talent though he did not improve it: Now is it not strange the Bp. should
overlook many more Scriptures then these, while he was so trifling with R. B.

Ibid. 12. The Bp. tells us that R. B. says That the knowledge of Christ's death
and sufferings, as declared in the Scripture, is not absolutely necessary for
making people partakers of this Light. Again P. 13. The knowledge of the
Scripture, though comfortable and profitable, is not needful.

Answ. We have already, in Answer to the four points laid down by the Bp. as,
G. K's. (p. 45. 46.) spoken to this point and therefore need say the less here,
nor do we find the Bp. pretends to confute it; Nay tells us, as to that part,
which lies in (p. 12.) that R. B. proves it after his way: And as to that part
in (p. 13.) the Bp. has neither fairly cited it, nor told the occasion, for R.
B. spoke in reference to such, from whom the knowledge of the Death and
sufferings of Christ has been withheld; to such says R. B. it is not
absolutely needful, so as they may be saved, notwithstanding, they have not the
outward History, provided they obey the Light and Spirit of God, (which he
plainly proves, is given universally to all) And thereby, from unholy become
holy Men: We desire thee, Reader, to peruse R. B's. fifth and sixth
Propositions for full satisfaction to all the Bp's. Objections.

P. 13. The Bp. proceeds thus; By what has been produced out of R. B. in his
own words, it appears Mr. Penn's double and agreeing Testimony of the Light
within and the Scriptures of Truth without, is but a New bubble upon the World,
a thin Leaf of Gold, to make the poisonous Pill of their Light within go down
with the less reluctance or even suspicion.

Answ. As to the Bp's. picking out, and putting false constructions upon R.
B's. and W. P's. words, we have observed to the Reader already; Next as to the
agreeing Testimony, we have spoken to that before, to which we refer.

Lastly as to his Calling the Light within a Poisonous Pill, we hope he will
not blame W. P. or any other for saying he has no share in it, while he thus
reviles it, and how far the Expression may Affect the Bp. in the sight of the
Lord we Love: But to be plain, had we (who believe in the Light of Christ)
uttered such words, we should have concluded our selves guilty of little less
then Blasphemy; Nor do we see how his salvo of calling it the Quakers Light
will excuse him, since we have always declared it to be the Light of Jesus
Christ, and universaly given to all Men, often testified unto in the holy
Scriptures.

The latter end of (p. 13. and 14.) The Bp. exclaims against W. P. for
mentioning many Reformers and Martyrs in concurrence with us as to the double
and agreeing testimony of the Spirit of God within, and the Scriptures of Truth
without; but says the Bp. without producing one word out of them or referring
to any Treatise or Page.

Answ. If the Bp. had first confuted the Scripture Testimonies, W. P. laid down
directly proving the sufficiency of the Light, Grace, and Spirit of God within,
he would have had the better pretense to have harrangued upon W. P. about these
Authors; but that he did not, for a good reason indeed, because he could not.
And as to those Authors, if the Bp. had published his Answer while W. P. was in
England, he might have received a fuller answer from himself then we can give,
he being a Person (to be sure) better read then we are. However, we question
not in the least, but W. P. had good ground for what he asserted, though at the
same time we think it is plain, he laid no such great stress upon their
Authority, seeing he referred not to particular Treatise or Page; and what need
for it, since he quoted Chapter and Verse, of an undeniable authority, viz. the
Scriptures. But why is the Bp. so loud against W. P. for what he is so guilty
of himself, he tells us, That Luther, Melancthon, Zuinglius, and Calvin, as
well as other Reformers, and Reformed, generally hold among other points Three,
that are expressly contrary to what the Quakers teach of the Light within; And
so goes on to tell us, what those Three points are, and after all not one word
in what Book, Treatise, or Page, we should find any one of them: Now is it not
strange the Bp. should so inconsiderately fall into the same Error, he but
just before charged upon W. P. or must it be a Fault in W. P. and none in the
Bp.

But the Bp. tells us he fairly avers it and takes upon him to prove it if Mr.
P. or his Abetters shall deny it, etc.

Answ. If he does it no better, then somethings we have noted him, not only
short but unfair in before, we have but too much cause to believe his proofs
will be very lame: But to end this Dispute and come nearer home, let the Bp.
but fairly refute the many Scripture Testimonies quoted by R. B. W. P. and some
by us to prove the sufficiency of the Light, Grace, and Spirit of God within
Man, given as a sure Guide and Director, etc. to him, and he will do the work
fully without either troubling the Reformers or Martyrs.

(P. 15.) The Bp. goes on thus; If they (i. e. the Quakers) shall say, the Bp.
wrongs them in saying, they make their Light within the rule of their actions
at any time, without or against holy Scripture, besides what may be produced
out of their Books, by way of Doctrine, and particularly W. P. (p. 105.) let
them answer among others to these two matters of fact. -- One Knight on a
certain Lords day, in the time of Divine worship, came into the Congregation.
-- And stood there stark naked. -- Crying out, behold here the naked Truth. --
Again one Workman in the town of Ross. -- Gave out for a miracle he would fast
-- Forty days; But though he gave off, before the Forty Days were near at an end,
Yet it was discovered, that in a Rick of Beans near his Chamber, he had made a
great hole, and devoured a suitable quantity of them.

Answ. (1st.) As to W. P's. Doctrine (p. 105.) If false Doctrine, why does not
the Bp. confute it, he tells us in (p. 2.) he ought not to connive, but why
then does he do it here, and not only here but before, for this is the place we
complained of before, wherein he made a great Outcry against W. P. for
falsifying the Sense of the Scripture. John 3. 21. about the Light, And at the
same time was wholly silent to the many other Scriptures which followed, and
which W. P. brought to prove the Light and Spirit of God within Men: Does the
Bp. think to come off thus by calling it false Doctrine, without proving it
such, we think 'twill hardly pass, unless with very credulous Readers. Surely
if the Bp. had well considered what he said or well observed what the holy
Scripture says, he would scarce have quoted that page for false Doctrine above
any other in that Book, great part of it being Texts of Scripture, so full to
the point he had in hand that hardly any thing can be more plain: Reader see
105. first, and 115, 116, pages second Impression. (2ly.) As to the Story of
Knight the Instance of which looks as if the Bp. would go far, rather than want
matter to defame the Quakers withal (it being about 26 Years Old) we hardly
suppose the Bp. gives this story of Knight's nor yet Workman's from his own
certain knowledge; if from report, (as we understand he does) would it look
well in a Quaker to take a story out of the Cobbler of Gloucester concerning a
Priest or Bp. and spread it as the Bp. has done, let him consider of it. As to
the Story it is not true in all its parts (as laid down by the Bp.) according
to our best Information, for we have made full enquiry into the matter, and do
find, that although he did go, and stand naked before the Congregation, yet that
he never said these words (behold here the naked Truth) for the Bp. may assure
himself, had Knight spoke such words, the Quakers would have been as ready to
disown him with abhorrance of such Expressions, as the Bp. is to Asperse the
Quakers with the Story; and how ready he is at that, we leave the Reader to
judge: But as to John Knight (for so was his name) the Man is dead, and cannot
answer for himself, but his Widow gives the relation of the words he spoke, as
he gave them to her, which are these: [As odious as I seem in your eyes, so
odious are your actions in the sight of the Lord.] And how odious the Actions
of that Congregation was in the sight of the Lord, the Lord best knows; And as
to Knight's call to that service, we shall leave it to the Lord; But this we
can say, we never knew or heard otherwise, but that he was a very sober,
honest, and Religious Man, and so continued to his end, which Character we
believe, all who knew him will give of him.

Thirdly, As to the story of John Workman; according to our best information
that story, is not true as related by the Bp. the Man being also dead, his
Widow has given a Narrative of the whole under her hand, too long to be
inserted here, but to give it in short; She says, He never gave out at all
(much less as a Miracle) neither pretended to fast any certain time, for when
he was asked the Question, by her self and others, he answered, he could not
tell how long he was to fast, that was hid from him, the time was until he had
freedom from the Lord to eat: She farther says, She is fully assured he did
really fast Thirty days, in which time he eat nothing, only at sometimes,
washed his Mouth with small beer or water, and at times drank a little water.
-- Then as to the Bean Stack being near the Chamber where he lay, and that he
made a great hole, and devoured a suitable quantity of them, she says it is
utterly false, for there was no such thing near his Chamber, and that his
Haggard of Corn lay at some distance from the House; But this she remembers,
that such a Lie was forged by a Light Frollicksome Fellow at Ross, who kept an
Alehouse, and to make his Tippling Guests merry, raised this lying Story, upon
that honest Man, for so we call him, and so he was reputed by his neighbors,
and one that abhorred deceit, and lying, and therefore his reallity in this
thing is the less to be questioned, and if the Bp. can disprove him to be such,
by credible witnesses, or the Story otherwise, then as we have told, he may do
it if he can. And so we proceed to the Bp's. demand.

Ibid. (15.) The Bp'^ demands of Mr. P. ^, Whether every strong impulse of mind
is to be followed, as being the Light within, if not, what have we to try the
Light within by, if it be said Scripture, agreed; but can Mr. P. produce, a
double and agreeing record for these, and the like actions?

Answ. As to the Bp's. demand, Is every strong impulse of the mind to be
followed as being the Light within? We answer no, nor does it therefore follow,
because some has falsely pretended to the Spirit of God, that therefore the
true motions of the Spirit, are to be rejected; No more then because false
Prophets and Teachers pretended to be sent of God, that therefore the Spirit in
the true Prophets and Teachers ought not to be regarded; Nor more then because
some, who have preferred the Scriptures to be their rule of faith and practice,
mistaking and perverting the Sense of the Scripture, have held or practiced
wrong things, therefore the holy Scripture should be wholly rejected, and
nothing believed or done that is therein declared or recommended; And as to our
Doctrines and Practices, we do not refuse in matters of controversy with our
Adversaries to have both tried by the holy Scriptures, and here may be a fit
place, to answer a Charge or Reflection of the Bp's. in this Paragraph, viz.
There is no project so wild, that their pretended Light within may not lead
them into.

Answ. We utterly deny the consequence, and say the Light of Christ which we
profess to be led by, did never lead any either into wildness or immorality;
but on the contrary, such as follow it, are led by it into godliness and
sobriety, according to the agreeing record, Titus 2. 11, 12. Ephesians. 5. 9, 10. 1
John 2. 27. And if any coming among us, and pretending to be of us, are guilty
of Immoral practices, we have Church Discipline, by which we deal with and
disown such as the nature of the Case may require. Then as to Doctrines and
Practices upon a religious account, if any should under pretense of the Light
within broach any evil Doctrine, or act any thing repugnant to or against the
Testimony of the holy Scriptures, we disown such Doctrines or practices;
knowing, that as every evil thing, contradicts the Scriptures, so it really
does the Spirit from whence the holy Scriptures came, and consequently in
reallity, they cannot oppose one another. Now as to those two Instances brought
by the Bp. which he demands a double record for, if he means going Naked, or
Fasting, without his other untrue Circumstances,

We answer, though we neither say nor allow such extraordinary things, as
appearing naked ought to be done by imitation, or because some of the Lords
servants did so of Old: Yet he may remember we have examples in holy Scripture
for both. Did not the Prophet Isaiah walk naked and bare footed, three Years as
a sign? Isaiah 20. 2, 3. And how was he and the Prophet Ezekiel as Signs and
Wonders to the wicked, in what the Lord required of them? many Instances of
which we could produce, but for brevity sake we omit them. And as to Fasting,
we have so many examples of that kind in both Old and New Testaments, that we
think it needless to bring any proof for that practice. Thus having replied to
the Bp's. demand we proceed,

Ibid. P. 15. The Bp. ends this Paragraph, with telling us he could have
assigned more immoral instances, but has forborne: And to end this Paragraph, we
must tell him our thoughts, which are, that if he could have gotten either
more, or such as he thought would have rendered the Quakers more odious, we are
doubtful whether his good inclinations to the Quakers, would have been so
prevalent on him, as to have forborne on that account.

(P. 16.) Notice should be given (says the Bp. of W. P.) of his repeated
cunning, as well as unfaithfulness in citing another particular Writer, against
the Bp. his cunning (and Mr. P. ought to have remembered, who lately Printed
that amongst his Maxims, that Cunning borders upon Knavery.) In that he never
produces his Authors words, and his unfaithfulness in representing the sense
widely different, if not contrary to what it is; Ouzelius in his notes on
Minutius Felix tells us the primitive Christians forbore the Heathenish
customs, and particularly therefore, they rejected the Custom of Crowning their
Dead with Garlands, this Mr. P. refers to, (if he refer,) to any thing to be
found in that Author. Thus the Bp.

Answ. It Is no news for the Bp. to make much of a little, as well as much ado
to no very great purpose against W. P. pray Reader see W. P's. Defense, p. 71.
and there thou will find, he does mention some of his Authors words, contrary
to what the Bp. has asserted; Thus W. P. I beseech him (i. e. the Bp.) to
converse with Ouzelius upon Minutius Felix, and he will tell him, that the
first Christians were taxed, and despised for ill bred in Manners, unpolished
in Speech, unfashionable in Behavior; in fine, Rusticks and Clowns, as the
Christians ironicaly returned their Scorners the style of well bred and
Eloquent; this and much more he cites out of Lactantius, Theodoret and
Arnobius, etc.

This is what W. P. has in that page, exactly as it lies there; Now judge in the
matter, Candid Reader, who is most guilty of cunning, and unfaithfulness, W. P.
in citing his Authors words as above, or the Bp. in saying he did not, and
taking no notice or giving any answer, to that large Quotation. And besides, if
we mistake not, the Bp. has given his own Church a great wound, by the above
citation out of that Author, who, as the Bp. says, forbore heathenish customs,
and particularly they rejected, Crowning the Dead with Garlands; upon which the
Bp. asks thus; Is there no difference betwixt Idolatrous Rites and the innocent
Fashions of Christians ordinary apparel? So that we think he makes Crowning the
Dead with Garlands an Idolatrous Rite, as well as a heathenish custom; upon
which we ask, what sort of Rite or Custom that is in a certain Church which
makes fine Garlands for the Dead, hanging them up in their Worship Houses, with
long streaming Escutcheons? to say nothing of covering the Dead with them. Let
the Bp. consider the matter. But notwithstanding, what we have said, we have
not yet done with the Bp. upon this head of cunning and unfaithfulness; we
observe, the Bp. has made a great ado and spent good part of a page about
Ouzelius, etc. to fix this charge upon W. P. without reason. Now we ask the Bp.
whether he had not something like cunning, in this to amuse his Reader, while
at the same time he skipt over several other Authors, some of whose Treatises
were cited by W. P. concerning the Care and Zeal, which some of the ancients
had to suppress Heathenish customs in Manners and Behavior from getting in
upon Christians; see W. P. Defense, p. 71, 72. But that which is more
observable is, that although W. P. brought several Scriptures, Chap. and Verse.
against conforming to the World, in their Fashions, Dresses and Apparel, and
particularly Romans 12. 1, 2. 1 Peter 1. 13, 14. Chap. 3. 3. yet the Bp. takes no
notice of all those Scriptures (though they were brought by W. P. in Answer to
the Bp's. Testimony, in which he put W. P. upon the Proof to show the primitive
Christians differed from others of their Nation, and Quality in such things)
Now what imaginable reason can be given, why the Bp. should make so much ado,
(and without cause too) about Minutius Felix, etc. while he was silent to all
the rest of W. P's. proofs: But to conclude about that of Apparel and Dresses
we shall only say, It is much to be lamented, that so great an Overseer as the
Bp. should (by not more publicly appearing against) tacitly plead for and
countenance such abominable pride (in Apparel and Dresses by calling them
innocent fashions) as is found reigning amongst the generality of those called
Christians in our day: As to what the Bp. tells us of Octavius that the
Christians knew one another only by their Innocence and Humility and not by any
bodily mark.

We Answer, the Bp. may know not only Innocence and Humility was a sign that
Peter belonged to Jesus, but his Speech also, Matt. 26. 43. Again the boldness
of unlearned and ignorant Men was another mark, Acts 4. 13. But to the next.

Ibid. 16. The Bp. goes on, and as to their language, after all artifices Mr.
P. has not been able to produce (which was a pressing point of his business)
one precedent or shadow of a Testimony that the primitive Christians used not
the ordinary Civilities in their common Discourse, and Salutations, but
affected a different Style or way by themselves; contrarily he might have
remembered that the beloved Disciple, being to write to a Christian Sister of
Quality salutes her by an inscription, To the Elect Lady.

Answ. We must needs say we cannot but greatly admire at the Bp. thus with an
artificial flourish to assert against his own knowledge, while he wilfuly
overlookt W. P's. Arguments relating to this particular case of Salutations;
see his Defense. p. 73, 74. there thou will find he plainly proves, Matt. 23.
6, 7, 8. Luke 10. 4. from Christ's own words, both his condemnation upon the
Pharisees for loving honor, and salutary greetings, and particularly in
affecting to be called Rabbi; as also his positive command to his Disciples,
against such practices of being called Masters. Again, W. P. Quotes Christ's
Question to the Jews, viz. How can ye believe, which receive honor one of
another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only, John 5. 44. And
after all this, with more, to tell us W. P. has not been able to produce one
precedent or shadow of a Testimony, that the primitive Christians used not the
ordinary Civilities in their common discourse and Salutations, is, we think as
much as to tell us, that they obeyed not the command of Christ, or if they did,
that the Sun does not shine when it appears in its greatest Luster. Then as to
Language.

If the Bp. means Thee and Thou to a single person, we find in holy Writ all
sorts used it then, which if all did now, there would be no difference in that
point between us and any other sort of people: We could say much upon the
fullsome and flattering Titles and Complements of the times, which, to be sure,
no precedent is to be found in the Scriptures for, and particularly those
Titles given to the Bp's. far beyond, and above, what ever was given to
Timothy, or any others that we read of in holy Scripture, who yet were endued
with the Spirit and power of God beyond what any of our Bishops will pretend
to: But we study brevity and will therefore be short upon this Head, only
before we end we must answer to the Title of the Elect Lady, who, the Bp. tells
us, was a Christian Sister of Quality, but Dr. Hammond a person of great note
in the Church of England in his Annotations on the New Testament tells us, that
direction 2 John 1. to the Elect Lady, will be best rendered, to the Elect
Church or Congregation, see Wilsons Christian Dictionary more largely: Verbum
Lady: and if so as Hammond says, the Bp. is mistaken in that Inscription, to be
sure at least, that he and the Bp. differ in their Opinions therein. But as to
the word Lady, as it signifies a particular person, it is our practice
sometimes to call a Lady, the Lady such an one: or a Lord, the Lord such an
one; which is no more then to say such a Lord, or such a Lady, so called; not
my Lord, nor my Lady, and so we end this Paragraph.

The Bp's. next head p. 16, 17. is about Water Baptism, in which he does, as in
other cases (as we take it, for want of better Arguments) endeavor to
misrepresent W. P's. sense, as we shall plainly demonstrate in what follows; he
begins thus,

The Bp. sincerely professes he mourns to see Men so hardened as it appears by
Mr. P's. wresting Scripture to elude the Truth. Mr. P. first in a manner
confesses himself put to his shifts; I am sensible of the disadvantage I am
under, etc. says he; Yet proceeds he to shift on.

Answ. We have little cause to believe the Bp's. mourning is real, while he
continues to abuse, as well as misrepresent us, as he does; however let his
mourning be of what sort it will, 'twas needless here, because it is without
ground, for we deny W. P. does either wrest Scripture or elude the Truth; But
on the other hand it is very plain, the Bp. does here wrest W. P's. words to
suit his own turn, not only in not laying down his following words but wrongly
applying those he has laid down. Now W. P's. words are these, viz. I am
sensible of the disadvantage I lie under, and that I touch a tender place, and
what I say upon this Head, and also anon upon the Supper, will be against wind
and tide with the generality.

Now, Reader, judge, does W. P. in a manner confess himself put to his shifts,
or does he not rather express himself thus, with respect to the people who are
generally in the practice of Water Baptism, and the outward Supper, and
consequently therefore did believe, the harder to be prevailed upon by his
Arguments, and this we take to be no more, then if the Bp. were writing against
the Papists in a received Tenet of the Church of Rome; Suppose
Transubstantiation; might not the Bp. with a great deal of reason say (with
respect to them) I am sensible of the disadvantage I lie under, etc. would this
be in a manner confessing he was put to his shifts? but we have more of the
same kind, nay worse in what follows: The Bp. proceeds to vindicate his
allegation in his Testimony, viz.

P. 17. The Bp. had avouched those words of our Lord, Matt. 28. 19. was an
Institution and command of Baptism with Water, and gave two substantial
reasons, which he holds to, Baptizing with the holy Ghost was not in the
Apostles power, therefore it could not be the thing commanded them. (2ly.)
Baptizing with Water was the Apostles and primitive practice and has been ever
since the practice of the Church. To the first of these Mr. P. answers; it is
not true; and to make that good alleges, Acts 10. 44. while Peter yet spoke
these words the holy Ghost fell on all those that heard the word. Hence he
infers, that Peter Baptized Cornelius with the holy Ghost: Now was there ever
any thing more impertinent and inconsequent? while Peter spoke, etc. the holy
Ghost fell on them, etc. therefore (which was the point to be proved) was it
Peter's act and in his power to Baptize with the holy Ghost? no the Spirit
breaths where it lists, John 5. 8. But God (says Mr. P.) by the Apostles
did Baptize Believers with the holy Ghost, (to which the Bp. answers, as we
take it tacitly granting the matter, Did he so?) Then 'twas God Baptized them
with the holy Ghost, and not the Apostles; they were only instruments at
pleasure, as long as the act was not principally theirs, it cannot be concluded
hence to have been in their power. Thus the Bp.

Answ. Reader, we must desire thy excuse for this long citation, we could not
well avoid it for the following reasons; (1st.) Let a Man act ever so warily
it is much if his words be not perverted, as the Bp. has done by W. P. on this
point. (2ly.) It will in part appear, from the Bp's. own words, (though to be
sure not designedly) how unfair he has been unto W. P. in representing him, as
if W. P. had said, 'twas in the Apostles power of themselves to Baptize with
the holy Ghost, though at the same time in a kind of contradiction to himself, as
a Salvo, adds; But God, says Mr. P. by the Apostles, did Baptize Believers with
the holy Ghost; But then with a short turn, Query's (as if W. P. had been of
another mind before) Did he so? Then 'twas God Baptized, etc. Now, Sober
Reader, we must desire thy farther patience, in citing W. P's. own words, as
they lie in one entire Paragraph of his Defense (p. 76.) which will not only
discover the Bp's. false representation of W. P. but fully clear up the matter,
that W. P. never intended or meant, 'twas barely in the Apostles power to
Baptize with the holy Ghost: Thus W. P. viz. I say then the Bp's. first reason
is not true, for God by the Apostles did Baptize Believers with the holy Ghost,
it fell upon them by the powerful preaching of the word; thus act. 10. 44.
while Peter yet spoke these words, the holy Ghost fell on them that heard: By
which it is evident, that Peter in that Sermon was the Minister of the
Spiritual Baptism, to Cornelius and his company. Now, Impartial Reader, judge in
the matter, was it possible for a Man to speak more plain, then W. P. does
here, that 'twas God by the Apostles, they as his Ministers, were made able by
him to Baptize Believers with the holy Ghost, and which was W. P's. point to
prove, and which he did by others, as well as this Argument, though the Bp. has
overlookt them; and what can be said or who can be safe? though ever so plain,
while it has been the common practice of our Adversaries to misrepresent us,
as the Bp. has now done by W. P. as if he should intend 'twas in the Apostles
power to Baptize with the holy Ghost, (see the Bp's. own words) But if we
mistake him not, the Bp. himself seems to allow, that God did instrumentally
Baptize Believers, with the holy Ghost, (we are sure we intend not to wrong his
Sense, but his words to us seems to import no less,) while he says, Did he so?
Then 'twas God Baptized with the holy Ghost and not the Apostles, they were
only instruments at pleasure, as long as the act was not principally theirs it
cannot be concluded hence to have been in their power. Nor did W. P. ever
intend 'twas in the Apostles power, only as Instruments in God's hand, and by
his power and at his pleasure, they Baptized Believers with the holy Ghost; but
whether this was the Bp's. Intention or not we will not determine, and so leave
it, and return to the Argument, That it is plain not only from this Instance
cited by the Bp. but by other Arguments advanced by W. P. (which the Bp. past
over in silence) that God did Baptize Believers instrumentally through the
Apostles, and therefore the Bp's. first reason falls, and W. P's. takes place.
Farther, whatsoever the Apostles did in the discharge of their Ministerial
Office, whether as to Preaching, Healing, or Baptizing, they were but
Instruments, it was all done by God through them, God spoke through them, yet
they said to speak; he healed through them, yet they said to heal; so to
Baptize through them, and they said to Baptize; And they were to do none of
these things, till they were endued with power from on high, Luke 24. 49. Acts
1. 4.

Ibid. (17.) The Bp. proceeds as one put to his shifts indeed, (to give his own
Term to W. P. when the Bp. told him, he proceeds to shift on) [Thus] Baptizing
with the holy Ghost and with Fire, the words that Mr. P. alleges, p. 69. and
runs upon was a special Prerogative of our Lord Jesus Christ's predicted only
of him, Matt. 4. 11. (which should be 3. 11.) and fulfilled only by him, Acts
2. not by any Man ever Living. The Bp's. first reason then is true. (says he)

Answ. If saying were proving the Bp. has done it, nor will this Argument avail
him any more then the former, notwithstanding it seems as if he would divide
fire from the Baptism of the holy Ghost, and only allow it to be fulfilled,
Acts 2. Indeed if he had said the Cloven Tongues of fire, it had been more
tolerable, but that fire (i. e. the Spiritual fire) was to accompany the
Baptism of the holy Ghost, when they were Baptized with the Spirit, is very
plainly proveable from Scripture, as well from that Text which the Bp. has
brought (to prove 'twas only fulfilled, Acts. 2.) as from others. Thus, Matt.
3. 11. John Tolls many of the wicked Pharisees and Saducees which came to his
Baptism and whom he called a generation of Vipers, I indeed Baptize you with
Water, etc. but He (Christ) shall Baptize you with the holy Ghost and with
fire: As if he had said, you, or who ever are Baptized with the Baptism of
Christ shall be Baptized with the holy Ghost, and with fire. Now we suppose the
Bp. will hardly plead that all those John then did speak unto, were of that
number, Acts. 2. consequently then Fire accompanied with the holy Ghost, was to
extend to others as well as it did to those Disciples, Acts. 2. which we shall
farther prove: In the mean time with respect to the Bp's. opinion in the
matter, as we cannot wonder at it, so neither do we think him a competent Judge,
whether Fire accompanies the Baptism of the Spirit or not; because we do not
find he pretends to the holy Ghost, unless to be obtained by outward means;
however let the Bp's. opinion be what it will, we cannot but admire he should
affirm so contrary to plain Scripture (not only in the above but in what
follows) as that the Baptism predicted Matt. 3, 11. was only fulfilled Acts 2.
whereas if we credit the Apostle we shall find it otherwise; thus Acts. 11. 15,
16. And as I began to speak the holy Ghost fell on them as on us in the
beginning, then remembered I the word of the Lord, how he said, John indeed
Baptized with Water, but ye shall be Baptized with the holy Ghost: Here Peter
refers to the pouring forth of the holy Ghost, at the time of Pentecost, and the
marginal note in the Bible, refers to Chap. 2. 4. which shows that Babtizing
with the holy Ghost was not fulfilled by Christ at that time mentioned Acts. 2.
4. but that it continued in the Church, and was dispensed through the Apostles
ministry afterward; so not fulfilled only by Christ as the Bp. says. How then
came the Bp. to fall into this mistake, he will do well to consider whether it
be not for want of inward acquaintance with the Spirit, by which he would
experimentally have witnessed, that Spiritual fire does accompany the holy
Ghost. As to what he says of the prerogative of Christ we ascribe to it, as
much as he can do; but then we say, he that had and has all power in Heaven
and Earth, Matt. 28. 18. could and did enable the Apostles instrumentally to
Baptize Believers with the holy Ghost, as has been shown by W. P. Now as to the
Bp's. Second Reason,

Ibid. 17. That Water was the thing commanded, Matt. 28. 19. and that the
Apostles practice in Baptizing with Water, was in obedience to that command;
which assertion of his depending upon that commission, we now come to consider
the same, by which if it appears that Water was not there commanded, it thence
follows, what the Apostles did in that of Water was practice and not
Institution; thus the Text Matt. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and teach all nations
Baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. Now that we are not to understand Water was intended by this commission
appears (1st.) Because here is not a word of Water mentioned. (2ly.) Because
the Baptism of Christ was the Baptism of the Spirit, spoken to in short by us
and more largely proved by W. P. (3ly.) Because we find the Apostles as
instruments did by the power of God (not of them selves) Baptize Believers with
the holy Ghost, as proved also by W. P. Lastly because we no where read, when
the Apostles used Water in outward Baptism, they followed the terms of that
Commission (as they ought to have done had they understood it Water) by doing
it in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; But did it in the name of
the Lord, or Lord Jesus, in which last form, practicers of Water Baptism in our
day would (we suppose) not think it rightly performed. Now for these reasons
(with others, which for brevity we omit) we have no ground at all to believe
that Water was commanded by that commission; but on the contrary that the
Baptism of Christ by his Spirit, was intended thereby; consequently then what
the Apostles did in use of Water must be practice and not Institution, as were
the many legal Rites, Circumcision, Purifications, Vows, Shavings, etc. which
we find they also practiced as well as Water Baptism, even after they had
received the holy Ghost. Farther we do not find any of the Apostles mentioning
Water Baptism, to be any part of their mission, nor yet recommending the
practice of it, in their Epistles to any of the gathered Churches in the first
settlement, though they do far lesser things then (some in our day account of)
Water Baptism, and since they are silent therein, we may well conclude, that
their practice in that of Water was not from that command, Matt. 28. 19. but on
the same foot they did those other Legal things before mentioned: Nay we find
that great Apostle Paul was so far from believing Water Baptism to be any part
of his commission, that he not only thanks God he Baptized no more of the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. 14. but adds in the. 17. Verse. He was not sent to
Baptize. Again although he writ an Epistle to the Ephesians, and in Acts 20 tells
them, he had not shuned to declare unto them all the counsel of God, Yet not a
word of a Command for Water Baptism. But on the other hand speaks of, and
recommends in several Epistles the one Baptism of the Spirit, see, Ephesians. 4. 5. 1
Cor. 12. 13. Gal. 3. 27. Thus then the Bp's. second reason, that Water was
commanded by that commission falls with his first. Reader, be pleased to mind,
that in what we have said upon this head about Baptism, and shall say next upon
the Supper, is not at all intended for a full discussion of these two points,
only as direct Answers to the Bp's. Objections, Not seeing any need at present
for such a Treatise, in regard great part of W. P's. Arguments upon those two
heads (in thirty Pages of his Defense) lie unanswered by the Bp. and in
particular that of Infant Baptism, which was a main and pressing point for the
Bp. to have cleared, though we do not find he has taken the least notice of it in
his Reply: and after all the Bp's. great talk of a divine authority for Water
Baptism, 'twill be hard for him, nay beyond his power, either to find Command
or Example from Scripture for what he calls Baptism. When Water was used in
primitive times they Repented, Believed, and were Baptized (that is dipped or
plunged.) Now Infants, neither capable of good or evil are sprinkled on the
Face with a little Water, a mere humane Invention; and as we find no command or
Example in Scripture for such a practice, so neither do we know how it can be
called Baptism at all; and as this is the Bp's. Case, till he had proved, or at
least vindicated his own practice by Scripture, from whence he pretends to judge
the Quakers, we think he ought to have been more sparing in his charges against
them. Reader, if any Objections remain in thy mind, with respect to these heads
of Baptism and the Supper, we refer thee to W. P's. Defense and R. B's. Apology
who largely treat on these Subjects. -- And to draw toward a conclusion upon
the Bp's. two Reasons, since it has appeared by W. P's. Defense
(notwithstanding any thing the Bp. has urged to the contrary) that the Apostles
did by the power of God, and as instruments in his hand, Baptize Believers with
the holy Ghost, and since it does not appear (nor can be proved) Water was
intended by that commission, Matt. 28. 19. It therefore follows, that the Bp's.
two substantial Reasons (as he calls them) falls to the ground. A little more
we have from the Bp. about Baptism, and then for the present shall have done
with this head.

(P. 18.) The Bp. tells us W. P. full well knows the Church of England Men no
more allow Water Baptism to be sufficient to the Salvation of Adult Persons,
without the New Creature, or Baptism of the Spirit, then he does.

Answ. (1st.) If not to Adult Persons, we Query whether the Bp. thinks Water
Baptism is sufficient to the Salvation of Infants. (2ly.) Since the Baptism of
the Spirit is an inward work, and the means there, how does this agree with
what the Bp. says (p. 23.) That people are now made holy by the use of outward
means, etc. Let the Bp. reconcile these if he can.

The Next is about the outward Supper in the use of Bread and Wine, and the Bp.
begins with citing no Page, as well as stepping over five Pages at once of W.
P's. Defense, though afterward he looks back to carp at the words [Wine from
Heaven] Reader see the Defense. p. 92. to 107. and compare with the Bp's.
Reply, how little of fifteen Pages the Bp. has answered, as well as the former
about Baptism; but perhaps the greatest part, which lies unanswered, are little
Cavils and poor Evasions with him, though we don't believe, they will be so to
the Impartial Reader, This is, we confess, a compendious way as the Bp. told us.

P. 18. It stands, (says the Bp.) (viz. the Supper) upon the same immovable
foundation with the Baptism, etc.

Answ. 'Twill then follow if the Bp's. Foundation for Water Baptism be not
sound, as has been shown above, it is not, this of the Supper must be the
same. But the Bp. proceeds with a heavy charge and exclamation against W. P. as
if he were not only guilty of a mistake, but in all appearance, (as he says) of
wilful prevarication in misreporting his words, that he might have something to
except against; for says the Bp. of W. P. the Bp. will have this Supper four
times repeated in the New Testament. -- Whereas the Bp. tells us his words
respected the command for the Supper, and not the Supper it self: and in
conclusion of his Paragraph ends with a Question thus, Is there not a vast
difference betwixt these two assertions, This Supper was four times repeated,
and the command for the Supper is four times repeated, which last was most
evidently the Bp's. sense? Thus the Bp.

Answ. It Is certainly a great lessening to the Bp. to make so great a noise, to
so little purpose, from whence we conclude, that either the Bp. hoped to amuse
his Reader by being so Critical about a word, or else he was very short sighted
in his Argument in rendering W. P. guilty of wilful prevarication, while the
Bp. overlookt his plain words, as well as sense, in what followed. It Is true W.
P. mentions the Supper, as the Bp. says, four times repeated, but nothing can
be plainer then that he intended the command for the Supper, while immediately
after he has the word command several times over, in relation to the Supper:
pray Reader, see his Defense (p. 97.) Now let us see, what something W. P.
could get against the Bp. by his (supposed) wilful prevarication, (had he
intended the Supper and not the command for the Supper) surely say we nothing;
nay so far from getting, that had he insisted thereon, he would have lost his
Argument thereby; for 'tho the Supper may be four times mentioned, the Command
for the Supper is not four times mentioned; so then if W. P. had argued, that
the Supper was not four times repeated, he had argued against himself. Now,
Reader, judge in the matter, what could the Bp's. end be in spending a large
Paragraph on this occasion to fasten (as the Bp. says, in all appearance)
wilful prevarication upon W. P.

Having cleared W. P. from the Bp's. Charge, which was without ground, let us
now see, whether W. P's. charge of a mistake, will not fall upon him doubled,
with good ground. The Bp. has asserted in his Testimony, the command for the
Supper was four times repeated in the New Testament, which in that Paper runs
thus, Can any command be more express then This Do in remembrance of me; four
times repeated in the New Testament.

Answ. We must tell the Bp. (as W. P. did) it must be his mistake thus to
assert, while we cannot find the command so repeated, (as the Bp. says) in all
the New Testament, for, as W. P. said, we must say over again, that which looks
most like a command is in Luke. 22. 19. (to the present Disciples) where he has
those words, Do this in remembrance of me? the other Evangelists, Matthew and
Mark, give only a relation of the Supper, without those words, and John says
nothing of it at all. Then as to Paul he comes, 1 Cor. 11. and gives the
Corinthians a rehearsal thereof, upon their great abuse of that practice, in
such words as do not import a command, but as often as they used it, they
showed forth the Lords Death till he came; his words cannot be called a
command: But supposing (not allowing) they could, yet the Bp. must still be at
a loss, to find the command for the Supper four times repeated in these words,
Do this in remembrance of me? Because we do not find them but three times
expressly mentioned in all the Scriptures; and but one of those times, can
reasonably be called a command at all; if so it was not repeated at all: nor
will the Bp's. Argument that the command was four times repeated hold good,
unless he prove it five times mentioned, and so we leave it upon the Bp. and
proceed.

Ibid. 18. Says the Bp. of W. P. he proceeds to what is more dangerous (meaning
then the prevarication) plainly to diffuse his Poison, this coming of Christ
was Spiritual.

Answ. We must needs say it is a very uncharitable expression without cause, and
if it were such Poisonous Doctrine, why did not the Bp. confute the substantial
Scripture Arguments, by which W. P. proved his Assertion, which he ought to
have done, before he used such an expression; But that the Bp. has not done,
unless carping at words and reviling him be doing it, as will appear in what
follows. And first he begins with reproaching W. P. for paraphrasing upon these
Texts, Matt. 26. 29. Mark. 14. 25. Luke 22. 18. where Christ told his
Disciples, He would drink no more of the fruit of the Vine, till he drank it
new with them in the Kingdom of Heaven; upon which W. P. paraphrased and called
Christ bread and Wine from Heaven. See his Defense (p. 98.) whereupon the Bp.
reviles (according to his usual way) and tells him, that he and his Brethren
uses to make, and wrest Scripture, etc. By Mr. P's. favor (says the Bp.) the
Scripture no where styles Christ Wine from Heaven.

Answ. If we had dealt thus with the Bp. for downright perversions and wresting
Scripture (as we have before proved) as he has done W. P. without reason or
ground, we must tell the Bp. we should have treated him at another rate then we
have done. But to the matter. Where did W. P. say the Scripture so said? he
only drew a natural consequence from the words of Christ, and the Text it self
is so plain, that it needs no comment to prove W. P's. paraphrase thereon: for
what drink or Wine was that which was to be drank in the Kingdom of Heaven, but
Wine from Heaven? and who was Wine from Heaven? but Christ? who as he promised
to drink with them, so he promised, Revelations, 3. 20. to Sup with those that
opened their hearts unto him: Now who but a Man that wanted matter and was
willing to take occasion to revile would Carp, etc. as the Bp. did, more
especially, while Christ is called a Vine, Bread from Heaven, Water, etc. with
a multitude of other Metaphorical Appellations in Scripture, and had the Bp.
been so well acquainted with the comfortable presence of Christ, as a truly
Spiritual Man (which he pretends to be) Really is, etc. he would never have
reviled W. P. as he did on that account.

P. 19. The Bp. goes on telling us the Apostles continued the use of Bread and
Wine after Christ was Spiritually come; therefore says he, this showing forth
his Death till he came, was not by them understood of his inward and Spiritual
appearance, but of his second coming to Judgment; for in that Case feeling so
fully, his being come in their hearts, they would have desisted.

Answ. Although the Apostles did feel Christ Spiritually come into their hearts,
and might also see no real Necessity for keeping up this practice; yet it does
not therefore follow, they would have presently desisted for these or the Like
Reasons. 1st. Because they might think it needful to indulge the weak and
carnal minded Christians among them, who wanted such a sign to keep up their
minds in remembrance of Christ's Blood, which was shed for them; and that such
weak and carnal believers were among them appears plainly by the sharp and
reprehensive expressions in the Epistles writ by the Apostles to some of them;
likewise it plainly appears by Scripture, that although Christ was come in Spirit
to some, he was not so come in Spirit to others, who yet waited for his coming,
see James 5. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 1. 7. Secondly, this practice might be continued
among them, were it only that we find it contributed to keep up a Brotherly
Fellowship and Communion in the Infancy of the Church, which appears from, Acts
2. 46. and they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking
Bread from House to House, did eat their meat with gladness, and singleness of
Heart. And here we may a little compare the present practice of those, who use
this Ceremony, with those in the primitive times (because the Bp. has something
of it) Their Breaking Bread was joined with Eating their Meat, quite contrary
to the practice now adays, and not only in that, but other respects they
disagree, as W. P. has noted. Again how widely do they differ in their
opinions of the thing it self, it is now called and believed by the Papists to
be the very Body and Blood of Christ, and the Protestants in the use of outward
Bread and Wine, say that the Body and Blood of Christ is in a Spiritual manner
partaken of under that sign, whereas in the primitive times, the use and extent
thereof, as Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 11. was in remembrance of and showing forth
Christ's Death till he came, which we believe was Spiritual, in relation to that
sign. (3ly.) Why might not the Apostles as well continue in the practice of
this sign (after Christ was Spiritually come in their Hearts) as in the
practice of Circumcision, Purifications, Vows, Shavings and other legal rites;
many Instances of which appear plain in Scripture, which we might Instance but
shall be brief and tell the Reader, that what we have and shall write on this
head is not intended for a Treatise thereof, only as in Answer to the Bp's.
Objections, referring the Reader as before to W. P's. Defense and R. B's.
Apology, who largely treats of this Subject. The Bp. proceeds,

Ibid. 19. To invalidate W. P's. allegation that Baptism and the Supper were
not made an Article of any of the Ancient Creeds, and thereupon tells W. P.
thus, he has forgot or was never Catechized as he ought to have been, or
forgotten what he was taught to be the meaning of that Article, I believe the
holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints; that is in short (says the Bp.)
I believe all the faithful are made one body by communion in the same Faith,
Covenant and Ordinances of Worship, especially Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Answ. Is it not very strange that the Bp. who in p. 3. tells Mr. P. (as he
called him) as to his Paper once for all, implication of Faith is not a
profession of Faith, and not only so, but would almost unchristian us, for not
being more explicit in that Paper (Gospel Truths) should now tell us by
believing the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, that the points
in Question namely Baptism and the Supper, etc. are employed: We must needs tell
him, and all may see that either he assumes a Latitude to himself by a strange
sort of implication, far beyond what he will allow W. P. and the Quakers, or it
must be confessed that Water Baptism and the outward Supper (and which we think
is undeniable) are not made an Article in that Confession, and consequently his
Proof falls to the ground with his Assertion. But as to the true Catholic
Church, and the Communion of Saints, we can readily subscribe to the Article,
and do truly own the Communion of Saints but deny it consists in eating outward
Bread and drinking outward Wine, while we suppose, the Bp. himself will not
deny, that very Wicked and Ungodly Men have partaken of the outward sign,
whereas we say none can truly partake of the Communion of Saints, but those who
are truly such, and which consists in Spiritual participation of the Body and
Blood of Christ, according to John 6. 35. 1 Cor. 10. 16. 2 Cor. 13. 14.

P. 20. The Bp's. next Instance is no more to the purpose then the last he
tells us in the Constantinopolitan Creed (compiled about the Year 379. or 380.
when rebaptizing Heretics had turmoiled the Church) it is expressed, I believe
one Catholic Church, I acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of Sins, that
is (says the Bp.) persons being once Baptized, and thereby ingrafted into the
Church ought not to be Baptized again, which is the true sense of one Baptism,
and not what Mr. P. suggests.

Answ. The Bp. who so much faulted W. P. p. 14. for not citing Treatise or
Page, does as before take the same liberty again in this Citation. But suppose
we should allow what he has here cited, which we do not, how will the
acknowledging one Baptism, the occasion mentioned by the Bp. prove his point?
he brought this for an Ancient Creed, and as such we might expect his proof,
that Water Baptism and the Supper were made an Article therein; whereas there
is no word of the Supper expressed, nor yet implied that we can perceive. In
short then this Instance falls with the first. Then as to his saying Persons
once Baptized, etc. is the true sense of the one Baptism and not what Mr. P.
suggests. Please, Reader, to view W. P's. Defense, p. 85, 86. and see whether
what W. P. says be his own Suggestions: On the contrary W. P. cites Ephesians. 4.
5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; which one Baptism he plainly proves by
several Scripture Arguments, to be the one saving Baptism of Christ by the holy
Ghost: The Bp. is out if he thinks his bare Assertion against W. P. will pass
for proof, while he is silent to all the Arguments advanced by W. P. The Bp.
should have remembered he told us, p. 18. that Water Baptism without the New
Creature or Baptism of the Spirit was not sufficient to the Salvation of adult
Persons (or words to the same effect) which bespeak two Baptisms, when the
Apostle tells us Ephesians. 4. 5. but of one Baptism, and if but one, that not in^ as
Water is, but the saving Baptism of the Spirit as was plainly prov^^ ^y W. P.
This considered, how could the Bp. now affirm that Persons once Baptized (i. e.
with Water) is the true sense of one Baptism, since himself confesses Water
Baptism is not sufficient to Salvation, etc. We suppose he will hardly say,
being once Baptized with Water produces the Baptism of the Spirit, and so
makes the one Baptism, if not it is worth his Consideration how to reconcile
his Assertions in these two places with the Apostles one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5.

Now to the Bp's. third and last proof about the Ancient Creeds, in which the
Bp. Cites not only Treatise and Page but part of the Articles too, but omits
the main part of all, namely the Year; we must tell the Bp. this will make no
more to his purpose then the former proofs; for though we should allow the
Citations true, and that they are from the poor Waldenses (whom W. P. commends
for the good Qualifications he found in them,) Yet this Creed is too late to be
accounted ancient, as in the time of Vladislaus King of Hungary, the first King
of that name, according to Heylen's Cosmogr: which was in the Year 1440. and
the second in 1491. but whether we are right in the time or not, yet it is so
late that it is rank Popery to assert, as the Bp. has laid it down. viz. No Man
is saved who eats not the body of Christ, which body is not consecrated but in
the Church and by a Priest. Again, that none are saved unless Baptized, and
that Infants are saved by Baptism.

The Bp. was much in the right to question what authority W. P. would allow the
Waldenses in this Creed, (supposing it theirs) To be sure say we none; Nor will
he allow it to be ancient any more then those made in the dark time of Popery,
and therefore this proof also falls with the rest; and if we should ask the Bp.
himself what authority he would allow the Waldenses in this Creed, will he
undertake to vindicate it from point blank Popery? we suppose nay. -- As to
what the Bp. says of Tradition, and consent of all Nations, that will come
under consideration in what follows.

Ibid. (20.) The Bp. frames an Argument upon those two heads, viz. Baptism and
the Supper, to prove us outwardly no Christians, though in so doing he must bring
himself under like circumstances in a parallel case.

Ibid. (20.) The Bp. says to renounce or cast off the outward badges of the
profession of Christianity, which our Lord Christ instituted, and his Apostles
delivered, and which the Apostolical Churches received, and constantly
practiced, which all Christian Churches ever since has held to, is to renounce
or to cast off the outward profession of Christianity, but Mr. P. and his party
renounce or cast off those outward badges of the profession of Christianity,
which Christ Jesus appointed and his Apostles delivered, which the Apostolical
Churches received, and constantly practiced, which all Christian Churches have
ever since held to, therefore Mr. P. and his party have renounced or cast off
the outward profession of Christianity, that is outwardly are no Christians; as
to their hearts the Bp. leaves them to God and judges not.

Answ. The Bp. in this Argument takes that for granted which we do not own,
namely that outward Baptism and the Supper, were to be continued down in the
Churches, as Institutions of Christ, as also that they are the outward badges
of the profession of Christianity, which we do not allow, the contrary having
been proved by W. P. in his Defense, and others of our Friends who have writ on
that subject: We observe although the Bp. continues to clal them outward Badges,
yet he omits to call them Seals, as he did in his Testimony, which to us seems
to be the effect of W. P's. Defense, and with more reason it may be attributed
thereto, then the effect attributed by the Bp. to his own Paper upon W. P. as
before noted.

But to this faulty and long Argument, may not we by a parallel Argument make
the Bp. and his party outwardly no Christians, while they difuse other things
no less (if not more) positively commanded in holy Scripture: Thus our Lord
Jesus Christ the very same night he eat the Supper, John 13. 4. to 15. rose
from Supper and with more Ceremony washed his Disciples feet saying, Verse. 14.
If I then you Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one
another feet. Verse. 15. For I have given you an Example, that ye should do as
I have done unto you. This seems to us as plain a command for this practice, as
that for Bread and Wine, and more plain then for Water Baptism, because Water
is not mentioned in the Commission, (and this command we find was put in
practice: See 1 Timothy 5. 10. and recommended as a virtue in a Widow) nor was
this only an Example of Humility and Love (true Badges of Christianity) but had
a signification of an inward cleansing as appears from the words of Christ upon
Peter's refusal, John 13. 8. If I wash thee not thou have no part in me. Again,
Acts 15. 29. The Churches were expressly commanded, as the mind of the holy
Ghost, to abstain from blood and things strangled. Again the Believers were
enjoined, Jam. 5. 14. that the sick should be anointed with Oil in the name of
the Lord. Now from these instances, we form a parallel argument thus, To
renounce, disuse, or cast off the positive Institutions and Commands which our
Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles delivered, and no doubt the primitive
Christians in obedience thereunto practiced, is to renounce and cast off the
outward profession of Christianity; But the late Bp. of Cork and his party have
renounced, cast off or disused the washing of feet, the abstaining from blood
and things strangled, and the anointing the Sick with Oil in the name of the
Lord, which things our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles instituted and
commanded. -- Therefore the late Bp. of Cork and his party are outwardly no
Christians, etc.

We take this to be a plain parallel argument and by which the Bp. and his
party are as much unchristianed as he Renders the Quakers by his, while he can
find no express repeal in Scripture for these things. -- And yet at the same
time we neither believe, he or they for the disuse of these things, nor we for
the other, ought or can be unchristian'd, for we believe they are all ceased
alike. If the Bp. say, those were temporary things (with as good ground) we say
the like of the other; If they say the repeal of blood and things strangled are
implied, where the Apostle tells us Coll. 2. 16. we are not to be judged in
Meat or Drink, etc. And that the Kingdom of God consists not in Meat and Drink,
Romans 14. 17. We say the same of outward Bread and Wine, being Meat and Drink;
In our argument, we have not included the constant practice of all Churches as
the Bp. does in his, because we do not depend upon the verity of Tradition, (as
the Bp. seems to do) although we understand that two of those instances we have
given, are still practiced after a manner by the Church of Rome, from whence we
suppose, he will not deny he derives the continued practice of Bread and Wine,
though he declines the other: But as to the practice of Christian Churches
(instanced by the Bp.) how greatly do they differ in their use as well as in
their belief of the thing it self, while there is none of all sorts (nay not
the Bp. himself) that follows the primitive practice, in the use of the outward
Supper, as we have hinted before, and W. P's. Defense has more fully shown;
how then can we depend upon tradition? and thus we end about the Supper.

P. 21. The last point of moment (says the Bp.) in Mr. P's. Book yet remaining
untoucht, is the great Difference or ground of dissent betwixt the Quakers and
Established Church, and this Mr. P. tells us, is the great carnality and
emptiness both of Ministers and People. Upon which the Bp. in return upon the
Quakers goes on thus.

Ibid. (21.) -- The Bp. hereby enforced speak out, he says then that if eating
the fat and drinking the choicest be carnallity. -- There is nothing to be
eaten that is better then ordinary, that comes in to our markets here, which
the People observe not presently bought up by the Quakers, they are still the
earliest and best chapmen every Market day, for such commodities, and much good
may they do them. -- And so concludes this as under the Title of carnallity and
in the number of Scandalous Instances.

Answ. If the Bp. in speaking out had spoke more to the purpose we think he had
come off with more credit, for certainly it is mean stuff for a Bp. to help to
stuff his Book with all, and in an Instance too, that if there be Scandal in it
perhaps he may be concerned beyond any Quaker in Ireland, (or for what we know
in England) while it is believed his Table is supplied with varieties beyond any
of theirs (though perhaps his eager pursuit after the Quakers made him forget
that part, or else thinks he ought to have a dispensation beyond them) But does
the Bp. go to Market himself, or does he write upon reports? if upon report,
does it become him to write to the Defamation of any people upon bare report,
which for ought he knows may be false, and we know is false as he states it?
for the Quakers of Cork, whom as we take it he means, by the word here, deny
they are still the earliest Chapmen; yet that some of them go with others at
the common market time no doubt is true, and where is the Scandal or Carnality
of it? if there be any the Bp. must be concerned in it, since (if it be true as
we are informed) his Caterer has been observed to be generally one of the first
there, though we will not say as the Bp. does, still the earliest, because some
extraordinary thing might occasion his coming later then usual, and by that
means perhaps miss a piece of meat for his Lord, (as he styled him) which
perhaps a Quaker (or some other) had bought before, which we will not say was
the occasion of this reflection, but probable enough it was so -- Well, but the
Bp. says we are the best Chapmen, and comes off with much good may they do
them. Then say we to the first, the Butchers have no reason to complain of us,
and to the last, what ever good he would have the meat do us it is plain he did
not intend the story in kindness, while he makes it a Scandalous Instance. Now
as to our eating and drinking, we hope we do it in the fear of God, and in
moderation, let the Bp. say what he will; and if the Bp's. aptness to vilify
the Quakers had not been uppermost and most prevalent with him he might with a
great deal more ease, have found those nearer to him then the Quakers, who are
guilty of great Excesses, as riotous Feasting, Drunkeness, Sporting, Games,
Plays, Pride, Wantonness, with many such like things that appear (but too
plain) to be gross carnality, and which behoved the Bp. to see his own Flock
more clear of, before he had brought this Instance to prove the Quakers guilty
of Carnality.

We would have the Reader observe that the Bp. in this page. 21. (which we are
now upon) had made a mixture of Interwoven charges, which we could not so
regularly answer without bringing the parts of each charge together (which lay
distant) as we did in the foregoing instance of carnality, so we do now in that
of his Charging us with worldliness. Thus,

If minding worldly gain (says the Bp.) and being so intent on it Day and
Night; as to pass most days in the week without a Prayer to God, either in
public Assembly or private Family; if the sliest ways, both to get Money and
to keep it be worldliness, he knows no sort of People according to the degree
of each given to those vices more then the Quakers: (and again at the end of
that page goes on thus.) -- And indeed how they should be a heavenly minded
People who so much restrain Prayer, that is lay aside, forbear or neglect it as
to common practice, (at least have done so) till of very late Years.

Answ. If charges were proofs in these and other Instances, the Bp. had no
doubt made us some of the worst of People, but to be reviled and abused without
cause has fallen to our lot, which we may not strange at since it was the lot
of the Apostles and primitive Christians from the Men of that age, and more
especially from the chief Priests. Now as to that gross and uncharitable
reflection upon our getting Money, we have already spoken to it before, so it
needs no farther answer here; But that we appeal to the Searcher of Hearts, who
best knows whether we have preferred, or regarded worldly things above the
things of God.

But as to Prayer, we say it is a false charge, that we ever did, either for
worldly gain, or upon any other account Restrain, Neglect, or lay aside Prayer,
either of late Years or from the beginning. Indeed if the Bp. means the many
set forms of Prayer made ready to our hands by Men, he is in the right, in
saying we neglect them, (though not to get worldly gain) and hope we shall do so
to the end, and we tell him, if such formal Prayers would make Men better
Christians, and more acceptable to God, there is a Church that perhaps far
exceeds his for multitude of Prayers, namely that of Rome. But as to the
Quakers, they firmly believe no Prayer is acceptable to God unless performed by
and through the assistance of his holy Spirit, which does not only consist in
Vocal but Mental Prayer, according to Romans 8. 26. We know not what we should
Pray for, as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us, with
groanings which cannot be uttered. Again 1 Cor. 14. 15. I will Pray with the
Spirit, etc. -- This sort of Prayer we dearly own, and to Gods praise without
boasting we can say, we have had and still have it frequently among us, not
only in our public Meetings, but also in private Families, both Vocally and
Internally, and not only so, but we are taught by the help of the Spirit to
Pray in Spirit every where, according to 1 Timothy 2. 8. as well in our Business
and Callings as in our public Assemblies.

Ibid. (21.) The Bp. says he could mention more Scandalous Particulars or
Instances, both of carnality and worldliness among them, but it is not agreeable
to his Temper. For a Man to say the worst he can, (which we suppose the Bp. has
done, and more than is true, and then pretends he could say more, is, we think,
a ^ye way of slander and bespeaks no good temper.

Again, (the Bp. p. 22.) Let Mr. P. then know, whatsoever Men's seize may
be, its not good so much to boast of their being Spiritual.

Answ. God he knows we boast not, (nor have we any thing whereof to boast) as
of our selves, but may we not without boasting as David did, Psalm. 66. 17. Tell
others what God has done for our Souls. And having by good experience
witnessed the good and blessed effects of the Light, Grace and Spirit of God
upon our Souls; shall we not in the love of God call and invite others
thereunto? surely we may, and if for these things we are accounted boasters, we
must and shall be content to bear this reproach with the rest.

Ibid. (22.) To speak, says the Bp. to the true Notion of Spirituality, such
Spiritual Persons as Mr. P. pretends to be, and as the Apostle speaks of, 1
Cor. 11. (but we supose he intended) 1 Cor. 2. the place so much insisted, on
by Mr. P. and ever and anon alluded to by him and his followers: Neither Mr. P.
is, nor any Person that we know now living; Namely they can none of them Preach
in demonstration of the Spirit and Power. Verse. 4. They have not (says the Bp.)
those extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit to speak with tongues, and Prophecy,
heal the Diseased; And so the Bp. goes on to other miraculous Gifts and
Revelations of the Spirit, which the Apostles had. -- And in p. 23. adds, this
kind of Spiritual Men are ceased.

Answ. It would take up much time and Paper to be so large upon these
Objections of the Bp's. as we could be, to show how that through the coming in
of the Apostasy Men became outside and nominal Christians, by forsaking and
neglecting the inward guidance of the Grace and Spirit of God, and instead
thereof set up outward Forms, and Prescriptions of Men: But we shall be brief,
and only and this, that God in his infinite goodness is bringing his Church out
of the Wilderness, and from the teachings of Man, to the teachings of his good
Spirit. But to proceed.

First. As to such extraordinary and Miraculous Gifts of the Spirit, as of
healing the Diseased, and speaking with tongues which the Apostles had, we
shall at present only return the Bp. the same answer, which the first
Protestants usually gave the Papists, who demanded a confirmation of their New
Doctrine (as they termed it) by Miracles; to which the Protestants replied that
they Preached no New Gospel, but the same which was confirmed before by
Miracles, and therefore needed no new ones to confirm it; and also that John
the Baptist with many of the Prophets, though immediately and extraordinarily
called, yet did no Miracles that we read of; and the same answer may serve for
us, while we have always been ready to confirm our Doctrine by holy Scripture:
but although such extraordinary Gifts of Tongues, etc. are ceased, yet it does
not therefore follow, we ought to neglect the inward teachings and dictates of
the holy Spirit of God, which is given to Christians, as a standing perpetual
rule, and more immediate guide under the New Covenant to walk by, and without
which they cannot rightly perform their duty to God, as we have shown before.
(p. 54.) As to that Text, 1 Cor. 13. 8. brought by the Bp. It Is plain those
Gifts there mentioned were to cease, by giving way to what was more excellent,
more perfect; see p. 10. 11, 12. following verse. and not by being succeeded by
what is more carnal, and destitute of the Spirit; but leaving this at present
we shall attend the Bp's. Objection, which relates to the Ministry, viz. that
none can now Preach in the Demonstration of the Spirit and power.

To which we answer, If that were so, then none can preach as the Oracles of
God, nor in preaching be beneficial to the People, since the holy Scripture
tells us, that the Spirit is a necessary and essential qualification to
constitute a Minister of Christ which we shall prove, (1st.) from Jesus Christ
himself, when he gave the Apostles that commission Matt. 28. 19. to Preach, he
tells them thus, Verse. 20. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I
have commanded you, and lo I am with you always, even to the end of the World.
We hope none will be so trifling as to say, this Command extended only to the
Apostles, if any so weak (to think so) then the foregoing Verse. 19. about
Baptizing (which they suppose Water) must likewise extend no farther; but
supposing none so weak, thus to object, yet some may Query how was Christ to be
with his Ministers to the end of the world? Was it not by the holy Scripture,
the outward means now left to Christians? To this we answer, 'twas by his
Spirit, which we prove from Christ's ^wn words, John 14. 16. I will pray the
Father and he shall give you another comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever. Verse. 17. Even the Spirit of truth, he dwells with you and shall be in
you. Ver. 26. The comforter, the holy Ghost he shall teach you all things
(says Christ) John 15. 5. Without me (says Christ) ye can do nothing: from
these with more Texts of Scripture, it is plain that Christ by his Spirit was to
be with his truly constituted Ministers to the end of the World, by whom they
were taught all things, and without whom they could do nothing, and pursuant to
that commission and promise of Christ, the Apostles were called,
commissionated, and did Preach by the Spirit, according to 2 Cor. 3. 6. Gall.
1. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 2. 4. and we do not find the Apostles did confine the Spirit
to themselves only, but did recommend the same Gift of the Spirit as the
necessary qualification to the constituting a Minister of the Gospel. (thus) 1
Peter 4. 10, 11. As every Man has received the Gift, even so minister the same
one to another as good stewards of the manifold Grace of God. If any Man speak
let him speak as the Oracles of God; If any Man minister, let him do it as of
the ability which God gives, that God in all things may be Glorified. Which we
take to be as much as if he had said none ought to speak or minister about the
things of God, but by the Gift of his holy Spirit, and who ever does not so
speak or minister cannot in so doing do it to the Glory of God. We could cite
more Scriptures to the same purpose, which for brevity sake we omit: these may
suffice to show that whoever pretends to be a Minister of Christ, cannot be
truly such without the Qualification of and being Commissionated by the holy
Ghost: And as to the Bp's. saying, that W. P. nor none can now Preach in
demonstration of the Spirit and Power, it is but his bare assertion, and more
then he can prove. -- But as to the Bp's. part, we may be sure he cannot so
Preach since he denies it to all, and while he thus asserts, he will do well to
consider, how he came by his Ministry, since Christ promised to be with his
Ministers to the end of the World, and that his Spirit was to continue with and
in them for ever; from which Gift of his Spirit, they were to speak (according
to the Apostle) as the Oracles of God, which to be sure cannot be but in
demonstration of the Spirit and Power. -- Having thus Proved the Spirit to be a
necessary Qualification to the constituting a Minister of Christ, we now come
to consider the Bp's. outward way to Holiness and Spirituallity, in which we
shall find him as much out of the way as in the last. The Bp. Proceeds.

P. (23.) People are now made holy by the use of outward means and grow up in
Grace by degrees, yet in both cases, as to Gifts as well as Holiness, there are
those, who by Analogy and Proportion, may still be termed Spiritual, that is,
there are persons, who by study and industry attain to speak with tongues, etc.
Others who having from the holy Scriptures, which were indicted by the Spirit of
God, learnt the mind of the Spirit, and being in their hearts persuaded of the
Truths and Duties they have thence learnt, and felt their Soul strongly moved
by the Power of the Spirit under the Ministry of the Word, to the performance
of such Duties, have yielded themselves and submitted to the Conduct of the
holy Ghost leading them by Scripture into all truth, as well as Holiness. Thus,
Reader, we have given thee this long Citation of the Bp's. that his own words
may fully speak his mind.

Answ. The Bp. has here asserted upon his own authority and without proof,
that People are now made holy by the use of outward means, and that there are
those, who by Study and industry attain to speak with tongues, may be termed
Spiritual: But contrary hereunto the holy Scriptures do abundantly prove, viz.
That People are made holy and Spiritual by inward means, as we shall plainly
show, only before we proceed we will here again give the holy Scriptures their
due place, and allow them to be whatsoever they say of themselves, according to
these or any other Texts, Romans 15, 4. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. believing them to
be the best Writings extant in the World, and we love honor and esteem them
beyond all others, and are so far from laying them aside as useless, that we
say they are instrumental, a furtherance and help to Believers in the work of
the Lord; but then we say it is through Faith which is the fruit of the Spirit,
Gal. 5. 22. And thus they furnished the Man of God, 2 Timothy 3. 17. for so he was
to be, that received those benefits by them; and we are so far from excluding
the holy Scriptures from being helpful and beneficial to us, that we exclude
not other outward and instrumental means, as Preaching, etc. But still we say
it is by the Gift of the holy Spirit, by the illumination of which (and as the
foundation) all outward means become beneficial and serviceable to us; and
thus, Acts 16. 14. -- Lydia -- Whose heart the Lord opened that she attended
unto the things which were spoken by Paul. Here 'twas the Lord opened the heart
of Lydia, by which means as the efficient cause Paul's preaching became
effectual to her; thus much briefly as to the holy Scriptures. Now to the Bp's.
words before Cited, wherein he has asserted, that People are now made holy by
the use of outward means, and from the Scriptures learnt the mind of the
Spirit. Whereas we say the principal agent and by which People are made holy,
is the Grace and Spirit of God, which we now come to prove by Scripture. Thus,
1 John 2. 27. But the anointing ye have received, abides in you, and ye need
not that any Man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all
things, Romans 1. 19. But that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for
God has showed it unto them. Again, 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7. 1 Cor. 2. 12. 1 Cor. 6.
19. Romans 8. 9. And wicked Men also has this Gift and means in themselves, though
they will not make use of it nor regard it: Thus the Slothful Servant, Matt.
25. 18. had a Talent though he made no use of it, and the Pharisees, the worst of
Christ's enemies, Luke 17. 21. had the Kingdom of Heaven within them. Thus
having shown (by a few of the many Texts we could produce) the means to be
inward; we now come to prove People are made holy by this inward means, viz.
the Gift of the holy Spirit. -- Romans 8. 13. If ye through the Spirit do
mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live; but if ye live after the Flesh
ye shall die, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. -- Neither Fornicators, Idolators, Adulterors, --
Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners, -- and such were some of
you, but ye are washed, Sanctified, Justified in the name of our Lord Jesus and
by the Spirit of our God, Ephesians. 4. 7. Unto every one is given Grace, according
to the measure of the Gift of Christ, Titus 2. 11. The Grace of God that
brings Salvation has appeared unto all Men, teaching us that denying
ungodliness and Worldly Lusts we should live soberly, righteously, and godlily
in this present World. Ephesians. 5. 9, 10. The fruit of the Spirit is all Goodness,
Righteousness, and Truth. Again John 16. 13. the Spirit was to guide into all
truth; then the Children of God were to be led by his Spirit, and none were
his, but such as was guided thereby, Romans 8. 9, 14. In short it is needless to
bring more of the numerous Scripture Testimonies which might be cited to prove
this point, but these may suffice to show that People are made holy by the
Grace and Spirit of God within Men and not by outward means, as the Bp. has
asserted, and the same way they are made holy, they are likewise made
Spiritual, it being impossible to be a holy Man without being Spiritual, see
Romans 8. 6. To be Spiritually minded is life and peace. -- And the way whereby
Men become Spiritual is by the Spirit of God according to 1 Cor. 2. 10. to 15.
But contrary hereunto the Bp tells us, There are those who by Analogy and
Proportion may be still termed Spiritual; that is there are persons who by
study and industry attain to speak with tongues, etc. We ask then, whether
wicked Men who have attained to speak with tongues, are not of the number of
the B'ps. Spiritual Men? and whether his definition of Spiritual Men is not
such as natural Men may attain unto? As to the Bp's. telling us of the power of
the Spirit, and again, the conduct of the holy Ghost leading them by Scripture
into all Truth, as well as holiness, He must not be displeased if we tell him,
that we know no such language in holy Scripture, as leading by Scripture into
all Truth: On the contrary, the Scriptures themselves do ascribe Holiness and
Truth to the Spirit directly, as we have shown, to which purpose, we will add one
Text here, John 16. 13. when he, (the Spirit of Truth) is come he will guide
you into all Truth; but upon what ground or with what reason can the Bp. speak
of the Spirit and the holy Ghost? when he first told us, People are now made
holy by the use of outward means, And from the Scriptures have learnt the mind
of the Spirit, whereas the work of the Spirit is within, as we have already
proved. If he shall retract, and tell us, as the holy Scripture does, that
People are led into all Truth and Holiness by the Spirit, we shall then agree
in that point.

Ibid. (23.) The Bp. goes on, telling us the several effects producible in his
way of Spirituality and Holiness, and p. 24. says thus, Let such Persons as
these be allowed to be Spiritual; and if so, the Bp. says he doubts not but
there will be found more such who are no Quakers, then who really are; and
particularly the Bp. claims to be such an one himself, and challenges Mr. P. to
prove the Contrary.

Answ. We will not differ with him about the numbers of his sort of Spiritually
made Men, and that they do exceed the Quakers, believing it true; But we have
already proved the Bp's. outward way, and the Scriptures inward way to Holiness
and Spirituallity do widely differ, and as they so do, the effects in reallity
must do the same, and therefore we shall be very brief with the Bp. as to his
challenge, and tell him, though we allow him also to be a Spiritual Man,
according to his outward way of making them, yet W. P. nor we need not go
about to prove that he is no Spiritual Man, according to Scripture Definition,
since he has so effectually done it himself. Thus much as to Spirituality and
Holiness.

Ibid (24.) The Bp. proceeds, as to emptiness the Bp. craves pardon if he be at
a loss what Mr. P. means thereby.

Answ. Why the Bp. at a loss, since W. P. spoke so very plain as to the
emptiness of the Clergy, while in p. 107, 108. he tells him it is preaching
without the Spirit in a lifeless and humane ministry, and such as were made
Ministers by humane Learning and Authority, whereas the Ministers of Christ
became such by the Qualifications an Gifts of the Spirit, as he had proved, and
which is further confirmed by us.

Ibid. (24.) If emptiness (says the Bp.) signifies the Ministers Sermons being
barren, with little substance or solid matter in them, the Quakers are much
more guilty, as far as ever the Bp's experience could reach; witness the first
things they published, if compared to the Printed Sermons of the conformable
Clergy, since Mr. P's. accession to them, it must be confessed, he has much
improved them, and brought them to write what looks like sense and Coherence.

Answ. We cannot wonder the Bp. should speak in the behalf of that Clergy being
one of the number himself, and against the Quakers, whom he has endeavored to
reproach, and therefore, to be sure, no competent Judge of either our Preaching
or Writings, for which reason we shall appeal from him to more competent and
impartial Judges, in relation to both; but this we will say, that although the
Quakers were never against, but for true sense and coherence in Preaching and
Writing, yet we lay no such stress or necessity upon the Learning, Arts, Parts,
and Wisdom of Men in doing either, as perhaps the Bp. does; and he may remember
the greatest Truths, namely the holy Scriptures, are delivered in a Style suited
to the meanest capacities. Again that Learned Apostle Paul was so far from
recommending the Learning and wisdom of Men, and excellency of Speech in
preaching, etc. that he both opposes as well as disesteems and undervalues them
from being either a means or furtherance to the work of the Lord. On the
Contrary he exalts the weak, foolish and despised things of the World as more
acceptable to God, see 1 Cor. 1. 17. to 29. and has this same up again, Chap.
2. 13. thus, Which things we also speak not in the words which Man's wisdom
teaches. But which the holy Ghost teaches, comparing Spiritual things with
Spiritual. Here the Apostle point blank opposes Spirituallity, and the
teachings of the holy Ghost, to the wisdom and teachings of Men, contrary
whereunto (as we have before observed) the Bp. has asserted, that Men may
still be termed Spiritual by outward Study and Learning.

But as to the Quakers, they are of the same mind with the Apostle, and are so
far from valuing the most excellent Preaching proceeding from the Arts, Parts,
Wisdom, and Learning of this World without the Spirits Teaching, that they
prefer far above and beyond it, a few plain mean words either from Man or
Woman, as proceeding from the Motion of the Divine Spirit, and although such
speech or words may seem very contemptible in the eyes of the wise and learned
Men of this World, in their natural State, yet such Preaching carries an
evidence with it to the enlightened understanding, far excelling the other, not
only to illiterate persons but to such also, who have had the Arts and
Literature of this World, whose understandings have been opened by the Divine
Spirit. -- And as to W. P. though we esteem and Love him yet it is not barely
either for his Parts or Learning, but for his Christian sincerity toward God
and his Truth.

Again the Bp. (p. 24.) But the Bp. would willingly know of Mr. P. what there
was in B. Wheddons holding Forth. -- after Mr. P. at Cork when he put his hat
before his face and laughed, and whether she be the only person from whom in
their Assemblies he has often heard such stuff.

Answ. In this story as well as other things, relating personally to W. P. the
Bp. took care to let W. P. be gone out of Europe before he published his Book:
we suppose the Bp. don't pretend to give this story from his own knowledge, how
well then does it become the Bp. to write such stories upon report, and is not
that word holding Forth used in derision or scorn? but what stuff? why did not
the Bp. tell us the stuff? if he knew, and if he did not, he might with more
credit have been silent to the story, while in thus doing he only demonstrates
his willing mind to bring any story (though it be a lame one) in hopes to vilify
the Quakers. But as to the story of W. P's. laughing it is as improbable as
frivolous, and which we no more believe, then that the late Bp. of Cork is now
in China. (1st.) because W. P. is a Man of a solid carriage and grave
Deportment, and in his common conversation seldom if ever given to laughter,
and not very often to smile. -- But that he should laugh at what was spoken in
a meeting by a Woman of his own communion, and in a place too, where perhaps
there were many scores if not hundreds of Auditors besides Quakers.

We say that he should laugh under all those circumstances is so ridiculously
improbable, that we should think none will believe it, but such as will not
disbelieve any story what ever against the Quakers. (2ly.) We let the Bp. know
whatever the Custom of laughing be in his congregation we have no such in ours;
and whosoever the Bp's. Spy or Informer was, we suppose him one who used to
laugh in his own Church or else (to be sure) he would not have imagined W. P.
to laugh in our Meeting. But that W. P. might pull his hat before his eyes
(while she was speaking) may be probable, it being very usual for him so to do
in our Meetings, which perhaps this Informer observing, might imagine he
laughed, while it was only the effects of a strong prepossession of mind, as
knowing it was common to laugh in his own Church; this is the most charitable
construction we can put upon that improbable story: But if this were not the
case, we then conclude it to be a wilful forgery to make a story to the Bp.
whom the Informer might know was ready enough to receive one against him and
the Quakers.

Ibid. (25.) And part of 26. is about the maintenance for the Ministry; and
indeed we find W. P. touched a tender place, while he treated upon this head,
which is apparent by the Bp's. being greatly displeased, if we may conclude
reviling and abusing W. P. be an indication thereof. viz. p. 25. says the Bp.
A Man will be strongly tempted to an unluckly guess where that person (meaning
W. P.) has taken in his Principles (alluding as we take it to Popery.) Again,
the Bp. p. 26. If Mr. P. be not popishly affected, which has been long feared
of him, and that on very likely grounds, it may be suspected hence that he has
a greater kindness for Atheism then is consistant with his profession.

Answ. The Bp's. fear and Suspicion that W. P. is either popishly or
Atheisticaly affected proceeds from the same ground, and are alike true, as
that he died a Papist about sixteen years ago in Pensilvania, and this was put
in Print too by some of his Enemies: But we must tell the Bp. W. P's. Credit in
those two points are above the reach of his Censorious pen, not only with the
Quakers, but with many Men of note and Character in the World even of the Bp's.
own Church. Well, but why must W. P. be affected to Popery or have a kindness
for Atheism with the Bp? why? it is because he is for a free Gospel Ministry,
and observes the Ministry is become too much a temporal preferment, and few to
be found among them, who court not stations of greatest profit and Honor; see
W. P's. Defense 109. which indeed falls so very pat, and touches the Bp. so to
the Quick (upon his late remove) (though no doubt was then unknown to W. P.) that
it is not so much to be wondered at, why he should be so uneasy under it. But
had the Bp. rightly considered, he could not have supposed that W. P's. dislike
of Tithes or other forced Maintenance proceeded from his being popishly
affected, because Tithes as a settled maintenance were introduced in time of
Popery.

Ibid. (25.) The Bp. tells us, meaning W. P. would have so great a body as the
Ministry in these Kingdoms all become somewhat like mendicant Friars. No Rents
or Dues must be allowed them, but Alms and Gifts, with what then (says the Bp.)
are they likely to be more sincere in their Doctrine by being put to please Men
that they may give them Alms.

Answ. No, W. P. nor the Quakers would not have the Ministry Beggars, nor yet
somewhat like Mendicant Friars, their begging way being nothing like the
Apostles way of maintenance, and yet we would have such as have occasion, to
be satisfied with Christ's free allowance, which was no other then free Gifts,
and from the hands of such too, as did receive them and their ministry; see
Matt. 10. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And this maintenance we find the
Apostles excepted of, and were satisfied with, though it seems so far from
pleasing the Bp. that he makes it a temptation to please Men: Surely we hope
the Bp. will allow, that our Lord knew better then he, and that his command and
way of a free maintenance, was not what would lead his Ministers into a
temptation to be Men-pleasers, and we think it was not reverent, and what
became a Bp. to draw such a consequence, whereby he implicitly reflected on
the Christian Lawgiver, though intended. directly against W. P. and the Quakers.

Again, Ibid. 25. Says the Bp. miraculous supports and ceased with Miracles
themselves. What miraculous supports? we find none required, they (viz. the
Apostles) were manifest to Men's Consciences, (is that ceased now?) and received
what was set before them, and from those who would not receive them, nor their
doctrine, they departed, and shook off the dust of their feet.

The Bp. tells us Ibid. 25. Mr. P. no where moves, that those laws which forbid
Ministers to exercise Merchandising, Mechanics or Secular Employments, may be
abrogated or taken away.

We ask whether those Laws are Civil or Canon? and upon what occasion these
Laws were made? and whether it was not because of the great covetousness of the
Clergy, who not being content with the excessive gain of Tithes, were so greedy
of gain, that they would be getting other ways too? (and perhaps by wily and
sly ways as the Bp. slanders the Quakers.) We farther ask the Bp. if W. P. or
the Quakers should move, as he speaks, will he promise for himself and engage
or endeavor with the rest of the Clergy, they will be content without Tithes,
provided those Laws be Repealed, when we know his mind he may hear farther; in
the mean time, without he had let us know his mind in that case, we think his
Objection was to little purpose. But says the Bp.

Ibid. (25.) If Lands and Tithes be denied them, and they are forbid other ways
of getting a livelihood, there remains nothing but going a begging.

Answ. If they are Ministers of Christ and sent by him, there is no danger of
that, for David under the Law, Psa. 37. 25. Saw not the righteous forsaken nor
his Seed begging Bread: And Christ exhorts his Disciples to trust providence
for Clothing, Meat, and Drink, etc. see Matt. 6. 21, 32, 33. and tells them
Chap. 10. 29, 30. as an encouragement to depend upon God's providence, that the
very hairs of their heads were numbered, and not a Sparrow fell to the ground
without God: And again promised to be with his Ministers to the end of the
World, Matt. 28. 20. And shall the Ministers of Christ in our day distrust his
providence for such necessaries as they stand in need of? surely no. They have
faith in him that he will open the hearts of some to administer to their
necessities, and will not fear their going a begging, though they have no Tithes.
But we confess it may be otherwise with those who are made Ministers by outward
means, as by Man and Money, and indeed it is no wonder if such want the true
faith, which is inward and the fruit of the Spirit, Gall. 5. 22. The Bp's.,
chief and indeed the only Scripture argument he has brought in spite (as he
says) of all such, ill consequences, to prove their maintenance to be jure
divino is 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. where provision is made for those who wait at the
Altar, etc. -- And they who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel.

Answ. (1st.) This Scripture, though the chief the Bp. could bring, will make
very little for his purpose to prove Tithes and other forced maintenance, due
under the Gospel dispensation, which was the point the Bp. ought to prove if he
could, and which to be sure he never can do by Scripture.

(2ly.) The Quakers never denied or disallowed such a living as we are to
understand Paul does here mean, to wit the Ministers of Christ who preached the
Gospel should be supplied with such necessaries of Food and Raiment as they
stood in need of; but as then so now, it is to come free and voluntary and from
the hands of such too who had partaken of their ministry, or believed them to
be Ministers of Christ, and to this agrees Romans 15. 27. If the Gentiles have
been partakers of their Spiritual things their duty is also to minister unto
them in carnal things.

(3ly.) This sort of living and this way of maintenance for Ministers of
Christ (who stand in need of and want necessaries) we are for, and with which
agrees the very command of our Lord Jesus Christ when he sent forth his
Disciples, Matt. 10. 8, 9. freely ye have received, freely give; But at the
same time bids them neither provide Gold, Silver, or Brass in their purses,
neither two coats, nor shoes, and gives the reason against such provision.
Verse. 10. for the workman is worthy of his meat; as much as to say, though you
are to preach freely, as neither to command or demand any thing for Preaching,
yet you may receive such necessaries as you want or stand in need of. Now who
are they to receive this from, but from such who received them, for he bids
them shake off the dust of their feet, as a testimony against such who would
neither receive them, nor hear their words. Verse. 14.

(4ly.) Beyond the extent of Christ's allowance and the persons from whom to
receive, we are not to understand that Text, 1 Cor. 9. 14. nor indeed are we to
understand it otherwise from the context it self, (1st.) Because 'twas to the
Believers he then wrote, therefore from the Believers only the Ministers of
Christ were to take what was given. (2ly.) That Paul was far from intending a
great and lordly allowance or living; hear what he says, Verse. 18. What is my
reward then (says he) verily that when I preach the Gospel, I may make the
Gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in the Gospel. From
whence two things are observeable. (1st.) That he makes it rewardable to preach
without charge, consequently then the more chargeable the less rewardable.
(2ly.) That there was a danger of abusing the Gospel Power (which must be only
understood in taking necessaries according to Christ's allowance,) therefore
being so nice a point, and having regard to his reward, and fearing he might
abuse his power, he chose rather to work with his own hands, then take any
thing at all, which he did to the supply of his own, and the necessities of
them that were with him, in which he became a good pattern and Example to
others.

Thus he tells the Church of Ephesus, Acts 20. 33, 34, 35. I have coveted no
Man's Silver, Gold, or Apparel, these hands have administered unto my
necessities, and to them that were with me: we think it can remain no longer a
doubt, what sort of living and maintenance Paul allowed the Ministry, by 1
Cor. 9. 14. viz. to receive at the hands of Believers for to answer their
necessities.

(5ly.) Now, Impartial Reader, compare the Gospel allowance from Christ Jesus
our Lord and what we are to understand from Paul, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. (the place
cited by the Bp.) and see what proportion or equality it holds with Tithes and
other forced maintenance in our day, and whether they, who pretend to be
Ministers of Christ, and get so many hundreds, if not some of them some
thousands by the Year for preaching, do not unreasonably exceed as well as
abuse the Gospel power and maintenance which Paul allowed the ministry.

Ibid. (25.) The Bp. proceeds thus, The Bp. doubts not to affirm, that take
away the Established Ministry (which in moral speaking cannot subsist without a
maintenance) and let our Parish Churches be left destitute of learned
Preachers, and not only Popery in some places, but Irreligion and Barbarity
more generally would soon ensue.

Answ. The first part of the Bp's. words are not hard to be understood, and are
as plain, as we believe them true, which we take to be that if the Ministers
settled Maintenance be taken away, the Ministry will fall and the Churches be
left destitute of them. -- Then say we if maintenance uphold and supports them
we think it is plain that maintenance is their foundation, since they fall
without it: We ask then whose Ministers they are? since Christ Jesus was the
foundation of his truly constituted Ministers, with whom he promised to be to
the end of the World, Matt. 28. 20. and upon whom a necessity was laid to
preach the Gospel, and who were so far from forbearing to preach for want of a
settled maintenance, that cruel Sufferings, as Whipping, Stoning,
Imprisonment, nay death it self could not deter or hinder them therefrom, the
hands of these we find administered to their necessities, whereas the Bp's.
ministry, morally speaking (as he tells us) cannot subsist, and that the
Churches will be left destitute of them in case they are not upheld by settled
maintenance: We could say much more upon this head, but forbear and refer, to
the Impartial Reader upon a serious consideration, whether such be true Gospel
Ministers, as the Bp. has stated them, or Ministers for Money and maintenance.

As to the Bp's. consequence that Popery and Barbarity would ensue, in case the
Established Ministry were taken away, (by forbearing of the maintenance.)

We answer the consequence is not true; for when the Clergy's maintenance was
greater in these Nations, before Impropriations were taken from them, there was
more Popery, Irreligion, and Barbarity then now, and perhaps would be less if
Tithes were wholly down, and all preachers left to a free maintenance. Now as
to Popery, there would be little danger of that, because if the Papists were
sure before hand to miss of the sweet gain of Tithes, etc. they would no more
trouble the Churches or People then the Bp's. Ministry, since they never fail,
wherever they get footing to promote Tithes, and are as much for upholding
them, as the Bp. or his Ministry can be; consequently then the Churches would
be as destitute of them as of the Bp's. Ministry, and therefore no danger of
Popery. Next as to Irreligion and Barbarity soon ensuing.

Answ. There would be as little danger thence, as of Popery, since instead of
Men made Ministers, and such whose prop and foundation is Tithes and forced
maintenance, we might not doubt the good providence of God in sending us
Ministers of his own making, who would preach freely as they had received the
same, and in so doing would come with less suspicion of worldly and sinister
ends, while gain and advantage was no motive to their undertaking of that
Office and the effects of such ministers preaching as these, no doubt would be
far from introducing Popery, Barbarity, or Irreligion, that in all probability
People would generally and sooner become better Christians under such a
Ministry, then they now are under the Established ones.

P. 26. In Mr. P's. Judgment (says the Bp.) they must be all hirelings and
Hypocrites, and the Bp. himself need not look far for such -- he is too
sensibly instructed in this affair (says Mr. P.) for a parting blow. -- (And in
a few lines after the Bp. adds thus) the Bp. meanwhile for himself hereby
Summon's W. P. to appear before God shortly at his Tribunal to answer for his
Censuring him as a mercenary, an hireling, and an Hypocrite.

Answ. We might with much more reason return the like Summons to the Bp. for
his great abuse of W. P. in particular, and the Quakers in general, as we have
shown, and by this Instance we find he resolves to hold out unfair to W. P. to
the end, in laying down words in a different character as W. P's. though they are
none of his directly, and not only so, but adding with a break between some
words Eight pages distant to answer his purpose, without giving any notice
thereof, therefore we shall Cite W. P's. Words in both places as they lie in
his Defense. Thus (p. 122.) If he (i. e. the Bp.) Has any shot left against
mercenary Religionist he may not miss the mark next time, but make it his main
aim, end, and study to expose Hirelings and Hypocrites in their proper colors;
and some are of opinion, he need not go far to find too many of them. Again, p.
130. I cannot pretend to tell the Bp. what tribe of Men in Christendom it is,
that have long made gain their godliness, and the pretense thereof their
worldly inheritance, since he has been, so much more sensibly instructed in
this affair then my self.

Pray Reader compare these Citations with what the Bp. has laid down as W. P's.
and see if they do not differ, but since the Bp. by falsifying W. P's. words,
p. 122. and by so doing applied them directly to himself, which is plain W. P.
did not unless the Bp. be included in the number [too many] and since it is very
plain as W. P. has told him, p. 130. he is more sensibly instructed in getting
worldly inheritance for a Spiritual consideration then W. P. is. We say since
the case is thus it will lie upon the Bp. to rectify and give satisfaction for
his unfairness (in this as well as other Citations, etc.) as well as to clear
himself of W. P's. last assertion (by way of comparison) in getting, etc. As to
making Gain Godliness, they were in return to the Bp's. suggesting the Quakers
such a People in his Testimony.

Ibid. (26.) The Bp. proceeds thus, he (i. e. the Bp.) is further bold to tell
the World that both he and diverse of his brethren with him in a certain City
labored in the Ministry both day and night, when they had neither Lands nor
Tithes, nor other Revenues to support them -- And did feed their Flock. -- That
the very persons or others of their party, who now call that spoiling, which is
but making some of their party pay a small pittance of Legal Dues, were at that
time in power at Court or otherwise; and instead of Preaching, were Directors
of public Councils for no good or much mischief.

Answ. If the Bp. could have boldly told us, that he and his brethren fed their
Flock freely, and at such a time when they could have compelled People to pay
Tithes and other maintenance, but would not do it, because 'twas no Gospel
maintenance, we say if he could have thus told us it would indeed have been
not only bold but well told too; but to tell the world he fed his Flock without
Tithes, etc. in a time of War, when 'twas not in his power to get them, we
think by such his boldness, he will merit no great Commendations; and as to
staying with his Flock in a time of danger, 'twas but his reasonable duty so to
do, if it were only for his being largely paid (by them) before. We will not
say he would have left them if he could, but he knows that unless he had gone
off in the beginning of the troubles, 'twas almost next to impossible to get
away afterward; and certain it is many who did stay would gladly have gone
afterward if they could, whether he was one of that number he best knows. Next
as to our not paying a small pittance of Legal Dues (as he calls them.) We
answer it is for conscience sake we deny such payments, as not believing Tithes,
etc. due to a Gospel Ministry, and as to the Legality of them, we dispute not
the point, but say since he demands and takes them for a Spiritual
consideration, he ought to prove his right to Tithes, etc. by a divine
Sanction, as well as insist upon the Legality of them.

Now to the last part of his charge, where he insinuates that some Preachers
amongst us were great at Court or otherwise, and instead of Preaching, were
Directors of public Councils for no good or much mischief.

Answ. This charge (as a parting blow to speak in the Bp's. words) as it is
untrue so it is equally unfair, not only in his being silent as to the person
or persons that were such, no good or much mischief Directors, (if he knew
them) but also in not telling the World what that no good or much mischief was,
such did, that hereby the matter being known, the World might judge, whether it
was criminal or not, and if particular Persons were guilty they might bear
their own blame, and the Innocent be cleared, but neither of these the Bp. has
done, for a good reason (no doubt) because he could not do it. But the Bp.
perhaps thought this general and hidden way best to serve his end, which we
cannot believe was any other then thereby to calumniate the Quakers in general;
all the pretense that we can suppose for this charge is, that some few (perhaps
not above a dozen at most in all the Nation, if so many) of our Friends were
(very much against their minds) nominated Common Counsel-men, and some of them
Aldermen in particular incorporale Towns, as likewise at the same time were far
greater numbers of other Protestants (which though a crime in us yet none in them
with the Bp.) And as to preachers, we do not believe there was at most above
two or three in the Nation of that number it self, nay we know but of one. But
that either preachers or hearers were great at Court at all, or Directors of
public Councils, as the Bp. says, we utterly deny, unless he will call: W. B.
one, who yet was no Preacher, nor indeed was he in unity with us. On the
contrary we are bold to tell the World (as the Bp. did,) we think with less
reason) and which we should not have done but that it is extorted from us on
this occasion, that the Quakers in most parts of the Nation did contribute
large Sums to the relief of distressed Protestants and never failed to do them
good on all occasions as it lay in their power.

But why's the Bp. so loud and hiddenly smiting the Quakers, we think he might
have been silent in such a charge above many others, since no Quaker in Ireland
was so high a Director (to give his own words) as a Parliament Man, which the
Bp. was in those times, which we do not reflect upon him for, yet he that was
such, he that writ the Specimen of Loyalty and so largely asserted the Right of
that Government, to be undoubted; and he that publicly reprehended or silenced
a Clergy Man in Cork for a Certain shortness in his Office, the better to
express his great Loyalty, might have forborne this undue as well as untrue
charge against the Quakers. We do not aggravate the matter, otherwise we could
be more particular, as to the two last, nor indeed had we mentioned any of them
but that we were led to it by his hidden reflection.

Ibid. 26. He (i. e. the Bp.) never persecuted Quakers, etc. -- to which we
answer, as we are plain where he injures us, so we will not be unjust where he
deserves praise; we do confess we never heard he did, and though persecution be
disagreable to the very nature of Christianity, yet the contrary is commendable
in the Bp. since some, while in their power, have been greatly guilty of
persecution, and although this controversy has happened with the Bp. yet we may
justly say, 'twas neither desired nor sought for by us, and had the Bp.
continued to be as easy with his Pen as he was in not persecuting the Quakers
otherways, there had been no occasion for all this public controversy: the Bp.
tells us, p. 26. he hindered a certain person from publishing Memoirs of Mr.
P's. Life, of his turning Quaker, and of his business at saint Omers, etc.

Answ. So far as the Bp. really did so in tenderness to the good name of W. P.
it is to be commended in him (though such Memoirs were ever so untrue) However we
tell the Bp. whatever his mind was heretofore, yet the giving such a slant of
being at St. Omers don't now look very kind: We farther tell the Bp. that W. P.
is no stranger to malicious lies and forgeries, both upon himself in particular
as well as upon the Quakers in general; and as to the true reason of W. P's.
turning Quaker, whatever Malice may frame or suggest, yet we think no
considerate and Impartial Man can possibly believe, he had any other motive or
consideration to his turning Quaker, but the good of his Soul, while the way to
Quakerism (so called) is so very contrary to the greatness, Honor, and
preferment with other such like worldly considerations (which are most commonly
the motives to great Changes) and that at the same time W. P. turned Quaker, he
turned his back upon all these things.

Next as to the business of St. Omers: This Instance shows what sort of Memoirs
these were like to be. This Story is as old and thread bare as it is false, and
if lying charges and stories were proofs W. P. was not only at St. Omers but
had received Orders at Rome, and had dyed a Papist many years past: But why do
not all his false Accusers prove his being there, by assigning a credible
witness or witnesses, who saw him there, or some way or other demonstrate he
was there? No that was never done, and indeed for a good reason, because it
could not in truth be done. Now this blind story, we confront by a public
Print, written by W. P. in answer to a friend of his, who importunately desired
him for satisfaction to the credulous, and such who knew not W. P. that he
would in a Public manner answer that among other lying stories; the Letter is
Dated -- October, 1688. wherein W. P. makes return to those lying Aspersions,
p. 11. and Solemnly declares that he was not only no Jesuit or Papist, but that
he never was at St. Omers in all his Life, nor did he so much as know, or ever
correspond with any one there. Here W. P. put it upon the test, his lying
Enemies had then a fair opportunity (if they could) to prove him a Liar, and in
so doing would have had good ground to suspect him a Papist too.

Ibid. p. 26. and 27. The Bp. concludes his Book, first, telling of W. P's.
vile Treatment, and calls his Defense an unhandsome piece; then proceeds with a
Prayer that God will forgive all to Mr. P. and his brethren, and bestow upon
them a Spirit of true Faith, meekness and peace, of heavenly mindedness,
Charity, Mortification, and all the Graces they pretend to; and that their
hearts may be one day found as void of Error, Pride, Scorn, and peevish
rancour, as Mr. P's. Book is full of the expressions of them all. Thus ends the
Bp.

Answ. As to the vile Treatment and the Expressions of Error, Pride, Scorn,
peevish rancour, etc. the Bp. tells us is in W. P's. unhandsom piece; we say
they are hard words, and sooner said then proved, and the Reader may remember,
the Bp. throughout his Reply has been readier at charges then proofs, most of
which (we think) has in the end fallen upon himself instead of W. P. as we have
shown; and in this case we do deny what the Bp. has asserted, and for Umpirage
(i^ the matter) refer our selves to the Impartial Reader, who have been most
guilty of these and such like expressions, W. P. in his Defense, or the Bp. in
his Reply.

Next as to the Bp's. Prayer. If the Bp. had been more sparing to misrepresent,
villifie, and abuse W. P. and the Quakers; then he has been, it might have
come with less suspicion of its reality; but we think its next to impossible
that any Man who endeavors to abuse and misrepresent another, can at the same
time Pray truly and heartily for him: And as to those Graces the Bp. mentions,
though on the one hand we will not boast of them, yet through the mercy and
goodness of God, some of us can in humility of Soul say, we have in measure
witnessed the work of Mortification in our Souls, through the Spirit of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

And now to conclude; We can in sincerity say we have not, according to the
best of our understandings, either misrepresented the Bp. or wilfully overlookt
his sense, but so far as we understood the Import of his words, and where the
force of his Arguments lay, we have as truly stated them, and thereupon
answered with uprightness; and whether we have thus done by the Bp. and he has
done so by W. P. or not, is left to the Impartial Reader, and so we conclude
this Rejoinder.

Cork, the 15. of the 11. Month, 1699. T. W. N. H.


The END.
THE Author's Absence from the Press has occasioned several Errors in the
Printing, the most Material whereof are here Corrected, and those of lesser
Note which have escaped, the Reader is desired to Correct with his Pen, or
overlook.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 6. for himself, thanks. Read, himself --,thanks. l. 15. abated,
and r. abated --, and. p. 13. l. 2. Doctrine, by r. Doctrine, -- by. p. 14. l.
1. r. First Impression. p. 19. l. 13. blot out. Heb. 10. 35. p. 24. l. 21.
deny. r. deny, etc. p. 39. l. 1* blot out then. p. 53. l. 1. (p. 9.) r. (p.
14.) p. 61. l. this. r. thus. p. 62. l. 11. Bp's. r. Bp. p. 66. l. 9. W. P's.
r. W. P. p. 83. l. 11. blot out and. p. 86. l. 25. (p 29.) r. (p. 57.) p. 90.
l. 23. 1 John. 1. 12. r. 1 John 1. 1. p. 93. l. 23. love. r. leave. p. 100. l.
2. what have. r. what Rule have. p. 106. l. 7. Matt. 43. r. Matt. 73. p. 110.
John 5. 8. r. John 3. 8. p. 126. l. ult. blot out appearance. Ibid. second
coming. r. second outward coming. p. 131. l. 2 and 3. blot out (which we do
not.) l. 4. the occasion. r. on the occasion. p. 133. l. 2. viz. no. r. viz.
that no. p. 143 l. 8. Psalm. 66. 17. r. Psalm. 66. 16. p. 145. l. 14. (p, 54.) r.
(p. 80.) l. 18. blot. p. l. 19. verse. r. verses. p. 148. l. 29 being. r. been.
p. 151. l. 2. blot out. 1 Cor. 6. 19. p. 159. l. 18. strongly. r. strangely. p.
161. l. 15. excepted. r. accepted. p. 163. l. 11. Matt. 6. 21. r. Matt. 6. 31.
p. 170. l. 7. as a Mercenary. r. as Mercenary.


