A CHALLENGE Sent to Master E. B. A Semi-Separatist From the Church of ENGLAND.

Now published by the Author, J. W.

1 PET. 3.15, 16. Be ready always to give an answer, to every man that asks
you a reason, of the hope that is in you, with meekness and reverence.

Having a good conscience, that when they speak evil of you, as of evil
doers, they may be ashamed which slander your good conversation in Christ.

London, Printed Anno Dom. 1641.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader.
IT is now three quarters of a year since I had a Parochial charge committed
unto me; My first coming unto them was, according to my commission with Peace
be to this House; but I found a multitude of them, De sit in bac mibi part
fides, nec credit factum, Which made them ready to battle. I will not tell
thee what fierce spirits they were, how before they had known, either good or
evil by me, They did begin to threaten to spend, some 200 l, others all that
they were worth; since 500 l, and if that would not effect it, a 1000 l should
not be spared, but they would remove me. Then did they discharge against me,
whole vollies of opprobrious speeches, whereby my credit and estimation was
made to bleed, my ministry disparaged, my calling scandalized and disgraced;
and but that God has set an hedge about me, my Person had been exposed to the
invasion of insolent zeal, and ungoverned fury. Why should I report, how I am
mocked by boys, scorned by children, judged unworthy of any place in the
ministry, by such whose Academy was never other then a shop, and their
learning borrowed from a Loom. Alas, how many of my Brethren, who have all
their life time flamed like Beacons on these Hills, sunt p^ssi graviora, and
sat down with silence! yet my condition is worse then theirs: Such blasts make
them but shine the brighter, but are enough to put my candle out: besides they
have been men of war from their youth, but I am but a stripeling: And that
which makes it more intolerable to me, I never crushed with Hercules a Serpent
in my cradle, but have until this time been a stranger unto strife, and now am
forced at first to grapple with an Hydra. It was my resolution to have overcome
this violence with patience, hoping it could not have held out so long, since
no Intelligence, muchlesse any that is Divine can move them in it; and that
like a boiling pot, the liquor would have either run over, and quenched the fire
which heated them, or have been consumed, leaving them in the bottom nothing
but repentance. But I find it is not only my first reach which has proved
boisterous, but a tempest is threatened me thorough out my whole passage; Nature
has not made me a shore, nor strength of friends a wall, to be able to resist
it. It is my silence has made them so insolent, and my patience has concluded
me for impotent, and cowardly: yet is not my complaint intended against these:
They are too low to batter my resolutions with injuries, nor, were I ten times
more provoked, would I take up arms against them, whom I have received to
carry in mine arms. They are but seduced, and deserve to be pitied, that I
may not say despised. There is a Master B. in their hive, whom they follow like
swarms, with whom I would enter into the lists. He is one who pretends himself
to be sent among them from God, as Simon Magus did, and yet has nothing but an
Enthusiasme of his own brain to show for it, and they cry him up for some great
power,

-- Et quis velle recuset
Os populi meruisse? Pers.

His faith and zeal, are the wings on which he flies, and I will boldly say it,
they are both of them, but presumption and passion: I will appeal to thy
judgment Christian Reader, if I speak without just grounds. I have many
credible Authors which will maintain, that his constant prayers and preachings
which he has at a neighbor Parish Church, have been commendations of himself,
and declamations against me. Indeed he palliates them under the glorious title
of Christ and his Kingdom; as if my Church were the seat of Antichrist, or if
there can be worse; so it has been called, the devils Church, against which
he proclaims war: Nor do I much marvel at that, since the whole Liturgy, and
the Government of the Church of England, of which mine is a member, is with
many of them no better. For mine own particular, I will justify my self
against all that dare accuse me, that I never brought in any thing of that, in
the least appearance, which they can rightly call innovation; nor ever pressed
upon them any thing in the performing of my service, which might stand with my
obedience to unquestioned authority, to have dispensed withal. If I have erred
in matter of Ceremony, it was only in this wish, that some of the innocent ones
might undeservedly be sacrificed unto their fury. What their other exceptions
are against me, I am so far from petitioning their charity to cover, that
with a reservation to malice and envy, I shall make it my suite to have them
proclaimed. This is somewhat a digression, I return unto thee, Chrissian
Reader. It was my desire to try the truth of these reports, and to be confirmed
by being an ear-witnesse of him my self: I heard of his preaching at a private
Fast, which (the place being a Church,) the Congregation of diverse Parishes may
entitle public. I cannot tell how well Authority may relish it: I was one in
the Afternoon; I joined with him in prayer, till I was fain to act a Separatist
in spirit, and betake me to my private prayers, that God would bless, though
they did curse, and not turn their prayer into sin unto them. Nor was his
temper better in his preachings: That which I will only mention, is this, That
the chiefest streams of his whole discourse were a perverting of Scriptures,
and a wresting of such Texts, which did denounce Judgments immediately against
the Babylonians and Edomites, those grand enemies of the Church of God, and
applying them against his brethren: (if so be, we which are the sons of the
Church of England, and do not separate with them from its Communion, may call
our selves so) and those he did press with so much eagerness, and violence,
as did discover unto many that were present, the fountain of his zeal to be
both salt and bitter. Nor (...) I be mistaken in my apprehension, this one
thing is enoug^ to confirm me, which is common in the mouths of many of h^^
disciples; That so many prayers and tears, which both in publi^^ and private,
the Saints of God have powered out against me, must needs be heard; That it is
impossible I should continue long in my place; and that God will work a
miracle, but I shall be removed. Tantae ne animis coelestibus Irae? I never yet
now learned any cause of all, but this; because I was not called by them unto
my place: The will of the Lord be done; but let not them have their desire,
lest they be too proud.

But lest I should tire thee Christian Reader, with a private story, concerning
my self; I will now tell thee the cause of my coming abroad. This Master B.
whom my Parishioners follow in swarms, sometimes to other Churches most
commonly to private Conventicles, is the Master of a faction: I may truly say
of him, as Saint Austin did of two principal Leaders, Primianus and
Maximianus, That Primianus had been Postremianus, and Maximianus had been
Minimianus; so h^d Bright been dark, and his name been buried in obscurity, if
with Theuas and Judas of Galilee, by boasting of himself to be some body, he
had not drawn away much people after him.

It cannot but be a grievous eyesore, to have Lupum in fabula, so busy in my
flock. It was my desire at first, fairly to expostulate with him my just
exceptions against him; but I found him altogether unfit for conference, by
reason of his impediment in hearing.

Magister artis Ingeniique largitor
Venture, non babet aures.
But then I received from his own mouth these words, That in all matters
belonging not only to the substance, but to the Ceremony of Gods service, there
must be an affirmative precept immediately commanding them, or that they were
not to be admitted; which seemed to relish much of the Saints belief, Turners
Creed.
and gave me sufficient matter of expostulating with him by writing, which I
did the same day in Latin: Whereunto he returned me this short reply, That he
would neither receive, nor answer any Letter. I leave it to thy judgment,
Christian Reader, Whether for the matter, or manner of it, I did deserve to be
so despised; yet did I not desist, every day I received some just exceptions
against him; the impudency of many of his followers in sulting over me, and the
weakness of many of my Parishioners; for whom I was afraid, complaining of
him.

I writ unto him certain questions in the nature of a Challenge in the English
tongue, containing some few of our just grievances, and desiring satisfaction
from him. After a quarter of a years expectation of his answer, I received
this; That he cared not for me, nor any of my notes. These are they which I do
now show unto the world; If it be his pride, I despise it; if his policy, I
detect it; if his ignorance, I pity it. There is nothing in them worthy to be
published, nor were they ever intended for any such purpose. My desire in doing
of it, is this, That he may either defend his positions in public, that there
may be no walking craftily amongst us or else desert them: either of these
ways, our integrity shall be made known, as becomes the Ministers of the
Gospel. If I be convinced of any falsehood, I shall with more patience submit
to the shame of the world, then I can to be thus contemned in my place by him,
and thorough his means.

I have now vented, be the event what it will. I am confident there cannot be
more danger in my speech, then has been pain in my silence. Let me have but
thy Christian Censure, if I do deserve it, and I shall rest most thankfully

Thine in him, By whom I am, J. W.

Domine in Domino Dilecte,
MAllem te scribendo quam loquendo convenire, hinc enim and tuae infirmitati
ratio babebitur, and meo Sermoni; Latin autem scribo potissimum, tum ut
brevior fiat and dilucidior oration, and ut nullum babeam judicem praeter
literatum. Quaestio a nobis nuper incaepta fuit circa obedientiam in rebus ad
religionem pertinentibus; Praeceptum tu divinum, affirmativum, immediatum, in
verbo Scriptum aliquod postulaere videbare, aut in praestanda obedientia non
satisfactum iri tenerae aliquorum conscientiae. Quod si in omnibus flagitare
perseveres and indifferentiam omnem and Magistratus potestatem eadem opera
tolles. Vide quae so, quae and quanta neges. Primam, mandatum Divinum
affirmativum, reddendo necessariam, tollit; Secundam, nihil relinquendo quod
Magistratus praecipiat; quid enim si hic imperet, quod deus suo verbo prius
imperavit, nosti hominum responsum, Non propter tuum dictum credimus, sed quia
ipsum (Christum) audivimus; aliud nihil contra, sive praeter, quod ad
obedientiam teneros obliget, illi permittitur: hoc enim mihi videtur sine dubio
verum, non deberi illi obedientiam, in qua praestanda non potest satisfieri
conscientiae. Non circa rem civilem sed religiosam disputo; hanc item, non ad
articulos fidei, aut internum dei cultum pertinentem, aut ipsum cultum omnino
intelligo; sed rebus gerundis deo non repugnantibus, exteriori religionis
parti, formae, ordini, decori sub servientem. Locos quibus and Magistratus
potestas suffulcitur, and Christianorum obedientia propter conscientiam ipsam
imperatur, babes ad Romans c. 13. and apud 1 Pet. c. 2. v. 13. Mitto quod
nonnulli audent obstrepere, ad res tantum civiles illos spectare, quasi nimis
insulsum, and Catholicis non approbatum, quod tu quoque for san non negabis:
ubi autem Civili tantum Magistratui obedientiam deberi inde concludi statuis,
vide ne potestatem omnem Ecclesiasticam e medio tollere videaris; and propriam,
viz excommunicationem, and delegatam seu politicam; deinde miror quo Argumento
fretus, transmarinas Ecclesias, quas non parvi pendis, stabilibis, Se eas omni
potestate spoliaveris. Frustra item, dictum foret, Dic ecclesiae, si illius
quam seniorum consessum ipse vocat Calvinus, nulla esset Authoritas. Qui ad
Civiles id aetatis ordinationes, locum applicare videtur Beza, cedo quemvis
arbitrum, number temporale faciens pr^^ceptum, solas eas intelligit; quae tu quae
so art Logica Universal affirmativum, Subjecti esto te (...), facies
indefinitum. Esto autem, quod dum concedimus nostro jure cedimus, civilem
tantum designari Magistratum; sibi videat Romanus Pontifex; nostrum nihil
interest, apud quos sola valet, and semper valeat potestas regia; omnis
qualiscunque sit secundi vel tertii ordinis authoritas, ab illo sive a capite
tenet, ejus solius majestas in omnibus illucet; iisne omnibus, redi obsecro ad
rem ipsam, qui ab illo mittuntur, obedientia sit pra standa, vel non? Si non,
responde Petro ibid. v. 14. sin alias, hem tibi locum cui acquiescat
conscientia; noli expectare aliud praeceptum positivum divinum, ne ut repetam,
and potestatem and obedientiam subvertas. Vereor ne taedio tibi sim. Tenerae
conscientiae non tuae causam agis: Age, vel tenerrimam hinc stabilire potes;
credat? non potest: nolet potius dixisses: utrumque vitio suo factum, vel
naturali vel acquisito: paeniteat? hoc nolit, nondum se peccasse senfit; doceo
contra legem divinam and humanam, si hoc sit peccatum: secundo manifesto
contradicitur, and in ea primae. Verum dubitat ne peccet; and eo dupliciter
peccat. 1o. Scrupulosa dubitatione circa rem lege stabilitam, deo non
repugnantem, in qua vel test Cicerone, inest facinus. Off^e. l. 3. 2o.
Neglecta vel contempta, quae ei debita fuit obedientia. Quis far potest
quemquam adhuc regerentem, indeterminatam suam opinionem legi stabilitae and
determinatae esse praeferendam? Laudo fidem quae ante credit observandum esse
quam didicit in quit Tertul. de cor. c. 2. Det deus ut omnes unum studeamus and
sentiamus, omni malitia, omni contentione, omni praejudicio valedictis, In unum
corpus Christi mysticum coalescamus; neli judicare ante tempus, paveas ne
pereas, quod and ipse deo juvante sequar

Qui tuus sum in Christo. J. W.

Certain Questions of no mean Consequence propounded to Mr Edward Bright, to
which the Author partly for his own satisfaction, and the Consciences of many
which are justly offended does Demand a speedy answer, or is ready, to prove
him a false reporter of God, a Seducer of souls, a Blasphemer of the Church of
England, a Timeserver, one that makes gain godliness, and Merchandizeth the
Word of God.
1. WHether you do think, that you are bound in Conscience (according to the
precept of Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 3.15. Be ready always to give an answer to
every man that asks you a reason of the hope, that is in you, with meekness
and reverence, Verse. 16. Having a good conscience, that when they speak evil
of you, as of evil doers, they may be ashamed which slander your good
conversation in Christ: And also the pattern of Saint Paul, Acts 28.22. Who
upon the like request made no more ado, but presently appointed a day for the
performing of it) to give some reasonable satisfaction to their just demands,
which take themselves to be offended at some of your bold affirmations which
both, publicly and privately you have not shamed to deliver; which have tended
only to the seducing of many ignorant, though well affected souls from their
duty of Obedience, to the shaking of their Faith, and weakening their Religion,
which they have been taught and iustructed in, in the Church of England, to the
kindling the Coals of hatred and separation among their Brethren, to the
sounding of the Trumpet to sedition and rebellion. Which I premise upon these
considerations, following;

First, Out of fear lest you should refuse it, having done the like already to
a letter which I wrote unto you in Latin, because of your impediment in
hearing; whereby I found you unfit for any conference, which you returned me
again with this short reply, That you would neither receive, nor answer any;
which seemed unto me contrary to the ingenuity of a Scholar, and the
Discipline of a Minister, being it contained a religious dispute concerning
Obedience, How far an ignorant man's conscience might be satisfied in performing
it to Laws Ecclesiastical; and savoured either of pride, that you would not,
or of ignorance, that you could not, or of underhand dealing, and most
pernicious policy, that you durst not answer it, lest one way or other you had
betrayed your self unto the state, or been deserted of your Disciples.

Secondly, Out of hope, that if you do it substantially and faithfully as you
ought, it will confirm your followers in those opinions, they have sucked from
you, in which they cannot walk doubtfully without danger to their souls; or if
simply and slovenly, as I expect you should in so bad a cause, it will release
them from the bonds of their captivity, under which your counterfeit holiness,
Hypocritical zeal, forged insinuations have hitherto holden them, that they
may return to their ancient liberty of conscience, and to the right path of
Obedience.

And thirdly, We for our parts shall from thenceforth cease to think or speak
evil of your sect, or as you assume it, to slander your godly conversation,
for if you prove them, our mouths shall be stopped; but if you fail in that,
our sayings shall be found true and no slander.

2. Whether you do believe that the religion of the Church of England, is the
true Orthodox Religion, and in all the Articles of Doctrine, agreeable to the
Word of God; because you have been heard to say in the Pulpit, that now was the
time to change their Religion; by which saying you must either prove our
Religion to be false, or your self a seducer of souls from the truth.

3. Whether you do hold, that any of the Ceremonies of the Church of England,
which have been by unquestionable Authority commanded to be used in the service
of God, be Idolatrous, or a worshipping of Baal, (for you have employed as much,
when you said of the Defenders of them after an ignominious manner, Let Baal
plead for himself;) which if you dare avouch, I demand farther, Whether they
were not Idolatry ten years ago, as much as now; and if then, Whether you by
practicing of them, were not an Idolatrous Priest, and by holding of your
peace, and not crying our against them until now, a cunning dissembling
Idolater, when as neither fear, nor favor should have stopped your mouth, or
restrained you from crying out against such a crime: and if you impute it (as
some of your followers) to the times of your Ignorance, Whether did you not
take your self to have had your calling to the Ministry from God, before these
years last past; and if you do, whether such asin can stand with such a
calling: And whether now you be deservedly counted so holy a man, so faithful
a Preacher as the people cry you up for, having formerly been so odious an
Idolater, and not yet acted your repentance upon the stage of the world, as
such a crime does require, nor been absolved by any Church, nor restored again
unto your Ministry, as the Ancient Canon does command: If you deny that ever
in your Judgment the^e was any Idolatry in them, there are multitudes of your
disciples will have the better opinion of them, and of the Church that enjoynes
them; but the worse of you; reserve not your determination till the times shall
be more open for you, but as becomes a Christian Minister of Gods Word, and one
that it behooves to be resolute against fear or flattery, tell us plainly what
we may trust to, to be your opinion.

4. Whether do you hold, that Bishops are Antichristian, and that the order of
Episcopacy is the spirit of Antichrist; which some of your faction have in
their Pulpits affirmed, and unto which affirmation, Whether have not you among
many others, which are reported to have done it, solemnly, and secretly entered
into a combination, that you will never consent unto that Government again; And
what do you think of all the Christian Churches which have been for 1500 years
under that Government; and whether were those ancient Bishops of the Primitive
times, and those of our Church in Queen Mary's days, Martyrs for Christ or no;
and whether Antichrist could dye for Christ, or those be saved themselves,
having not first put off their Antichristian calling, or could they be saved
through ignorance, having not repented them of their being in such an order; for
either they did know it to be a sin, or did not know it: if the first, why did
they not publicly confess and repent? if the second, how could they?

5. Whether do you hold, that your justifying your selves, and condemning of
your Brethren, does stand with the charity of a Disciple of Christ, or rather
the vainglory of a Pharisee, since the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 10.7. If any man
trust in himself, that he is Christ's, let him consider this again of himself,
that as he is Christ's, even so are we Christ's; have you by any Divine Law,
Commission to judge others, which stand or fall to their own Master; or to
sever the Wheat from the Tares, seeing it is our Masters Command, that both be
let grow together until Harvest, when he will appoint his Angels to do it? or
to dissubject (as you call it) any one from Christ? And because you once
proudly told me, that I (which am by the law of this Land rightly invested in
my Parish Church, whereto you never had any title at all) was not called
thither, either by God or Man, but that you were by both, whereby you have
disparaged my Ministry in the place where I live; I require you to give
satisfaction to these particulars.

1 Whether you can tell the secrets of the heart, and the preparations of the
same, wherein does consist internal Vocation, which are known only to God; or
whether can you be justified in judging them not to be at all, ubi non constat
de malo; in both which you commit no small sin, but either against Christian
Charity, or of Arrogant presumption.

2 Whether do you hold our external calling now practiced in our Church to be
unlawful, a nor coming in by the door as you call it; and so condemn all the
Ministers thereof for Thieves and Robbers.

3 Whether your first coming to be a Curate to this place, being by the
commendations of one private man, your admission by entreaty gained from the
former Incumbent, your approbation gotten among some Mechaniques only, ignorant
and unlearned Tradesmen. Women and Children, (there being diverse, Gentlemen and
Scholars in the Parish, whose consent you neither have had, or must ever look
to have hereafter) be either a sufficient warrant for you to presume your own
calling is from God, or prove that you are lawfully called by the people.

6. Whether do you hold that there is any obedience for conscience sake due to
the temporal Magistrate in matters Ecclesiastical which tend only to the
Ceremony of Religion, and are no ways repugnant to the Word of God: if there
be none, you deny the Kings Supremacy: if there be, why do all your Disciples
(whom you must either disclaim being yours, or else learn another lesson)
pretend so much their conscience against their obedience? either you must
substantially prove them repugnant to the Word of God, or be reproved your self
for suffering so long their erroneous conscience, in a matter of such
consequence, as obedience is: And whereas you told me, that in all matters
belonging, not only to the substance, but to the Ceremony of Gods Service,
there must be an affirmative precept immediately commanding them in Scripture,
or that they are not to be admitted; It behooves you to clear this necessary
Question; Whether things in their own nature indifferent may not be commanded
by the Magistrate, and of necessary consequence challenge, obedience for
conscience sake, according to the precept of the Apostle, Romans 13.5. Which if
you deny, you take away all power from the civil Magistrate, which can be only
versed about things indifferent (all things that are commanded or forbidden in
Scripture, being to be obeyed without any respect to the Magistrate at all, and
immediately binding the conscience:) if you confess you shall make many return
to their obedience, which stand at this time seduced from it; wherein you shall
do God and your Country good service, for from you they will sooner receive
satisfaction, of whom they have so good an opinion; or else you shall make them
to forsake your society as being your self now, no Minister of faction, and
declaring that such which will not be satisfied, but perversely stand out, are
not worthy to retain any Communion with you; for in matter of such importance,
as you are to satisfy the weak, so you are to reject those that are
refractory, and wilfully contentious.

Lastly, I do think it a work worthy such a Minister of God as you would be, to
declare openly unto the world, what that conscience is, which is so much
pretended against Obedience, and wherein it consists, that we may know whether
it be not false and erroneous; because I find the consciences of others which
are much better informed to make no such scruples; which makes me think it may
in many of them proceed ex ignorantia aut vitio; and also what that Idolatry
is, with which they charge all outward service of God, and lay horrible
blasphemous imputations upon the Church of England, which are not to be endured
by any of her sons. I do but desire to know whether you be right in your
determinations, that I may follow you also; or wrong that I may help to restore
you: you, and I shall not be benefited alone, but many others shall be
confirmed with us. Let not fear, nor favor, nor gain, which are by a true
Minister, to be counted base respects, deter you from this work; It will tend
undoubtedly to Gods glory, to settle so many doubtings, which like furies walk
up and down in so many of our breasts; you cannot pretend your want of leisure,
since you have no cure of souls to attend unto. Wrong not your self so much,
as to refuse it, there will many imputations lie upon you if you do; and if you
do it, whether well or ill, we shall be confirmed and a multitude of souls with
us, either with you or against you; if the first, we shall return to unity; if
the second, we shall go on with constancy, with true faith to God, obedience to
the Magistrate, and good conscience toward all, which unfainedly desires to do

One that should be Your Brother in Christ, James Wilcock.

FINIS.

