Faithful Warnings, Expostulations and Exhortations, TO The several Professors
of Christianity in England, as well those of the Highest as the Lowest Quality.

TOGETHER, With a Testimony against diverse great Errors in some Teachers, and
other Hearers, under strict Profession of Religion; occasionally written some
time ago in Opposition to diverse Atheistical Notions delivered by Dr. P --, in
a Sermon Preached on the Death of the Late QUEEN; and now Illustrated with
several Openings of many places of Scripture, concerning the Great Doctrines of
the Christian Faith and Religion.

To which is added, Two Letters written from the Minister of Port Royal in
Jamaica, giving a full Account of the great Destruction that came on that Place
(for its great Sins) by the Dreadful Earthquake that was there in the Year 1692.

AS ALSO, An Epistle of Bartholomew Tertian, written to the Waldensian
Churches, wherein are many wholesome Christian Exhortations and Reproofs, of
Sports, Dancing, etc. And a Historical Relation of a Dreadful Monster that
appeared at Palermo, a Seaport in Cicily, Destroying some Thousands of People,
in the Time of Marcus Aurelius, in Judgment to them for their great Wickedness.

With other Things, very Useful to Recover all Mankind out of his Fallen State
into Paradise again.

By JOAN WHITROWE.

London Printed, and are to be Sold by E. Whitlock, in Stationers-Court near
Stationers' Hall, 1697.

Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy Heart, bu^ thou shall plainly rebuke
thy Neighbor, and suffer him not to sin, Levit. 19.17.

Thou shall not avenge, nor be mindful of wrong against the Children of thy
People, but shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, I am the LORD Levit. 18.19.

When I shall say unto the Wicked, Oh Wicked Man, thou shall die the Death, if
thou do not speak and admonish the Wicked of his Way, that Wicked Man shall
Die for his Iniquity, but his Blood will I require at thy Hand. Nevertheless,
if thou warn the Wicked of his Way, to turn from it, if he do not turn from his
Way, he shall Die for his Iniquity, but thou have delivered thy Soul, Ezekiel. 33.

My Son, have thou sinned? Do so no more, but Pray for thy former Sins, that
they may be forgiven thee, Eccles. 21.

Flee from Sin as from a Serpent, for if thou come near it, it will bite
thee: The Teeth thereof are as the Teeth of a Lion, to slay the Souls of Men,
Verse 2.

All Iniquity is as a Two-edged Sword, the Wounds thereof cannot be healed,
Verse 3.

Whose hates to be Reformed, is in the Way of Sinners; b^^^^ that fears the
LORD, Converteth in ^^^rt, Verse 6.

He that keeps the Law of the LORD, rules his own Affections thereby; and
the Increase of Wisdom is the End of the Fear of GOD, Verse 11.

To the KING, and Both Houses of PARLIAMENT, I humbly present this following
Treatise.
THE Reason why I presume so high in my Dedication, is, you being his
Vicegerents on Earth, are the great Instruments in GOD's Hand, who can Cure the
Nation of its Malady, and Heal the Languishing Diseases, and so make up the
Breaches thereof; which if GOD is pleased (though now at last) to honor you with
this great Work of Reformation, to advance the Kingdom of CHRIST in the Earth,
you will not only give occasion to your Dearest Friends, but your greatest
Enemies shall Bless, Praise, and Magnify the LORD of Lords on your behalf, for
then shall that Prayer be answered, Thy Kingdom come, and Thy Will be done, in
Earth as it is in Heaven; and will not this be a Glorious Day, when instead of
Killing and Destroying one another, we shall Pray one for another? Then we
shall be Christians indeed, not only in Name, but in Nature. Oh Blessed Day
will this be, to love the LORD above all things, and your Neighbor as your
selves; here will be an end of Covetousness, that great Idolatress, Abomination
of the Land, and Merciless Idol of all the World, an end of Lust, the Mother of
Penury, which never obtains what it seeks, an end of Malice, Deceit, and
Discord: Here the Work of Justice shall be Peace; here you will be Just, and do
that which is Lawful and Right; here you will not Oppress the Poor and Needy,
nor Spoil any by Violence, but will restore the Pledge, every one to his
Neighbor, and so do Justice to the Widow, and give your Bread to the Hungry,
and Cloth the Naked with a Garment, and will execute true Judgment between Man
and Man; Whoredom, and Wine, and New Wine, shall not take away your Hearts;
here you will not Oppress nor Vex the Widow, Fatherless, the Stranger, nor the
Poor, neither will you respect Persons, nor receive Gifts nor Rewards, because
the Gift blinds the Eye of the Wise, and perverteth the words of the Just, that
you cannot see to reprove Sin in the Gate; for behold the Eyes of the LORD are
upon all the Earth, to show himself strong with them that are of a perfect
Heart toward GOD, to love him, and keep his Commandments; and here you shall be
the Blessed, If you walk not in the Counsel of the Wicked, nor stand in the Way
of Sinners, nor sit in the Seat of the Scornful; but your Delight to be in the
Law of the Lord, and in his Law meditate Day and Night. Oh Happy People who are
in such a Case; yea, Blessed for Ever are they whose GOD is the LORD! Then
Blessed shall you be in your going out, and in your coming in, if the KING and
his PARLIAMENT join together Unanimously in this Great Work, to exalt the Name
of GOD in the Earth, and for the perfecting thereof, take to them the Zeal of
Josias, the Courage of Jehosaphat, the Love and Zeal of David, who said, The
Zeal of thine House has eaten me up: And, Oh how I love thy Law, it is my
M^^itation all the Day: I love thee dearly, Oh LORD. And thus he goes on
expressing the Indearedness of his Affection to the LORD, and his Holy VVays,
making Vows and Promises, saying, I will walk in my House before thee with a
perfect Heart; I will set no wicked thing before my Eyes; I hate the work of
them that fall away, it shall not cleave unto me: A froward Heart shall depart
from me; I will know no evil: Him that privily slandereth his Neighbor will I
destroy; him that has a proud Look, and a high Heart I will not suffer; mine
Eyes shall be upon the Faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me: He
that walks in a perfect Way, he shall serve me, there shall no deceitful
Person dwell in my House; he that tells Lies shall not remain in my sight;
thus will I destroy all the Wicked of the Land, that I may cut off all the
Workers of Iniquity from the City of the LORD: Mark how he would destroy them;
not by taking away their Lives, but by putting them out of their Offices, to
depose them from their Trusts: Oh! that I might be so happy to prevail with the
King and his Parliament, to try this way of winning the People of this Land;
first, by their own Pious Lives and Conversations, the King in his Court, and
every Member in Both Houses of Parliament, particularly, every one in his own
House, (and Both Houses of Parliament to purge out the Atheism and
Antichristianism) and when this is done, the greater number will be on the
LORD's part, to set up CHRIST, and to throw down Antichrist, that you may
prosper and live long in the Land which the LORD has given you; for David
Reigned Forty Years by taking this way of method, to purge his own Heart, House
and Kingdom; and you hear how highly the LORD styles him, to be a Man after his
own Heart; and will you, Oh ye Princes! be negligent in so great a Work both
Internal and External, wherein so great a Happiness does consist, as your
Prosperity in this World, and your Eternal Joy and Heavenly Felicity in the
Life to come, for a Momentary Life of sinful Pleasure, which you know not but
that Moment may be the last of your Enjoyment, as Christ said, Thou Fool, this
Night shall thy Soul be required, and you know that it was David's true
Repentance, and deep Humiliation, that brought him into so great Favor with
GOD; you hear how great the inward Travail of his Soul was, to bring forth the
Will of GOD in all things as he required, which was the Ground from whence all
his good External Actions of Government in his House and Kingdom did proceed:
Nor did David hide his Light which he had received of GOD under a Bushel, but
set it up to all the World; for that end, no doubt, that all might see wherein
he fell, and by what means he obtained Mercy, and so he came to sing of Mercy
and Judgment, unto thee, Oh LORD, said he, I will sing: He was not ashamed to
Confess the GOD whom he served before Men; no, no, before the Gods will I sing
praise unto thee, exalt the LORD our GOD, and fall down before his Footstool,
for he is holy. Holiness becomes thy House, O LORD, and the place where thine
Honor dwells; and thus was his whole Life a Life of Prayer and Praise, and
admiring the LORD in all his wonderful Works. Again, as David was, as it were,
proud of the LORD, in making his boast of him, in vehemently loving him,
praising, admiring, and exalting him above all things Visible or Invisible;
even so does GOD own David before all the World, and makes his boasts of him;
and the good that he did to Israel was for his Servant David's sake; for, said
the LORD to the Prophet Ahijah, I will not take the whole Kingdom out of
Solomon 's hand, but he shall be Prince all the Days of his Life, for David my
Servant's sake, whom I chose, because he kept my Commandments, and my Statutes;
but I will take the Kingdom out of his Son's hand, for his Father Solomon 's
Sin; yet I will give him one Tribe, that David my Servant may have a Light
always before me in Jerusalem; and so the Mercy goes on in his Line till it
comes to Christ: But was this a bare Historical Service or Worship that GOD
was so well pleased with in him; was it his going to the Temples, and offering
Sacrifices? No, for he speaking in the Person of Christ, said, Sacrifice and
Offering thou would not, therefore I come to do thy Will, Oh GOD, in a Body
which thou have prepared; and, said he, the Sacrifice which God requires, is a
broken and a contrite Heart, and this Sacrifice David offered plentifully to
the LORD in GOD's House, within him in his Soul, in his most inward parts,
which is GOD's Temple and Dewlling Place; for Heaven is my Throne, and the
Earth my Footstool, then where is the place of my Rest? for all these things
have I made, says the LORD: And says the Apostles, God dwells not in
Temples made with hands: So then that outward Temple was but a Figure of the
inward Temple, which was destroyed with the Glory thereof: And the innermost
Sanctuary, where the High Priest was only to come, was a Type or Figure of the
inward or innermost place in the Soul, where GOD will be worshipped, and whose
Right it is to have his Habitation there, in the Holiest of Holies; as our Lord
and Savior said to the Samaritan Woman, Ye worship ye know not what, the time
comes, and now is, that the Father will be worshipped neither in this
Mountain, or that Mountain, nor at Jerusalem it self, but in Spirit and in
Truth; for such the Father seeks to worship him; although they were to wait at
Jerusalem to receive this Promise of the Father, the Spirit of Truth, which
would lead them into all Truth, as their Lord said to them, when their Hearts
was filled with Sorrow at his departure from them, It is expedient for you,
says he, that I go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come
unto you, and when he is come, he will reprove the World of Sin. I have yet
many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. Here you may see how
weak and ignorant the Disciples of our Lord were, whilst only his Bodily
presence was with them, though pure, chaste and holy; how ignorant were they of
Divine Inspiration, Heavenly Revelation, and the Secret Mysteries of the
Kingdom? Which made Christ say, It Is the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh
profits nothing: And so says the Apostle Paul, Although I once knew Christ
after the Flesh, yet henceforth know I him so no more. So here you see he
leaves the outward, and comes to the inward, saying, The Law of the Spirit of
Life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death: Here Is a
great change in Paul, since he was crying out of the Body of Sin and Death,
saying, Who shall deliver me? Yet in this deplorable state, from a sight of Sin
under the Law, there arises a little Comfort; I thank GOD, says he, that with
my Mind I serve the Lord, though my Flesh wars against the Spirit, and tempts me
to Sin; yet here is no evidence that Paul yielded to the Tempter, but contrary,
overcame the Temptation. I besough^ the Lord thrice, said he, and who can te^
but that thrice was threescore; and the Answer makes good the Effect, My Grace
said GOD, is sufficient for thee: So her was the Grace presently at hand to
help and strengthen Paul to overcome the Temptation, The Grace of GOD which
has appeared to all Men, teaching them to deny all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and to live righteously and holily in this present evi^^ World; so that
if you join with the Grace as Paul did, and give up your strength and might to
it; but if you deny to give up your strength and might, and join to the
Temptation, then you resist the Grace where the Power is placed, and can have
no Benefit thereof; for it is no Sin to be tempted, but to yield to the Tempter
is the Sin; for our Lord himself was tempted, but he powerfully resisted to the
Death; and so did Paul, and so he followed Christ, and bids us all do the same,
Follow me, says he, as I follow Christ; so Christ is the Captain, the Leader,
the Lawgiver, and his Soldiers receives the Command from his Mouth, to follow
him the Captain of our Salvation, resisting powerfully and manfully, fighting
our way through all the Snares of Hell and Death, as that worthy Person of the
Church of England said in his following Letter.

And thus, Oh King and Princes, you have the Example of all the Holy Fathers
from Righteous Abel, and of all the good Kings, from David until this time,
whose Names and Acts are upon Record, to be in Everlasting Remembrance before
the Lord, and throughout all Generations, for a Memorial and Praise to all who
follows their steps, in loving the Lord, and fulfilling his Commands. But on
the contrary, they that followed their pernicious Ways, both Kings, Princes,
and People, that disregarded the Lord, and sought not the Honor of his
Glorious Name, because of which, their Names became a Stink, a Proverb, a
Byword of Reproach, not only to themselves, but all the Heathen round about
them, till at last he cast them as Dung from his presence.

But before it came to this, how long was his Righteous Soul grieved with their
Rebellions against Him and his Holy Laws, yet still he sent Messenger after
Messenger to reclaim them, declaring b^ them his Will and Pleasure; but the^
slighted his Messengers, and evil-intreated them, and so went on so long till
hi^ pure Spirit was as it were weary with striving; and thus they sinned out
the Day of their Precious Visitation, till the fier^ Indignation of the Lord
took hold o^ them, and then as Dindimus said to Alexander the Conqueror, They
shall know the Pains justly inflicted by GOD upon unju^^ Men; for he is a Judge
of all Injuries, an^ the Sighs of those that are injuriously treated become the
Pain of those that injure them

Then Oh ye Rulers of the People, see^ ing it is to be so, how great is you
Charge, to make Laws for the Glory o^ GOD, and with all your Power to pu^ them
in Execution; and to this you mu^^ take his Jealousy for your Armor, an^ put
on Righteousness for a Breast-plat^ and take true Judgment instead of an He^
met, and put on Holiness for an Invinc^ble Shield, and sharpen his fierce Wrath
for a Sword to Fight with him against the Unwise, as that great Champion
Ph^^nehas stopped the Plague from the Children of Israel, by his Valor, and
fiery Zea^ for GOD against the Workers of Iniquity; and if you do the same, who
knows ^ut that GOD of his Infinite Mercy may ^top the Decree [that is gone
forth against these Kingdoms of your Dominions] which are Great Plagues, and
Amazing Judgments, and are just ready to break forth, if a speedy Reformation
does not prevent them? Then Woe and Alas what will become of all your Gallantry,
Pride, Pomp, Ostentation, and Inordinate Lust that captivates Men, which now a
whole World is not able to satisfy? Will the Honor and Glory of a perishing
World avail you then! No; but be a gnawing Worm in your Consciences, which will
make you Curse your Lovers, who were the Cause of your fooling away so Great a
Glory, for so frivolous Vanities, and false Delights.

But will the destroying Angel pass by you because of your Greatness? O no, the
Great and the Small, they are all one to HIM; but the Greater you are in Power,
being Officers of HIS Kingdom, if you Judge not right, nor keep the Law of the
Most HIGH, to fulfill the Will of GOD in all things, then horribly and suddenly
will he come upon you, to giv^ you the Reward of your Works; for the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that bea^ his Sword in vain, and so Blasphemes h^ Holy
Name.

And indeed it is dreadful to consider the Original of these things, which are,
when Men send their Sons to the Universities t^ learn something that is good,
to be se^ viceable to GOD and the Common wealth; but instead of learning good
they often learn all manner of Evi^ as Pride, Cunning, Craft, Subtilty, ho^ to
overreach the Simple, and to depriv^ him of that which he has gotten by hi^
Sweat and Labor; and here they lear^ to Mock, Scoff, Blaspheme, Curse, Swear^
Cheat, Lie, with all shameless Vices, etc. If but one among them appear that
fears GOD, they shout and wonder at him as if he were an Owl, and count him
a^ Fool or Madman; and here they learn all Impudence: And these are they that
must be Trusted with Churches, Schools, Universities, and Ordained to be the
Shepherds of Christ, also these are preferred to Civil Governments, and Places
of Trus^ and Authority in Commonwealth; and such Superiors commit the greatest
Wickedness, and the Inferiors learn of them: For as it was said, the Superior
by his Craft and Subtilty gets the Estate of the Inferior to himself, by his
Oppression and Extortion, and so constrains the poor Glly Souls to labor
hard, to maintain the Pride and Luxury of the Rich, and must be the Slave,
Afflicting and Consuming his Body, when, at the same time, the Rich Man's Dogs
fares better than the Needy Soul, and all this must be counted Equal, Just, and
Right, although it be contrary to Nature it self, but having its Center in the
Dark or Bottomless Pit, where one Property of Darkness afflicts, tormenteth,
and tortureth the other, and where the Life is at Enmity with it ^elf; and then
another sort of Inferior ^earns of the Superior to maintain a Luxu^ious Life,
by Covetous Couzening, Cheating, Lying, Overreaching the Sim^le, and so
Robbing one another of their Rights, Measures, and Weights, without Pity or
Compassion to their poor di^ressed Neighbor; and if notice is ta^en of it, by
way of Reasoning or Re^roof, the Answer is, they are forced to do so, to exact
more Profit, and (...) to extort from their poor Neighbou^ without Mercy or
Compassion, becau^^ of the Oppression they lie under themselves, thus breaking
the Precious Commands of Christ, who says, Love the Neighbor as thy self; and
whatsoever (...) would have Men do unto you, do ye that un^ them; but contrary
to this Heaven^ Maxim, the Inferior does all this to follo^ the Superior in
Riotousness, Luxury Pride, and the like; for what the Superi^ does in State and
Delicacy, that the I^ferior does in a Beastial manner of Lif^ and thus
wickedness is wrought by wic^edness, till the World is filled with Vi^lence,
and the Devil becomes Prince ov^ the Body and Soul of Mankind.

Wherefore seeing this to be the Cou^ of the World, their Force to be evil,
(...) their Course not right, I thought it (...) Duty to Cry unto you, Oh ye
Princes (...) the People! as the Woman of Abel cry^ to Johab for Mercy, even so
cry I un^ you, that you would be Merciful (...) your own Lives and Liberties,
by Enco^ raging and Establishing Righteousne^ and Suppressing all Vice and
Wickedne^^ that ye may be able to stand before the Almighty and most Terrible
GOD, who shall come to Judge the Secrets of Men's Hearts, together with their
Public Actions; in his fiery Zeal, and severe Judgment, when the Superior and
Inferior's Works must be put into the Fire, and here tried; or otherwise, how
will the ^uperior be able to endure, when the Infe^or-shall Cry out in the
Anguish of his ^oul, saying, Woe, woe, be unto you Supe^ors, for giving me
occasion by your Examples to be Wicked, Lewd, and Unrighteous: ^o be unto you
that did not restrain us from ^ning against our Creator.

Oh then how will the Superior be able (...) stand before the Judge of all the
Earth, (...) render an Account of his Office, where^^ he has been set and
placed for that ^d, to hinder Injuries, and all Unrigh^usness, and to keep the
Wicked in ^ve, by Reproof, Correction, and Pu^hment; but alas! instead of
taking ^s way of method to save Souls from ^struction, it has been the study
of (...) Superior how to satisfy his Covetous ^terprize, by getting the Estate
of the ^erior to himself, and so has coveted his Money more than the good of
h^ Soul; this is the Rule of the World, the is the Course both of Superior and
Ins^rior, of the Shepherd, and of the Shee^ devouring one another, as the great
Fish^ in the Ocean devour the small, and a^ this under a Notion of Religion;
Christ Passion and Sufferings must be the Cloa^ for all these Abominations:
Here if the can but Confess themselves to be Christ ans with their Lips, though
they lodge t^ Whore of Antichrist in their Hearts, the are secure: But Oh! ye
False Shepherds (...) all sorts, throughout the World, who pr^fess him in
words, but climbs up into t^ Sheepfold another way than by Chr^ the Door, who
are the ground Cause (...) all the Errors which the People lie inta^ gled in,
by casting the Garment (...) Christ's Sufferings over the Hypocri^ and
Deceivers, who have hardly the she dow thereof, how much less the su^ stance?
How will you Answer it, wh^ Christ shall require an Account of (...) Sheep from
you, who have wittingly a^ wilfully for Favor of Money, Rich Honor, and
Reputation, covered the S^ both of the Superior and Inferior? I^ Christ do so,
who told every one the Truth to his Face? He did both bruise and heal, not for
Favor or Respect to the Person of any, but according to the Will of his
Father, and ought not you to do the same? Ought not you to be their Pattern in
well-doing, as he was? And then truly tell them they must Fight against Pride,
Lust, and an Hypocritical Life, that they must with speed go out of themselves,
and enter into Righteousness, Love, and Humility; telling them plainly, that
the Passion of Christ will benefit none, unless they turn from their evil,
false, wicked Ways and Purposes, with a true and unfeigned Repentance; for so
said our Lord, He that repents and forsakes shall find Mercy; and to him the
Sufferings of Christ are powerful and profitable; and here he enters into
Covenant with GOD, and is partaker of the sure Mercies of David; thus you would
stand for GOD, and be a Witness against all Unrighteousness.

Wherefore, I beseech both Old and Young, Superior and Inferior, in the Bowels
of the Love of GOD, whilst it is called to Day, that is, whilst the Door of
Mercy is yet open to you, which I am a Witness for the Lord is; turn you, (...)
turn you this Moment, put it not off til^ another time, but whilst it is to Day
har^den not your Hearts, for you know no^ but this may be the last Visitation
of the Love of GOD, that Ever may be te^dered to you; for the Earth is now
fill'^ with all manner of Wickedness, the fier^ Wrath of GOD is at hand, the
last Judgment is at the Door, GOD will purge (...) sweep the Earth with Fire,
and then giv^ every one his due Reward.

I have seen the Harvest ripe, the Grapes and Fruit just ready to drop; an^ it
was said to me, This Crop of Wicked ness shall not stand, meaning througho^ the
Universe; therefore I humbly be that you will not neglect this great Salvation,
which the Holy GOD tenders (...) you at this time; and say not in yo^ Hearts,
Who shall ascend to fetch it from above, or descend to fetch it from b^ neath,
because it is in you; the Word (...) Faith is in you, the Power to do (...)
Will of GOD is in you, because Christ the Hope of Glory, is in you, and in hi^
is the Power placed; so that you need (...) go to the Universities for it, or
Travel beyond the Seas in far Countries to seek for Wisdom in remote places,
for she stands at the Door of your Hearts knocking, saying, Open to me my
Beloved; and if she find a Soul that is emptied of it self, hungering and
thirsting after the Love of Christ, as David's was, when he said, As the Heart
pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O God, then she
there reveals her self; but if the Soul yield it self to her for a full
Possession, then she penetrateth through it with her inflaming Fire of Love,
and unlocketh Mysteries to the Soul; so that there is no more need of
searching, and painful toyling about it, for every simple Man may attain it, if
he do not hinder himself by his own willing and running from GOD to the
Creatures: As for Example, the Prophets and Apostles who were simple ignorant
Men, before they were called, and then after they were called, they waited to
receive the Promise, and in this waiting state they received the Blessing; for
said Christ, Blessed shall that Servant be, who is found waiting; so here the
Soul witnesses what John said, That which we have tasted and handled of the
Word of Life, we declare unto you: They declared it to them, but they could not
give it to them, they could only give direction how to attain it, but could not
give them the Life and Virtue thereof, that they must seek themselves; as
Christ said, Seek, and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be opened to you the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of GOD, the Heavenly Wisdom, which is first pure, and
then holy; and whose awakeneth to he^ betimes, says Solomon, shall have no
great Travail, for he shall find her sitting at his Door. To think upon her,
says he, is perfect understanding, and whosoever watches for her, shall be soon
without Care, for she i^ the School-mistress of the Knowledge o^ GOD, and a
pure influence that flows from the Glory of the Almighty, therefore can no
defiled thing come unto her^ I loved her, says he, above Health, an^ purposed
to take her for my Light; for he^ Light cannot be quenched, because Love is the
keeping of her Laws, and the keeping of he^ Laws is the assurance (...)
Immortality, and Immortality makes (...) near to GOD therefore the desire of
W^sdom leads to the Kingdom.

If your Delight be then in Thrones and Scepters, O Kings of the People, Honor
W^sdom that you may Reign for Ever; for if Riches be a Possession to be desired
in this Life, what is Richer than Wisdom, that works all things? I, said
Solomon, preferred her before Scepters and Thrones, and counted Riches nothing
in comparison of her, neither did I compare Precious Stones unto her; for all
Gold is but a little Gravel, in respect of her, and Silver shall be counted but
Clay before her; wherefore I prayed, and understanding was given me, I called,
and the Spirit of Wisdom came into me; for when I perceived I could not enjoy
her, except GOD gave her, and that that was a point of Wisdom to know whose
Gift she was, then I went unto the Lord and besought him, and with my whole
Heart, I said, O GOD of my Fathers, and LORD of Mercy, which have made all
things with thy Word, and ordained Man through thy Wisdom, that he should have
Dominion over the Creatures, which thou have made, and governed the World with
Equity and Righteousness, and executed Judgment with an upright Heart; give me
that Wisdom which sits by thy Throne, and put me not out from among thy
Children; for, though a Man be never so perfect among the Children of Men, yet,
if thy Wisdom be not with him, he shall be nothing regarded: Thy Wisdom, O
Lord, which was with thee when thou made the World, which knew what was
acceptable in thy sight: O send her out of thy Holy Heavens, and from the
Throne of thy Glory, that she being present may labor with me, that I may know
what is acceptable in thy sight; for otherwise who can know thy Counsel,
without thy Holy Spirit; for so the Ways of them which are upon Earth are
reformed, and Men are taught the things that are pleasant unto thee; and are
preserved through thy Wisdom.

So far the Wisdom of Solomon, which may give you to understand the way he
came by all his Excellent and Unheard of Wisdom; he prayed and sought the Lord
with his whole Heart, as David his Father did, daily waiting at VVisdom's Gate;
and well had it been for him if he had never departed therefrom; which may be a
Caution to all Princes to watch and pray, lest they enter into Temptation: So
this is that Wisdom and Power from on High that you are to wait for, O King
and Parliament, even the Spirit of Truth to lead you into all Truth, to be with
you in Council, to go before you in all your Acts, whether Internal or
External; for without this you can do nothing which will be Acceptable to GOD,
or Good Men.

Wherefore, O Parliament of England, let my Council be Acceptable to you, and
break off your Sins by Righteousness, and your Iniquities by showing Mercy to
the Poor: But if you will not receive this Admonition, I Will weep in secret for
your Sins; therefore I beseech you, let not such a Spirit be found in the
Parliament House, as shall presume to make a Mock or a Derision at these great
and weighty Truths, as knowing the Penalty thereof, That whosoever falls on
that stone shall be broken, but on whomsoever he falls shall be broken to
pieces.

The next is, if I may be so bold to ask, Why the Tax is laid so heavy upon
the Commonalty? I know the Answer may be soon given, Because the Nation is much
in Debt, and the King greatly necessitated for Money to Pay off his Fleet and
Army: Well, but why then do you lessen your own, by Taxing your Lands lower
than before, whereas you ought rather to have made the Peoples Burthem lighter,
and your own heavier, as all o^ you being Men of Considerable Estates, and best
able to bear it, which would have tended not only much more to your Honor, but
also lessened the Peoples Complaints and Murmurings against you which I hear
daily to my great Grief.

Oh that the Wisdom from above had been with you, to have directed you more
equally to have laid them; which (...) humbly propose, Whether the High Heads,
Black Patches, Rich and Costly Apparel, Playhouses, all sorts of Gaming
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Swearing, Cursing, taking the Name of GOD in vain,
Feasting and Rioting, Couzening and Cheating, Overreaching the Simple False
Weights and Measures, Long Periwigs, a great Tax to be laid on them Washes,
Paintings, all sorts of Sports Perfumes, Packs of Dogs, Costly Furniture in
Houses, Jewels, Rings, Necklaces, with all the rest of those needless Vanities;
and all Taverns, and other Houses, that suffers any to have more than their
Necessity requires, to be largely Taxed, both the Giver and Receiver; and the
Cursed Playhouses to be severely Taxed, and Players greater, and every
particular Person, Men, Women, and Children, that goes to them, greatly Taxed,
according to their Quality; also many other things of this kind, which your
Wisdom may find out to lay heavy Taxes upon; and here no Mouth justly could
have been opened against you, ex^ept the wicked, whose Mouth GOD has
determined to stop; and, by these Noble Acts of Righteousness and Justice, your
Name would have been as Precious ^intment poured forth, the Perfume hereof, as
a good Savor, would have ^ast forth its fragrant Smell, to the fur^hermost
parts of the Earth; and here GOD would have Honored you, O ^arliament of
England, with a Name and ^ame beyond your Predecessors, as the lord has
promised, saying, They that Honor me I will Honor, but they that Disregard
me, shall be by me Disregarded, Samuel: So whether you will hear, or forbear, I
have Discharged my Duty and am a VVitness for the Lord, that he is clear of
your Blood.

J. W.

THE PREFACE.
FIRST I declare my self to be no Teacher, for the LORD has tried many in that
matter, but has found none so fit for that Work as himself, Glory to ^im for
ever: But as a Fellow Laborer ^n the Vineyard of my Lord, or as a Beg^er who
has received a good Alms, ^ends all her Fellow-beggers thither.

Secondly, I declare my self to be in the Universal Love of GOD to all Mankind,
without Respect to Persons, Sects or Opi^ions.

Thirdly, I have no Malice in my Heart (...) any: And that it has not been
from a spirit of Prejudice that I have undertaken (...) Correct their Faults,
but from an In^med Love, and Burning Zeal to GOD's ^lory, and the good of all
Mankind; that a necessity lay upon me which I could (...) ways avoid, without
being Disobedie^^ to GOD's Command; yea, Woe had bee^ to me, if I had not done
it, neither cou^^ I have laid down my Head in Peace; for^ lay upon me as the
weight of a Milston^ before I gave up to the Will of GOD neither have I any
Prejudice against t^^ Church of England more than the re^^ but an Honorable
Esteem for some among them (as I have for some amo^^ all the rest) which I
shall declare: (...) Printing a Letter which one of the Chu^^ of England sent
me, upon the Reading (...) my last Book, Printed in the Year 16^ Which Letter
declares him to be of (...) Faith of a true Christian, and I wo^^ all the
Church of England, and all other both Priests and People, were of (...) Mind,
to Love Righteousness, and h^ Iniquity: So, as to be daily Fight^ their way,
through the Snares of Hell a^ Death: And the Torrents of Belial: ^^nestly
desiring to resist unto Blood, (...) to the perfect Death of the Body of (...)
and so be made Conformable to our d^^est LORD JESUS. Here Is the Wo^^ a
Christian, deeply to be engaged aga^^ ^^e Enemy of his House, this War would
^ickly put an End to the Devils King^om, and then your Swords would be turn^^
into Plow-Shares, and Spears into Pru^^ing-hooks: to dress your own Vines, that
^^u may bring forth Fruit to the LORD ^f the Vineyard, an Hundred Fold, and
then ^^all you Learn War no more.

J. W.

THE LETTER
My Dear Friend in our Emanuel,
I Read over this Evening the Book (...) bestowed upon me, being your Tha^
givings for the King's Safe Return, (...) the Reading whereof, I received a
most (...) doubted Testimony of its Divine Origi^^ and at the same time had so
clear a sight (...) your Happy State in GOD, and far (...) vanced Growth in the
Second Adam, t^^ my Heart was knit unto you, lifting up (...) Heart to GOD in
Thankfulness on j^^ Behalf, for his Extraordinary Grace besto^^ upon you, in
making you so Signal a Wit^^ for himself, in the midst of this most Cro^^ and
Perverse Generation, and so shining Light in this Dark Night of Apostasy: W^
Blessed Daughter of Sion, be not discour^ though you do not see all the Fruit of
your (...) bours in the LORD which you may des^^ but let this Stay, Comfort,
and Support (...) Heart, that GOD, even your GOD, has Sworn, that the Word
which is gone out of his Mouth, shall not return in vain, but shall accomplish
the thing he sent it for; they that sow to the Flesh, can expect no better Crop
than that of Corruption; but you, thrice Blessed Soul, have sowed your Tears,
your Prayers, your strong Cries, your Watchings, your Fastings, your Unwearied
Labor of Love, for the K -- and Late Q --, for England, for all the Three
Nations; yea, for the whole World, in God, in the Land of the Living, where not
one Grain of what you have sown can miscarry, but must spring up in Light,
Life, Love, Joy, and Eternal Glory: Whilst I write this I am melted into Tears
of Joy, and Ravished with a Pisgah-sight of the Beauty, surpassing Loveliness,
and transcendent Sweetness of your Portion, and Inheritance of all the Saints
in GOD. And no wonder when Moses himself, when he took the same Prospect, burst
out into this Transported Rapture, Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like unto
thee? A People saved by Jehovah, etc. And the Man after God's own Heart cries
out for Joy, The Lines are fallen to me in pleasantness, and I have a lovely
Inheritance: And the foregoing Verse tells us what this Portion and Inheritance
is, Jehovah is the Lot of mine Inheritance: And how can the sight of such an
Inheritance but Charm, Ravish, Transport, Fill, and Overcome with Joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory? My Dear Friend, in this our Blessed
Inheritance, let us often meet and rejoice in this Land of the Living; and in
your approaches to the Throne of Grace; forget not your Unworthy Brother, who
in this Valley of the shadow of Death, amidst of great Weakness of Soul and
Body, is daily fighting his Way through the Snares of Hel^ and Death, and the
Torrents of Belial, earnestly desiring to resist unto Blood, even t^ the
perfect Death of the Body of Sin, and s^ he made Conformable to our Dear
Deare^^ LORD JESU, whose sweetest Name is m^ Salutation unto you, my Dear
Friend, and i^ whose sweetest Love I desire even to Rest with you, and all the
Saints, who am known to yo^ by the Name

C. H.

Some REMARKS on a Sermon, Preached on the Death of the Late QUEEN, etc.
BEcause the Days of my Mourning are not yet over, for my Beloved Lady, the
Late Queen, therefore I must take leave to Assuage my Sorrow and Ease my Grief;
which I can no ways ^o, but by clearing my Conscience: For ^t has lain upon me
as a great Burden, which I had hoped length of time would ^ave Removed; but I
find, by sorrowful Experience, the longer the time, the heavi^r the Burden;
therefore I will declare it, ^oping thereby to find Relief. Upon our Dear, the
late Queen's fatal Death, many Sermons were Preached; some of them I perused,
wherein I had some Sati^faction, especially one Preached in ^he Tower, which I
had great Unity with the most part of it: But after this I ^a^ another by one
called a Doctor of Divin^^

Thus I have briefly accounted (...) this Expression in my Text, of calli^^
Rulers, and those none of the best, (...) the Name of Gods and Angels, and t^^
by the Holy Ghost himself, whom no^ can have the Blasphemous Impude^^ to Charge
any with Flattery in so ^^ing: Thus says the Doctor.

Now I shall not dare to presume to sa^ the Holy Ghost Flatters, in giving such
^^tles to Mortals: No, I thank God for (...) Grace that has taught me other
way but I may presume to say, this Doctor one of the greatest Flatterers,
exce^^ that in the Gospel to Herod, that ever Read of in any History; and what
(...) can Propose to himself, or any oth^^ more than Flattery, (...) deliver
such thin^ in such an Atheistical Age as this is a^stery to the Wise; but it is
like his oth^^ Doctrine, where he says, The Que^ taught them Virtue, those of
the be^ Quality of her own Sect, and She P^^ctised it her self in a right
manner, a^^ to the best advantage; not as a Su^^ Melancholy Humor, a piece of
Pevi^^ness and Moroseness, or a Superstitious Restraint from the Innocent
Freedoms and Pleasures of Life which has affrighted so many from it.

O what Scurrilous Names he gives the Practice and Absteinuous Life of our
Blessed Savior, the Holy Prophets and Apostles, and all the Primitive
Christians, as well as those of latter Ages: But did you ever hear of any that
were true Christians, or the true People of God, that had not there times of
private Retirements, as may be found throughout all the Holy Scriptures, the
Book of Martyrs, and other Ancient Ecclesiastical Histories which declares of
their Retirements and Abstinences, as Fastings, Watchings, and deep
Humiliations* and for this End they did perform this (...) First, To Obey the
Command of Go^; and Secondly, To get the Victory over themselves, their own
Wills, Ways and Works; which this Man calls Innocent Freedoms and Pieasures of
Life; which were the very things the Christians were to deny themselves in; for
what more Pernicious than the Pleasures of Life to a Soul that is fighting its
Way through all the Snares of De^^ and Hell, to Obtain a Heavenly Inh^tance, an
Immortal Crown of Glory, (...) the Joy of which the true Christians den^^ the
Pleasures of Life, took up the Cross Christ, and Despised the Shame.

But the False Christians, who sa^^ They were Christians and were not; (...)
were of the Synagogue of Satan, The Lived in the Pleasures of Life, whose G^^
was their Belly, whose Glory was the Shame; for they minded Earthly thin^ and
so became Enemies to the Cross Christ, that Crucifies the Pleasures (...) Life,
and Mortifies the Liberty of t^ Flesh; with the Affections and L^^ thereof: A
Woeful Day was it to o^ well Disposed Queen, when this M^^came to be her
Teacher, who Taug^^ the Pleasures of Life to be the right Manner and the best
Advantage; which, ha^ she followed his Prescriptions, she h^^ never answered,
in the least measure, t^^ End of the Lord in her coming into England: But,
Blessed be God, sometimes s^^ had a better Teacher, who showed h^ that straight
was the Gate and narro^ was the Way that led to Eternal Happiness and
Everlasting Blessing. Oh that she had thoroughly followed the Dictates of His
Holy Spirit, then had her Days been Prolonged, and she Advanced to that Degree
of Honor, that all her Predecessors never attained to: Again says this
Doctor, She gave them Patterns of Virtue, not Uncouth or Fantastic, affected
Unnatural, such as we meet with in the Legends; but what are agreeable to Civil
Life; and to all the Stations of this World; what Christianity and the plain
Laws of God require of us; and those things which they had not forbidden, she
did not think necessary to forbid her self: The undue Rigours and Severities of
some Indiscreet Persons have done great harm to Religion, by Condemning those
things, as absolutely Sinful, which are so only by Accident, but in themselves
Innocent, such as Dancing, Playing at Cards, going to Plays, and the like; our
Admirable Queen could distinguish here b^^ween Duty and Prudence, between
Unlawful and Inexpedient; she would not refuse those common Diversions, nor use
them too much; she would not wholly keep from Plays, as if they were utterly
Unlawful, but went very rarely to show she did not much approve them, and that
she thought her time much better spent another way, in Reading, Prayer, and
Meditation, and Private Devotion in he^ Closet.

No Thanks to this False Teacher that she thought her time much better spent
another way, in much better things in Reading, Prayer, and Meditations. This
was the Infinite Love and Mercy of God to her: For had she not bee^ Visited
with the Lord's Loving Kindnes^ otherways, then through such as him, she had
been Swallowed up in those Gulf of Vanities, which they had prepared for her
common Diversion: But she w^ withheld by a Secret Hand, though she kne^ it not,
from Running so much into the Excess, as they had privily laid for (...) She
being under them, and they over h^^ She had a great Spirit for God, and wo^^
have done Generous things: But she w^ kept back by them; their Power was (...)
bove hers; she, precious Soul, might w^ say as David did, These Sons of Serv^
are too hard for me: As the Doctor afo^^said declares, for out of his own Mouth
he shall be Judged, who taught our Innocent Queen, that the Cursed Abominations
of Plays, Cards, Dancing, and the Pleasures of Life are Innocent in themselves;
yet notwithstanding the predominency of his Barefaced Lies, the Spirit of God
had that Influence, by striving and wrestling with her, as to show her she
should not approve of them; and that she thought her time much better spent
another way; what an Admirable Temper, and Excellent Inclination was here in
her to be wrought upon; here was the good Ground indeed for the precious Seed
of the Kingdom to be Sown in, had she had the Good Husbandmen about her, such
as Paul and Apollos, and such as Bartholomew Tertian, Pastor to the Waldensian
Churches of the Valley Pragela. I say, had she had such Faithful Laborers to
Encourage her own Pious Inclinations; Oh what Excellent Fruit had she brought
forth, both to God and Man; but alas she was Compast about with the Contrary,
such as brought up new Doctrine, contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and all
the Primitive Christians; who Preached the Cross of Christ, which is the Power
of God to them that believe in the Sufficiency thereof, to give the Victory
over all Sin and Iniquity; if the Soul abides in it; that is, in the Cross, and
goes not out from it. They that do thus, shall receive Power to become the Sons
of God, for they shall Grow from one Degree of Grace to another, till they come
to the perfect Stature of the fullness of God in Christ Jesus their Lord and
Lawgiver; this is the Reward of the Cross of Christ, which is the Power of God.

But if you follow your Blind Atheistical Guides, who Teaches you to go from
one Playhouse to another, and from one Dancing-house to another, and from one
Game of Cards to another, and from one Pleasure of Life to another; till you,
Prodigals, spend your Portion both External and Internal, and so have nothing
to Feed on but Husks, you must expect the just Recompense of Reward, as our
Savior said: For the Blind Guides, and those that are led by them to fall into
the Pi^ of Destruction for Ever: But this Idle Shepherd, that has Fed himself,
and not the Flock; what do I say, not Fed the Flock; Yes he has with Lies and
Deceit; or else what means his saying, That the plain Laws of God do not forbid
to go to Plays, Cards, Dancing, and the Pleasures of Life; and those things,
says he, that the plain Laws of God had not forbidden; the Queen did not think
necessary to forbid her self. O Behold this Doctor, what Pains and Advantage he
takes to uphold the Kingdom of Antichrist, and to throw down the Kingdom of
Christ: Woe and Alas, it is no wonder that our Sweet, Humble, Meek-Spirited
Queen, did no more of this great Work of Reformation, before she went off, when
she had such about her, that would say any thing for the Wages of
Unrighteousness; any thing that the Devil put into their Wicked Hearts for
filthy Lucre Sake; as this Man of Belial can have the Impudence to bring forth
his Works of Darkness, which he has fetched out of the Bottomless Pit into the
Face of the whole World: That when he had Hatched his Cockatrice Eggs to bring
forth a Viper to destroy the Souls of all Mankind.

I Will call Heaven and Earth, and God the Judge of all, to Witness against his
Lying Doctrine; and all the Spirits of just Men in all Ages, of all Sorts and
Sects whatsoever, to be Judge, whether this is Doctrine fit to be Preached in
this Atheistical Age, or among a Christian People? And he has not only the
Impudence to Justify those Cursed Vices, but to Condemn those that Bear their
Testimony, for the Lord, against all such Abominable and Hellish Practices:
For, says he, the undue Rigorous Severities of some Indiscreet Persons have
done great harm to Religion and Virtue, by Condemning those things as
Absolutely Sinful, which are so only by Accident, but in themselves Innocent;
such as Dancing, Playing at Cards, going to Plays, and the like. Oh that it
might be according to his saying, to have done great harm to that Devilish
Religion that he is of, which is the Pleasures of Life, and his Vicious Virtue.

Oh LORD GOD Everlasting, Holy, Just and True, When will thou stop the Mouths
of these Lying Teachers, that Presumptuously take thy Ever Blessed Name into
their Ungodly Mouths, and Hates thy Holy Pure Spirit, to reform their Vicious
and Ungodly Lives.

But, pray take notice, how high this Spirit of Error, charges the Holy
Prephets and our Blessed Lord and Savior, and his Blessed Apostles, who
followed His Heavenly Doctrine of Self-denial with the Primitive Christians and
the Blessed Martyrs, who were Living Witnesses against all such false Doctrine,
and sealed to the Crucifying and Self-denying Life of Jesus with their Blood;
and those Blessed Protestants the Waldenses, whom the Protestants of our Age
own to have been their Ancestors, and from them, you say, you have your
Religion; but how much your Doctrine and Lives Resemble theirs, all their
Histories fully declares, where they have writ whole Volumns against all your
Ungodly Practices, as Dancing, Music, Singing, Cards, Dice, Plays, Pride
Fantastical Dresses, your wicked Sports; and with a Burning Zeal declares
against the very Houses, where such Cursed Abominations are Practiced, which
Houses in some Cases might be useful, viz. The Tavern which, say they, is the
Fountain of Sin, the School of the Devil; for when the Drunkard goes to the
Tavern, he goes upright, but when he comes forth, he cannot go at all, he has
lost his Sight, Speech and Hearing: The Lectures that are Read in this School
of the Devil, are Gluttonies, Drunkenness, Oaths, Perjuries, Lyings,
Blasphemies, Flatteries; and diverse other wicked Villainies, and pernicious
Effects, by which the Heart is withdrawn further and further from God. So far
these precious Waldenses and first Reformers of the Protestant Church; and
further, say they, of Dancing, Music, and the like wicked Recreations, which
this False Teacher says, are Innocent.

Dancing, say they, is the Devils Procession, and he that enters into his
Procession, the Devil is the Guide, the Middle and the End of the Dance. So
many Paces as a Man makes in Dancing, so many Paces does he make to go to
Hell; a Man Sins in Dancing diverse ways in his Pace; for all his Steps are
Numbered; in his Touch, in his Ornament, in his Hearing, Sight, Speech, and
other Vanities; and therefore we will prove first, say they, by Scripture, and
afterward by several Reasons, how wicked a thing it is to Dance. The first
Testimony we shall produce, say they, is in the Gospel, where it pleased that
Heathen and Tyrant Herod so well, that it cost the great Prophet John Baptist
his Life; the second is in Exodus, when Moses, coming near the Congregation,
saw the Calf, and the People Dancing, he cast the Table of the Law of the LORD
from him, and brake it to pieces at the Foot of the Mountain, and afterward it
Cost Three and Twenty Thousand of their Lives: And again, say they, Those that
Dance break their Promise and Agreement they have made with GOD in Baptism,
when their Godfathers promised for them, that they shall renounce the Devil and
all his Pomps, and Dancing is the Pomp of the Devil, and he that Danceth
maintains his Pomp. And again, say they, A Man breaks the Ten Commandments of
God: As, 1. Thou shall have no other Gods but me; and here they make out most
fully what our Savior said, His Servants ye are whom ye obey; and so says
Jerome, Every Man's God is that which he serves and loves best. And so these
precious Waldenses goes o^ most Excellently, making out at large to the end of
that Discourse, the Breach of a^^ the Commandments, by the practice (...) that
one Accursed Thing of Dancing which is too long for me to insert here. Bu^ hear
also what Augustine says, The Miserable Dancer knows not, that as many paces
as he makes in Dancing, so many leaps he makes to Hell: And further this Famous
Augustine for his Knowledge in Church Affairs, whose Sentences were Oracles, he
says, That Plays, and a^ such Recreations, are more Pernicio^ and Abominable
than those Idolatrou^ Sacrifices, which were Offered in Ho^ nour of the Pagan
gods.

I my self can Witness to the Truth (...) this Learned Man's Testimony; for ho^
pleasant were those Vanities to my Senses And how did they Captivate my Min^
from God, till the Lord, in his Infinit^ Compassion, by the Light of his Hol^
Spirit, showed me the wickedness there of? Yet after I was showed the Evil
(...) such Vanities, how great was my Suffe^ings before I came fully off from
deny in my self those Cursed Pleasures, as Plays, Dancing, Singing, and the
like, wherein I my self have been one of the Chief Actors therein? And how
often did the Lord follow men, in the Secret of my Soul, with the Reproofs of
Instructions, saying, Why will thou do this, and sin against God? Oh then, as
soon as I could get from my Company, I have gone out, as Peter did, into a
private place, and wept most bitterly before the LORD, begging his Assisting
Power, and Heavenly Strength, against the next Temptation, to resist it,
promising by his Assistance never to do the like again. Thus the Lord follows
his Creature, sometimes in the heat of Temptation, in the very Act; and
sometimes when it is over, in the cool of the Day, as he did to Adam,
condescending so low as to lie knocking and calling at the Door of our Hearts
(till his Locks are wet with the Dew) in the Night of our Apostasy, Wooing and
Beseeching the Soul to receive his Love, saying, Open, open to me, my Beloved,
and I will make an Everlasting Covenant with thee, even the sure Mercies of
David: But alas! How should such give Entertainment to him, who have made a
Covenant with Death and Hell, to disinher it him the true Heir and Subscribe
themselves Servants to Sir for Term of Life, as their False Teachers tell them,
That they may go to Plays, Cards, Dancing, and the Pleasures of Life, the Pomp
and Glory of the World for Term of Life; these are the Guests that must he
Entertained with Voluptuous Fare, with their whole Heart, Soul, Strength and
Might; but their Savior, the King of Eternal Glory, must lie in a Manger among
the wild Beasts, to be trod underfoot, to be spit upon, scoft and scorned at,
to be beat and buffeted, to be Crowned with Thorns, to be Crucified afresh, and
put to an open Shame; this do ye, ye Church and People of England, of all Sorts
and Sects, who treads underfoot the Son of GOD, and counts the Blood of the
Covenant an unholy thing, by your often transgressing against his Righteous
Laws, and Smothering, and Murdering his Holy Witness in your Hearts, that would
rise and bear witness against your ungodly Ways and Works: For is it not so,
when the Priests of the Nation, whose Lips should preferve Knowledge, are the
great Instruments to lead the People into all Error, Ignorance and Blindness;
and trains them up with the highest Encouragement in the Broadest Way to utter
Destruction; and the great Lamentation is, the People Love to have it so: Now,
what think you will the LORD do in the End thereof? Why, says he, I will Feed
this People with Wormwood, and give them the Waters of Gall to Drink: O heavy
Portion; but seeing you, Oh ye Priests, are the Fundamental Cause of this
bitter Portion to the People, therefore Woe be unto you; Woe be to the Priest
that Preaches Lies in the Name of the Lord; Woe be to the Priest that causes the
People to Err, by their Lies and Flatteries, and the LORD never sent nor
commanded them; but they have their Commission from the Devil, the Father of
Lies, who was a Lier from the beginning, and the Works of their Father they
will do; which is evidently seen by their Fruits; You shall know them, says
our Savior, for a good Tree cannot bring forth Evil Fruit, neither can a
corrupt Tree bring forth Good Fruit: Therefore, by their Fruits, you shall know
them; for though they may Speak good Words, that is not to be the Touchstone;
for the Devil himself can Speak good Words, as witness, what he said to Christ,
We know thee, who thou art, the Holy One of God. Could there be a higher
Confession than this; and further it is written, They may Speak with the Tongue
of Men and Angels, and have not Charity; such Words are but as Sounding Brass:
Even so, though these Priests may use their Tongues, by which they get their
filthy Lucre, yet they have no Charity, which is Love to GOD, and the
Everlasting Good of their Neighbors, but instead thereof, they have Proclaimed
upon the House Top Open Rebellion against the Lord, and against his Anointed;
saying, Let us break their Bonds, and cast away their Cords from us; let us
Dance, Sing, Play at Cards, go to Plays, and Enjoy all the Pleasures of Life;
for who is the LORD, that we should Fear him; O ye Fools that hate knowledge,
know ye not that he that is in the Heaven shall Laugh; the Lord shall have you
in Derision, he shall Speak to you in his Wrath, and Vex you in his sore
Displeasure: Then shall you hear the Decree, Thou art my Son, this Day have I
begotten thee: Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance, and the utmost Ends of the Earth for thy Possession; Thou shall
Crush them with a Scepter of Iron, and Break them to Pieces as a Potter's
Vessel: Then shall you hear, O ye Treacherous Deceitful Priests, who are
neither Faithful to GOD nor Man; though now your Lust makes such a Noise, your
Cursed, Covetous, Earthly Self-Interest Cries so loud, Give, give, that, though
the Charmer Charms never so wisely, you are like the deaf Adder that will not
hear: But then you shall hear, when the Righteous Judge of all the Earth shall
Summon you to appear before his Tribunal, to give an Account of all the Souls
that you have Slain by your Lies and Flatteries; so that none could turn from
their Evil Ways, that received your daubing, sweet, deceitful Words; Crying,
Peace, peace, when there was none but utter Destruction in the way that you
have prescribed to them; therefore you shall give an account of all the Souls
that you have Slain by your Lies and Dreams; and the Blood of all that has
not, nor do not, fear the LORD, and turn from their Evil ways, shall lie at
your Door, except you speedily Repent; and turn from all your Abomination which
you have committed against the LORD and his People.

And further, in the Fear and Dread of the LORD, and in a Holy Zeal for his
Glory, I must lay the Blood of our Virtuous, Dear, Innocent Queen, as heavy as
Lead upon your Heads; because you Healed her VVound slightily, and Spoke Peace
to her, when sudden Destruction was at the Door, as appears at this Day: For
how great was the Loving Kindness of the LORD, in visiting her with his Mercy
and Truth, declaring to her his Mind and Will; though through Contemptible
Vessels to Eyes of Proud Flesh, which has ever been his Way, and for that End,
to stain the Glory of all Flesh, that no Flesh might Glory in his Presence; As
I my self, among the rest, had the Henour, though Unworthy to be his Messenger,
to declare his Mind and Will to the late Queen, both in Print, and Private
Writings, all which fully declares the Labor of the Spirit of the Lord with
her, and that he would have Honored her with the great Work of Reformation in
these Kingdoms of her Dominions; and I see^ing so much of the Powerful
Operations of the Love of GOD in Visiting the Queen with his Will and Counsel:
I expected some Excellent Work to be brought forth in answer to the LORD's
Requiring: But when I waited, time after time, and year after year, and saw so
little Fruits of my Labor; I humbly Inquired of the Lord, what the Reason was,
and why it was so; whereupon the LORD, in his Condescending Goodness, was
pleased to answer my Request, by the Revelation of his Word by Day, and also by
Dreams or Visions of the Night; which were so many that would sill up much
Paper; therefore I shall only Instance part of one sight, which I had a little
before the Queen's Death, which is as followe^h: I thought I saw my self in a
large Room in White Hall, where I saw my dearest Lady, the Queen, sit on a Seat
a little higher than the People, with her Ladies, Priests, and Servants, round
about her; some of them Reading to her. After a while I looked, and on a sudden
the Queen was down upon the Ground, and all that sat about her, lay a top of
her, as if they would have Crushed her to Death; insomuch that I Cried out with
a Vehement and Lamentable Cry, The Queen will be Smothered, what shall I do;
the Queen will be Smothered? After this she was gone from under them by an
Invisible Hand, none of them knew how, nor whether; they Run to and fro, as
Distracted, seeking her, but could not find her; nor is it to be Expressed the
Distress I saw her Ladies, Priests and People, who had lain upon her, in Crying
out one to the other for her, but all in vain; for, my thoughts, she was gone
to be seen no more; I my self sought her with bitter Mourning, but could not
find her.

By the first of this sight, I was given to understand, she was under them, and
them over her; and therefore could not do what her Pious Heart was Inclined to:
The next was, her Removeal from under their Yoke.

Well is it, I hope, with her, that it is so; for the longer she had Continued
under their Controuling Power, the worse it would have been for her, except she
had had Strength to have Obeyed the LORD, rather than them; but to you, Oh ye
Priests, it is the Judgment of GOD; for Just is the LORD in Removing her:

For you were unworthy of such an Excellent Governess, who might have been an
admirable Instrument in the Hand of the Lord, for the Reforming these
Atheistical Nations, and bringing back the People from their Idolatrous Ways,
from Worshipping their Gods of Silver and Gold, and the Work of their own
Hands; together with the rest of the Abominations of this Age; as the like had
not been in our Memory, had you but Assisted her with good Counsel, to have
strengthened her weak Hands, and you joined with her in the Work.

But, instead of being Instruments, to put your helping Hand to this great and
weighty Work of Reformation, to recover the Children of Men out of their fallen
State into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of GOD; some of you are, and have
been the chiefest Instruments the Devil has to bring them into Bondage, to
sink them into the Pit of Destruction, to damn them into Hell Fire, which is
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, and for all those that forget GOD, so as
not to keep his Commandments: For is it not so, Oh ye Priests, when Christ our
Savior tells us, That straight is the Gate, and narrow is the Way that leads
to Life, and few there be that find it; and that broad is the Way, and wide the
Gate that leads to Destruction: And he that takes not up his Cross, and
follows not me, is not worthy of me: Take my Yoke upon you, and Learn of me.

These are the Commands of CHRIST, Oh ye Priests, then what is his Cross? What
is it to Learn of him? What is it to bear his Yoke? What is it to deny Self? Is
it to go to Plays? Is it to Dance? Is it to Play at Cards? Is it the Pleasures
of Life? Answer, Ye, False Teachers, are these the Cross of Christ, which is
the Power of GOD against all such Works of Darkness, is this to Learn of him,
to go to Cards: Do you follow him, when you go to Plays or Dancing? Or do you
not follow your Father the Devil, whose Works ye will do?

Oh! ye Runagates, whether are you gone; what Hew and Cry shall be sent after
you, to bring you back to the Primitive Church, from whence you are fallen, who
are gone so far a Whoring from the LORD after your Idols and Inventions, as to
proclaim upon the House top, that the Devil's Works are Innocent.

Oh ye Adulterers, whom shall we bebieve, our Savior, or you? Our Savior that
Commands us to strive to enter in at the straight Gate; for, says he, that is
the Way to Life: Or you that tells us the Pleasures of Life, that leads to
Destruction, are Innocent.

Ye, Foreheads of Brass, with what Face durst you presume to Preach such
Doctrine in a Pulpit; shall Treason be Spoke against an Earthly Prince, and no
notice taken thereof: But you have Spoken high Treason against the KING of
Righteousness, and are stirrers up and proclaimers of open Rebellion against
the Lord of Hosts, and against his Anointed Christ: You are bold indeed. Again,
I say, shall any be so Presumptious to Speak Treason against an Earthly King,
and not be called to an account: But this Preacher of Lies has done worse
against the King of Eternal Glory, than whatsoever could acted against all the
Kings or Monarchs in the World; and yet none has laid it to Heart, or so much
as said, What have thou done?

For, as it was in Jeremiah's time, so it is now; when the Roll was Burnt,
says the Text, Yet they were not afraid, nor rent their Garments; Neither the
King, nor any of his Servants.

Therefore, O England, England, what Lamentable Lamentation shall be taken up
for thee; there is not a Man to be found in thy populous Cities, or vast
Countries, that has so much Zeal for the LORD of Hosts, as to take this matter
in Hand, to Vindicate the Truth of the Everlasting GOD, with this Uncircumcised
Philistine, who has defied the Power of the Living GOD; but every Man taking
up his own Quarrel, to plead his own Interest; and their fierce Zeal is so hot
for Self, that they are Sheathing their Swords in one another Bowels; which
Swords should be turned every one against the Enemy of his own House; for that
should be the Work of this Day: But contrary to this, here is Brother against
Brother, and Friend against Friend, to the great Dishonor of GOD and Religion;
and being so busied in this Evil Work, they do not mind the Cry that is gone
forth. viz. Who will be on the Lord's part; who, against the Man of Sin, Now
Iniquity is filling up to the Brim? Who will come forth to help the LORD,
against the Mighty? Who will be so Valiant for GOD, as to throw Jesabel, with
her painted Face and tired Head, out of the Window, for the Dogs to Eat her
Flesh and Drink her Blood? He sought for a Man, but could find none to take his
Righteous Cause in Hand: Therefore his own Arm shall bring Salvation, nothing
shall hinder it; and seeing there was no Man, among all the wise Rabbis and
Learned Doctors of our times, that has so much Love or Zeal for the mighty GOD
that gives them Breath and Being; therefore the LORD, who stains the Glory of
all Flesh, in his Wisdom has opened the Mouth of a silly Ass, to Rebuke the
Malice, Lies and Madness of this false Prophet, as one just Recompense of his
Reward: The next Recompense shall be that he, and whosoeve else Concerned,
shall answer for all t^^ Neglect of our late hopeful Queen in he^ Service and
Dury to GOD, in the Act of Reformation, and for the Sins of all the Souls that
have been deceived under their false Ministry, except they speedily Repent with
the deepest Humiliation and through Reformation to turn from all the Evil of
their pernicious ways; Confessing their Sins, and Condemning themselves worthy
to be cut off for ever from the Lord, and all his Heavenly Hosts, Saints, and
People.

But if you will not thus give Glory to my Righteous Name; Then will I Rend
you, by my strong Hand and my outstretched Arm, from all the Delights of your
Eyes: I will pull you out with Hooks, and your Posterity as with Fishbooks; for
though you Build your Nests in the Stars, from thence will I pull you down, and I
will get me a Name and a Fame in your Destruction: Therefore Repent and
Forsake, that you may find Mercy, says the LORD.

Upon these last Words I was Melted into Tears, and Cried out, O Lord God, will thou have Mercy upon such as have, not only themselves Rebelled against thee,
the Holy GOD, and thy Righteous Laws, but ^aused Multitudes to go out of thy
Ways, unto the By-ways and Crooked Paths, till they wandered into the Dark Night
of Apostasy, and so sat in the Region and Shadow of Death, and to this Day
sees no way out! O LORD GOD will thou have Mercy on such: And here again my
Heart was broken to pieces before the LORD, Crying out, Oh who is like unto
Thee! This makes good thy Word, which says, Thou have no Pleasure in the Death
of a Sinner, but rather that he would turn from his Evil VVays and Live: And
therefore have thou sent thy Prophets Early and Late, and are still sending
them; for thou art a God that art never weary of well doing; therefore, Oh who
is like unto thee, Jehovah! Lord who is like unto thee, to be admired of all
those that Loves thee, and keeps thy Commandments: And they that know thee,
will put their whole Trust and Considence in Thee, the Eternal Goodness: But
thy Enemies shall lick the Dust, and shall be as the Chaff of the Summers
(...); but they that wait upon the LORD shall renew their strength; they shall
run in the Ways of thy Commandments, and not be weary, and Walk in the Ways of
the LORD, and not faint: This Honor, Power and Dignity, have all thos^ that
seek thy Face in Truth.

Wherefore, I beseech you, Friends Neighbors, and People, of all Sorts and
Sects, under what Denomination soever^ by the Mercies and Love of God, that you
come out from among these Hireling Shepherds, who leave you to the Wolf to be
devoured: I mean those false Teachers that give you the least Liberty to
fulsill the Lusts of the Flesh: I beseech you, now at last, before it be too
late, consider the ill Effects it does produce for you to Live and Dye in your
Sins: I beseech you again and again, in the Bowels of Christ, Consider how much
you are the better at the Years End, for all your Hearing, Preaching and
Praying? How much of the World have you overcome? How much Pride have you
overcome? How much Earthly-mindedness? How much Lies and Deceit? How much
Couzning and Cheating? How much Malice and Hatred? Besides Drunkenness,
Whoredom, Gaming, Feasting, and all Sinful Delights; and are not many, that
wear the Cloak of Religion, guilty of the most part of these Abominations?

Therefore, pray Consider, if you have not forsaken these Groser Evils, which
are detestable, not only to the Pure and Holy God, but the very Heathens: How
will you deny your selves in those things which are more Lawful in themselves,
which is the Duty of every Christian, so far as GOD requires it of them.

Wherefore, seeing it is so, that you grow no better, but rather worse and
worse; deceiving, and being deceived, under all your Church Discipline,
Ordinances, and great Gatherings to Meetings: Seeing these outward Services
bring you no further then to a Historical Faith, and only a bare outside
Profession of God and Godliness; without having an inward Power and Life of
Righteousness; it is high time for you all to separate your selves one from
another, but more especially, You of the COMELY ORDER, as you call it, and
every one seek the LORD apart, every Family apart, every Individual apart, the
Husband apart, and the Wife apart; and there to Prostrate your selves before
the Lord, lying at his Footstool, never leaving Him, till you have Received the
Blessing from on high; which Blessing to be Emptied of your selves; your o^
Ways and Works, Gifts and Parts, (...) whatsoever else you hold out of the L^^
of Christ, for your Eyes have seen t^^ Dangerous Consequence of your goi^^ out
of that Poverty of Spirit into the Richness of Spirit, has produced, Pride
High-mindedness, Haughtiness of Spirit lifting up your selves above your fello^
Creatures; and being so pust up in Pri^ and Self, that nothing less will serve
yo^ than to Reign as Kings; and if the cannot be obtained, to set your Feet
(...) the Necks of your Friends, then you g^ to War, and so Sheath your Swords
(...) each others Bowels, and so make t^ Name of God a Stink in the Nation and
Religion a Byword of Reproach a^ among the Heathen.

Just so it was with the Christians in the Emperor Constantine's Reign, till
the he^ vy Wrath and Judgments of God bra^ in upon them; and do you think to
Escape, being found in the same Work No, you will surely Drink of the same
Cup, except you speedily Repent; there fore Return from whence you are fallen
and do your first Works; and say not in your Hearts; We are a Rich and a
Mighty People: But consider with your selves how quickly the Lord can bring you
down, even to the Ground.

Again, I must say, if these be the Fruits that are brought forth, by all your
Preaching, Praying, and Hearing, to swell in Pride, to bite, tear, and devour
one another; this is no comely Order, but great Iniquity, horrible Distraction,
and miserable Confusion, to the Amazement of all the Beholders, that ever a
People, who pretend to so high a Dispensation as you have, should fall as Stars
from Heaven to Earth, as it has happened among some of you; your Leaders, as
well as others, being the cause thereof.

Wherefore, Woe and Alas! Seeing these Lamentable things are come to pass, is it
not high time for all Tongues to be turned into Silence, and all Mouths to be
in the Dust, and all Heads covered with Ashes, and Loins with Sackcloth: And
from thence to come before the Lord with weeping and wailing, even as a Woman
in the strongest Travail that ever was: Acknowledging your own Backslidings and
great Unworthiness to lift up your Eyes to him: That thus, by bearing the
Indignation of the Lord, you may, if polsible, appease his Wrath which is
Kindled against you; that so you, beyond all others, by your true and unfeigned
Repentance, by Watchings and Fastings, and deep Humiliation; for that was the
way by which some of you came to God in the beginning, when you were little in
your own Eyes, and nothing in your own Sight; and that is the way now, by which
you must come out of your fallen State to God again, by the suffering Life of
Jesus; for he is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; and none can come to the
Father but by him; by his Suffering Life, by his Death and Bloody Passion, both
without and within in your Souls, you must know the bitter Agony he was in,
when he Swet Drops of Blood for your Backsliding from him, or to speak more
plain for your Crucifying of him afresh, and putting him to an open Shame; as
witness the foresaid.

Therefore you, that are guilty of these things, come down from your exalted
Spirits, and sit down in the Dust, and Mourn most bitterly, for the Miseries
that is coming upon you, except you speedily Repent.

And now, to all People every where, both Old and Young, Rich and Poor, that
would Inherit Eternal Life and Glory, Endless Joy, Everlasting Peace and
Happiness to all Eternity, this is your way to obtain it, through the Agony of
Christ's Internal Sufferings; this is Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life;
and none can come to the Father but by this Way: He that goes another way, than
through the Agony of his Soul, is a Thief and a Robber, and comes but to Steal,
as our Savior says.

Mark that, To take that which is none of his own; but he that feels it in his
own Soul, it is his own, as the Samaritans witnessed, and said, John 4.42. unto
the Woman, Now we Believe, not because of thy saying, but because we have heard
him our selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the
World: And as he himself said to Thomas, Reach hither thy Hand, and thrust it
into my Side.

So this Soul has it not by bare hearsay, but he feels the Agony of his
Sufferings in his own Soul, and so he comes (...) have the fellowship of his
Sufferings, and to bear in his Body the Dyings of the Lord Jesus; and this is
his Daily and Hourly Work, to Mortify and Crucify the Deeds of the Flesh, and
to leave nothing undone that God requires to be done: And, in order to this, he
sets a Holy Watch over his own Soul, keeping his Heart and Mind close to the
Lord, always in Communion with his Blessed Holy Spirit; and his Holy Exercise
brings you into Acquaintance with him, as it is written, Aquaint thy self with
the Lord, and be at Peace; and said our Savior, Agree with thine Adversary in
the Way: And by this Agreement the Partition Wall is broken down, and then God
and the Soul comes together, who were at such a distance one from the other,
that the Lord said, As far as the Heavens are from the Earth, so far are my
Thoughts from yours, my Ways from your Ways. But in this State of the Souls
Union with God, it is quite contrary; for the Soul is so filled with the Love of
Christ, that its whole Delight is to follow him in his Footsteps, and to keep
his Commandments in all things; believing it to be the Sign or Token of her
Love to him; as he himself said, If ye Love me, keep my Commandments; and she
knows this to be the Living Faith which gives the Victory over all Sin, and
brings the Soul into the Obedience of Christ actually, not in Conceit, which is
the Fruits of the Dead Faith of those whose Fear toward God are taught by the
Precepts of Men, who believes Christ to have taken away the Sins of Believers
past present, and to come without actual Repentance, and actual Forsaking;
although the Promise was upon no other ground than this, He that repents and
forsakes, shall find Mercy.

Alas for such, how they deceive and cheat their own Souls; for here they may
make merry over the Witness of God, and so make Shipwreck of a good Conscience
without Control. Oh Fools that hates Knowledge, to believe that the Son of the
Living Eternal God Emptied himself of all his Glory, in coming out of the Bosom
of his Father, to take upon him an Ignominious Death, through Agonies of
Sorrows and Griefs, bitter Death, and bloody Passion, strong Cries, Groans,
Sighs and Sobs, Watchings and Fastings, cruel Mockings and Scourgings, Exposing
himself to all the Malice that Men or Devils could invent, to save you in your
Sins; what think you, Was this the End of his coming from Heaven to Earth, to
secure you in your Sins? Alas, poor Mortals, how Ignorant are you of the End of
his Office! How is he your Savior, if he do not save you from your Sins; for
otherways you have no Right to his Merits; you have no Right to his Sufferings,
if you do not suffer with him: For you are to fill up that which is behind of
the Sufferings of Christ in your Mortal Bodies, as the Apostle says: And so
his Sufferings comes to be your Sufferings; and thus you are Obedient to his
Commands; who, by his mighty Power in you, Works both the Will and the Deed:
For of your selves, you can do nothing; but by Him, through Him, and with Him,
you can do all things, Destroy the Devil and all his Works: For, by believing
in his Power, you come to receive Power, as it is written, To as many as
Received him, to them he gave Power to become the Sons of God: But if you do
not receive this Gift of God, which is his Son, you cannot receive Power: You
must receive him, in the Love of him, and believe, in his Power, that he is God
All-sufficient to perfect the Work which he has begun in your Souls; For
without Faith it is Imposible to please God. Therefore this is your Work, to
Pray and wait upon God for this Living Faith, for the Faith of the Son of God,
which must give you the Victory over all Sin and Iniquity, as our Savior said,
If ye have (...) Faith as a Grain of Mustard Seed, you shall say unto this
Mountain, Be thou Removed, and it shall be done. What Mountain? The Mountain of
Sin. And again, said he, Oh Woman, great is thy Faith, be it done unto thee, as
thou have Believed: And in another place it is said, He could not do many mighty
Works there, because of their Unbelief: And in the Prophets it is written, If
you do not Believe, you shall not be Established.

So you see the dangerous Consequence of Unbelief, the very cause why the
Children of Israel could not enter the promised Land, because of their
Unbelief; which Canaan, you know, was a Type or Figure of the Spiritual Canaan^
the Eternal Rest of that Soul that Travels on to know the Lord, and never takes
up a Rest by the way in no External things whatsoever; but Fights its way
through all the Temptations, Trials, and Tribulations; and so runs the Race
that is set before it, to obtain the Price of the High Calling the Heavenly
Jerusalem; if they hold out to the End, they come to an Innumerable Company of
Angels, and the Spirits of Just Men made perfect; and (...) God the Judge of
all, which the Living Faith, the Faith of the Son of God leads to. But your
dead Faith keeps you in Death and Destruction for ever: For said the Prophet,
The Dead cannot Praise thee, nor those that go down to the Pit cannot Celebrate
thy Praise: Yet you of this Generation are so presumptious, though you are Dead
in Trespasses and Sins, to Sing the Praises and Hymns of those, who had born
the heavy Wrath and Indignation of the Lord, for their Sins; and was resolved
to bear, and would except of no Deliverance, but from God.

None of the false Teachers, deceitful daubing Flatterers, Crying Peace, when
De^^uction was at Hand; Crying, The ^emple of the Lord! the Temple of the Lord!
No, no, These Holy Ones knew what the Temple of the Lord was better than so:
This is the Temple of the Lord, said they, if ye thoroughly amend your Ways and
your Works, if you Execute Judgment between a Man and his Neighbor, and
Oppress not the Stranger, the Fatherless and the Widow; shed no Innocent Blood,
nor walk after other Gods to your own Destruction, Jer. 7. which Chapter gives
a more full Relation of what God Requires of Mankind in general; and as was
said, It was not their Blind and Lame Sacrifices would do their Work, whilst
the Idol of their Imagination and Abomination stood in their Temple; they knew
the small Scourge that was prepared to whip out the Buyers and Sellers,
Money Changers, and those that made his House a Den of Thieves; I say, they
knew the Work that God called them to, better than so; which made them Cry out,
I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, until he arise and Plead my Cause: And
another says, I will wait upon the Lord all the Days of my appointed time,
until my Change come. What Change did Job wait so long for? To (...) Changed
from the Power of Satan to the Power of God; he waited to be Changed from doing
his own Will, from doing ^is own Works, from speaking his own Words, from
thinking his own Thoughts, and in this State he was partaker of the Rest of the
People of God, and kept Holy the Sabbath Day: And thus David, he was a Man
after God's own Heart, because in this State, he answered the End of his
Creation: For Man was Created for this very End and Purpose, to Love God and
keep his Commandments; and here he has Communion and Fellowship with his
Creator and Maker: But out of this State, he is worse than the Beast that
Perishes.

So you see the Servants of the Lord could not be Satisfied with any thing less
than Victory over all Sin and Iniquity: And that great Apostle Paul, after his
strong Warfares and weary Travels, gives this account, that he had not been
beating the Air, but had so fought as to obtain the Crown: I thank God, says
he, through Christ, who has given me the Victory. It was through Christ he
obtained it, through his Suffering Life, which he was made partaker of, through
his Holy Cross, wherein he places the Power of God to them that Believes in it;
but as he said, A Rock of Offense to them that do not.

A Rock of Offense indeed to them that gets above it. This Holy Cross, which he
Glorified so much in, that Crucified him to the World, and the World to him;
that was his Glory, the Victory that he had got over the World, and he returns
Thanks to God, who had given it him through Christ, through those
Soul-Sufferings which Paul had so great a share in, and which was Christ in him
the hope of Glory: So Paul was made One with Christ, by his Internal and
External Sufferings; and here our Blessed Lord's Prayer was answered, when he
said, Father that they may be One, as we are One; I in them, and thou in me;
that they may be made perfect in One: Father I will that they which thou have
given me, be with me, even where I am; that they may behold my Glory.

Now Observe, The place where he was then, was his Suffering Life; he was just
going to Dye upon the Cross, and from thence into his Glory.

Oh the Height and Depth of this Love who can declare it, that our Savior
should Pray to the Father, That where he was, there we might be also; who, in
his secret Wisdom, knew what State w^^ best, and safest for us, whilst we were
on this side the Grave, to be kept in, to be partakers with him in his
Suffering Life; this bespeaks more of his Endless Love to us, than if he had
set Crowns of Diamonds upon our Heads, and given us all the Glory of a
Perishing World: For in this Soul-suffering we are made One in him, we Eat his
Flesh and Drink his Blood; and so by the Virtue and Nourishment of his Life, we
grow up in him, who is our Head, and our Immanuel in his Love and Faith, in his
Chastity, in his Heavenly-mindedness, in his Humilty and Self-denial, Merciful
Loving Kindness, and in the Power of all his Heavenly Virtues: If we abide in
him, and go not out from him to the Creatures, to vain Man for help; for here
you must cease from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, wherein is he to be
accounted of, not at all in this Work of the Souls perfecting; your Work here
is with God, and not with Man; your Work is to keep in your strong Travel, with
your Eye fixed on God, for his Power to bring forth what he begets in you, for
otherways all your work will prove but false Conceptions, if you do not see, of
the Travel of your Souls: And being Faithful to God in this Work, you shall see
the Will of the Holy ONE brought forth in you, in perfect Obedience, and then
in this State you come to the Anointing, that Teaches you all things; yea, the
deep things of God: And you need not that any Man should teach you, but as the
same Anointing teaches you; so you shall abide in it. Here you come to the
discerning of things that differ in Nature and Effect, by the Tasting and
Handling of the Word of Life; here you shall come to the Law of the Spirit of
Life, which shall set you free from the Law of Sin and Death, being filled with
all Spiritual Life and Power, to do the Will of God in all things; and in this
State you shall behold Christ's Glory, as he desired of the Father: And this
take from one that, upon Trial, has proved it; whosoever beholds his Glory,
shall tread the Worlds Glory under their Feet, and scorn the Pomp and
Effeminacy thereof, and values it no more than the Dirt they tread on, further
than for them to serve the Lord, and his Creation therewitth and so far
redeemed out of it, that i^ would be their Joy to have no occasion to make use
of the least part thereof; and so far off are they from coveting the
Incomberances of it, although to procure great Riches, that they grudge the
very time that is spent in serving the Necessity of their outward Man. So
precious (...) time to them, and so great is their Love to God; that, if they
had the Years o^ Methusala added to their Days, they were all too few to attend
and wait upon the Divine Majesty of the Eternal Goodness.

Thus all the Children of God were found in this Holy Exercise, David waited
upon the Lord more than the Watchman waited for the Morning; this is your
Laboring in the Vineyard: And being Faithful in this Exercise, you are the
wise Virgins who had Oil in their Lamps who were ready to enter in with their
Lord into the Marriage Chamber.

But I hope you understand, by the foregoing Directions, what I mean by the
word Waiting, that it is not your bare going to Church, nor receiving the
Sacrament, nor saying, Lord have Mercy upon us Miserable Sinners, and the rest
of your Historical Service; for here you may stick till the Day of your Death,
and be but Hypocrites, Mockers, Scoffers, and filled with Malice and Hatred
against any appearance of Good, which by sad Experience is seen, that the most
part of you are too guilty of to my knowledge; that your very Poor that receive
Alms are so Proud and Malicious, that it is a Happiness to have nothing to do
with them: This I speak to let you know what Fruit is brought forth by your
Preaching, and their Hearing. What I say unto you, I say unto all the rest of
the Churches, to examine themselves how far they are guilty of this Iniquity,
to repent and forsake with speed, that they may find Mercy: For it is not their
outward Services will please God, though they are a little more finelier dressed
than yours, but it is Truth in the inward Parts that God requires: Neither at
Jerusalem, nor in this or that Mountain will the Father be we shipped, but in the
living, powerful Operation of his own Spirit and Power.

I have told you the way God will be found in, which is to wait upon him (...)
the Sense of your own Nothingness and Poverty, and in the silence of all Flesh
for you have wearied him with your words, therefore will he turn you into
Silence.

And now to you, who are not guilty o^ these grosser Sins, but are Convinced o^
the Truth of all this, yet come not in^^ Faithfulness, but climb up another wa^
than through the Cross, by getting Eas^ to your selves, in going to hear Men,
by reading, by talking much of God Friends, this will not do your work, you do
but waste your precious Time; altho^ these things may be done in their time and
season; But must it be with you as it is with the Ignorant, ever learning, and
never come to the knowledge of the Truth? Do not you know, that it is only the
Truth that can make you free? And have not you had some Experience, that one
Day with the Lord is better than a Thousand elsewhere? To wait upon him in that
Soul-searching Exercise as Jacob was in, when he received the Blessing: It Is a
fine pleasant way for you to go to hear Discourses of God, and to sit before
him as his People; this is an easy way, but will this do your work any more
than the rest? Deceive not your selves, for as you have more Knowledge than
others, so more is required of you, which if not answered, then what
unavoidably follows is this, He that knows the Will of his Master, and does it
not, must be beaten with many stripes; for if you go out of your Travail into
Sloth and Ease, how do you think the Man-child should be Born that must Rule
the Nations with a Rod of Iron, Rev. 12. For unto such as keeps in their strong
Travail and Cries mightily to God to be delivered, is a Child born and Son
given, whose Government is upon his Shoulders, whose Name is Wonderful
Counselor, the Mighty God, Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; but if
your Pains go off, there is no hopes of a living Child, which made the Prophet
cry out so vehemently, saying, Wherefore do I see every Man with his Hands upon
his Loins, as a Woman in Travail: But in the Old Translation it is thus, We have
heard, terrible cry, fear and disquietness; for what else does this signify
that I see^ Namely, That all strong Men smite every Man his Hand upon his
Loins, as a Woman in the pains of her Travail. Who ever saw a Man Travail with
Child, inquire and see? their Faces are mavelous pale* alas for this Day
which is so dreadful that none may be likened unto it! And alas for the time of
Jacob's Trouble, from the which he shall yet be delivered, for in that Day,
says the Lord, I will take his Yoke from off thy Neck, and break thy Bonds;
they shall no more serve strange Gods under him, but they shall do service unto
God their Lord, and David their King, whom I will raise unto them: And as for
thee, Oh my Servant Jacob, fear not, says the Lord, be not afraid, Oh Israel,
for lo I will help thee from far, from the Land of thy Captivity, and Jacob
shall turn again, and shall be at Rest, and Prosperous in Life, and no Man
shall make him afraid; for I am with thee to help thee, says the Lord; and
though I shall destroy all the People among whom I have scattered thee, yet will
I not destroy thee, but correct thee with discretion. I am sorry for thy Hurt
and Wounds, there is no Man to meddle with thy Cause, or to bind up thy Wounds;
there may no Man help thee, all thy Lovers have forsaken thee, for I have given
thee a Cruel stroke, and chast'ned thee roughly, for the multitude of thy
Misdeeds and Sins have I done this to thee; why makes thou moan for thy harm? I
my self have pity of thy Sorrows, Jer. 30. Now you hear what the Lord says,
that the Work of Regeneration is not Man's Work, but God's Work, there shall no
Man help thee, it is I that have wounded thee, and I will heal thee: Here you
see Man is quite thrown aside, and none left together but God and the Soul; the
next Work is, Man must be Born again, before he can enter the Kingdom of God:
and here the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 31. brings in Ephraim to this Work,
saying, I heard Ephraim that was led away Captive complain on this manner, O
Lord, thou have Corrected me, and thy Chastning have I received as an untamed
Calf; Convert thou me, and I shall be Converted, for thou art my Lord God; yea,
as soon as thou turnest me, I shall refo^^ my self, and when I understand, I
shall smite upon my Thigh, for verily I have committed shameful things: Oh! let
my Youth bear this Reproof and Confusion: Upon this complaint, says the Lord,
I thought thus by my self, Is not Ephraim my Dear Son? Is he not the Child with
whom I have had all Mirth and Pastime? For since the time I first communed with
him, I have him ever in remembrance, therefore my very Heart drives me to him;
gladly and lovingly will I have Mercy upon him, says the Lord.

These two Chapters concerns the whole state of all Mankind, both in his Fall
and Restoration, in his true Repentance, and God's Gracious Mercy. I call that
true Repentance that repents and forsakes, as said the Prophet, Have thou
sinned? do so no more. But here you hear of the Infinite Goodness of God, how
he waits for the Souls return, and how ready he is to receive it into his
Mercy: Is not Ephraim, says he, my Dear Son? Is he not the Child with whom I
have had all Mirth and Pastime, and so goes on parlying with the Soul: Here Is
Pastime for you the Christians of our Age, that knows not ^^ow to pass away
your precious time, but in Cards, Dice, Cursed Plays, and the like, hear you
what the Lord says to the Penitent Sinner, for since the time, says he, I
first communed with him, I have had him ever in my remembrance, therefore,
says he, my very Heart drives me to him, gladly and lovingly will I have
Mercy on him: Here you may know the Pastime that God delights in, and wherein
his Communion and Fellowship stands, and what moves him to this indeared Mercy
and Compassion, is a broken and contrite Heart, that trembles to offend him in
any kind whatsoever, judging and condemning your selves for doing the least
Sin, as well as the greatest that grieves his Holy Spirit in you: And as you
read Ephraim's return in the History, pray try if you can read him within you,
in your own Souls, without which, no Christians,: And as I told you before, the
next work after the return, is the New Birth: And shall I bring to the Birth,
says the Lord, and not cause to bring forth? Yes, I will cause to bring forth,
if you wait upon me in that Heart-searching Exercise that Jacob was in when he
received (...) Blessing, for there you are in the way (...) will be found in,
and if I find you at whatsoever time I come, whether in the second or third
Watch, waiting upon me to receive my Power, to do my Heavenly Will in all
things, then will I come in, and sup with you, and cause you to eat of the
Banquet which I have prepared with all manner of delicious Food, the Ravishing
Enjoyments of my Heavenly Love: But you hear what state the Soul must be found
in, not a state of worldly Pleasures, or sinful Delights; no, no, but a state
of Mourning, and deep Sorrow, as you hear of Ephraim, bitterly crying out
against your selves for serving your Lusts in any kind whatsoever, though in
things more just and lawful, if God forbids; and so laying the Axe to the Root
of the corrupt Tree, cut it down, and cast it in the Fire of God's Wrath, and
there Sacrifice your Lusts and vile Affections, together with your own Wills,
that as you bear the Name of Christians, so you be living Witnesses of the
unspotted, chaste, and undefiled Life of Christ Jesus: For as Adam through Lust
fell from his Paradisical ^state into the Beastial Nature, by eat^^g of that
Forbidden Tree, and so brought the Curse, Death, and Destruction upon all
Mankind; even so by Christ, in his pure, spotless, chaste, innocent, heavenly
Life, shall all be restored out of the Curse into the Everlasting Blessing, and
be brought out of their fallen state into Paradise again, where they have the
Fellowship of Angels, by keeping chaste to him in Body and Soul, admitting of
no other Lovers but himself alone; and this Men and Women may do, though in a
Married state; for Marriage is honorable, and the Bed undefiled, but
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge: This Doctrine may seem strange to
the World, but I have good ground for what I say on this account, which is our
Savior's own words to his Disciples, as I remember, in his Discoursing of the
Resurrection, saying, There be some that be Born Eunuchs, and some that are
made so by Men; but there is some who have made themselves so for the Kingdom
of Heaven sake, yet all are not able to bear this saying, but his Disciples
were able to bear it; To you, said he, it is given to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom, but to the World in Parable (...) therefore to you, sincere
Christians, (...) deliver this, and not unto the World.

And that great Apostle Paul was of his Royal Master's Mind, and followed him
in his steps of Holiness and Chastity, wishing that all Men were as he was, to
have power over their own Wills, to keep their Virgin pure, whether in
Marriage, or out of Marriage, prophesying that the time should come, That they
who had Wives should be as if they had none, and they that used this World, as
if they used it not; and so in all things else, to witness God's Redeeming
Power, as he said to Virgins, that they should be Holy in Body, Soul, and
Spirit; for your Bodies, says he, are the Temples of the Holy Ghost; and God
has said, I will dwell in them; shall I then take the Temple of God, says he,
and make it the Member of a Harlot, God forbid.

The Apostle Paul had to do with as unholy a People in his time as we have in
ours, which made him sorely complain of some; he was fain to give them Milk
instead of strong Meat, and as it were, parlying with them of what
inconvenience (...) the satisfying their inordinate (...), what encumbrance it
brought upon ^^em; and it is certainly so, as it is to be seen daily with our
Eyes, the Miseries and Sorrows the poorer sort brings upon themselves, who are
under the Curse indeed several ways, getting their Bread with the sweat of
their Brows, being driven out of Paradise into the Earth, and also bring poor
Infants into the World to know an Ocean of Sorrows, which must lie heavy at
their Doors who is the Cause, and as they grow up in Age, so in Sin and
Wickedness, and then become the multiplying Brood of the Ungodly: And the
Middle Sort and Rich are not without their Trials and Afflictions on this
Account; for how many of their Children of all sorts, both of Professors and
Profane, comes to utter Destruction? For how rare a thing it is to see any
soberly inclined among a multitude? But not one in a Thousand comes so to fear
God as to keep his Commandments; then see what Pains the Christians of our time
take to increase the Devils Kingdom: But for the Elderly and Aged, whose length
of Days should have taught them the Mortification of their Lusts, for them
(...) Live in that Beastial Nature they (...) worse than the Beast that
perishes; who, once a Year for Propogation, but no further. Therefore, the
Beast shall rise up in Judgment against all Mankind in that Nature; but it has
been said of Old, The Woman shall be saved in Childbearing. Yes, verily so she
shall, but what Birth is it that must bring Salvation to her? I hope none is so
Ignorant as to Imagine it to be a Fleshly Birth; for then all the Women in the
World that bear Children, Bastards or any, must be saved: Therefore it is plain,
that that is not the Birth she is to be saved by; but the Blessed Babe that was
Born in a Manger, is he which brings Salvation, which the Inn would not
Entertain; it being so full of Guests, so full of Lusts to Satisfy, so full of
Worldly Cares and Cumberances, how to be Rich, how to add House to House, Land
to Land, and One Thousand Pound to another. So here is no room for the New
Birth, the Babe of Life, the Immortal Babe, the Begotten of the Father that
brings Salvation, to be Brought forth but among the wild Beasts, it must (...)
till the Visitation from on High, and (...) the Seed of the Woman shall bruise
^^e Serpents Head; the holy Seed, whose Substance is in it, which is engendered
in the holy Womb of the pure, chaste, undefiled Virgin, which must Bring forth
this Lamb of God that takes away the Sin; this Glorious Emanuel, who is
appointed for this great Work, to Kill the Serpent and his Seed; and for that
End has he tasted Death for every Man, that we through his Death, by being
partakers thereof, might have Everlasting Life. And here comes in the
Restoration out of Adam's Fall, by being Baptized or Plunged into his Death, to
Die with him upon the Cross, being fully resolved to suffer with him the Wrath
and Anger of the Father: Here Is the Faithful Spouse! Here Is the Beloved Lady,
who is so inflamed with her Beautiful Lord, that if he who is the Chiefest of
Thousands to her Die, she the Faithful will Die with him; if he is Wounded and
Pierced, she will be so too; if he go down into Hell, she will take fast hold of
him, and go down with him; for where his Presence is, there is her Heaven, as
David said, If I go down into Hell, thou art there. Not unlike (...) was
Pompeia Paulinas Love to Seneca (...) Noble Husband, whom Nero put (...) Death,
that she refused to Live when he was Dead; as the History reports, he^ Veins
was cut as well as his; but Nero hearing thereof, fearing her Death would bring
him great Reproach, because of her Noble Alliance in Rome, sent with all speed
to have her Wounds stopped, that, if it were possible, to save her Life; which,
though she being half dead, was done, and she, against her will, lived; but
always with a pale hew, and wan complexion of Face, to declare how much of her
Life was gone with Seneca her Dear Friend, Philosopher, and Husband.

And had this great Roman Lady so high a Value for an Earthly Husband, because
of his Worth and Goodness, as not to value her own Life for his sake? And shall
we be shorter than she in our Duty and Affection to our Heavenly Husband? And
set a higher Value upon the vain Enjoyments of a sinking, perishing World, than
not to give up our Lives to the Death of all that is in it, for his sake who
Died for us; yet, said our Lord, he that (...) seek to save his Life shall lose
it, but he that gives up his Life for my sake shall find it, and receive an
hundredfold of the Dear Enjoy^ents of his Ravishing Love, which out-ballances
all the fiery Trials, Temptations, and Tribulations; for as they go through the
Valley of Tears, they dig up Fountains, and as a Spring it all appears when
thou fills their Pits; and if it were not so, the Soul would sink if it did not
drink of the Brook by the way: They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their
strength: I will strengthen, says he, the weak Hands, and feeble Knees: In
this state the Soul is Heir to all the Promises; they are all Yea and Amen in
Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, who sets free from the Law of Sin and
Death.

And here the Soul is not kept in Bondage in things here below, but as it is
called out of Egypt, so it is delivered out of the House of Bondage; and so the
Bondwoman and her Son is cast out, and the Freewoman kept in; Jerusalem, from
above the Mother of all the Faithful; and as you go through the Valley of
Teats, this fiery Baptism, you shall be led down with him your Beloved Lord
into the Pit; but fear not, for it is (...) him you must suffer, and with him
you must obey, that in all things he may be with you, and you with him; for he
is the Election, therefore make him sure to your selves, both in Life and
Death, then shall you be changed with him; and though (...) go down in the lower
parts of the Earth in the Carnal, he shall raise you Spiritual; though sowed
Weak, yet raised in Power. If you rise not, but with him, as he raises you; if
you cast not off the Yoke, nor fly the Cross, as ^^^y have done, nor heal your
own Wound; for though your Wound may be Mortal, yet the Cure is Immortal; and
what though you go down in Shame and Reproach, as your Lord and Master did before
you, yet shall you be raised in Glory, and covered with Immortal Honor, and
Eternal Life, with Power and Strength to fulfill the Will of God, and the Answer
of a good Conscience, which through this fiery Baptism, and holy Resurrection,
you shall attain, as a Servant of God said, I must decrease, but he shall
increase: I Baptize you w^^^ Water, but he shall Baptize you with ^ire, and the
Holy Ghost, whose (...) is in his Hand; he shall thoroughly purg^ his Floor,
and gather his Wheat into the Garner, but the Chaff he will burn up with
unquenchable Fire: When this work is done, all the work of a Christian is (...).

Now comes in the first Resurrection of whom the second Death shall have no
Power; for as you have gone forth weeping, carrying precious Seed, so now you
must return with Joy, and bring your Sheaves with you; for here, in this Fiery
Baptism, ^^ich has been the Furnace wherein you have been melted and tried,
the Dross is left in the Furnace, and you are come forth as the Gold Seven
times refined; wherefore now you are fitted for the Society of Angels, and the
Spirits of Just Men made perfect; you are come to God the Judge of all, where
you shall be attended with his Glorious Presence, and the Ravishing Enjoyments
of his highest Love; and here shall be given you the Garment of Praise for the
Spirit of Heaviness; your Fellowship and Communion shall be with the Father and
the Son, Night and Day Visions and Revelations attend you here; for here the
old Heavens and Earth are past away as a (...) and all things are become new;
new Heavens, and new Earth, wherein dwell Righteousness, and wherein you shall
see the Glory of God, and sing the Songs or Moses and the Lamb, Hallelujahs for
Ever Amen. But still I hope you understand how you came by this Heavenly
Mansion that it was through Christ the Way, tho rough the Humanity of Christ,
and no to climb up to the Deity, before you have hardly entered into the
Humanity, how much less than to go through the whole The perfect Death of the
Body of Sin, such are Thieves and Robbers that climbs up another way than
through the whole Humanity; these of all Sex, steals the Word from their
Neighbor, and say, The Lord says it, when he has not spoken to them; these
can prate like Parrots of the Death, Sufferings and Resurrection of Christ, and
pride themselves with their Tongues being covered with the Mantle of Christ,
and so deceive the People; therefore to you, who are here, of all Sorts and
Sects, whether in Gatherings, or out of Gatherings, without respect to Persons,
who are guilty of this foregoing Iniquity, I have this to say to (...), the
time is swiftly coming upon you in which it shall be said, Friend, how came
thou hither without thy Weddinggarment; that is, the Humanity of Christ, which
makes the Soul ready: And you ^^o are got to the uppermost place with^^^
bidding, shall with Shame and Con(...) of Face be brought down to the (...);
you shall be brought down (...) your high Places in that Day, and (...) Lord
alone shall be exalted; and (...) vain shall you cry, Lord, we (...) at and
drunk in thy presence, we (...) come to the highest State, to Perfe^^^on it
self; the Answer will be, But (...) me you thither? Depart from me ye (...)
iniquity, I know ye not; yet it is (...) Soul may have been once in (...) state
as it boasts of before Christ; (...) is, to have eat and drunk in his Presence,
and cast out Devils; that is, overcome some of its Sins, Lusts, and
Corruptions; but here was its Misery, it looked upon it self as something in
this Work, and so fell to Loving and Admiring it self, thinking now I have done
enough, now Soul take thy Ease, thou art increased with Goods; and thus in^ of
going on in a watchful state to incre^ its Talent, it lays it up, or buries it;
a^ then Soul take thy Rest indeed, go (...) Sleep; and here it is in this state
of Security, that the Enemy comes and sows (...) Tares, which is Pride,
Arrogance, a^ Deceit; here the Soul looks upon it (...) to be something; I am
Rich, and i^ creased with Goods, I have Gifts, Part and Eloquence, I can use my
Tongue, (...) will exalt my self by domineering au^ throwing down others; I am
above the Law; nay, above Christ; what are t^ Sufferings of Christ to me? I am
abo^ his Cross, in the Liberty, I am at my ow^ Hands, out of his reach, I am
got to the Godhead, above the Manhood, I am Rich^ I want nothing, This State a
Person who lately came out of the Country to the City, declares her self to be
in.
I have attained to Perfection ^ self; but Oh! thou M^ serable, Hear what the
Lord says, I will reprov^ thee, and set thy Sins in order before thee (...)
and though thou exalt thy self above the Stars from thence will I bring thee
down: Have thou attained to Perfection, and goes up and down hearing Lies,
entertaining false ^ports, Backbiting and Slandering the Innocent, Judging and
Condemning the Just without Cause, and all this in Secret; also refusing to
bring forth the Accusers; besides abundant more thou art Charged with, not fit
to be mentioned here. Now if this be Perfection in thee, then what is
Imperfection? Let the Righteous Principle in all judge; where was thy
discerning of those whispering Spirits? How great was thy mistake, to entertain
Lies for Truth, Evil Spirits for Saints? This was gross Darkness, and horrible
Wickedness: I could have born these Lies, knowing him that is True, whose
Shoe-latchets I am not worthy to unloose, that went before me through bad and
good Report: But my end in reproving thee, in one respect is, if it were
possible, to undeceive thee; the other is, the Glory of God; for it lessens his
Omnipotency and Glory, to call that Perfection which is so great Imperfection:
And further, I must be so plain as to tell thee, that it seems to me thou art
so far short of Perfection, that thou do not understand what Perfection is;
Perfection does not consist in speaking much of God, or in having a large
Knowledge of God, so as to Dis^^^ with great and big words, as with (...)
Tongue of an Angel, thou may be a L^cifer for all that, and so wholly
Imperfect; but it consists in the deepest Humility Annihilating thy self to
Nothing, in the midst of all thy Gifts, Virtues and Grace, which is unknown to
me if thou have any and take this for a Maxim, That the deeper thou art in
Perfection, the less thou will boast of it, for it will declare it self, if
thou art silent: Perfection seeks not it self in no kind whatsoever, but the
Glory of God, and the Good of Souls; and there is no way for a Soul to
accomplish this, but by taking upon it the Humanity of Christ, his Passion, his
Agonies of Soul in thy Soul; and not only to taste a little the Bitterness
thereof, and then get into Sloth, and idle Carelessness, and so to take up a
Rest by the way in the knowledge of that sight, and then to aspire and climb up
to the Godhead; dest thou think that small Taste, Glimpse, or Light was given
thee for that End? No, but for thee to see more clearly to the end of the
Mystery of the Godhead, in the Manhood, and not to climb up to his (...) alone,
and leave his Manhood and (...) behind; this brings the greatest (...) chief
that can befall the Soul; it will (...) just as if it looked at the Sun in its
full strength, to dazzle and blind thee quite, (...) that thou shall neither
see thy self, nor it, for its Glory: But if we humble our selves to his Manhood
and Passion, there he has promised to speak to us. Go down, says the Lord to
Jeremiah, to the Potters House, and there thou shall see my Work, how I can
make a Vessel, and mar it again, if it does not please me: Yea, Lord, so thou
can, I am a Witness of thy Power, that thou art the Potter, and I was the
Clay; and thou did make me a Vessel of Honor, as I thought, but I was broken
in thy Hand; so thou returned and made me another Vessel, as seemed good to
thee the Holy ONE to make me, yet a Vessel for thy Praise, though of another
Fashion: I must declare it, on this Occasion, without boasting, to the Glory of
God.

There was a time in which, if ever any Enjoyed a Heaven upon Earth. I Enjoyed
it then; I was as it were shut up in God, and as the Prophet said, He saw Men
like Trees, I saw them as Shadows; I was Dead to the World, and (...) Things in
it, and only Alive to (...) refused to have Society, tho with (...) best of Men
and Women, as I thoug^ for my Fellowship and Communion was with the Father, and
the Son, Day and Night, for which I withdrew my self out of the City and Towns,
into the Fields and Woods, where I spent my time from Morning till Night, in
Contemplating his Glorious Power in all the Works of his Hands, and singing
Praises and Hallelujahs to his Ever Blessed Name; I could not touch with the
World; I did but once in that time Discourse of God and his Kingdom, and it was
as if I had committed Adultery with the Creatures, and defiled my pure
Garments; although the Hearers so wonderfully affected, crying out, Oh what
Service she might be to come forth in the World! Here you may see that God may
condemn, when Man justifies.

I am not able to declare the state I was in at that time, Prayer was turned
into Praise; for what I had Travailed in Pain for, I was now in the Possession
and Enjoyment of; I was in Unity with the whole Creation, my greatest Enemies
(...) to me as my Dearest Friends; I was ^eague with all the Beasts of the
Field, ^s, Bears, and Tigers; I sat in the (...) with the roaring Bulls as
with Lambs, and with the Birds I sang Melodious Praises; I took Care for
nothing, my whole Care was cast upon the Lord, believing He, whom I served
would take Care for me, for I had overcome the World, the Flesh, and the Devil,
and had lost my self in God; Visions and Revelations attended me Night and Day;
I always saw in the Night what the next Day brought forth; the opening of the
Scriptures was wonderful, but I could not write, being so filled with Ravishing
Joy, yet kept in the deepest Humility before the Lord; I was as Innocent in
reality as a young Child, and it was impossible to move me to Anger; I could
not reprove for Sin, nor exhort to Righteousness, for all my Concern was with
God, Praising and Admiring him in all the Wonders of his Glorious Works,
Adoring him in such exalting Joys above a Mortal Tongue to express; my Senses
were all shut up in him; the Ravishments of his Heavenly Life and Love was so
great, that I was as it were ready to burst ^ vent, which was one occasion of
go^ remote into desolate Places; yet (...) this High Enjoyment, I never four
(...) Trumpet, or ever declared to any one how it was with me; but, I do
believe, had I remained in this state, it would have declared it self, for to
me the Marriage of the Lamb was come, and his Wife had made her self ready, for
now my Beloved was mine, and I was my Beloved's, under whose shadow I sat down
with great Delight.

But I had not been in this Heavenly Mansion half a Year, when the Enemy of
Man's Eternal Peace, and Heavenly Felicity, that old Dragon, called Lucifer,
cast his Floods after the Woman to Devour the holy Child; but the Child was
taken up to God, and the Woman left in the Wilderness, where she has been
tempted and tried; for as I told you, whilst I was here Solacing in the Bosom
of my Beloved Lord and only God, a false Report was raised of me, which through
the earnest Desire and Over-perswasion of some Endeared Friends, I went to
London to find out the Author, but in this thing I highly displeased ^d the
Lord, though all my Enemies fell ^e me with Shame and Confusion of (...), to the
great Satisfaction of those my Friends, but to my unspeakable Loss: For, first,
I disobeyed the Command of the Lord; and, secondly, I left that Great and
Glorious Work he had called me to, which was to have my Heavenly Communion and
Fellowship with him the Ever Blessed, to touch and defile my self with such
Evil Creatures; and then the Work which I thought was wholly done, I was then
to begin again, as if I had never gone through it, which was the Travail of my
Soul in Watching, Prayer and Fasting, which has been my Exercise ever since,
and must be till the second Restoration, which I wait for; and of the Trials,
Temptations and Tribulations, that have attended me ever since, I could write a
Volume, and not declare the one half; yet in all this, the Angel of his
Presence has been with me, to guide me in the Way, and to bring me to the
Place which he has prepared; yea, the Lord is with me as a Giant, or as a
Mighty Man, who has and shall make my Enemies moulder away as the Dust; for he
is my Joy, and my Delight, his Glo^ Presence is with me Day and Night; ^ has
led me down into the Deep, where I have beheld his Wonders, and by his strong
Hand, and out stretched Arm, he drew me from the Pit, and has set my Feet on
him the Rock of Ages, so that I shall never be removed; he has established my
going, wherefore will I praise him, because he is Good, and his Mercy endures
for Ever; he gives me Songs in the Night, Praises for Ever, he has put a new
Song into my Mouth, and upon every Trial he renews his Praises; therefore will
I pour out my Heart and Soul into him, unto whom be Infinite Love, and Endless
Obedience, Now, and for Ever, Amen.

And as I was telling you how he was the Poster, and I the Clay; and how he was
making me a Vessel of Honor, but I brake in his Hand, then he returned and
made me another Vessel, as seemed good to the Glorious God, the Holy Potter,
whose Works are deep, and his Ways past finding out; and now he has made me a
Vessel and is fitting it for his Praise; Glory be to him for Ever.

(...) this I propose to the Reader, when his was not one Degree of Perfection
was brought to by the Power of God; yet not such a Degree, but that I fell a^
Adam did, though not in the same thing, but by disobedience to that Heavenly
Command, who had said to me at that time, I am God All-sufficient to Vindicate
my own Name, walk thou before me, and be thou perfect, and I will make all thy
Enemies thy Footstool; for the Tongue that is lifted up against thee shall
never Prosper; which was fulfilled at that time, as I said, to my great loss.
Therefore let all that Boast they stand, take heed least they fall; for if I
had taken heed, as I ought to have done, to the precious Word of the Lord, I
had not fell.

I did not think ever to have Published this, but that it should have gone to
the Grave with me in Silence; but because there are so many, running to and
fro, Crying, ^o here, and lo there: Wherefore I set down this for that End, to
be a Sea-Mark to some, and a Touch Stone to others; to try their State, how far
they are entered into the State of Perfection: For who are fully Perfect, never
falls more.

Therefore let no one Boast it ^ putting on his Harniss, as if they h^ it off,
for the Day will declare every O^ Work, of what sort it is. And this, le^ those
be assured, whom it does concern, the nearer to Perfection, the less they will
Boast of it; for I say again, it will declare it self; And, had I stayed a
little longer, I was so Inflamed with the Burning Love of God to all Mankind,
that I had Poured it forth in the Streets as I went along, not his Wrath and
Indignation, but his Inflaming, Melting, Dissolving Love, which had Issued it
self forth in such a healing Life, that Miracles would have been wrought
thereby: For Oh! the earning and melting Bowels that I have had to poor
Orphans, as they have lain in the Streets, almost Eaten up of the Evil and
other Distempers, which I have Cried to the Lord to heal them: I thought, if I
had had a little more Faith, it would have been done. I have had numberless
returns of Prayer, and I am sure, whoever comes to the State of Perfection,
shall have the Power attend them that Christ Jesus had to work Miracles; they
shall also be healed themselves in Body, Soul and Spirit; no Sickness shall
attend them, none of the (...) Diseases of the Land shall cleave un^em.

Although this is the Miracle of Mira^es, the Change of the whole Man, his
Restoration out of his fallen State, to be Translated out of the Earthly into
the Heavenly, where the Tempter can come no more. Wherefore let none deceive
themselves, to think they are what they are not, but come down from your
Exalted Imaginations into the low Valley, the Valley of Achor, where God will
try your Works; and if you can abide Devouring Fire, and dwell with Everlasting
Barning, then are you Stones fit for God's Building, not else; for God's House
must be Built with Tried Stones, and the Stone which the Wise Babel Builders
have Rejected, is now to be made the Head of the Corner, because it is a tried
Stone Elect and Precious. Therefore try and prove your selves; for the nearer
you come to God, the deeper in Humility; the more you Love God, the more you
will Hate and Abhor your selves, and all Selfinterest; the World, instead of
being ^our Delight and Pleasure, will be your greatest Burden; all things will
be (...) besides the Enjoyment of God alone: (...) as it is with those that are
next to a Kin^ so will your whole attendance be to the Pure Divine Spirit
within you, giving no admittance for any to go in or out, but what belongs to
that Secret One, all wandering Thoughts and vain Imaginations will be resisted
and put by for that End, to defend and preserve that Holy Spirit from all
manner of Contumelies and Injuries; and if thou will have it to preserve and
Honor thee, thou must give up thy whole Strength to Love, Serve and Obey him;
for here the Soul must give up it self with all its Power and Strength into the
Hands of God, for otherwise it is imposible to be Saved out of the Horrible Pit
of Destruction, as it was showed me in a Vision of the Night, For God Speaks,
says Job, to Man in Visions of the Night, when deep Sleep is upon him, and Man
preceives it not.

Thus it was with me, I saw my self stand over a deep and dangerous Pit, upon a
very narrow slip of Wood which lay a cross the Pit; which, if I had stirred or
moved, I had fallen into the Pi^; I Cried out aloud with a Ve^ment and
Lamentable Cry for help, (...) none would come; although I looked to the right
Hand and to the left, where (...) Creatures; but at the last, tho it was long,
and I could stand no longer, but just falling into the Pit, in the twinkling of
an Eye, there appeared a mighty Man of a wonderful Stature, I thought I never
beheld the like for Height and Bigness, neither in Form or Figure, with a
bright Shining Light, Glorious to Behold, about him, and stood before me by the
side of the Pit, and stretched out his Hand to me, and bid me give him my Hand,
which I did; then he bid me give up my self to him with all my Strength, and
with all my Might; and the Force, Might and Strength I gave up my self to him
in, I cannot compare with any thing in this World, but a Woman in the strongest
Travail and greatest Pain that ever was known, to bring forth a Child into the
World; for, notwithstanding his strong Hand, and outstretched Powerful Arm in
pulling me to him; yet was I fain to Labor with such unutterable Force and
Strength, to give up my self to him, or else I could not have been saved out of
this horrible Pit.

This was a wonderful Discovery me of the Way of the Lord in M^ Redemption, how
he must work ou^ Salvation with Fear and Trembling, ^ how Man must join with
God in t^ Work, and so to be Workers togethe^ as the Apostle Paul says, and
this sig^ fies the Laboring in the Vineyard, and In^ proving the Talent, and
helping the Lord against the Mighty: Yet in all this gre^ Work, the Creature
must be nothing it self, and before the Lord; but the Lord must be all, and the
Creature n^ thing: For it has done nothing b^ what was Commanded it, and this
strip^ it of all its own Works, Gifts and En^ dowments, and so the Soul stands
empty and naked before the Lord, waiting for his Mercy; for seeing the Creature
without him can do nothing, what has it to boast, that is, of its own, but its
Infirmities; for could I have helped my self, when I was falling into the Pit,
then it had not been the Lord; but I stood helpless, poor and miserable, Crying
to the Creatures for help, but none came; though I looked to the left and right
Hand, but no help whilst I sought it from Man; (...) when I Cried to the Lord,
he appear^^ as a Mighty Man, which fulfils that promise, I have laid help on
One that is Mighty: And again, Call upon me in the Day of Trouble, and I will
deliver thee, and thou shall Glorify me. Then it is not unto ^s that the Honor
belongs; no, but to ^hy Glorious Name be Endless Praises.

So here is nothing to the Creature, but Shame and Confusion of Face, when it
comes before the Lord. Oh then, faith Jacob, I am not worthy of the least of
all ^hy Mercies: What am I, and what is my Fathers House, says another. And
here the Creature Nothinginsing it self, and entering into its own nothing, its
first Original, and so sits in the lowest place, as the Master Commands, and as
he himself was their Example, who Humbled himself to the Death; and in this
State were all the Prophets and Apostles kept ^n; in all their Riches of Gifts
and Gra^es, One Crying out, My Leanness, my ^eanness! Another Cries out, I am
like an Owl in a Desert: Another, Oh wretched Man that I am: Another, I am not
worthy ^o unty his Shoe Latche^: Again, I am ^ot He: Another, Though a King, I
am Poor and Needy. Now shall any pres^ in their Proud, Exalted, Lordly, Luc^^
an Spirit to say, This is a feigned Humil^ God will Silence that Tongue that
she utter such Blasphemous Lies.

Wherefore go on, thou Soul, whoe^ thou art, and be not discouraged; k^ but in
his Footsteps of Obedience, and Jesus Feet, as a second Mary Magd^ and thou art
safe enough; what, tho'^ Enemy in a Scoffing Vaunting, Ish^ Spirit say, What Is
She? What Is her Wo^ If a Fox go up the Wall, he shall break it d^ Neh. 33. Let
it be so, Lord, if the W^ be of Man; but if it be of God, an^ Glory, the
Foundation thereof; then the Cunning Fox, with all his Craft^ Subtilty, run to
and fro, and try to the it down.

Therefore, go on, Oh my Soul, and (...) you Holy Builders, whose Building
(...) Foundation is God; lay but the St^ which the wise cunning Master Build^
have Refused, at the head of the Cor^ of your Building, which is Christ, (...)
Rock of Ages, the Elect and Prec^ Stone; let him be the Beginning a^ End of
your Work, and then let (...) ^ah's Rail, and Sanballat Mock, Tobiah the
Ammonite Lie and Jear, the Lord shall be with you to the Disappointing and
Confounding of all your Enemies: For did his Power, Wisdom and Strength attend
an External House, whose Materials were all External, and Men the Builders; all
which was but a Representation of the Internal Work, and will he not be with
you in his Power, Wisdom and Strength, in the Building his House from above,
the Heavenly Jerusalem, the Holy City of the Living God, whose Builder and
Maker is God himself: And shall not his Powerful Presence be with you, if you
Faithfully follow him, the Captain of your Salvation, with the Sword of the
Spirit in the one Hand to keep off the Enemy, and the working Tool in the other
to build the Temple of his Holiness, and repair the Breaches thereof; for are
ye not the Temples of the Holy Ghost, and has not God said, I Will Dwell in
them; why are ye then so slack in bringing back the King to his Holy
Habitation, I mean the King of Glory. Open therefore, ye Everlasting Doors, and
let the King of Glory in, was Ezra, Nehemiah, and the rest of the Builders, so
Vigilant and mirable Diligent in the External Building, as to VVatch and Ward
Night and Day, with their Swords Girded upon their Loins, and so Builded,
Watching in the Night, and Laboring in the Day, not putting off their
Clothes, but for the Washing: Notwithstanding the^ public and secret Enemies,
who lay in a Bush, to Destroy them, that so the Work might Cease; yet how did
the Lord Discover their Enterprises, and delivered them that served him, and
how did the Enemy Serpentine Spirit try every way to put them into Frights and
Fears, raising False and Scandelous Reports, and all to Accomplish their Malice
against God, that the Work of the Lord might Cease; but notwithstanding all
the Trials, Temptations, Mocks, Scoffs and Jears of their Malicious
Adversaries, and the False Brethren that joined with them; yet how Courageously
and Valiantly did they go on, and never ceast, till the Work was Finished, and
then how was their Mouths filled with Praises in such abundance, that in
rapture of Joy they Cried out, Praise his Glorious Name, which Excels above all
Thansgiving and Praise; this is a great Figure and Type, there is not a greater
in all the Holy Scripture of the Internal Work of the Soul: And was the Lord
thus with his Servants in the Outward Work, and will he not be with you in the
great Work of Regeneration, and the new Birth; yea surely, he will certainly be
with you, if it be in Deed and in Truth, then New, and not the Old under the
Title of the New; for many Deceivers are gone out, Crying, Lo here, and Lo
there; but go not you out after them, but keep you on your Watchtower in the
Day, and in your Wards in the Night, and never rest till the House be Built,
the Temple Finished; that he may fill it with his Glory, and then your Eyes
shall see how far the Glory of the latter House Exceeds the Glory of the
former; and here you shall be ready to meet your Lord, as a Bride Adorned to
meet her Husband in the purest Chastity of undefiled Souls: And this is the
Glorious Day which all the Prophets Prophesied of to the pure in Heart, to them
who are come forth of the Furnace Purer than the Gold Seven times Refined, to
those Holy Ones who have followed their Lord through many Tribulations, and
Washed their Longsuffering Robes, and made them White in the Blood of the Lamb;
these are they to whom the Glorious Day shall appear, here is the joy of his
Salvation; the Meltings, the Dissolvings, the Raptures, Extacy, the Embraces,
the Melodious Praises, the Heavenly Hallelujahs, the Communion of Saints, the
Fellowship of Angels, the giving up Body, Soul and Spirit; all into the Hand of
this Supreme Good to be Deiformed, being Raised above Nature, to a State of
Incorruption and Immortality; and by this means become Instruments of the
Endless Glory of God, the Portion of all those who follows the Example of our
Dearest Lord Jesus: But what is all this to the wicked and ungodly, who casts
his Law behind their Back, to what End is it for you to desire it; for the Day
of the Lord shall be Darkness, and not Light, to you who will not part with
your Sins, but hugs them in your Bosom, till the Day of your Death, and then to
be Summons'd up to the Bar of Judgment; and all you false Tongues, Whisperers,
Backbiters, Slanderers, false Accusers, Judgers and Condemners of the Just, and
Justifiers of the Wicked; you Proud in Heart, though not in Habit, who are
covered with the Mantle of Christ; to deceive, if it were possible, the very
Elect. The Day of the Lord shall be Darkness, and not Light, to you, wherein
you shall stumble and fall.

A Dark and Gloomy Day, a Day of Dread and Fear, Terror, Horror, and
Amazement to you, lukewarm, of all sorts; and, though you run to the Rocks and
Hills to cover you, yet in vain; for all Covering shall be too short, and you
shall be stripped Naked and Bare.

I have seen the Day of the Lord as Fire and Brimstone upon the Wicked; and I
have seen the Heavens Open, like the two Leaves of a Door, and the Vials of
God's Wrath, and fierce Indignation, Pour down upon the Earth, as Water out of
a Mill-pond, when the Flood-gate is first Opened; and when I saw it, I fell
upon my Knees, with my Eyes looking up to Heaven, wringing my Hands, and Crying
out most Vehemently, saying, Mercy, Lord, Mercy! Oh Righteous God, be Merciful,
for thy Mercy Sake: Stop it, Lord, stop it: Oh Mercy, Mercy, Mercy! For thy
Infinite Compassion Sake, be thou Merciful: And thus I continued for the space
of half an Hour; yet I saw it not stopped; neither is this that I mentioned in
my last Book: Oh the Dreadful Sights I have had of the Judgment of God, which
are to be Executed in the World, now in these latter Days; and also of the
Glorious Reign of Christ in the Earth, of the many Revelations thereof; I shall
mention one here, but I am not able to give you a Description as it was, for it
is beyond my Tongue of utterance.

I, and a few more Women with me were in a Glorious Place, where there was a
Bed, and in the Bed there was a Woman, and the Woman had Travailed, and brought
forth a Child, which was a Son: The Woman was All-Glory, the Child was
All-Glory, the Bed All-Glorious, the place where we were was All-Glorious, far
beyond the Sun in its full strength, far beyond the Polished Gold; and I, with
the Woman that was with me, sitting a little from the Bed side; there is no
Tongue can declare our State; we were Translated into a Glorious Shining
Brightness, and new Angelical Bodies, filled with Unutterable, Heavenly,
Ravishing Joys, and Sounding Melodious Praises, inwardly, in our most inward
Parts; but no Sound, or Voice to be heard outwardly: My Soul being so filled
with this Ravishing Glory, that my Body, though new, was ready to burst, as a
Vessel that is filled with New Wine, which wanted Vent, and being so filled with
this unutterable Exalted Joy and Infinite Glory; I, bursting out, said, O my
God, is it come, meaning the Glorious Day; The immediate Answer was, Not yet:
And this Appearance was about the time the Queen Died.

And thus, I have had the Manifestation of his Righteous Judgments, which are
to be Executed in the Earth, in his appointed time: He has also been pleased
to give me the Revelation of his Mighty Appearance in the Earth, to Restore
Mankind out of his fallen State, and from the Tincture of his Love in my Soul,
which has been the Occasion of my great Travel and Labor, to put Souls in the
way wherein God will be found, to attain this great Salvation; and which ought
to be the Work of all such as Prophecy or declare of the Kingdom of Christ
entering into its Succession, to Labor mightily with Mankind, to prepare for
his coming; for they cannot but understand how terrible a Day it will be to all
the Workers of Iniquity; though to those that waits for his Appearance out of
Sin, shall the Son of Righteousness arise with Healing in his Wings, and they
shall go forth, and grow up as fat Calves in the Stall, and shall tread down
the Wicked, as Dust under the Soles of their Feet, in the Day that I shall do
this, says the Lord of Host, Malachi, 4.2, 3. But to the Wicked (says God)
the Day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all the Proud; yea, and all that
do Wickedly, shall be Stubble; and the Day that comes shall burn them up, and
shall leave neither Root nor Branch, says the Lord of Host: So you hear what a
Dreadful Determination there is against ^he Wicked of all Sorts, without
Respect to Person or Sect; to the Proud, and all that do Wickedly: Now what a
wonderful Concern ought there to be upon you Ministers, of all sorts, that the
People may be found in a Posture, suitable to meet the Lord; in this the Day of
his most Terrible Appearance, wherein he will be as a Refiners Fire, to Purge
the Sons of Levi, and to Refine them, as Gold is Refined: Now, whether this
great Work does not lie on your part to be done, before the Day of his coming,
that there may be found that in you, and them, that can stand in devouring
Fire, and dwell with Everlasting Burning; which you know there is nothing can,
but that which is pure, as the three Holy Children VValk'd in the midst of the
fiery Furnace, Praising God, and not so much as their Clothes Singed, or the
smell of Fire upon them; but you know the same Fire Devoured their Adversaries;
wherefore, I say, that this is the Work of our Day, that there may be nothing
found in us that the Judgment is to, that his Anger can take hold of, then
happy shall we be, then, Come, ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you; ent^^ you into the Joy of your Lord. Wherefore, I say again,
you Ministers have a great Charge lies upon you, to perform your Duty to God
and Man, to see that ye walk in all things like your Pattern, both in Life and
Doctrine, that your Doctrine be such as to Kill Sin in the Birth, before it be
brought forth; nay, in the Conception, that the Root and Ground of Iniquity may
be removed, that the good Seed may be sown in the good Ground, that it may
bring forth to God an Hundred fold.

And all you, who profess your selves the Ministers of Christ, ought to have a
wonderful Care what Doctrine you deliver to the People, that it be sound, and
without mixture, that it be the very same with the Doctrine of Christ, without
Equivocation, or private Meaning; for here has been the Mischief to all
Mankind, the Iniquity of their Teachers in this thing, which God himself
heavily complains of; telling them, they gave for Doctrine the Precepts of Men.
Wherefore, none ought to give out to the People any thing but what makes for
God, and the increase of his Kingdom, which is the Doctrine and Life of Christ;
and not to speak or write the Conceits and Imaginations of their own Brain: For
is not this the Imagination of your own Brain, to imagine that Christ Died for
your Sins, and you are to be Saved by his Merits, without the Power of his Life
working you into the New, and out of the Old Nature of Sin and Iniquity.

That Great Apostle Paul, makes a distinction between his Words and the Lord's
Word; for though he had to do with a People that would have slighted Christ, the
Gift of God, and turned back again to magnify the Law; although Christ was the
End of the Law, for in him the Law was fulfilled; and now some of you are as
much in the Extreme as they, for you throw away the Law, which is Holy, Just,
and Good, if not abused: For, say you, God Justifies Sinners by the
Righteousness of another, by the Obedience, and by the Sufferings, and by the
Death of another this is Miracle, say you; but the Law of Righteousness that
was given at first; that Law, Do this and live; be thou holy, be thou perfect,
and thou shall have the Reward of it; here is nothing answering to Miracle, say
you, which is your great Mistake: For if Obedience to the Will of God is not
Miracle, what is? Will Christ's Obedience to the Father perfect the Soul's
Work, without the Soul's Obedience to Christ? The Law in it self made nothing
perfect; but Christ, being the End of the Law, the Law was fulfilled in him; be
thou holy, Christ was holy; be thou perfect, Christ was perfect; so he was the
Perfection of the Law, in him the Law was perfected: Here Christ has done the
Will of God, Lo I come, as it is written of me, to do thy Will, O God: Now
Christ has fulfilled all that was commanded the Creature in the Law; is there
nothing now for Man to do? Yes sure there is, to come to Christ; he calls, Come
unto me all you that are weary (with toyling under the Law) and heavy laden,
(still with your Sins) come unto me, and I will give you rest; take my Yoke
upon you: What was Christ's Yoke, was it not his Fire-Baptism of Sufferings,
Death, and Resurrection? You have toyled all Night but caught nothing, while
you were under the Law; but now, cast your Net on the right side of the Ship,
and you shall find: Take my Yoke upon you: So you see here is a Yoke still, though
you are from under the Law: Take up my Cross, deny your selves; but take
notice, you must confess me before Men, or I will deny you before my Heavenly
Father: Confess thee, may some say, so we do daily externally; the Answer is,
but that will not do your Work now with me, you have had enough of that under
the Law; but what has it profited you, now you are come to me, the Grace of
God which teaches to deny all ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live
Righteous and Holy in this present evil World; this is the Effect of this
Grace; and then, if my Grace takes this Effect, it brings Salvation, but no
other ways.

And thus by Grace ye are Saved, that works out the old, and works in the new,
so here is works still, Works of Holiness and Righteousness, for the Grace of
Christ does not make void the Law, but has fulfilled it; otherwise God would
destroy his own Works, which he does not; but only makes it of another Fashion;
for in the Law the Power was wanting; but in the Grace of God is the Pow^^ of
God placed, which is Christ Jesus, (...) Grace, Wisdom, and Power of God, a^ to
as many as received him, (the Grace into their Souls) to them he gave Power to
become the Sons of God: But to them tha^ refuse this Gift of God to be their
Teache^ and Leader out of Sin, or turns this precious Grace into Wantonness and
Lasciviousness, Pride, Pleasures, and worldly Lusts, to them it is no Savior,
but a^ Judger and Condemner; for do you thin^ this Grace of God, which has
appeare^ to all Men, is an idle Grace? You ar^ grossly mistaken, it is a working
Grace you must work with it, or else it will no^ work with you; and what is
your work* You must give your selves all up to God for him to work his own Will
in you; and to this, you must Watch and Pray continually against the Tempter,
that when your Lord comes he may find you waiting upon him for his Power, to
resist and overcome the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this
wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and to keep God's holy
Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the Day^ of your Lives, and
this is a state of Per^ection: And is there no Reward for him that is found
waiting? Oh yes, Blessed is that Servant, who when his Lord comes shall find
him waiting, he will make him sit down at Table, and gird himself, and serve
him, Luke 12. Again, and again, Well done thou good and faithful Servant, enter
thou into the Joy of thy Lord: Says another, Verily, there remains a Reward
for the Righteous: And says our Lord, He will make him Ruler over his
Household, and over all that he has.

Oh, what Precious Promises of Reward is here! He will not only make him Ruler
over all the Land of Egypt, as Joseph was; but over the Egyptian Darkness which
blinds the Soul, that it cannot see its way to God, over his own Will,
Desires, and Evil Inclinations: As the Divine Beggar, (if it be lawful to give
that Title to a Mortal Man) it was to him, who said to S. Thaulerus, another
Excellent Man, Titled a Famous Divine, who by the space of Eight Years had
con^inually importuned the Lord by Prayer, conceiving he wanted the right
Know^edge of the Truth, notwithstanding all his Humane Learning, and spent who
Nights therein, begging of God to ^f him know Him, and know himself, and to
show him any Man that might teach him the Way of Truth; and, on a certain
time, when he was inflamed with a most vehement Desire thereof, a Voice, from
Heaven thus spoke unto him; Go forth, and there thou shall find a Man that can
teach thee the Way of Truth; and, going forth, he found there a certain Beggar,
with patcht and torn Apparel, and with dirty Feet; to whom, by way of
Salutation, he said, God give thee a good Morning: The Beggar replied, I do not
remember I ever had an evil one; and thus he Answers to all his Desires and
Questions, insomuch that this Learned Man was Astonished, and desired him, now
at last, to speak more plainly, which (...) Beggar did, most Excellently
unfolding the Mystery thereof, the whole being too ^uch here to relate, I shall
only mention the latter part: Then said the Beggar to Taulerus, Thou say
moreover, that God would be pleased to make me Happy; whereunto I answered,
That I had never been unhappy; for I am fully resolved, through his Grace, to
adhere, and only to cleave to the Wi^^ of God, as the best, and abandoning my
own Will, into which I have so wholly poured out my own Will, that whatsoever
he wills, that I will also; and for this Cause, as I said, I was never unhappy;
seeing that I will cleave to his Will only, and have wholly resigned my own
proper Will: To this Taulerus answered, This is very strange; but what, I pray
thee, would thou say, if the Lord of Majesty would Drown thee in the
Bottomless Pit, would thou then be content with His Will? The Beggar said,
Drown me in the Bottomless Pit! Why certainly, if he should, I have two Arms by
which I would still embrace and clasp fast about Him; the one is, True
Humility, and that I lay under Him, and by it I am united to His most Sacred
Humanity; the other, and that is the Right Arm, is Love; which is united to His
Divinity; and by this Love given to me, from Himself, I hold Him so fast, that
he would be forced to go down to Hell with me; and it were much better for me
to be in Hell with God, than to be in Heaven without him.

By this Discourse Thaulerus learned, that the most Compendious Way to God, is
a true Resignation, with profound H^mility.

Hereupon, Thaulerus spoke again to the Beggar, and asked him with Admiration,
saying, Good Lord! whence came thou? The Beggar said, From God. The Learned
Man, Where found'st thou God? Beggar, Even there, where I left all the
Creatures. The Learned Man, But where did thou leave Him? Beggar, In humble
and clean Hearts, and in Men of good Will, which are His Temples and
Dewlling Place. The Learned Man, I pray thee, Friend, who art thou? Beggar, Who
am I? Surely I am a King; and Jesus himself has Crowned me with Peace, Power,
and Rest. The Learned Man, Art thou a King? But where is thy Kingdom? Beggar,
The Kingdom of Heaven is within me, in my Soul; and I can now, and do, by His
Power in me, so govern and command all my inward and outward Senses, that all
the Affections and Powers of the Old Man in my Soul, are conquered, and are in
subjection to the New Man in me, which Kingdom, no Man can doubt, but that it
is better than all the Kingdoms, Scepters, Crowns and Glories of this World.
The Learned Man, Lord! what brought thee to this Perfection? Beggar, My
silence, subline Meditation; and, above all, my Union with the Everlasting God
of Peace and Rest, which is my Kingdom; and, to say the Truth, I could rest in
nothing which was less than God; and now, having found my God, I have forsaken
the unquiet World, and, in Him, I have found Everlasting Peace and Rest.

Here are the words of Christ fulfilled; here was a Man that was a Partaker of
all his Precious Promises; here was he that was made Ruler over all that he
had; here was Two that were gathered together in his Name, and he in the midst
of them; here, were the Faithful Servants, who, when their Lord came, were
found waiting, for Him to give them their Portion of Meat in due Season; the
first had attained to Regeneration, and the New Birth, to Perfection it self,
he was come to the Power and Kingdom of God within him, by which Power in him,
he could so govern and command all his inward and outward Senses, that all the
Affections and Powers of the Old Man in his Soul, were conquered, and brought
into subjection to the New Man in him: Here was a Man that witnessed to the
Power of Christ actually in him, and not in Conceit as Formal Christians.

The second was John Thaulerus himself, (if we may believe the Ancient Copies)
who, by the space of Eight Years, had continually importuned the Lord by
Prayer, conceiving he wanted the right Knowledge of the Truth, notwithstanding
all his Learning, and spent whole Nights therein, begging of God to let him
know Him, and know himself.

If I may be so bold as to ask you, how many such Learned Divines comes out of
your Schools of Oxford and Cambridge, that notwithstanding all their Learning,
goes back again into their own Nothing, and becomes as a little Child to learn
their A, B, C, crying, Father, show me, teach me, the Way of Truth, which is to
know Thee, and to know my self?

This Divine, as the History styles him, did he go to Man for this Knowledge of
God and himself? No; but to God only; for he had all the Learning Man could
give; he had been at the Universities, from whence he had the Title, A Learned
Divine; yet, you see here, he was as Ignorant of the true Saving Knowledge, as
he who was a Ruler in Israel was of the New Birth; yet had a Belief of Christ
that he was the Messiah; so it was with the Learned John Thaulerus, he had an
outward Historical Faith of God in Christ, but that would not do with him now,
when the Spirit in him was making search after the deep things of God, to know
Him, and to know himself; which is a Key to open the Cabinet of Divine
Mysteries, the highest Knowledge Man can attain to in this Life; for to know
God is Life Eternal: And that Soul who truly knows God, in and through Jesus
Christ, shall quickly know it self, and be made to cry out, Woe is me, for I am
undone; because I am a Man of polluted Lips, and I dwell in the midst of a
polluted People, for mine Eyes have seen the King, and Lord of Hosts.

But then again, Oh thou Soul, this is the very state, in the Sense of thy own
Nothingness, where thy Lips shall be touched with a Coal from the Altar, which
shall take away thy Iniquity, and then thou will be ready to go on the Lord's
Errand, though dreadful, Go unto this People, and say unto them, ye shall hear
indeed, but not understand; ye shall plainly see, and not perceive: Make the
Heart of this People fat, make their Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes; least
they see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and understand with their
Hearts, and Convert, and he heal them: Then, said the Prophet, For how long
Lord? Then answered he, Until their Cities be waste, without Inhabitants, and
the Houses without Man, and the Land be utterly Desolate.

Oh Amazing Message! What Destruction to come upon a People, when they are
Blind and Deaf: Oh Astonishing Judgment! But how long does the Lord bear, and
wait upon a People for their Return, that he may show Mercy to them before thy
are thus Sealed up? Surely till his Locks are wet with the Dew of the Night,
till his Holy Spirit is weary with Striving, and then the Breath cease from
before him, which he has made; Then shall they Call, but I will not hear; for
us I called, and they would not hear; so shall they call, and I will not hear
them, says the Lord; then shall their Seers be ashamed, and their Diviners
confounded, when they shall have no Answer of God: But, says the Lord, it
shall be said unto them in that Day, Call upon your Gods of Silver and Gold,
let them deliver you now that had your Hearts, Pride, Pleasures, wherein you
spent your precious time; of which time you gave me a little to ^ock me, when
you came into your Idols Temples, with your Abominations before my Eyes, to
Provoke me to Destroy you, and your Idols, out of my sight; that so your
Abominations may cease from before me.

But Oh! Ye false Shepherds, the Woe will be unto you, who are the cause of all
these things, though the People Love to have it so; yet Woe will be unto you, who
have bred them up in this Historical Way of outward Ceremonial Worship, as the
poor Jaimaco Minister said, To keep up some Show of Religion: But what good did
their Bartholomew Shows do them, when the Plagues and Vengeance of God fell
upon them, for mocking him with their Shows of Worship? Does the Infinite,
Unspeakable, Incomprehensible Glory want a Show to come before Him? Carry your
Hearers to Bartholomew Fair, and to the rest of your Cursed Play Houses, the
Abomination of the Land, to see your Shows of Worship, where your Hearers brag
and boast, they can Learn as much as at a Sermon; truth indeed, for the most of
your Church-Sermons, and Play-House-Sermons are alike: For a Proud Lustful
People Worships in the one, and a Proud Lustful People Worships in the other^
for other ways, what means your Stage Players Attire, and your wanton
Carriages, Playing and Toying one with another, as you sit before your Priest:
This I have seen with my Eyes many Years ago, with more of your Abominations
too many to Insert here, to the Abhorring your Sacrifices; and the same
Behavior is amongst some of you still, as I am Creditably Informed by some of
your Hearers: So here is like Priest, like People; Children of Belial, fat Kine
of Bashon, Sons of Eli, every one Neighing after his Neighbors Wife: Oh ye
Adulterers and Adultresses! Have ye not Houses to sport your selves in? Oh ye
Presumptuous Ones! How is it ye are not afraid the Ground should Open and
swallow up you, and your Idols Temple together? Which plainly Appears some of
you are so much tinctured with an Atheistical Faith, as to believe there is
neither God (...) Devil: VVo and Alas! What Lamentable Lamentation shall be
taken up for the People of these Nations, who have such Pastors as destroy and
scatter the Sheep of his Pasture: Oh what shall I say? I have not Words to
declare my Grief, for my Heart breaks within me, as Jeremiah's did, because
of the Hireling Priests and False Prophets Filthiness, who commit Adultery, and
walk in Lies; they strengthen the Hands of the Wicked, that none can return
from his Wickedness; They are to me, says the Lord, as Sodom and Comorrah:
Therefore will I Feed them with Wormwood, and give them the Writers of Gall to
Drink. For, from such Preachers in England is Profaneness, and all manner of
Wickedness gone forth into all the Land: I am a VVitness of this Truth, for
what can I say of the Wickedness of some Priests, from a Girl of Nine or Ten
Years of Age; which I my self have been both Eye and Ear VVitness to; besides
all their Abominations that I have heard from others; which is beyond my Tongue
to Express; and when I was at London, I was in a place where a Priest, and
Three Men more (...) (or Devils in the Shape of Men) were, (...) Backs were to
me, and my Face to them so I saw them, and heard their Discourse The Men's
Discourse was Lascivious, and I heard not one Word, but either at the
beginning or end thereof, was, God Dam^ them! And, God Damn their Blood! their
Priest Joaking Merrily with them, and Laughing out right Heartily at their
unclean, lascivious Discourse: I bore the Burden of their Wickedness so long,
whilst I could bear it no longer, and then I Reproved the Men and their Priest;
the Priest Mocked and Scoft; but the lewd Men, as Surprised, were more moderate,
and would have heard me longer; but the Priest pulled and hurried them away;
the People that heard, went away Sighing and Lamenting at their own Condition:
Now, is not here cause of a Bleeding humiliation, that a People, that bears the
Name of Christ, should have such Monstrous Beasts for their Teachers? It Is no
wonder our Land is overrun with the Spirit of Atheism: Is here not cause to
make Proclamation of Fasting, Sackcloth, and Ashes; as I, unworthy Messenger,
did in your Ears, a little before my Dear Lady, Queen Mary's Death, when the
Lord Commanded me to go to London, I knew not for what, for I had been there a
little before, therefore had no Business of my own; but it lay upon (...)
weightily, saying, Thou must go to ^don; which I did, though in a great ^ross to
my own Will, and Landing at Queen-hive, I went directly into Cheapside, which
was not my usual way; where I saw Multitudes of People in their Belconies and
Windows, and the Sreets so filled with People, that it was very Troublesome,
either to stand or go: I enquired why it was so, the People Answered, The
Ministers are going to their Feast; then I stood still, and humbly Inquired of
the Lord what his Pleasure was with me, now I was come to London; his immediate
Answer was, Call them to Fasting. Then I continued there till they came by, and
I went with them from the middle of Cheapside, till I came into Cornhill, and
then, in the Dread and Power of the Lord, I opened my Mouth to them, and said,
The Lord calls for Fasting, and you go to Feasting: He calls to Weeping and
Mourning, and Girding with Sackcloath; but (...) stead of this Exercise, behold
you have Jo and Gladness, Slaying Oxen, and Killing Sheep, Eating Flesh, and
Drinking Win^ and so I went along with them, declaring the Word of the Lord
throughout Cornhill, and part of the next Street; (...) when I had finished my
Testimony, Ind^ them, and Returned that Day to Patney^ Now, O ye Teachers,
where was your Discerning? Where was your Divining, Revelation, Knowledge and
Sight; As some of you Titled the Queen.
the Light of your Eyes, being taken from you; had you that Spirit of
Revelation, from on High, that the Children of the Prophets had, when their
Master Elijah was to be taken from them; when the Children of the Prophets came
out to meet Elisha, and said unto him, Know thou that the Lord will take
away thy Master from thine Head this Day: And Elisha said, Yea, I know it: So
here was the Scholars Inspired with the Revelation thereof, as well as the
Master: But where was your Discerning, from the Master to the Scholar, of so
great a Change as our Dear Lady, the late Queen's, being taken away from your
Head? Then is it not happened to you, as it was to your Forefathers, that Night
is come upon you, that you have no Vision, and the Day is become dark that ye
cannot Divine; And why? Because your Gifts and Rewards have blinded your Eyes,
that ye could not see to reprove Sin in the Gate, your Lives of Ease and
Pleasures, as says the Text, Ease slays the Foolish, and the Prosperity of
Fools destroy them; your Hundreds and Thousands a Year, your Honors and
Glories of the World have stood between, and withheld you from standing in the
Gap, to keep back the Anger of God from destroying the People; will not these
be Spots in your Feasts, in that Day when the Lord shall say, You have fed your
selves, and not the Flock, therefore will I feed you with Judgment; and in that
Day, says the Lord, you shall be ashamed of your Priesthood; for you shall no
longer wear a rough Garment to deceive; for in that Day, you shall say, I am no
Prophet, but an Husbandman; for Man taught me to be an Herdsman from my Youth
up: Then, Ch ye Priests, shall ye be made to speak Truth, that Man taught you
from your Youth up, though hitherto ye have spoken Lies, and (...) The Lord
taught you; and says that Te^ In that Day, says the Lord, I will cut of the
Names of the Idols out of the Land, and they shall no more be remembered; and I
will cause the false Prophets, and the unclean Spirits, to depart out of the
Land: And if any^ should yet Prophecy, his Father and his Mother that begat
him, shall say unto him thou shall not live, for thou speak Lies in the Name
of the Lord, and his Father, and his Mother, that begat him, shall thrust him
through when he Prophesies: Oh wonderful! that the very Begetters of your Lies
and Falsehood should destroy you, and s^ your Destruction comes to be of your
selves, and not of the Lord; this also shall be the holy Zeal of the true
Regenerated Soul, to destroy, without Mercy, all, both old and young of the
Darlings, and dearly beloved Sins in its own Soul; for Agag must be hewed to
pieces, before the Lord in Gilgal; the very place where the Disobedient
Offering was to have been offered, Samuel 15. But, said the Lord, I will cause
the Prophets, and the unclean Spirits to depart out of the Land; meaning, says
the Margent, the false Prophets and Teachers, who are the Corrupters of all
Reli(...); whom, the Prophet here says, the ^rgent calls unclean Spirits: But
this ^^phesie goes further, and, in all the ^and, says the Lord, two parts
thereof shall be cut off and die; but the third part shall be left therein: And
I will bring the third part through the Fire, and will fine the, as Silver is
fined; and will try them, ^ ^old is tried; they shall call upon my Name, and I
will hear them; I will say it is my People, and they shall say, the Lord is my
God, Zachariah 13. Hear, what must be done to the People of both sorts, the
Reprobate Silver must be quite destroyed, the other must be tried in the Fire,
and fined as Silver and Gold is fined, before God will own them to be his
People, whereof you have one of the greatest Representations happened to you,
that ever befell a People in this latter Age of the World; therefore observe,
and take notice, I beseech you, for it is of great Matter and Weight to you
all, and not only to you, but to the whole Universe throughout the whole World;
for as you have done to your Silver, so will God do to you; this is the Word of
the Lord to you, of all Persuasions whatsoever, (...) out respect of Persons,
who owns the ex^ a God and Christ, who, in the sight (...) the Lord, are grown
Corrupt, as (...) have done to your Idols of Silver and Go^d so will God do to
you; he will melt yo^ and try you, and purge you with Fir^ and refine you with
Coals, and so take (...) way your Dross by Fire: But, if you^ all Tin, he will
consume you wholly and the old, though never so good and larg^ shall not pass but
by weight; it will ^ weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary ^ and, if it be
found too light, it must (...) melted down, and new Coined, and so must be made
all new; and then shall the Heavenly Image be stamped upon it, the Beauty of
his Holiness; then shall be the new Heavens, and the new Earth, where^ in
dwells Righteousness; the old shall pass away as a Scrowl.

Oh! how the Lord has punished you, with your Gods; your Gods has been your
Plagues, and shall be yet more your Whips and Scourges; for the Day is swiftly
coming upon you, that you shall throw your Gods of Silver, and your Gods of
Gold to the Bats, and to the Moles of the Earth; and ye, your selves, and run
into the holes of the Rocks, for (...) the Lord, and from the Glory of (...)
lajesty, when he shall rise, in the (...) of his Might, to destroy the Earth,
and then the high look of Man shall be humbled, and the Proud Loftiness, and
Haughtiness of Man shall be abased, and the Lord only, and alone shall be
exalted in that Day; for the Day of the Lord of Hosts, shall be upon all the
Proud and Houghty, and all that is Exalted, and they shall be brought low; upon
all the tall Cedars, and all the strong and sturdy Oaks, and upon all that has
made Gold their Hope, and the Wedge of Gold their Confidence: For, as you have
not answered the End of the Lord in your Treasures; neither will he Answer your
End, in the Enjoyment of them; for he has determined, in his Secret Counsel,
to rend you from them, and them from you; and in that Day, which is even at
your Doors, you shall know, that the Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness
thereof; and that you are but Servants or Stewards; and now his Day is come, to
call you to an Account of your Stewardship, and to require his Silver and and
Gold, and his Ra^ Treasures at your Hands; and ther^ (...) shall know how you
have Trespass^^ on the Lord's Lands; and Claimeds (...) priety to your selves,
which you Go^ Right to, further than for Food and Raiment, which the God of the
whole Earth allows to all Liberally; for so it was (...) the beginning, till
the Fall, till (...) Lusted after that that was forbidden; and so it was after
Christ's Departure, when the Power of God bore Rule; they ha^ all things
Common, when the Church o^ Christ was in its Lusture; and so it will be again
in the Restoration; there shall be no more Thine and Mine, but all the Lord's;
and he shall be served therewith and the Glory shall be to him for E^ ver.

The next is to the Shepherds of Israel, Woe be unto you that Feed your selves,
ye Eat the Fat, and Cloth you with the Wool; ye kill them that are Fed, but ye
Feed not the Sheer the Weak have ye not Strengthened, the Sick have ye not
Healed, neither have ye bound up the Broken, nor brought again that which was
driven away; neither have ye sought that which was lost, but with Cruelty and
with Rigor have ye Ruled them, and they were scattered without a Shepherd; and
when they were Dispersed, they were devoured of all the Beasts of the Field.

Wherefore, Oh ye Shepherds of Israel, ^ear ye the Word of the Lord, Thus says
the Lord God, because my Flock has been spoiled, and my Sheep devoured;
therefore, thus says the Lord, Behold I come against the Shepherds, and will
Require my Sheep at their Hands, and I will cause them to Cease from Feeding my
Sheep; neither shall the Shepherds Feed themselves any more; for I, the Lord,
will search my Sheep, and seek them out; for as the Shepherd searches out his
Flock, so will I seek out my Sheep, where they have been scattered in this
Cloudy and Dark Day; and, I will feed my Sheep, and bring them to their Rest,
says the Lord God. I, the Lord, will seek that which was lost, and bring again
that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will
strengthen the weak: But, I will destroy the Fat and the Strong, and I will
Feed them with Judgment; for, because you have thrust with Side, and with
Shoulder, and pusht all the weak with your Horns, till ye have scattered them
abroad; therefore will I help, and they shall no more be spoiled, and I will
Judge between Sheep and Sheep; beween the Fat Sheep, and the Lean; between the
Rams and Goats; and you, my Sheep, shall know, in that Day, that I am the Lord,
when I have broken the Cords of their Yoke, and delivered you out of the Hands
of them, that that served themselves of you; and I, the Lord, will be your God;
and I will make an Everlasting Covenant with you, a Covenant of Peace; I will
cause the Evil Beasts to Cease out the Land, I will be your God, and my Servant
David shall be Prince over you. Now, you know that that David was a Type and
Figure of Christ, and David was a Man of War from his Youth, I mean the
Spiritual War, of which the outward War was but a Figure; and how deeply he
was Engaged in the Internal War, the History of his Life fully Declares; and
this is he who was a Man after God's own Heart, in bearing his Righteous
Judgments for Sin, and so it runs in the Line, till it come to Christ, the
Lord's David, who is to be Prince over you for Ever.

And here I take occasion to say to the ^ishops, who are now in Power, that
they ought not to suffer such Doctrine (as was by the forementioned Doctor of
Divinity) to be Preached in a Christian Nation, as gives the least Toleration
for any liberty to Sin; for otherwise what fignifies a change of the Old
Bishops to you New, if there is no Reformation in Religion thereby? For not
only is the Practical part neglected by this Man's Doctrine, but Toleration
proclaimed upon the Housetop, for the Door to be open that lets in all manner
of Ungodliness, which is the very thing that destroys Nations and Kingdoms; for
what need we fear all the Enemies in the World, if it were not for our Sins?
It Is the Sins of a People that draws down the Wrath and Vengeance of GOD upon
Nations and Kingdoms; and ought not you to be the Persons to stand in the Gap,
to keep back the Judgments of God, by your holy and self-denying Lives in your
several Stations, by your Watchings, Fastings, and deep Humiliation, Preaching
in Doctrine the Sufferings of our Lord Jesus, to bring the same to be the Duty
of every true Christian, to suffer with him in his Se^ sufferings, that as he
suffered both in So^ and Body, who had no Sin, for us Sinners, and so made his
Soul an Offering for Sin, to Redeem us by his Precious Blood from all Iniquity,
so we may, by the same Power in him, be partakers with him of the same
Sufferings in Soul and Body, as he, our Lord, by his Power and Strength shall
enable us; that so, in our own Souls, we come to feel for him a share of those
unmeasurable Sufferings he, our Savior, felt for our sakes, and to this Day
feels the same, if we Rebel against his holy Laws; he suffers in us, and we
Crucify him afresh; therefore our Sufferings are never to be at an end, whilst
he suffers in us; whilst we do the least thing that grieves his Holy Spirit in
us; and this is the only Sacrifice that is acceptable to him, your suffering
with him; for this is more than all your Preaching, Praying, and Hearing, out
of this Life; for what cares he for all your multitude of words, which has
nothing but Self-interest at the bottom, they are as great Abomination to him
as the Jews and Pharisees of old were, who wearied him with their words so
long, till they ^ought his Long-suffering to an end. The same is your Case, Oh!
ye Bishops, and Priests, and Teachers, of all Sorts, who seek your selves more
than the things of Christ, which is the very reason why you do not profit the
People, to turn them from their evil ways, because you your selves are out of
the Way, out of Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life; for it is plain his
Ways are not your Ways, nor his Works your Works; your Voluptuous Life of
Fleshly-liberty being witness: But if there be any among you, Bishops, Priests,
and Teachers, who are otherwise minded, which I hope and believe there is some,
why come ye not forth to help the Lord against the Mighty, now in this Day
wherein the measure of Iniquity is filling up to the brim? Where is your Ensign
hung forth, to show that you are on the LORD's part? What signal Testimony do
you give, that you are for the LORD's Christ? There be many Talkers of him in
high Notions, which he values no^; for his Day is at hand that shall try both
Words and Works: How many of these great Talkers, and high Pretenders to his
Religion, g^ with him to suffer? How many of these are his Companions, in his
Soul-sufferings, and are willing to be Crucified with him? No, no; here all
forsake him; but it may be some may stand afar off, bewailing him, and crying,
Alas! Alas! But what good does that Alas do to him; Does it mitigate his Pain,
or assuage his Grief? No; but add to his Burden: Weep not for me, says he, but
weep for your selves, for the Miseries that are coming upon you: So you hear
what Christ says, Weep for your selves, for the Miseries that are coming upon
you, humble your selves under the Mighty Hand of God, suffer for your own Sins;
be grieved, in the very innermost parts of your Souls, for all your Rebellion
against my holy Laws, and there suffer in Heartbreaking Sorrow, in Watching,
Fasting, and great Tribulation: And the deeper your Exercise is here in barring
the Indignation of the LORD, the more you please him; for when you suffer most,
he suffers least, and this pleases him, for us to bear the burden of our own
Iniquities; for it was his time, when he was on the Earth, in his Body of
Flesh, to bear the burden of our Sins; but now it is our time to distharge him,
and bear our own burden, so long as the Root and Ground of Iniquity remains in
us; and then when we are washed, purified and cleansed from all the filthiness
both of Flesh and Spirit, by his Righteous Judgments, then will he arise and
plead our Cause: So, ye Teachers of all Sorts and Sects, this should be your
Work, to bring People to this work of Regeneration; first, by your own Example,
and Life of Holiness; and then laboring with them in Doctrine: But if neither
your Life, nor Doctrine will Reform them from their Pride and Life of Vanities,
then it is time for you to turn into Silence, and stand Dumb before them, with
your Loins girded in Sackcloth, and Heads covered with Ashes; and thus, by your
Faithful Obedience to GOD, you may be instruments to Convert them, and save
your own Souls: And how can you quit your selves before the Lord, otherways
than to mourn in Sackcloth and Ashes, seeing no other Fruits are brought forth
[by your Ministry] than Pride, Envy, Worldly-mindedness, and all the Sins of
Sodom, and other Nations, wh^ GOD destroyed from off the Ear^^ reigns here:
What became of the Old World? What became of the Jews, who trusted in their
Service as much as you? How often were they, and their Temple destroyed, till
at last they were swept away as a Refuge of Lies? And, do you think to escape,
who are guilty of the same Iniquity? Yet, they thought themselves secure in
their Ways and Works, whereof they proudly boasted; for when the Prophet
pronounced the heavy Wrath of GOD against them, their Answer was, Why?
Wherefore has the LORD pronounced all this great Plague against us? Or, what
is our Iniquity, and what is our Sin, that we have committed against the LORD
our GOD? The Answer was, Because your Fathers have forsaken me, says the LORD,
and have walked after other Gods, and have served and worshipped them, and
forsaken me, and have not kept my Law, and ye have done worse than your
Fathers, for behold you walk every one after the stubbornness of his own wicked
Heart, and will not hear me.

Here you may see how they filled up ^^e measure of their Fathers Iniquity; for
although they did not worship other Gods, it may be judged by us, because they
had a sight of their Fathers Wickedness; yet God Charges their Sins upon them
to be greater than their Fathers, to walk after the stubbornness of their
wicked Hearts, and not to hear him, and obey his Commands, all which are the
very Sins of the People of our Nations, and this Generation who walks after the
stubbornness of their wicked Hearts, and will not fear the LORD, though he
sends his Messengers early and late, as he did to them.

I humbly entreat you, that Read this Book, to Read the foregoing Plagues and
Judgments that are pronounced in the foregoing Verses: For this great Sin, in
walking every one after the stubbornness of their wicked Hearts; this Scripture
has often been pressed upon my Mind, when I have been writing to this People,
and now I think it my Duty to impart it to them, that every Soul amongst you,
of all Sorts and Sects, might seriously and weightily consider, how far they
are guilty of this great Sin, to walk (...) the stubbornness of their evil
Heart (...) and not to hear HIM, that they man Repent and Forsake before it be
to^ late; and think not that your outward Services, and Duties, though Comely
Orders, will do your work any more than it did theirs, whilst you keep back the
One Offering, which is Self, that Accursed Thing which is to be Offered up once
for all, which was our Savior's Offering, who Offered up himself Once for all,
who was Accepted of GOD, and this is the only Offering Acceptable to GOD, to
offer up Self. Self in all its Appearances, whether in the Lust of the Flesh,
the Lust of the Eye, or the Pride of Life: It must be Offered up, and Self in
every Respect; whether the Love of the Word, Honor, Name, or Fame; all must be
brought to the Cross of Christ, and Die there; for, as in your first State, you
were Dead in Trespasses and Sin; So now you must be Dead to Sin, and Alive to
Righteousness; otherways no Christian; For, as in Adam all Died, so in Christ
all are made Alive: In Him, Mark that; Not out of Him: Oh (...) Reverence that
is in my Soul to Him, (...) the writing of this Word, In Him; for (...) of Him
there is no Salvation; in his ^^^ure unspotted Life, in his Humility, in his
Patience, Meekness, and Long-suffering; in his Universal Love to all Mankind,
in his Soul-sufferings and bitter Agony: For, as he knew all this in his
Righteous Soul and Holy Body, so must we in our Sinful Bodies; for as our High
Priest, and Aaron bore the Breast Plate of Judgment upon his Heart before the
LORD, so must we bear the Judgments of the LORD upon our Hearts; because we
have Sinned against him, as it is written, Sion shall be Redeemed through
Judgment; for Christ did not come to Destroy the Law, but fulfill it; for, said
he to John, Suffer us to fulfill all Righteousness: So our Righteous Aaron
fulfilled the Law, when he had tasted Death for every Man; that we, through
him, might do the same, through is Death, and through his Resurrection without
the Gate of Jerusalem, that we might be partakers thereof, by our Death to Sin,
and the Resurrection of his most Holy Life in us; for that was the End of the
Spilling of his Precious Blood, to Redeem us from all Iniqui^^* And thus we are
made Partakers of t^ Benefit of his Death and Resurrection. ^ we Die to Sin,
and Rise to Righteou^ (...) For GOD so Loved the World, that (...) his only
Begotten Son, that through (...) might have Life. Here the Love (...) Extended
to all; but he, or she, the (...) not accept this Gift of GOD, (...) his Son,
has no benefit of his D^ (...) Resurrection; I say, Accept him (...) Souls, to
be your Teacher, Lea^ ^^vernour and King over all in (...) you to yield your
selves, to (...) to the Guidance of his Holy Spi^ (...) not doing your own
Will, spea^ (...) own Words, nor thinking (...) Thoughts; but doing the Wi^
(...) Heavenly Father in all things, (...) him above all things, and not your
(...) but for his sake. In this State yo^ (...) all the benefit of his Death
and ^^rection, but otherways, out of the (...) you do but deceive your Souls,
to (...) he Died for you, without being ^^kers of this his Holy and Incor^
(...) Life; and your Dead Faith is the (...) why you remain still in your Sins,
because you do not believe in Him, you be(...), but not in HIM; you believe
(...) his Death outwardly, that the Love of God was such, to send his Son ^o
Die for Sinners, which is Everlasting^y True; let that Mouth be stopped, and
(...) for ever put to Silence that de^^^^; but what is this to you, who (...)
believe in his Power to Redeem, (...) ^ood to Cleanse, VVash, and Pu^^ (...)
from your Sins, whilst you are (...) ^de the Grave, in this Life; this (...)
your Faith; but your Faith is to (...) ^ie in your Sins, and so it comes (...)
recording to your Faith, as Christ (...) ^he Pharisees, If ye do not believe
(...) He, you shall Die in your Sins. ^oy wont He? He the Blessed Savior,
(...) ^^ove to Mankind induced him to (...) himself of all his Glory, and took
(...) an Ignominous Death: Oh ye ^hriscians! Here Is your Pattern; what do you
do for him? Do you forsake (...) Pride and Lusts for him; your (...) and
Pleasure for him; your Self(...) in all Respects for him? He has one all this
for you; but wherein is your Love to HIM? In what; In doing worse than your
Fathers the (...) in Crucifying afresh, the Son of (...) and and putting him
Daily and Hou^ to Shame: Your Fathers, the Jews, Cr^cified but once his Body;
but y^ Crucify both Body and Soul, you a^ Daily Piercing him, with your Spe^
of Pride, Avarice, and Self-interest; yo^ are Hourly Pricking his Head with ^
Thorns of your Lusts, and Pleasure^ Malice and Envy; you hate the (...)
Appearance and Image of him in his ^^vants, and them that fears him; (...) hate
him that Reproves Sin in the (...) you do all this to your Savior; when fore,
how many Thousand times wor^ are you than the Jews, who did not o^ him for
their Savior? Oh! How y^ Dishonor the Lord! To call him yo^ Savior, when you
can give no Eviden^ thereof? How many of the Numberle^^ Sins you are guilty of,
are you save^ from? for if you commit Sin, Sin is o^ the Devil, and his Works
you do, bu^ Christ came to destroy the Works of the Devil; has he destroyed
them in you^ Then is he your Savior, but no further (...) wherefore, in vain
do you believe hi^ outward Death and Resurrection to be (...) Benefit to your
Salvation, who do not witness his Blood in your Souls to cleanse you from all
Sin and Iniquity; for, by the Law all things were purged with Blood, which was
a Type of the Blood of the Immaculate Lamb of GOD, which was spilt to Redeem us
from all Iniquity, and from dead Works, to serve the Living GOD; so then it is
neither your dead Faith, nor dead Works will save you from Damnation; no, but
you ^^ust Eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood; (...) so said our Savior, Except
ye eat my Fles^, and drink my Blood, you can have no Life in you.

The Blood is the Life which runs into the Veins and Vital Parts, and
nourishes, causing to grow.

It Is an easy way to believe Traditionally in the Righteousness of another,
but what will that avail me, if I am not made Partaker of his Righteousness by
Faith and good Works? For otherwise it is just as much as to say, Thou shall eat
Food to nourish thy Body, and I will live by what thou eatest; even so is this
sort of Imputed Righteousness; for, Faith without Works is dead, as the Apostle
(...) says, Show me thy Faith without (...) and I will show thee my Faith by
my Works I believe there was some in this Blind Conceit in the Apostle's time,
that were High Talkers and Vain Bablers of the Righteousness of Christ, who
were little Possessors thereof, which was the Cause of his so great and severe
Reproof, as you may Read, from the beginning of his general Epistle to the end,
wherein he exhorts them to Patience and Prayer, and not to boast of an idle
Faith, but to declare a true Faith by lively Fruits, and to this, says he, But
will thou understand, Oh thou vain Man! that Faith which is without Works is
dead: And further, says the Apostle, What avails it, my Brethren, though a
Man, says he, has Faith, when he has no Works, can that. Faith save him?
This question is answered but vainly, by some who have the Form of Godliness,
but denies the Power. Yes, say they, By Faith we are saved, without the Works
of Love; no Humane Work is of any avail in this case, only by the Faith in his
Blood shedding, for the manifesting and declaring (...) righteousness; whence
follows, say (...), that nothing is more needful for (...); than to exercise
our selves in the ^ Faith. To which I Answer, That no Humane Work of the
Creature is available; but was not Abraham's Work, a Work of Christ, when he
Offered up Isaac? And was not his Work the Work of Love, which so highly
pleased the Lord, that the Everlasting Blessing was placed to him, and in his
Seed for ever? That is, to them that would follow his Steps in Faith and
Obedience, to the Holy Seed Christ Jesus; who, although he was a Son, yet
learned he Obedience by the Things that he suffered: And so it is with all the
Faithful, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; such take him for
their Pattern, with their whole Souls, Strength, and Might; they follow him in
his Holiness of Life and Conversation, to be Conformable to him both in his
Life and Death, and so of his Resurrection, believing in his Power, that he is
GOD All-sufficient to slay the Serpent, and his Seed, humbly waiting in the
deep sense of their own Nothingness upon him, for his Strength to overcome the
Enemy of their Souls, in (...) Temptations, that so, by the pow^ (...)
Operation of his Holy Spirit in th^^^, they may work out their Salvation with
fear and trembling, and so to be made more than Conquerors, through his Eternal
Love; who, by his powerful workings in us, works out the old leaven, th^^ so we
may be made a new lump in him, Holy as he is Holy; that as he who has called
us to this Heavenly Work is Holy, even so we may be Holy in all manner of Life
and Conversation; so you see here is Works, and not vain Words; here the Law
comes to be fulfilled, as our Savior said, Not one jot or tittle of the Law
should go unfulfilled: for, said he, I am not come to destroy the Law, but to
fulfill it: And again, says he, Suffer us to fulfill all Righteousness. And did
Christ Jesus fulfill the Law? So must we; and then, when we have fulfilled it,
we are no more under the Law, but under Grace; for the End of the Law is Grace,
The Grace of GOD that teaches to deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lust, and to
live Righteously, and Holily, in this present evil World. But you, who are not
come to witness this Life brought forth in you, you deny the ^^ace of God, and
turns it into Wantonness; wherefore the Law takes hold of you, as Transgressors
of it, and will bring you under it; though you boast against it, as if you were
got above it, yet it has power to bring you down under it, and ^^ke you pay
the utmost Farthing; for the Law is our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ,
therefore Holy, Just, and Good: Then how dare any speak slightingly of that,
wherein there is so great Service, as to be a Preparative for a more Glorious
Manifestation? Is it not Excellent to be a Faithful Servant? And is not the Joy
of the LORD prepared for such? Then, who is he or she that presumes to call the
Obedience barely Legal, and slightingly call it the Servant state, to such, I
say, you are so far from fulfilling every jot and tittle of the Law, that I
question whether ever you came to fulfill one jot or tittle thereof; then, if
so, how far are you off Christ Jesus, in whom the Love of the Godhead was
perfected, and Manhood also, who laid down his Precious ^ife for Sinners? Are
you come to this point, you that boast of a more Glorious Ministration than the
Law? Do you (...) the Everlasting God, with all your Hear and Soul, Strength
and Might? Do you admit of no other Lovers but him alone? Do you love your
Neighbor as your selves? Where Is your proof of it, you vain Bablers, who love
your selves more than all? How much of your Pride, Lusts, Earthly-mindedness,
Self-interests, Honor and Glory of a perishing World have you forsaken for
his Sake, who forsook all for yours; yet, you vain Talkers, together with all
Christendom, as it were, are heaping up your Hay, Straw, and Stubble upon this
Foundation, of the Death of Christ, and you to live and dye in your Sins, as if
this was the End of the Suffering and Death of Christ to secure you in your
Sins; you, vain Boasters of the Blood of Christ, who pleads more for your Sins
than any Malefactor pleads for his Life before a Judge at the Bar; here your
Love to Christ is manifest, in your loving and hugging your Beloved Sins, and
secret Lusts in your Bosoms, and then pleading so strongly for them; for what a
Man loves most, he pleads most for; wherefore, see what manner of ^hristians
you are, who instead of be^ obedient to Christ's Commands, to ^ge and condemn
Sin, and your selves, or sinning, you vindicate your selves, and justify your
Sins; and thus, instead of being Christ's Friends, you are his greatest
Enemies, who profess him with your Mouths, and in Works deny him; and so
Blasphemes his Holy Reverend Name among the Heathen, which GOD will certainly
call you to an Account for, who are calling him, Lord, Lord, but do not the
things that he Commands; and here you are proved to be no Christians; but as
Jews, under the Law, whilst Sin has Dominion, and not under Grace, for all
your proud Boasting; you that live in Pride, Luxury, Wantonness, Pleasures,
Covetousness of any sort, as Self-interest, Self-love, in any Concern
whatsoever, wherein the Glory of GOD is not the End thereof, ye deny the Grace
of GOD that brings Salvation; and you that hates the Innocent without Cause,
you deny the Grace of God; you Envious Ones of all Sorts, but especially you
that makes a Profession of Religion above all others, who separate your selves
from all, yet you are guilty of their Abominatio^ shall you be counted the
People of GO^ who goes up and down secretly slandeing the Innocent? Ye
Whisperers, Backbiters, and Notorious Liars, is not the Poison of Asps in your
Mouths, and your Envious Tongues sharper than a Twoedged Sword, to slay the
Innocent? Although the LORD has commanded in his Holy Law, saying, The Innocent
and Righteous thou shall not slay; yet dare you in your Actions presumptuously
say, Who is the Lord that we should obey him? You Instruments of Cruelty, I
must say to you as Christ said to your Forefathers the Pharisees, I have done
many good Acts among you, for which of them do ye stone me? How often have I
forgiven your Iniquity, and returned you Good for all your Evils, and done what
has lain in me to stop some from uncovering your secret Parts, and publishing
your Abominations on the Housetop? But it was beyond my Power, for the Just
GOD had decreed it so to be, that the same measure you had meted to others,
should be measured to you again; yet all this has not humbled you, but you are
as Proud, Stiff-necked and Rebellious as ever; wherefore, GOD himself will yet
humble you, and in that ^ay your Hypocrites covering shall be too short; you,
lukewarm Professors, GOD will spew you out: Dare you pretend to so high a
Dispensation, and walk in the Blackness of Darkness, wherein some of you are
fallen, as was Prophesied of you Years ago.

I shall speak no more here, for the tender regard I have to some among you,
but declare the rest to you in Writing, and shall expect you to prove your
Lies, or otherwise take what they will produce upon your own Heads, for I value
not my own Name, but the Precious Name of the LORD, which I profess, whose
Honor and Glory is more to me than Ten Thousand times Ten Thousand Lives; and
so consider these things, you, whose Malice is your Laws, and whose Religion is
vain, that knows not a Bridle to your False, Envious Tongues, how easily may
you be proved to be no Christians? For, by their Fruits you shall know them,
says Christ; so your Fruits makes you manifest whose Servants you are; for
according as your Fruits are, so shall your Judgment be; and you above others
who pretend to the highest Knowledge of GOD shall be Condemned, For if the
Light the is in you be Darkness, how great is that Darkness?

The next I am to speak to, are such who please themselves with the Passion,
Death, and Satisfaction of Christ, and do apply and impute the same to
themselves, as a Pardon or Gift of Favor, and yet remains still Unregenerated,
Worldly, and Sensual; such a Christian is every ungodly Man; and to those, I
say, the Devil would be an Angel again upon such terms as Grace applied from
without; but to forsake his Craft, Subtilty, Pride, Deceit, Self-love, with all
the rest of his Serpent's Nature, to be Born again, and to become as a little
Child in Innocence, Humility, and God's Heavenly Love, this pleases him not,
neither does it please the Titular Christian, who would put upon himself the
covering of Christ's Grace, and apply his Merits unto himself, by an Historical
laying Claim to a Promise, and yet will not enter into the Adoption and New
birth, although Christ says, He that goes another way, is a Thief and a Robber,
and shall never enter the Kingdom of God. For what is Born of the Flesh is
Flesh, says Christ; and, to be Fleshly-minded, says the Apostle, is Enmity
against God: But to be Spiritually minded is Life and Peace. And with this
Spiritual Mind the Servants of the LORD ever served their LORD and Master, and
do still serve him with all their might, and with all their strength; yea, with
all their might they give up their Hearts, according as he requires, saying,
Son give me thy Heart; and so they give it him, with Body, Soul and Spirit, for
Him to dispose of, as seems good in His sight, and as may be most for His
Glory; they offer up all to Him as a whole Burnt offering in His own Flaming
Love, which he has sh^^ abroad in their Hearts, that fills them to the brim,
so that their Cup over-flows; and therefore cannot but Invite all to taste and
see how good the LORD ^s; for the Love of Christ constrains us to keep his
Commandments, who said, When thou art Converted, Strengthen thy Brethren; and
thus he calls us to the Heavenly Banquet of his Love, to Eat and Drink with Him
at His Table, whose Meat was to do the Will of His Heav^ ly Father, as He said,
Sacrifices and Off^ ings thou would not; then said I, Lo I com^ in the Volume
of the Book, as it is writt^ of me, to do thy Will, Oh my GOD, my Body as thou
have prepared. And to us, sai^ he, Learn of me to do the Will of God, a^ I have
done the Will of GOD, and forsake your selves, as I have forsook my self of ^
my Glory, both Heavenly and Earthly, a^ betook my self to Watching, Prayer, an^
Fasting, for a defense against all the Assault and Temptations of the Devil,
and all Ev^ Spirits, their Lies, Revilings, Mocking^ Envy, and Slanders; and to
be willing (...) bear and endure all things for my Name Sa^ as I endured my
FATHERS Anger an^ Wrath for your Sakes; and here you answer the End of my
Sufferings, and a^^ workers together with me, and not against me, if you
forsake the Devil and all his Works, as you have vowed in Baptism, which are
the Pride, Pomps, Pleasures, and Vanities of this World, Covetousness, and all
Self, desiring nothing but the Glory of God, and that his W^ may be done in
your Earth as it is in Heaven; if you do these things, then are yo^ my
Disciples, says Christ; but not otherwise: No, true Christians, Please your
selves with your Historical Faith, and Feed thereon; but you shall starve in
the End, as the Swine-herd did when h^ went from his Fathers House to Feed upon
Husks; for this know, to believe ^arely in the outward Sufferings and ^eath of
Christ, without having an in^ard Life and Power of Faith, to give ^e Victory
over Sin and Iniquity, is Tabel and Confusion: And an External ^mputed
Righteousness, and the External Assumed Adoption, and Particular Ele^tion and
Rejection, or Reprobation from ^ternity, is without Foundation; for Christ
said, You must be born again, or ^lse you cannot enter the Kingdom of God. ^o
you may see, if your Eyes were open, where He has placed the Election, that ^t
is in the New Birth, and the Resurrecti^n in the Old: Jacob and Esau, who were
^s Types or Figures of this; in Jacob was ^laced the Election, for he was a
Type and Figure of Christ, in his Obedience, Humility, Sufferings, and
Self-denying ^afe, and loved the Election, so as to ^uy it with a Price; in
Esau the Rejection, for he Rejected his Election, a^ Despised it, so as to sell
his Birth-rig^ for a Mess of Pottage, and so was R^ jected, but not that he was
Personal^ and wholly from all Eternity, Predest^ nated to Damnation; this is a
great mistake from a False Faith, for whatsoever was Evil in Jacob was Rejected
of God, as well as in Esau; but here was the Figure, as indeed most the Old
Testament is a Figure of the New, till ^ comes to Christ, the End of all Types
Figures and Shadows of good things t^ come, and in Him the Figure stands i^ the
Divine Power, who is the Holy Seed to which all the Promises are made, wh^ does
bruise the Head of the Serpent ^ us, if we yield up our Bodies, Souls an^
Spirits to Him, to work in us all hi^ good Pleasure; For to as many as receive^
him, to them he gave Power to become the Sons of God. For, as I said before,
Go^ placed his Love, or hatred, in two Seeds wherein is the Election or
Reprobation; that is, Jacob and Esau, who was a Typ^ or Figure of the declared
Will of God in the refusing the one, and choosing the other. Now, pray observe,
that tho^ these two came out of one Womb, yet ^ere they of contrary Natures,
the one as a cunning Hunter; that is, Crafty, ^^tle, Self-ended, Wild-man, and
so a Reprobate; therefore God hated him, or that Spirit in him: But Jacob was a
plain, innocent, self-denying Man; therefore God Loved him, as Christ said of
Nathaniel, Behold an Israelite indeed in whom there is no Guile: So, in these
two are placed the Election or Reprobation; in the Good the Election; and in
the Evil the Reprobation; and not that GOD Ordered it so in the beginning: No,
no; for then how is Man's Destruction of himself? Or, how shall the LORD be
clear of his Blood? For, shall not the Judge (...) all the Earth do Justice?
Yea, let GOD ^e True, and every Man a Liar, Perfect ^s the Work of the Mighty
GOD, for all His Ways are Judgment. GOD is True and without Wickedness, Just
and Righte^us is he; but they have corrupted themselves toward Him, by their
Vices, not being his Children, but a froward and crooked Generation, Deuteronomy. 23.
Wherefore Men ^ught to Dread and Fear before the might GOD, in putting such
Conclusions concerning the Children of GOD, a^ God had, out of his own purpose,
beg^ ten Condemnation to One, and hardn^ him, that he could not come to the
(...) doption; and chosen to himself another that he could not be Lost: This is
a^ groundless Fiction, there is no Foundation from Nature, or from the Holy
Scripture for it: It proceeds from the Darkness of the Bottomless Pit; this
ha^^ been one great Cause why so many ha^ run to Disperation; for, instead of
destroying Sin in them, they have destro^ed themselves; this makes void the
^^ferings and Death of Christ for all Mankind; then where is the Universal L^^
of GOD to all? Oh do not have su^ hard thoughts of GOD, as that he wou^ have
but a few Saved, for his Will (...) That all should be Saved, but Man will no^
You will not come to me, says Christ, the you may have Life; all the Holy
Father and Patriarchs, as Adam, Noah, Abraham Isaac and Jacob, were Figures,
there a^ always two Figures Represented; Chri^ and Adam, a Good and a Evil Man:
A^ so Cain, Ham, Ishmael, and Esau, we^ Ties of the Corrupt Man; and A^ (...)
Isaac and Jacob, were Types of (...), who opened himself in the Di(...)
Covenant, and set himself forth ^^ough these Holy Men: Before the ^^rrupt
Children of Adam, as a Light ^feshew them the Evil of their Ways, and a
Preacher to Convert them: For God did not send His Son into the World, to
Condemn and Destroy the World; Poor miserable corrupt Man! But he sent Him into
the World, among the Godless Crew of Evil Men of all sorts, Professors and
Profane, to call them from their Evil Ways, that they, through doing his Will,
might be saved from their Sins, is it is written, The Willing and the Obelient
shall eat the good of the Land. So we see it is not only the Will, but the
Obedience that GOD requires; and by this GOD will not accept the Will without
^he Deed: No, for then he must do more ^or Man than he did for his Son Jesus
Christ, who humbled himself to the Death, to satisfy his Fathers Wrath, and
^ve must do the same that He did, humble our Souls to the Death of all Sin and
^niquity; this is the Duty of every true Christian, to go through that Agony of
Soul our Savior went through, or (...) ^^ceptance with God; we must brin^
(...) our Honor, Glory, Name, Fame, the interest, Pride, Deceit, worldly
P^^sures, Worldly-mindedness, Malici^ Envy against the Innocent, Justifying
(...) Wicked, and Condemning the Righteous, or whatever else is Abominable in
the sight of God, all which must he brought to the Cross of Christ, to he
Crucified and Slain to us, and we dead (...) such Works of Darkness, and after
a full Redemption from all Sin and Iniquity then to live in the deepest
Humility (...) looking upon our selves to be what we are, that is, just
nothing, and God to be all; giving him the Glory of al^ his own Works, who
works all ou^ Works in us, and for us, unto whom be Thanks, Honor, and Glory,
Now, and for Ever; and thus to be Baptized into his Death, and to have the
Fellowship of his Sufferings, otherwise no satisfying the Wrath, or appeasing
the Anger of God, without which no^ Remission of Sins; for it is with the
unconverted Soul as it was with Hagar when she fled from her Mistress Sarah,
the Angel (...) of the Lord met with her by the way, ^^bid her return and
humble her self to (...) Mistress; this Hagar, and Ishmael, (...) in her Womb,
was a Type of the inregenerated state of all Mankind in their First Birth, who
are Mockers, Scoffers, and Runagates from God; for the Rebellious Self-will of
Nature was in Ishmael, which he received from his Mother Hagar, which was a
Mocker of the New birth, out of which stock Esau took his Wives in contempt,
disdain, and spite to his Father and Mother; the Ishmaelites who were of the
Line of Mockery, which was great grief of Heart, and anxiety of Soul to Isaac
and Rebeccah, and the same Spirit rules to this Day in the Children of
Disobedience of all sorts, but especially many of the Church of England, who
are the greatest Mockers, Scoffers, and Revilers of all sorts, but their own
Sect, that this Age can produce, insomuch, that a Man or Woman who fears God,
can hardly pass along the Streets, without being branded with Nicknames, as
Presbyter, Quaker, or such like; but especially if they are not in the same
Excess of Pride in Habit that they are in, then they are made a Scorn and a
Deri^ to Fools; or as an Owl among spec^^ Birds, and that by those of Older Ye^
as well as Children, who profess, (...) preach Christ in Words, but in Works
deny him; who commanded them that professed him, to follow him in his
Footsteps; and his Apostle Peter, who saw his Glory and Transfiguration in the
Mount, commanded also, that those that professed the Gospel of Christ, should
not Adorn themselves as they did in the time of their Ignorance of Christ,
naming in particularly, not in broidring the Hair, not in Rich and Costly
Attire, Gold and Silver, and such like; but alas! How do the Babylonish Dresses
of our Age, fitter for Stage players than Christians, as you might view your
selves in Bartholomew Fair, exceeding all former Ages of the World; and those
that do not run in the same Excess with you, are made an Abomination to you,
crying out against them as Heretics, for not worshipping your Idol-gods, your
Heathen-dresses; is this to follow Christ in his Footsteps, to be Adorned with
the hidden Man of the Heart, which is Christ in you, the Hope of Glory; and to
be Adorned in Modest Apparel, as be^^s the Gospel of Christ, that, as he who
(...) called you is Holy, so for you to be ^oly in all manner of your Life and
Con^ersation, seeing, that without Holiness none shall see GOD: But perhaps you
will think of your selves, we are Holy, we keep close to the Church, or we keep
close to Meetings; Friends, I must tell you, that is as great an Abomination as
the other, for you to appear before the Lord as his People, when your Hearts
goes a Whoring from him after your Idols, and Cursed Inventions; this is to
mock God, and abuse your Liberty; is this to Worship God as Christ commands?
Is this to follow the Examples of good Old Jacob, the Type and Figure of
Christ, who buried all his Idols under the Oak at Sechem, before he went up to
Bethel to Build an Altar to worship the Lord God, who appeared to him when he
fled from his Brother Esau, as he himself said, when he commanded his Household,
and all that were with him, saying, Put away the strange gods that are among
you, and cleanse your selves, and change your Garments, for we will rise from
hence, and go up to Bethel, and I will make an Altar the^ unto God, which heard
me in the Day of (...) Tribulation, and was with me in the W^^ which I went;
and then they gave unto (...) cob all the strange gods which were in their
Hands, and all their Earrings that were in their Ears; and Jacob hid them
under the Oak at Sechem; then they went on their Journey, and the fear of God
was upon the Cities that were round about them, so that they did not follow
after the Sons of Jacob, for their Cruel Murder at Sechem, which was the high
Favor of GOD to preserve them from their Enemies: You may also see what
Acceptance they had with GOD for this great Work of Reformation; you may also
read in the History, how the severe Hand of GOD followed Jacob whilst their
strange gods were amongst them, from his departing from Laban to Bethel; first,
how Laban pursued him, then Esau came against him; Rachel's Nurse died by the
way, Dinah's Ravishment, the Murder at Sechem, and his Beloved Rachel died by
the way.

Oh England! England! And thou London, the City of Abominations, this is thy
state at this time; therefore put away your strange gods from among you, and
(...) your Idols out of the sight of the Ho^^ GOD; cleanse your selves of all
your ^^olatrous VVays and Worships, change your filthy Garments, both of Flesh
and Spirit, which the Idols of your Abominations have polluted, and come to
Judgment; Repent, and come to Judgment; Judge your selves, Abhor your Sins, and
your selves for sinning thus out the Day of your Precious Visitation, and GOD's
Long Forbearance, casting all your Abominations out of his sight; and, every
one with their Hands upon their Loins, mourning for your Iniquities, as a
Woman in strong Travail, and bitter Pains, for your so often offending so
Gracious a GOD, piercing and grieving the Holy Spirit of so Dear, Merciful, and
Loving a FATHER, who waits to be Gracious, and has no pleasure in the Death of
a Sinner, but would have him turn from his evil Ways and live; wherefore, he in
his Boundless Love, has set before them Life and Death for them to choose, only
here it is stated, he that will have Life, must go through Death for it,
through the Flaming Sword that turns every way, which must separate you from
your L^^vers and Lust; I say, the Flaming Swor^ which he has placed at the
Garden (...) Eden, to keep the way of the Tree of Life, which Flaming Sword is
the Suffering Life of Jesus, the Son of GOD, which he has ordained for Man's
Redemption, that is, to be Baptized into his Death, and to Suffer with him, as
he has appointed, both in Soul and Body, Internal and External, which the Soul
is called to it, in our own Souls, to know that bitter Agony for our sinning
against him, that he knew for our Sins against his Heavenly Father; and thus
the Wrath of GOD is Satisfied, and his Anger Appeased, by treading into his
Son's Steps, by working with him, and not without him; without him we can do
nothing, but in him, and through him, in the powerful working of his Holy
Spirit in us, we can do all things, destroy the Devil and all his Works, in him
Victoriously Triumphing over Death, Hell, and the Grave, and all this by his
Divine Power working in us, which Glorious Power must be always waited for as
at the Pool of Bethsaida, in the deepest Poverty of Spirit, in that Poverty of
Spirit which Christ gave the ^lessing to, in his Blessed Sermon which ^e
preached upon the Mount, in the deepest Sense of our Impotency, waiting upon
GOD in the Living Faith which gives the Victory; for without the Faith of the
Son of God, it is impossible to please God; but by believing in his Power, and
setting a holy Watch over our own Souls, continually praying, intentively
waiting to receive what we pray for, and this is his way which he will be found
in, and wherein he himself walked, when he was upon the Earth; and thus you are
workers with him in his Vineyard; and, abiding in him the Vine, you shall
receive Power to bring forth Fruit, both to God and Man; for he is the Power
and the Glory, and if you abide in him, and he in you, you shall receive an
Unction from the Holy One, that shall teach you all things, and you shall have
no need for any Man to teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you, so
shall you abide in it: Here is the Teacher of Teachers, as Moses, the Man of
GOD, said, None like GOD, Oh Righteous People, who Rides upon the Heavens for
thy help, and on the Clouds in his Glory; the Everlasting God thy Refuge, and
under his Arm thou art p^ served for Ever; he shall cast out the Ene before
thee; and, by the Word of his Power destroy them; then the Beloved of the Lord
shall dwell in safety, in a Land of Wheat and Wine, and his Heaven shall drop
with Dew. Here you may see what shall be done to the Man whom the King
delights to Honor; for the Man that comes to the Unction of the Holy One, to
the Anointing Power, he cease from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils: Oh!
What an Eternal Good would it be to all Mankind, to come to the Teaching of
God's Holy Spirit in himself; and then, from the beginning of the stirring
Motions thereof, to keep close to God in that frame of Spirit, which Christ
Commands; to Watch and Pray-continually, and whatever the Soul wants ask it of
God, who gives liberally, and upbraideth none; and not to go out to the
Creatures, to no Man or Woman upon the Earth, except God requires, but to keep
close to GOD in this diligent, watchful state, in close Communion with the
Lord; let the inspeakings of your Souls be to GOD, seeing it is, as Christ
said, That whatsoever is to be known of GOD, it is manifest within you;
therefore keep within, go not out, for without you shall find Dogs, Wolves,
and Tigers, which will tear and devour the Precious Food of Christ's Flesh and
Blood from you; but within you shall find Christ, the Hope of Glory, who by his
Heavenly Manna, and Virtuous Power, shall Heal your wounded Souls, and Redeem
you, by his Precious Blood, from all your Sins, Weaknesses, Frailties, and
Backslidings; but then you must come to him, and not run away from him to the
broken Cisterns, and will not come to him the Fountain, when he Invites you to
him, saying, Come unto me all you that are weary and heavy laden, and I will
give you Rest; and you shall find Rest for your Souls: And, Dear Friends and
People, this is the very reason why you do not find Rest, because you do not
come to Him, who is the True and Everlasting Rest to the People of GOD, but
runs away from Him, the Power of GOD, to the Creatures, from Man to Man, from
Mountain to Hill, and so you weary your selves in the Fire, and brings forth
nothing but your own Works, which must be burnt upon for, when he comes to call
you to an Account for the Tallent he gave you, and finds it not Improved, then
his Wrath is kindled against you, and then in vain you may call to the
Mountains and Hills, in whom ye trusted, to cover you from the Wrath of the
Lamb.

For Christ himself positively said, Neither in this Mountain, nor that
Mountain, will the Father be Worshipped, but in Spirit and in Truth: Wherefore,
in vain is all your Worship, from the highest to the lowest out of the Spirit
of Christ, the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sin: But, Oh the Love of
Christ! How Undeclareable is it in calling the Soul to him; Come unto me; come
off from the barren Mountains, and the exalted Hills, down, down, into the low
Valley; Learn of me, for I am Meek and Lowly, and you shall find rest unto your
Souls: But did he bid them go to this Man, or that Man: No; but, quite
contrary, commands to Cease from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils; For
wherein, says the Prophet, is he to be accounted of: Indeed Christ, in his
Complaint, sent them to the Scripture, saying, Search the Scripture, for in
them you think (...) have Eternal Life; and them are they (...) Testify of me;
but you will not come to (...), that you may have Life: ^^or, being they were
so Ignorant of the Internal, and their Wills so strong for the External, he
sends them to the Scriptures, which is as much as to say, there you have the
Literal Knowledge of me; but what will that avail you, seeing that is but the
Shell, and my Life the Kernel: Will the Shell ^ourish you without the Meat: No
more will the External Knowledge of me and ^y Sufferings, declared in the
Scriptures ^f Truth, avail you, without the Powerful Operation of my Holy
Spirit working in you, out of the Old Nature of Sin and Iniquity, into the New
Life of Holiness and Righteousness; but the Husk will serve the Prodigal to
feed on, whilst his time is out, and then he shall be called to an Account for
his running away from his Fathers House; for the Complaint is, You will not
come to him that you may have Life: Not but that the Holy Scriptures are of
most excellent Use, to them who are upright in Heart and Soul, who loves the
Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Everlasting Truth, more than their Pernicio^
Ways; such are as the laboring Bees t^ suck Sweetness out of every thing,
(...) turns all to a right and good Use; but (...) idle Droan, devours all, and
no Fruit (...) be seen of the Bees Labor, but turns all into its Droanish
Nature; so does all that Reads the Precious Scriptures, that treat of the Life
and Death of Christ; with their dark Lights, as Christ says, If the Light that
is in you, be Darkness, how great is that Darkness: If they come not to the
Spirit of God, that gave forth the Scriptures to Interpret, and give them the
right Understanding of them.

Epistle of Pastor Bartholomew Tertian, written to the Waldensian Churches of
the Valley of Pragela; thus Translated, JESUS Be with you.
To all our Faithful and Well-beloved Brethren in Christ Jesus, Health and
Salvation be with you all, Amen.
THESE are to put you in Remembrance, and to Admonish you, my ^ethren, hereby
Acquainting my self of at Duty, which I owe unto you all in (...) behalf of
God; Principally touching (...) Care of your Soul's Salvation, accord(...) to
that Light of the Truth, which (...) most High God has bestowed on us; ^^at it
would please every one of you, to ^rease, Maintain and Nourish, to the ut^most
of your Power, without Dimi^^tion those good Beginnings and Ex^ples, which have
been left unto us by (...) Forefathers; whereof we are no ^^s worthy; for it
would little profit us to have been renewed by the Father Visitation, and the
Light which (...) been given us of God; if we give (...) selves to worldly
carnal Conversatio^ which are Diabolical, Abandoning (...) Principle, which is
God, and the Salvation of our Souls, for this short and Temporeal Life; for the
Lord says, What does it profit a Man, to gain the whole World, and loose his
own Soul: For it would be better for us never to have known the Way of
Righteousness, than, having known it, to do the contrary. Let m^ therefore
entreat you, by the Love of God that you decrease not, nor look bac^ but rather
increase the Charity, Fear an^ Obedience, which is due unto God, and to your
selves, amongst your selves; and stand fast in all those good Principles which
you have heard and understood o^ God, by our means; and that you would remove
from amongst you all vain Co^versation and evil Surmises, Troubling the Peace,
the Love, the Concord; and whatsoever would indispose and deaden your Mind to
the Service of God, your own Salvation, and the Administration of the Truth; if
you desire that God should be Merciful to you, in your Goods Tempo^^ and
Spiritual, for you can do nothing (...) thout him; and if you desire to be ^irs
of his Glory, do that which he Commands, if you would enter into Life, ^eep
my Commandments, Mat. 19.17.

Likewise, be careful that there be not Nourished amongst you any Sports,
Glut^ony, Whoredom, Dancings, nor any ^ewdness or Riot, nor Questions, nor
De^eits, nor Usury, nor Discords; neither support or entertain any Persous of a
Wicked Conversation, or scandal or ill Example amongst you: But let Charity and
Fidelity Reign amongst you, and all good Example, doing to one another as every
one desires should be done unto him; for otherwise it is impossible that any
should be Saved, or can have the Grace of God, or be good Men in this World, or
have Glory in another.

And therefore, if you hope and desire to possess Eternal Life, to Live in Good
Esteem and Credit, and to Prosper in this World, in your Goods Temporal and
Spiritual, Purge your selves from all disorderly Ways, to the End that God may
be always with you, who forsakes not those that trust in him; but know (...)
for certain, that God hears not, (...) dwells with Sinners, nor in the So
that is given up unto Wickedness, nor (...) the Man that is subject to Sin:
Therefore let every one cleanse the ways of his Heart, and flee the Danger if
he would not Perish therein.

I have no other thing to write at this present, but that you would put in
Practice these things, and the God of Peace be with you all, and go along with
us, and be present amongst us, in all our sincere, humble and fervent Prayers;
and that he will be pleased to Save all those his Faithful that trust in Christ
Jesus.

Entirely Yours, to do your Service in all things possible, according to the
Will of God. Bartholomew Tartain.
In the Year of Rome 720. and in the 43. Year of the Age of Marcus Aurelius,
upon the 20. Day of August, about Sunset, at Palermo, a Seaport in the Isle of
Cicily, there chanced a thing Perilous to (...) who then saw it, and no less
(...) readful to them who heard of it after^^ards; whilst they of Palermo were
^elebrating a great Feast, with much Joy, for the great Spoils which they had
taken at Sea from the Numidians, and which the Pirates purposed to divide among
themselves, they were partly prevented by the Magistrates, and partly by the
said Accident; for when the People were returned to their Houses, there
appeared in the City a Dreadful Monster in this Form, He seemed to be of the
length of three Cubits, his Head was Bald, so that his Skull did appear, he had
no Ears, but two Holes in his Neck, whereby it was supposed he heard, he had
two wreathen Horns like a Goat, his right Arm was longer than his left, and his
Hands were like the Hoofs of Horses, his Shoulders and Head were both of one
height, his Shoulders shined like the skirts of a Fish, his Breast was Airy,
his Face, in all things, like unto a Man, save that he had but one Eye in the
midst of his Forehead, and but one Nostril; from the middle downward nothing
could be seen, because he sat in a Chariot which concealed (...) the Chariot
was in Fashion like (...) Chariots then used, and drawn (...) Four Beasts, two
Lions before, and tw^ Bears behind; within the Chariot stoo^ a great Caldron,
with Ears, wherei^ this Monster sat; it wandered a great pace through the City,
from one Gate to another, casting out Sparks of Fire, which caused so great a
Fear throughout the City, that Women with Child Miscarried, and some Died out
right with Fear: Men and Women, great and small ran to the Temple of Jupiter
and Mars, and Februa, making Importunate Prayers, with sad Cries; at the same
time the Pirates were in the Governors Palace, whose name was Solyno, Born at
Copula, and in that Palace, the Spoils being kept; there the Monster came,
after it had wandered through the City: And cutting off one of the Lions Ears,
wrote with the Blood thereof upon the Palace Gate these Letters, R. A. S. V. P.
I. P. P. These Letters were diversely Interpreted, so that the Interpretations
were more than the Letters: but in the End a Prophetess, greatly Esteemed for
her Sense, opened the true meaning ^f the Letters: This was the Sub^ance.

Render to other Men that which belongs to them, if you will possess in Peace
that which is your own.

The Pirates were wonderfully afraid of this Command, and the Woman highly
Commended for her Exposition, but the Injunction was not obeyed: The Monster
went the same Night out of the City unto an Hill named Jamicia, and there
remained three Days within sight of the City; the Lions and Bears terribly
Roaring, and the Monster casting forth Flames; during all which time there was
neither Bird seen in the Air, nor Beast in the Field near that place; and the
People offered great Sacrifices to the Gods, yea their own Blood to appease
their Wrath; three Days being passed, there appeared in the Element a
mavelous dark Cloud, seeming to Darken the wole Earth, and then it began to
Thunder and Lighten so terrible that many Men Died, and diverse Houses fell to
the Ground; and at last there came such a Flame of Fire from the Monster that
it burnt the Palace where the (...) rates were, and all that was there (...)
Consuming the very Stones thereon yea the Tempest was so great that th^^ fell
above two Thousand Houses, and more than ten Thousand Persons Died in the said
Tempest, in that place where the Monster stood; upon the same Hill the Emperor
built a Sumptuous Temple to Jupiter in Memorial thereof; of which Temple
Alexander the Emperor made afterward a strong Castle, this is taken out of
the Epistles of Marcus Aurelius the Emperor.

Thus you have an Evidence of two Witnesses, one of Divine Credit, and the
other Recorded by one of greatest Fame among Heathen Philosophers and
Emperors, to show how Dangerous it is to neglect Justice, and not to Render to
every Man his own when God Requires it to be done.

You see your Work, and what is to be done; that it is not your Contending
about the Body of the Ever Blessed Savior, which was the Pure Case or Holy
Temple where his Glorious Heavenly Life was closed in, they must be Infidels
^eed who deny that, if ever he had (...) Christ to them, for the very
De^^emselves, who are in Chains of ^^^ness, confesses both his Humanity ^^d
Divinity. But he, the Blessed, would ^ot Accept of their Confession, because
^^ey were not in the Life of that they ^^d Confess to; you may see it is an
easy ^^ing to confess to the Truth, from a ^^ght of it, but this will not do
the Souls Work; no, it is the Life that is to be ex^lted above all Knowledge,
all External Knowledge; but it is Eternal Life to know the Lord, and Jesus
Christ, whom he has sent in the Powerful Operation of his Holy Spirit working
out the Old, and working in the New; that, by the tasting and handling of him,
the Word of Life, we may have the Fellowship of his Sufferings; and so know the
Power of his Resurrection; and this is saving Knowledge, to be Baptized into
his Death which will bring the Soul into the real Possession of his Eternal
Love, which is Everlasting Life; as a most Excellent Man said, Assure your self
there is no security in any State, but that of Dying and Anhilation, which is
to be Baptized into Christ's Death, that we Live the (...) Mortification; our
best way is the to divest our selves of all, that (...) Child Jesus may Govern
all; all that (...) be Imagined in this lower World is (...) small Concernment,
though it were the loosing all our Goods, and the Death (...) all in it; this
poor Ant-hil is not worth^ of a serious Thought, had we but a litt^^ Faith and
Love, how happy should w^ Esteem our selves, in giving away all to attend no
more, save on God alone, and to say, my God, and my all; let us therefore
Encourage our selves to lead this Life, unknown and wholly hid from Man, but
most known and intimate with God, divesting our selves and chasing out of our
Minds all those many Superfluities and many Amusements which brings with them
so great a Damage, that they take up our Minds instead of God; so that when I
considered that which thwarts and cuts into so many pieces, this Holy, this
Sweet and Amiable Union which we should have continually with God; it appears
that it is only a Mounsieur, a Madam, a Complement and Chatting; indeed a mere
Foolery; which, notwithstanding, does ^^vish and wrest from us the time that is
so Precious, and the fellowship that is so Holy and so desirable; there is
nothing in this World so separate from the World as God, and the greater the
Saints are, the greater is their Retirement into him: This our Savior taught
whilst he Lived on Earth, being in all his Visible Employments united to God,
and retired into the Bosom of his Father.

Here was a Man Mortified to the World, and Quickened to some tastes of a
Supernatural Lise, adorned with so much Zeal and Piety, though a Young Noble Man
of admirable Parts, as well as great Birth; as History Relates.

Next a Man of great Fame, Sr. W^^^er Rawleigh, being an Extraordinary Man, as
our Nation has produced his Advice to his Son, viz. Exceed not in the Humor of
Rags and Bravery, for these will soon wear out of Fashion: And no Man is
esteemed for Gay Garments, but by Fools and Women. On the other side, seek not
Riches basely, nor attain them by evil Means: Destroy no Man for his Wealth,
nor take any thing from (...) Poor; for the Cry thereof will pierce^ Heavens:
And it is most detestable, ^fore God, and most dishonorable befo^ worthy Men,
to wrest any thing from the Needy and Laboring Soul: Go^ will never Prosper
thee, if thou offende^ therein [A most worthy Saying! But h^ adds,] Have
Compassion on the Poor and Afflicted, and God will Bless thee for it* Make not
the Hungry Soul sorrowful; for if he Curse thee in the Bitterness of his Soul,
his Prayer shall be heard of him that made him. Now, for the World (dear Child)
I know it too well, to persuade thee to dive into the Practices of it; rather
stand upon thy own Guard against all those that tempt thee to it, or may
practice upon thee; whether in thy Conscience, thy Reputation or thy Estate:
Resolve that no Man is Wise or Safe, but he that is Honest. Serve God; let him
be the Author of all thy Actions: Commend all thy Endeavors to him, that must
either wither or prosper them: Please him with Prayer; least, if he frown, he
confound all thy Fortune and Labor, like the Drops of Rain upon the Sandy
Ground. Let my Experienced Advice, (...) Fatherly Instruction sink deep into
(...) Heart: So God direct thee in all thy ^^ys, and fill thy Heart with his
Grace.



Two Letters from the Minister of Port Royal, in Jamaica, June 22. 1692.
Dear Friend,
Doubt not but you will, both from (...) Gazetts and Letters, hear of the ^reat
Calamity that has befallen this ^sland by a Terrible Earthquake, on the ^th.
Instant, which has thrown down ^lmost all the Houses, Churches, Sugar-Works,
Mills and Bridges through the whole Country. It tore the Rocks and Mountains,
and destroyed some whole Plantations, and threw them into the Sea, but
Port Royal had much the greatest share in this terrible Judgment of God; I will
therefore be more particu^ar in giving you an Account of its Pro^eedings in
that place, that you may know what my Danger was, and how unexpected my
Preservation. On Wednesday the 7th of June, I had bee^ Church Reading Prayers,
which I (...) every Day since I was Rector of P^ Royal, to keep up some show of
Relig^on among a most Ungodly Debauche^ People, and was gone to a place hard b^
the Church, where the Merchants use to meet, and where the President of the
Council was, who acts now in Chie^^ till we have a new Government; wh^ came
into my Company, and engage^ me to take a Glass of Wormwood Wine with him, as a
whet before Dinner, he being my very great Friend, I stayed with him, upon
which, he lighted a Pipe of Tobacco, which he was pretty long a taking; and not
being willing to leave him before it was out, this detained me from going to
Dinner to one Captain Ruden's, where I was to Dine (...) whose House upon the
first Concussion Sunk first into the Earth, and then into the Sea, with his
Wife and Family, and some that were come to Dine with him; had I been there, I
had been lost. But to Return to the President, and his Pipe of Tobacco; before
that was out, I found the Ground rolling and moving under my Feet, upon which I
said to (...) lord, Sir, what is this? He replyingly Composedly, being a very
Grave an, It is an Earthquake, be not afraid, will soon be over; but it
increased, and ^e heard the Church and Tower fall, ^on which we ran to save our
selves; (...) quickly lost him, and made toward ^organ's- Fort; which, being a
wide o^en place, I thought to be there secu^est from the falling Houses: But as
(...) made toward it, I saw the Earth open and swallow up a Multitude of
People, and the Sea mounting in upon us over the Fortifications. I then laid
aside all thoughts of escaping, and resolved to make toward my own Lodging, and
there to meet Death in as good a Posture as I could: From the Place where I
was, I was forced to cross and run through two or three very narrow Streets,
the Houses and Walls fell on each side of me, some Bricks came rolling over my
Shoes, but none hurt me; when I came to my Lodging, I found there all things in
the same order I left them, not a Picture, of which there were several fair
ones in my Chamber, being out of its place, I went to my Balcony to view the
Street in whiee^ House stood, and saw never as I down there, nor the Ground
so^m ^^crack'd; the People seeing me the^^ cried out to me to come and Pray
wi^^ them; when I came into the Street, every one laid hold on my Clothes and
embraced me, that with their fear and kindness I was almost stifled; I
persuaded them at last to kneel down and make a large Ring, which they did, I
prayed with them near an Hour, when I was almost spent with the heat of the
Sun, and the Exercise, they then brought me a Chair, the Earth working all the
while with new motions, and tremblings, like the rowlings of the Sea; insomuch
that sometimes when I was at Prayer I could hardly keep my self upon my Knees.
By that time I had been half an hour longer with them, in setting before them
their Sins and heinous Provocations, and in seriously exhorting them to
Repentance, there came some Merchants to me of the Place, who desired me to go
aboard some Ship in the Harbor, and Refresh my self, telling me that they had
gotten a Boat to carry me off; so coming (...) the Sea, which had entirely
swal^^ wed up the Wharf, with all those g^odly Brick Houses upon it, most of
them as fine as those in Cheapside, and ^wo Entire Streets beyond that: I, upon
the tops of some Houses which lay levelled with the surface of the Water, got
first into a Canoe, and then into a Longboat, which put me Aboard a Ship,
called the Siam-Merchant, where I found the President safe, who was overjoyed
to see me; there I continued that Night, but could not Sleep for the returns of
the Earthquake almost every hour, which made all the Guns in the Ship to jarr
and rattle: The next day I went from Ship to Ship to Visit those that were
Bruised and a Dying, and to Pray with them, and likewise to do the last Office
at the sinking of several Corpse that came floating from the Point, which indeed
has been my sorrowful Employment ever since I came Aboard this Ship, with
design to come for England, we having nothing but Shakings of the Earth, and
Thunder and Lightning, and foul Weather ever since; and the People being so
desperately Wicked, it makes me afraid to stay (...) that Place; for that very
Day this ^^rible Earthquake was, as soon as Nigh came on, a Company of lewd
Rogu^ whom they called Privateers, fell (...) breaking open Warehouses, and
House deserted, to Rob and Rifle their Neigh^ bours whilst the Earth Trembled
under them, and some of the Houses fell on them in the Act: And those audacions
Whores, that remain still upon the Place, are as Impudent, and Drunken as ever.
I have been twice on Shore to Pray with the Bruised and Dying People, and to
Christen Children, where I met too many Drunk and Swearing, I did not spare
them, nor the Magistrates neither, who have suffered Wickedness to grow to so
great a height; I have, I bless God, to the best of my skill and power,
discharged my Duty in this place, which you will hear from persons that come
from hence; I have Preached so seasonably to them, and so plain in the last
Sermon I Preached to them in the Church; I set before them what would be the
Issue of their Impenitence, and Wickedness, that they have since confessed,
that it was more like a Prophe^^ than a Sermon; I had, I confess, an ^^pulse on
me to do it: And many times ^ave Preached in this Pulpit, things that I never
premeditated at home, and could not, me-thought, do otherwise. The day when all
this befell us was very clear, offered not the suspicion of the least Evil; but
in the space of three Minutes, about half an hour after Eleven in the Morning,
Port Royal, the fairest Town of all the English Plantations, the best Emporium
and Mart of this part of the World, exceeding in its Riches, plentiful of all
good things, was shaken and shattered to pieces, and sunk into, and covered for
the greatest part, by the Sea, and will in a short time be wholly eaten up by
it; for few of those Houses that yet stand, are left whole, and every day we
hear them fall, and the Sea daily incroaches upon it; we guess, that by the
falling of the Houses, and opening of the Earth, and the inundation of the
Waters, there are lost Fifteen Hundred Persons, and many of good note, of whom
my good Friend Attorney General Musgrove, Provest Marshal Reves another, my
Secretary Reves another, Will. Tu^ Thomas Turner's Brother, is lost, Mr^ mer
escaped, but his House-mate, (...) Watts, is lost.

I came, I told you, on Board this She in order to come, but the People are so
importunate with me to stay, I know not what to say to them; I must undergo
great hardships if I continue here, the Country being broken all to pieces and
dissettled, I must live in a Hutt, eat Yams and Plantans for Bread, which I
could never endure; drink Rumm-Punch and Water, which were never pleasing to
me. I have writ to send a^ Younger Person, who may better endure the Fatigue of
it than I can; but if I should leave them now, it would look very unnatural to
leave them in their distress, and therefore whatever I suffer, I would not have
such a blame lie at my Door; and I am resolved, that by reason of the present
distress, to continne with them a Year longer: They are going all in haste to
Build a new Town near the Rock in Linnavea, the Guardian of this Island. The
French from Pituguaveis did attact this Island on the ^^rth side, but were all
defeated and ^^stroy'd, it being about the time of the earthquake.

June 28. 1692
EVer since that fatal Day, the most terrible that ever I saw in my Life, I
have Lived on Board a Ship, for the shakings of the Earth return every now and
then; Yesterday we had a very great one, but it seems less terrible on
Shipboard than on Shore, yet I have ventured to Port Royal no less than three
times since its Desolation, among the shattered Houses to Bury the Dead, and
Pray with the Sick, and Christen the Children. Sunday last I Preached among
them in a Tent, the Houses that remain being so shattered, that I durst not
venture to Preach in them; the People are overjoyed to see me among them, and
wept bitterly when I Preached to them: I hope by this terrible Judgment, God
will make them reform their Lives, for there was not a more ungodly People on
the Face of the Earth. It is a sad sight to see all this Harbor, one the
fairest and goodliest I ever saw^ vered with the Dead Bodies of Peo^^ of all
all Conditions floating up (...) down without Burial, for our great (...)
famous Burial-place, called the Pallis^^does, was destroyed by the Earthquake,
and the Sea washed the Carcasses of those that were Buried out of their Graves,
their Tombs being dashed to pieces by the Earthquake, of which there were
Hundreds in that place: Multitudes of Rich Men are utterly ruined, whilst many
that were Poor, by watching Opportunities, and searching the wracked and sunk
Houses, even almost while the Earthquake lasted and Terror and Amazement were
upon all the considerable People, have gotten great Riches. We have had
Accounts from several parts of these Islands, of the Mischiefs done by the
Earthquake; from St. Anns we hear of above 1000 Acres of Woodland changed into
the Sea, and carried with it whole Plantations, but no place suffered like
Port Royal; where whole Streets were swallowed up by the opening Earth, and the
Houses and Inhabitants went down together, some of them were driven up again by
the Sea, which arose in those Breaches, and wonderfully escaped; some were
swallowed up to the Neck, and then the Earth shut upon them, and squeezed them
to Death; and in that manner several are left Buried with their Heads above
Ground, only some Heads the Dogs have eaten, others are covered with Dust and
Earth by the People which yet remain in the place, to avoid the stench. Thus I
have told you a long and a sad Story, and God knows what worse may happen yet;
the People tell me, that they hear great Bellowings and Noises in the
Mountains, which makes some very aphensive of an Eruption of Fire; if so, it
will, I fear, be more destructive than the Earthquake. I am afraid to stay, and
yet I know not how, in point of Conscience, at such a juncture as this, to quit
my Station.

These few following Lines were Occasiona^^ writ, in Answer to one that was of
(...) Opinion, That there was nothing to do for the Creature, till the Day of
God's Power of which Power she was Ignorant, and ho^ to attain to it.
IN the Day of my Power, says the Lord, my People shall be a willing People;
therefore we must wait upon God for the Day of his Power, for so the Lord
Commands, whether he comes in the Second or Third Watch, we are to be found
waiting in the Cross of Christ, which is the Day of his Power; The Cross of
Christ, says the Apostle, is the Power of God. Then it is not Wood, Gold,
Silver, or precious Stones: No, but the Power of God; here the Soul is to wait
at the Pool of Bethsaida, for the Angels going down into the Water, John 3.
And, though he tarries long, and others steps before thee, be not discouraged,
but keep waiting for him; He that Believes, makes not haste; he that will
come, shall come, and will not tarry; he that will cure thee of thy Malady, if
he finds thee waiting upon him, in the sense of thy own Poverty (...) thine own
Insufficiency; but be sure (...) keep constantly waiting, and in deed Humility,
for it is the Humble God will each; for, although he Loves his People, yet all
his Saints are in his Hands, and they are Humbled at his Feet, to receive his
Heavenly Commands, Deuteronomy. 33.

Therefore, Oh my Soul! Be sure thou sit in the lowest place, that he that has
bidden thee to the Rich Banquet of his Eternal Love, may vouchsafe to say unto
thee, Come up higher into the Contemplation of my Heavenly Life, where thou
shall see my Glory: Therefore help us, Oh Lord, to wait continually, and to do
thy Will at all times; and do thou watch over us for Good, and keep thy
Vineyard as thou have promised, and Water it every moment, least any hurt it,
that the Plant of thy Renown, which thy own right Hand has Planted, may
prosper and grow as Lebanon, and as the Tree that is Planted by the Rivers of
Waters, that is Replenished by the Glorious Sun of thy Love, to bring forth all
manner of pleasant Fruit, delightful to thy taste; some Fifty, some Sixty, and
some an Hundred Fold, of Holiness and Righteousness in the deepest Humility,
(...) profoundest Adoration, Oh God of (...) Incorruptible Life, to thy
Boundless P^^ and our Endless Peace and Joy in thy Blessed Spirit, Amen.

Concerning denying our selves.
There be some that say, not only in Actions, but presumptuously in Words, that
they cannot deny themselves; then why do not such quit the Christian
Profession, for if they cannot, nor will not deny themselves, then they are no
Christians; for Christ says positively, Ye cannot be my Disciples, except ye
deny your selves; it is not the Name, but the Nature of Christ's Life that makes
a Christian, for they had a Name that they Lived, when they were Dead, Rev. 3.
To these, says the Spirit, awake and Repent; and if thou will not Watch, I
will come on thee as a Thief, and thou shall not know what Hour I will come
upon thee. Then there were some that were neither cold nor hot, To them, says
the Spirit, because thou art neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out: In
this State, see how the miserable Creature deceives it self, to think it is
something, when it is worse than nothing; for thou say, ^^m Rich, and
Increased with Goods, and have ^^d of nothing; and know not how thou art
^etched and miserable, poor, Blind and Naed; how many thousands, at this day,
of the ^hristians of our time, are in this woeful State of Self security, who
think it a high State of Christianity to be no better than the Beast that
perishes, and in not being in the excess of the debauched atheistical Spirits
of this age, who believes there is neither God nor Devil, neither Resurrection
nor Judgment; and so gives up their Bodies and Spirits to Commit all manner of
Abominations, with Greediness; never ceasing, till they have destroyed their
Bodies as well as their Souls; for, being Sold and given up to serve their
lascivious Lusts, there is no stop nor stay till their Destruction comes as a
Whirlwind, and then they shall know that there is a God, Resurrection, and
Judgment.

As I was going from the Printers, Conversing with the Lord, and Contemplating
of his Glorious Power, being filled with Harmonious Praises in Melodious
Sounds; yet as it were in deep Conflict of Spirit; and thus going on till I
came about the middle of Paternoster Row, where I stood still and beheld; and,
as I looked with Admiration, these Words, in great Power, spoke aloud in my
Ears, This is London, the City of Abomination, this is the Abominable City,
this is the City of Abomination; this is the Abominable City: And these words
were Repeated over and over, till I came about middle of Cheapside, and then
in, a mig^^ Power, this word was added, Woe to the Cit^^ Abomination, Woe to the
Abominable City; thus crying louder and louder with a might strong and powerful
Voice, that I had much a^ to contain my self from pouring it forth in t^^
Streets; and thus it continued till I came to Bishopsgate-street; after which
Exercise I humbly Prostrated my self before the Lord, crying to him for Mercy
for these poor Nations, for it seemed to me to be the sealing of the Vision,
which I saw when the Heavens Opened whereupon I fell into the same Exercise,
and am not from under it to this Day.

And upon another sight which I had a little before the Fire, at White Hall, I
writ a Paper to our Dear and Excellent Queen, telling her therein, that the
Sword of the Lord was drawn and Furbished, two Edged, yea three Edged, and only
wants Commission. Wherefore, O Queen, make haste, for the Lord's Sake, make
haste, there is but an Inch of time, arise in the Lord's Strength, and put thy
Power in Execution; Fear none, but the Lord, O Queen, let him be thy Fear, and
let him be thy Dread, and take Queen Esther's Resolution, who said, If I
Perish, I perish, for they that will seek to save their Lives, shall loose
them, and so went on, declaring to her the very thing that came to pass to my
unspeakable Grief, which Paper I had Printed at this time, but for fear of
renewing the King's Sorrows.

A Confession of the Christian Faith which was made at Constantinople in the
Year 1585. by one, who being complained of as a great heretic, gave this
Answer and reason of his Faith, to some (...) and Greek Christians, as (...)
several Jews and Turks that (...) present.
WE Believe that there is One, First of all things, which comprehends them all,
which cannot be comprehended of any: That there is One Cause, and One Essence
of all Things that have a Being: One Supreme Good, which we call GOD, whom we
know in this Mind, and honor in Speech, showing by Goodness and Well-doing,
that we are the Children of our Father, the Supreme Good.

We Believe in One Jesus Christ, w^ is the Perfect Example and Pattern of (...)
Children of GOD, whom we are to for low in patient Suffering of the Creature
and in love to our Neighbors, and so ^ecome Temples of his Spirit, where the
(...) Divine Worship which is acceptable (...) GOD, the highest Good, is
Well^^g.

(...) Believe also in the Holy Ghost, (...) we feel the Operative Power of
this (...) Good in our selves. We are all in (...) Communion of Christ, and
they, who ^y this Communion, are born again ^^to this Power, and thereby
Deified, being raised above Nature to a state of Incorruption and Immortality,
and by this means become Instruments of the endless Glory of GOD.

Without holding these things none can have a true or right Faith.

Quest. Why were you Born?

Answ. For GOD's good Will.

Q. For what end were you Born?

A. For the Glory of GOD.

Q. What is your Religion?

A. Well-doing.

Q. What is your Profession?

A. Our own Nothingness.

Q. What is your Comfort?

A. GOD's Almightiness.

Q. What is your Prayer?

A. To be Resigned, and Will-less.

Q. What is your Life?

A. GOD's Goodness.

Q. What is your Death?

A. A Translation into the Glory of GOD.

Q. What do you hold amongst so many Religions as there are in the World?

A. We Believe of GOD in Goodness, we think of our Neighbor in Love, and
meanly of our selves.

Q. Are you Baptized?

A. Yes; and are yet willing to be Baptized.

Q. Wherewithal?

A. With Water, which the moving of the Spirit of GOD drives from our Hearts,
through our Eyes, and incorporates us in his Love, at times when it seem good
unto him.

Q. Do you Celebrate the Lord's Supper?

A. Yes, many times and often.

Q. In what Church or Communion?

A. In the Church or Communion GOD

Q. What do you hold of Christ's Body What is his Flesh and Blood?

A. Christ's Flesh is a constant enduring Patience, and his Blood is a Divi^^
Oper^tive Living Love: Where this Fles^ possessed in Patience, and where this
(...) lives in Love, there is the true Con^^nion of the true Body of Jesus C^^*
This suffering Flesh, and this lov^^ (...) of Christ makes us Children of (...)
by means thereof we have (...) with the Son of GOD. The (...) and Good Nature
of GOD comes into (...) and that cannot be without a Tr^^stantiation, or a
change and destract^^ our evil Nature.

Q. Have you no other Sacraments (...) remonies than these?

A. The forementioned we (...) willingly Observe and Celebrate wi^^ (...) if so
it seem good unto you; and w^^ other may be besides these, we will wh^^ly leav^
to your selves for to avoid D^putes. And so I take my leave of you*

Jesus Animae Consolatio semper.
FINIS.

