My Lord Whitlocks REPORTS ON Machiavil; OR HIS RECOLLECTIONS For the use of
the Students of Modern Policy.

Lex esto Emolumentum. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Bateman, 1659.

My Lord Whitlocks Reports, ON, MATCHIAVIL,
I Will not meddle with the Law, for that I did overruled at my pleasure, and
therefore I propose no maxims, no unquestionable principles of the Norman
sovereignty; I was by a new Commonwealth name, called a Commissioner of the
Seal, to as much purpose, as my Lord General Monck was made a Commissioner of
the Army; the difference is, I would have turned my Masters out of door by the
Committee of Safety for my own ends, and he has not left them to themselves but
as a mock and derision, to the general content and benefit of the three
Kingdoms.

I should discourse of Equity and good Conscience, and tell you how far -- and
something further it might be stretched, for a^ my Chaplain George Cockain
says, we ought not to be hide-bound in our Consciences, where there is an
opportunity of making our purses to strut and swell above the gaged measure of
a Private Fortune: But I had learned so much without his Example or Precept,
and a fig for that ignorant Rabbie. I will now make the World my Confessor.

I was born to a Competent Inheritance, if it had meet and been entertained
with a Competent mind, I was Christened with an hard and ominous name Bulst^ode,
to which my numerous issue have adapted and fitted the Onomatopeia; for never
any Parish had such a sure stout strider, as my self: but before I had such a
chargeable large Family, I was an Infidel in the public Aconomy of the State,
and I was so far from caring for my Children, that I cared not for my Parent
whom God and the Laws had given me; and I will briefly show you the reasons.

When the Long Parliament was called (which has dwindled and shrunk up to a
Rump as short as an old Hens? I was elected a Burgess; I had had my education
in the Nurseries of the Law, the Inns of Court, and so suitably qualified for
the charge and employment, and the fitter and more convenient for the projects
the great Bontefeus had ^yed, if I could be gained to their Faction^: I had
then no interest, but contented my self with seeing the Fashions of the
Parliament House, but Pyms discerning eyes, spying that curiosity, presently
a^^qued my unconcerned, undetermined mind, and with the proffers of greatness
and Popularity, brought me over to his d^sign: I was then his second and my
abilities were by him every way extolled, to this purpos^, that where he smelt
too ^ckly (as in all the Over^^^es and Treaties (...) I by his management and
^ble direction, should supply his absence from which (...) by strange ^yes
obliged my self by no means to vary.

This sudd^^^^ brought me upon do Stage, I was appointed with the Ea^l of
Northumberland M. William Pierpoint, etc. To attend the King at Oxford with
Propositions from both Houses, where the great respect showed to the other
Commissioners during our stay; and the small notice (or rather disrespect)
taken of me by the King, (which (...) aggravated to my self, by the
conciousnesse of my strict obediende to Mr. Pym) implanted in me such an
inveterate, implacable malice to him and his posterity, that I can better
remember my crime, then tell how to expiate it, if it were possible such a
dutiful thought should ever deign ^o harbor within me.

By this means I was partly lifted, and partly scrued up my self to the Honor
and greatness of being entrusted with the keeping of the great Seal, the Rumps
Confident, the Darling of the newborn Free State. I was sent to make speeches
against the young King at Guild Hall when he was at Worcester, which I did with
so much vigor and confidence, that Titchburn the next day durst throw the
Kings Declaration into the fire made at the Exchange, for which sure he will
con me little thanks.

My next grand employment, my Masterpiece, was my Embassy unto Sweden (to which
VISCOUNT Lisle after a review was not thought sufficient) where as if I was
born to baffle and despose Princes, I let the Queen Christina on progress
through the world, as not being capable to act those designs, which I was sure
the money and promises of this State, would engage her successor CHARLES to,
viz. the diverting the forces of the Emperor from the succor of Flaunders,
and consequently the interest of the King, by an invasive war in Poland the
Imperial Dominions. Here I was almost non-plust with the dissolution of the
Rump by OLIVER, which I presently recovered by an impudent complement, calling
him, and stiling him, His most Serene Highness my Master, for which I thank him
still, he made me of his Treasury, although his extravagancies permitted me not
to be as nimble fingered as I would.

Was not I therefore, fit to be a Master of mis-rule, and to be of that
irregular Committee of Safety, wherein I was obliged to do the same service for
Lambert, as for Cromwell? I never could imagine the Rump any thing as long as
the Sword (...) Free-Parliament; What would your way Politician to do? I knew
nothing but Arms could secure me, and that there was no Compos^^^^^ for my
Estate, which consists in the spoils of the (...) purpose I (...) my self as
for (...) do for my Salary, and (...) I pretended, for which I sat alone in
the cold weather three days in the Court of Chancery.

By these Arts I have changed my Manor of Folly-Hall, into Knaves-Court at
Chessey. I have drawn William Lilly with a Golden Chain, to the making me his
Heir to 200 l. per annum, and the like, though with no bait but cunning
insinuation, have I done to an Essex Gentleman that shall be nameless, for his
names sake. But what does (...) will all this avail me? My Patron and Friend
the King of Sweden is dead, and my incensed Sovereign survives my Plots and
Devices. I will therefore timely bethink my self of the Kings Clemency, and do
as I see others doing before me; and so Exit all my Po^i^ and Honor.

FINIS.

