THE SEED OF ISREAL'S Redemption, Fully prophesied of, (And the Scriptures
opened,) Which now is about to be fulfilled by its Savior and ^edeemer, whom
God has now raised up for an Ensign to the Nations, and the salvation of his
people, who is here evidently demonstrated, and fully born witness of, as he is
the Remover of bondages, the worker of perfect freedom, and the end of things
abolished to both Jews and Gentiles who through faith receive him.

And here all they who are weary with being captives under the bondage of
corruption, and would know the way to the Kingdom of God, may receive a word of
Consolation.

From a Witness of Gods Sa^vation, who waits for the Consolation of his Seed,
and thirsts for Sions welfare, George Whitehead.

Amos 3.8 The Lion has reared, who will not fear?
The Lord God has ^poken, who can but prophecy?
Dan, 10:21 I will show thee that which is noted in the Scripture of truth, and
there is none that holds with me in these things but Michael your Prince.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

AS this following Testimony was given forth in the faith of the Righteous
seed, even as the things therein were revealed by the spirit of promise, so
they are not given forth to feed vain-minds, nor to satisfy the seed of the
wicked, who continue in their sin, unbelief and hardness of heart against God
and his Eternal Truth; for many of them do get the saints words and apply
promises to themselves in that nature which is in enmity against the seed of
God, and so with an empty profession covers and paints themselves over; so are
covered, but not with the spirit of God, taking counsel, but not of God; and
there are many in that nature gotten into a false ease, who pretend a
dependency upon the mercies and promises of God, but when ^hey come to be
tried, they are found in ^he unbelief, hating the Light of the Lord, which
brings them that believe in it to ^ee the promises of God fulfilled; so then
^hey who believe not according to Gods ^romises in his gift, but continue in
the ^nbelief, against the gift of God in them, ^hey come short of the promise
of God, and of his righteousness, because of their unbelief, and the deceit of
their own hearts; so that woe and misery is upon all such, and woe is unto all
selfe-conceited empty Professors, who hate to be reformed, and persist in their
pride and rebellion against God, yet this I testify, that God is not slack
concerning his promises, (as dispisers, unbelievers, mockers and scorners count
slacknes) but is near to fulfill them to the seed where ever it is scattered,
which is willing to wait in the patience to see his coming, and the
establishing of his everlasting Covenant, according to his promises, and to
that Seed I prostitute these things, which neither the swine nor the devourer
has any right unto; And to the gift of God in people which witnesses for him
against all unrighteousness do I appeal, to which I am manifest in the sight
of God, whatever such as resist the truth may think or speak of me, my diligent
labor in giving forth these things is known to the Lord God, as one who there
in have sincerely obeyed him. And let such as read this following Testimony,
mind their own state, and see if they believe according to these things, as
these who come to feel of the same things fulfilled and revealed by the gift of
God in themselves; For I have not written these things for people to feed their
airy minds with reports of them, and so to live upon reports of things they
feel not, but to be read singly, believed seriously, fulfilled effectually, and
witnessed eternally, as they may be known and made manifest by the power of the
Lord God, which they receive who receive the Son of God, and believe in his
everlasting Name, which is his Word, which lights every man that comes into
the world.

The particular Contents or subjects treated upon in this following Treatise,
are as follows, etc.
FIrst the Seed of Isreal's Redemption and its Redeemer fully prophesied and
declared of.

Afterward here are certain reasons according to the Scriptures of truth,
produced from a sure ground, Whereby is proved that the Messiah or Savior of
Israel did come in the flesh, and things are come to pass touching him and his
outward sufferings, according as the true Prophets have foretold; Whereby is
proved,

First, The Conception and birth of Jesus, according to his outward Nativity,
who is called Christ, or the Messiah.

2 Concerning the life of Jesus.

3 Touching his Ministry.

4 Touching his works.

5 Touching his sufferings and death.

6 Touching his Resurrection and Ascension.

With several things of concernment both to the professors of the world and
others, touching Christ and his way.

And these things are born witness of according to the evidences of faithful
witnesses; that both Jews and others who are in the state of unbelief, and
have been gazing abroad, and are yet looking to see the Messiah come in person,
(or who do not believe that he is already come) may take warning to turn their
minds within, and wait for the life and power of Christ Jesus to be revealed
in them, that thereby their souls may live and be satisfied, least they die in
their sins, and their souls remain in misery with the hard-hearted and
unbelievers.

Also here is the difference between the first and second Covenants, and
between the first and second Priesthoods, and the end of the things abolished,
and how far they reached, truly described,

Wherein is discovered,

1 Something touching the giving forth of the outward Law, and the establiing of
the first Covenant, and of the state of the people at that time.

2 Of Moses his making intercession for the people when they had transgressed.

3 Of the outward Circumcision.

4 Of the outward Passover.

5 Of the outward Sabboths.

6 Of the brazen serpent that Moses made.

7 Of oaths and swearing.

8 Of the outward anointing of the Priests

9 Of the Tithes the Priests received.

10 Of the outward Tabernacle under the Law, and the instruments thereof; and
the Lords forsaking thereof.

11 Of the outward sacrifices and burnt offerings.

12 Of the Ephod and consecrated garments which Aaron and the Priests had.

13 Of the outward washing of thepriests

14 Of meats and drinks and days in the first priesthood.

15 Of the tribe that the first priesthood were of, and their appointment.

16 Of the reading of the Law, and of the pulpit of wood.

17 Of Jewels of silver and gold, and costly ornaments.

18 Of Solomon's Temple.

19 Of the singing and praising upon outward Instruments which was used in the
outward Temple.

20 Of the overthrow and destruction of Solomon's Temple, and the building it
again, and its destruction the 2d time.

And the end of the things particularly in like manner described.

A ^rue account of these things are given that both Jews and professors who are
seeking rest for their souls, and to meet with God in visible things, and
carnal ordinances, which were upheld either under the Law, or since the Law,
may see beyond and come out of these thing and out of their will worships, and
feed no longer upon the husk, bu^ come to the bread of life which comes down
from God.

By a lover of the seed of God, and a friend to them that follow on to know
him, G.W.

The seed of Isreal's Redemption, and the Redeemer thereof fully prophesied and
declared of, etc.
NOw are the times of Restoration come and coming as thousands do witness, and
will witness for the remnant of Jacobs sake, the seed, concerning which the
determination of the everlasting God is gone forth, which he will fully
accomplish and fulfill for the gathering of the remnant of the seed unto
himself, for which his his holy Arm is made bare, and stretching it self forth
over all the Nations of the earth where the Remnant of his seed has been
scattered, whether among Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, kindreds or Peoples;
the Lord God of power and glory has a controversy to plead with all Nations
where his remnant has been carried away captive; yea, and his promises will he
fulfill which has been declared by the mouth of his holy Prophets since the
the world began, for his captivated seed which lies desolate, and which is
trodden under foot by the heathen, the uncircumcised and the unclean, even as a
vine that's trodden under foot by the wild beasts of the forests that it could
not spring up, nor bud forth, nor bring forth fruit for many years; yea, and
the remant which the Lord has to gather unto himself, is even like unto a
widow, who is cast out of her habitation, and bereaved of her children; and now
has her habitation been trodden down and laid waste, and her children taken
from her by the enemies, and she as a widow is in a waste howling wilderness as
one that mourns for the want of her husband, and for the want of her
children, and who wants a Comforter; even so have thou, O seed of Jacob, and
oh habitation, of Israel, long been oppressed; and long have thou been
desolate, and long have thou been destitute, thou have been encompassed with
death, with captivity, with want, with bondage by thy oppressor within and
without, he that has oppressed thee within, is he that has the power of
death, and whose dwelling and kingdom is in the darkness, and has caused many
thousands to transgress the Law, and to err from the Covenant; and to disobey
the Council of the most high God; and they that are thy oppressors without, are
they that fear not the Lord God, neither do they serve nor worship him; but
follows the imaginations of their wicked hearts, and serves and worships
strange Gods. And even among many who in words professes the true God, and do
often make mention of his name, is Jacob very small; in many he is even eaten
up and destroyed, and among many is his habitation laid desolate and waste; And
these that feel not his habitation nor him raised up, they are out of Gods
Council, and out of his Covenant, what ever they in words do profess or speak
concerning him, or what ever they act in pretense of obedience to him who is
the true and living God, whose name is to be professed in truth and in
righteousness, even in the righteousness of himself whereinto he will gather his
seed to serve and to obey him, and to bring glory to his powerful name, through
his own righteousness and sincerity, wherein his pure name must be held forth,
and no otherwise, for the woe is to all them that profess God, or hold his
truth in unrighteousness, and woe to all them that reject and hare the Council
of the Lord God, and cast his law and fear behind their backs, and yet do
present their prayers and vain oblations before him who is Lord of heaven and
earth, who will have a pure people or seed to place his name in, and he will
raise up a clean habitation, and an holy house to dwell in, wherein no
uncircumcised nor unclean person must dwell: and he will raise up his holy
mountain, and manifest his everlasting salvation, which his holy seed shall
possess, and into which no unclean thing shall come, and into his mountain
shall no venomous beast nor any destroyer enter, but there shall the seed
inhabit which must have dominion and power over the earth, and over all the
powers of the earth, and the Lord God has a seed to bring forth and to gather
both among Jews and Gentiles; yea, both among many professors, and among many
that have not a profession of the truth in words; yea, the Lord God has an
heritage to possess among the heathens, whom he will rule with a rod of Iron,
and subdue Nations by his holy Arm; and make way for his anointed, his Elect
seed, who is the right heir and chosen One, that he may possess the
inheritance: now is the day come, and the Sun risen, whereby the darkness which
has covered the earth, and the people shall be expelled, and driven away, and
in this the day of the everlasting God will he fulfill his promises and finish
his work which he has begun in the Northern Islands, who have waited for his
law, and many have received the law, and the everlasting Covenant which is the
inheritance of the seed which God is bringing forth according to his promises,
and all that now incline their hearts toward the Lord God, and wait for his
law, believing his promises, his righteousness shall appear, and his salvation
shall be brought near unto them, but they who refuse the Counsel of the Lord
God, and do still walk on in their Rebellion and wickedness, who will not wait
for his law to be written in their hearts, nor yet receive his Covenant, nor
believe his promises, they shall be overturned and scattered in Gods fierce
wrath and heavy displeasure, and his love to such will be turned into fury, and
his mercies into bitterness, for as much as in the time of their visitation
they have hated reproof, and hated to be reformed from their evil ways, and
have despised the messenger of Gods Covenant, even his own living witness which
he has sent, and which has often appeared and knocked at the door of their
hearts to warn them, and to instruct them to cease from their iniquities and
Rebellion, that they might have returned from their wickedness, and the Lord
might have healed their backslidings, who often erred and backslided from the
true messenger when he has appeared to convince them of, and to draw them from
their wickedness and evils. Therefore O thou seed of Jacob, which has been
scattered, and dispersed abroad, and oppressed, and O thou tabernacle of David,
and habitation of the righteous, arise, arise, and come forth, for thy day is
come, and thy time is come wherein he is come to visit thee who will build thee
up, and restore unto thee thy fermer dignity, and renown thee with beauty and
Authority; that thou may even be the glory of the Nations, and thy King may
rule over the whole earth, for he is King of Kings and Lord of Lords; arise,
come forth, and show forth thy self, thou that have been as a vine trodden under
foot, and as a desolate widow, who long have been barren, since the spoilers
and the destroyers had power over thee; come forth, and see him that visits
thee, and know thy Rock, the everlasting Councelor, that no longer thou may be
desolate nor remain Barren; but awake and come forth, for thy light is come,
and a time of love is coming upon thee, shake thy self from the dust, and let
thy oppressors come into the dust, and sit in the darkness, for now is he come
who will spoil the spoiler, and deliver the oppressed, and will take away and
remove the bands of wickedness, that the oppressed may enjoy glorious liberty
and Redemption out of all snares and encumbrances whatsoever, that she that
has mourned in dust and ashes, may rejoice, and have beauty for ashes, and the
garment of praise in stead of heaviness, and that she that was desolate may be
married unto an husband who is the everlasting Comforter, and will be an
husband unto the widow, that receives him who has waited for him: and then
the Barren shall b^ing forth children, and rejoice in her precious fruit, which
shall increase abundantly, and multitudes shall come up to the mountain of the
Lords house, and walk in the light of the God of Jacob, in which light he that
waits shall see these things brought in the day of the mighty God whose power
is gone forth to manifest his saving health in the Nations: whosoever will, let
them come freely, and taste of the everlasting light and power of the Almighty,
who breaths and thirsts after righteousness and salvation, whether they be
Jews or Gentiles, that they may receive and feel his anointed brought forth
who sets open the Treasures of life and mercies to all that do receive him, who
believe in his light according to his promises.

O ye Jews, ye people who are scattered among the Nations, There is a remnant
the Lord has among you, even as it were the Corn which is left in the time of
harvest for gleaners, and as the gleaning grapes which is left for the stranger
to gather; For though you be many in number, and you may profess the Law of
Moses and the prophets, yet the iniquity is great you are in, and you worship
an unknown God, while you are worshipping in the outward observations and
traditions held forth by your predecessors and forefathers, and you have not
seen, felt nor known him whom you worship. Jacob is small, and how shall he
arise among you? And the remnant is little that will receive the witness and
Testimony of the everlasting Covenant; Say not you are Abraham's children,
except ye were in Abraham's faith, and the righteousness which he was in; he
heard the voice of God, and through faith obeyed him, and was accepted; yea
whose worship stands in outward observations, ye have not heard Gods voice, nor
do ye obey him while your hearts are enranged from the light and the power of
the living God, many of your forefathers transgressed, and break the Covenant
that God made with them, wherein was the outward Tabernacle, Altar, Sacrifices,
and outward ordinances, which had a shadow of an everlasting Covenant which God
has in store for the seed of Abraham, who come into the faith and
Righteousness of Abraham; And the Israelites forsook the true and living God,
and followed after the Gods of the heathen, and profaned his name, and
polluted his Sanctuary through their Idolatry and their abominations; So that
Gods anger turned against them, he turned his countenance from them, he gave
them over for a pray to the heathen: so that they were dispersed and scattered
among strangers, and their seed came to be mixed with the heathen and so the
curse came upon them, and their enemies got the pre-eminence over them; for
they hated his counsel, and break his Covenant, and persecuted and slew his
prophets and messengers, and yet the Lord God did not leave himself without a
witness among them after that they had transgressed; For he gave his good
spirit to instruct them, and yet they temped the Lord and wrought grievous
provocations against the Lord, Nehemiah 9. and the Lord God overthrew and cut
many off in his wrath, and in their iniquities who tempted him, and would not
hearken unto his words which he spoke unto them by his holy prophets, nor unto
his good spirit which he gave to instruct them; But they made their hearts as
an Adamant, least they should hear the Law, and the words which the Lord of
Hosts has sent in his spirit by his former prophets, Zechariah 7.12. Yea and
they set up covetous Priests, who were greedy after gain, as ravening wolves,
and they profane the holy things that were consecrated under the Law: For the
service of the outward Temple which God comands, and even abused the outward
things that stood in the shadow, by their cursed inventions, and in serving
strange Gods; There was a time when Gods presence, and of his virtues was found
in the Temple that Solomon builded, and in the outward things that he commanded
which shadowed forth the heavenly things; But when Israel fell into Idolatry,
and offered incense and sacrifices, and built up high places to worship strange
Gods in, then the Lord forsook them, and forsook the Temple and outward things
which he had commanded, according as he promised, Read 2 Kings 18. and 2 Cron
7. So when they had gone a whoring after their own inventions, and had forsaken
the covenant and the Testimonies of the Lord God, he was wearied with their
prayers, and did not esteem of their sacrifices, nor accept of their
burnt-offerings, nor of their vain oblations, but cried away with them, and
said the true prophet, at that day shall a man look to his maker, and his eyes
shall have respect to the holy One of Israel and he shall not look to the
Altars the work of his hands, neither shall he respect that which his fingers
have made, Isai 17. And said the prophet David unto the Lord, Thou desire not
sacr^fice^ else would I give it; Thou delightest not in burnt offerings* the
secrifices of God are a broken spirit; a br^ken and contrite heart O God thou will not despise, Psa. 51 Therefore hear O ye Jews, and consider these things
ye people scattered among the heathen, for now I come to witness forth the
everlasting Covenant of Life and peace unto you, which the first covenant that
stood in the outward observations and ordinances, had the sha^ow of. And this
is the second Covenant, which in these latter days the Lord God of power is
bringing to light among many thousands, and this I say before you, and before
the Gentiles, that you eyes might wair upon the Lord God, and you may have
resp^ct to the holy One of Israel who is descended and revealed unto, and in
many of the children of men, and has given gifts unto men; yea, he has
received gifts, even for the Rebellious, that the Lord God might dwell among
them. Psa. 68. (mark) Here is the end of the outward Temple which God departed
from, here the Lords Temple or Tabernacle is among men, and his sacrifices are
a broken spirit, a broken and contrite heart: and this does his gift bring many
to witness, who come to feel their hearts prepared and firted for the Lord by
his own good spirit, or gift which he freely bestows upon them, and this is he
whom God has given for a Covenant, who has ascended and received gifts, even
for the rehellious; this is the Shilo that was promised, and this is he unto
whom the gathering of the people must be, Genesis 49. And this is the Prophet whom
God promised unto Moses, to raise up, whom the people was to hear, and
whosoever will not hearken unto him shall be cut off. for God will even require
it of him that will not hearken unto the words of God spoken by him; And says
h the Lord God, I will give him for a Covenant unto the people, and for a light
unto the Gentiles, (yea for a Leader) to be my salvation to the ends of the
earth; (mark) this is the true Leader, who is the light, the everlasting
covenant, now since that your fathers have broken the first covenant, that the
Lord God made when he had brought Israel out of Egypt. It is expedient for you,
that you turn your minds from the outward Temples or Synagogues, from the
outward offerings and outward things that pertained to the first covenant, and
look unto the holy one of Israel, who is the salvation of God freely tendered
unto you, that by him your hearts may be cleansed, and you saved from your
manifold transgressions and offenses, and be established on an everlasting
foundation, least that through your obstinacy and wilfulness and rebellion,
you be found in your fathers iniquities, and so perish with them that God
destroyed; for Israel was as the sand of the Sea in number, yet it was but a
remnant that were saved, or preserved in comparison of the number that were
destroyed; and had it not been that the Lord of Hosts had left unto Israel a
small remnant, they had all been, unto the Lord, as Sodom and as Gomorrah whom
God destroyed, read, Isa. Is and Chapter the 10th, and even so it would be with
many Nations, but that God has respect unto his heritage, the seed, whom God
will sift from among the Nations, and gather into his everlasting covenant,
that a right vine and plant may grow up among them, which plant he will cause to
take root, and to spring up and bring forth fruit in abundance; and this is he
that comes out of the stem of Jesse, and out of the root of David, unto whom
the Gentiles shall seek,, and his rest shall be glorious who shall be for an
ensign of the people; and the second time will the Lord set his hand, to
recover the remnant of his people unto him both out of the Sea, Jslands, and
many far countries, and he shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather
together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth, Isa. 11.
(mark) this is the seeker and savior of that which was lost, unto whom the
people must be gathered both of Jews and gentiles, yea, this is the righteous
plant, upon whom rests the spirit of wisdom, of understanding, of might, and
of the fear of the Lord, whom man despises and the Nations abhoreth, who is a
servant of Rulers; Thus says the Lord concerning him, Kings shall see and
arise, Princes also shall worship, because of the Lord that is faithful, and
the holy One of Israel and he shall choose thee, thus says the Lord, in an
acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped
thee, and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant to the people, to
establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages, that thou
may say to the prisoners go forth, and to them that are in darkness, show
your selves, they shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all
high places, they shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat nor Sun
smite them; for he that has mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs
of water shall he guide them, and I will make all my mountains a way, and my
high ways shall be exalted, behold these shall come from far, and lo these
from the North, and from the West, and these from the land of Sinim, Read Isa.
49. Even this in the North, and in several of the Islands of the Sea is come to
pass already, and believed by many who have been as desolate heritages; but
now the Redeemer is come who is bringing many out of bondage, and out of the
prison house of corruption and iniquity, wherein many are yet in bondage, unto
whom this shall be reported, and who shall be visited by this Redeemer and
Savior whom God is raising up, and has raised him up in his power and
Majesty, amongst many in the North Countries, whom God has gathered unto him,
and who now are led by the River of water, which comes from the everlasting
fountain of life and mercies, as many in the Island of England do, and shall
witness, who were once desolate, and as Gentiles by nature, that knew not the
everlasting covenant of light, but now are come into the light and power of
God, in which God is setting up his holy mountain, that his peomay find rest
and dwell in safty, and shall praise the Lord in the glory of his light, and
beauty of his holiness: Therefore ye in whom there is some sincerity, and some
thirsting after holiness, in whom Jacob is not wholly eaten up or destroyed,
nor his habitation quite desolate, and in whom there is some thing of the truth
appearing and kindling; look ye unto the servant of the Lord, the Elect, the
chosen one, in whom his soul delights, he shall bring forth judgment to the
Gentiles, for the spirit of God is upon him, A bruised reed shall he not break,
and the smoking flax shall he not quench, he shall bring forth judgment unto
truth; this is he that is given for a Covenant of the people, and for a light
of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the
prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house, his Law the
Isles shall wait for, Isa. 42. and he shall sprinkle many Nations though he be
despised and rejected of men, he being a man of sorrows, and acquainted with
grief, yet he grows up as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground
Isa. 53. and the Isles must listen to him, and the people must hearken unto him
from far, for the Lord has chosen him and made his mouth like a sharp sword,
in the shadow of his hand has he hid his chosen one, and made him a polished
shaft in his quiver; Mark, how God gives his Elect power to execute Judgment
who surely will shoot at the wicked, and slay the unrighteous, who will not
listen nor hearken unto him; Therefore y^ scattered people dread and fear the
holy One, for it is he that must Reign, though long he has been despised, and
his glory and dominion must reach unto the ends of the Earth over both Jews
and Gentiles, for his light is broken forth already among many, and the scepter
of his Kingdom is held forth, and his righteousness must be declared even unto
the ends of the earth, that he may be known to be the foundation of many
generations whom God is raising up among thousands, and whom thousands in the
Northen Islands of England do already witness raised up; and take heed how you
do resist his government, least that the Lord God shoot forth his arrows, and
empty his quiver or vials of wrath against you, and kill you in his wrath for
he has a bundance of Arrows reserved to shoot forth against them that do
resist his chosen One, and would not that he should rule over them, nor walk in
his light, nor suffer it to lead them; and they who are so far from knowing his
government, as they say, that his light does not enlighten the heathens, or the
Gentiles, they are far out of his faith and righteousness, and there are many
such that profess his name in words, but are ignorant of his righteousness and
judgments, who will not own that Gods Anointed is a light to the heathen, or
that the heathen are enlightened by him, and such there are many, but if it were
so, how should he inherit the wast and desolate places? And how should the
Gentiles seek or come unto him from far? For the Gentiles shall come unto the
Lord from far, yea from the ends of the earth, and they shall say surely our
fathers have inherited lies, vanities and things wherein there is no profit,
Jer. 16. Now they that seek after the Lord, they must first have a feeling
after him, and that which brings any to feel after him, is a measure of his
life and light, who enlightens every man, and who works in every man to will,
and gives him strength to obey him, even by his free gift which he has freely
bestowed upon man; So that all who come to seek and find him who is the holy
one of Israel; They must not follow the vanities nor Traditions which their
sore-fathers have inherited, contrary to the will and commands of the Lord, but
every one come to hear and obey him, (mark) they are to hear what the Lord
speaks, and walk in his light, for God himself must reign, and his holy one
shall lead, and they shall not be as the false prophets in Israel, who said
thus the Lord said and the burden of the word of the Lord, when the Lord had
not spoken unto them, for said the true prophet, thus shall ye say every one to
his neighbor, and every one to his brother, what has the Lord answered? and
what has he said? Jer. 23. Chap. and now the Lord is manifesting his
everlasting covenant, for behold the days come says the Lord, that I will
make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, not
according to the covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day^ that I
^ook them by the hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, which my covenant
they brake although I was a husband unto them says the Lord; But this shall be
the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days says
the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people, and they shall
teach no more every man his neighbor and every man his brother, saying, know
the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least of them even unto the
greatest of them says the Lord, for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will
remember their sin no more. Read Isa. 54. and Jere. 31. And I will cleanse them
from all their iniquities whereby they have sinned against me, and I will
pardon all their iniquities, whereby they have transgressed against me says
the Lord God, Read. chap, 33. and again, I will take you from among the
heathen, and gather you out of all countries, and bring you into your own land,
then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your
filthiness and from all your Idols will I cleanse you, a new heart also will I
give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh, and give you an heart of flesh, and I will put
my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, Read Ezekiel. the 11,
Chap. and Chap. 36. and again, says the Lord, I will also leave in the midst
of thee, an afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the Name of the
Lord, the remnant of Israel shall do no iniquity, nor^speak lies, neither shall
a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth, for they shall feed and lie down,
and none shall make them afraid; Zephaniah the 3d chap. Now these things is the
Lord God of Israel bringing to pass, in these our days, since he has this
second time stretched forth his hand, and made bare his holy arm, to recover
his seed in the Islands of the Sea, and in all countries where it has been
scattered, and many do already know and feel him who takes away all iniquity,
and does even thoroughly refine his heritage, who is the teacher of his people
himself; therefore all they who do not believe that they shall be so taught of
God, But that they must have need of men to teach them so long as they live in
the body, they are in darkness, and deny the promise of God which his seed
that believes in him is a witness of: And all they that do not believe that
any may be washed and thoroughly cleansed from all sin and iniquity whilst they
live; their faith is out of Gods light, and they deny his Covenant, and so
comes short of adoption, because of their unbelief and the deceit of their
hearts, for this is the Covenant which God will gather his people into, even
the covenant that he made with David who walked wisely before the Lord, and
with a perfect heart, and became wiser then his Teachers, when he knew the
deliverance and salvation of God toward him: and all that believe in the light
of the everlasting Covenant of God, they come to be made partakers of the sure
mercies of David, whose Tabernacle the Lord God is building up among men, and
restoring the waste places thereof, that his seed may be exalted, and his
Covenant may be enjoyed among his people, in which Covenant they may witness
holiness, and purity, and life in the countenance of the everlasting Jehovah;
and the Prince of Peace, whom the Kingdom and the government belongs unto, and
in this Covenant they shall be so spotless that the Lord will not find fault
with them, as he did with them that brake the first Covenant, which he commanded
in Horeb, and gave to the Israelites, when he had led them out of Egypt, which
Covenant is put an end to (for righteousness) by that which never shall have
end, wherein his people shall be found faultless; therefore linger not in death
and darkness, and go not a whoring after your inventions, and take heed of
rejecting the message or despising or persecuting the messengers of the
everlasting Covenant of God, as your fathers of old have done, least the
iniquities of them that hated Gods Covenant and slew the Prophets be upon you:
And now is the Lord God of power sending forth messengers to witness forth his
everlasting name and Covenant, and to direct peoples toward his holy mountain
and habitation, yea the Lord sends forth messengers from the North Country to
witness forth his Covenant, for his remnants sake; and behold he causes his
trumpet to be sounded forth, and his voice to be uttered through his sanctified
ones, whom he has chosen to War against Babylon, against her that is polluted,
whose abominations have been long over all the earth, therefore blessed is that
people, and happy is that land that receives the Testimony of the everlasting
Covenant of God, and do open the doors that the righteous that holds the truth
may come in and be received among them, in the name of the everlasting Jehovah
who has sent them, that his Name may be published, and may be great even among
the Gentiles or heathen, from the rising of the sun unto the going down of the
same; as he has promised, Malachi the first Chapter: But woe unto them that
reject the messengers whom God sends forth of the north Country, and who
despise their message, and persecutes them, or puts any of them to death, he
Lord God will himself arise like a man of war, and will awake and come forth
against them to destroy them; as a fierce lion that comes forth of his Thicket
to lay hold on the prey; for they that truly receive the witnesses that God
sends forth to direct people into his living way, they receive him that sent
them, and so receives his truth in the love of it, but they that reject them,
they do reject him that sent them, and so do refuse the waters of Shilo which
run softly; and therefore will the Lord bring upon them his fierce indignation,
as an overflowing scourge that shall sweep away the refuge of lies and liars;
and evil doers into the pit of his indignation; therefore O ye scattered
people; have a regard to Gods Covenant and to his Truth that his Elect seed and
heritage may be known among you, that there may be a man found among you to
make up the breach, which has been between God and you, and that he may stand
in the gap whom God has chosen to mediate between him and you, and to turn
away his wrath from you, which has come upon you because of your Rebellion;
for thus says the Lord to the men of Judah and Jerusalem, break up your fallow
ground and sow not among thorns, circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take
away the foreskins of your hearts ye men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem,
least my fury come forth like fire and burn that none can quench it, because of
the evil of your doings, Jer. 14. chapter, so be not uncircumcised in heart,
but let thine ear and thy heart be circumcised and hearken to the words of the
holy One who calls unto the prisoners to come forth; and who is come for to
relieve the oppressed; he says, the Lord God has given me the tongue of the
learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary;
and again he says, the spirit of the Lord God is upon me: because he has
appointed me to Preach good tidings to the meek, he has sent me to bind up
the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the
prison to them that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and
the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn, Isai. 61. chap.
Mark, whom glad tidings, liberty and comfort is Preached unto, not to the
hard-hearted, nor the proud, nor the stubborn, nor such as are at ease in their
inquities, which causes the seed of God to suffer, and imprisons the just; but
to the meek, to the prisoner, and to him that mourns, hear this thou seed of
Jacob and receive consolation O Israel for thy Savior and Redeemer is come to
visit thee, according to the promise, a deliverer shall come forth of Zion, and
he shall turn away iniquity from Jacob, for unto him the Lord says, I am with
thee to save thee, though I make a full end of all Nations whether I have
scattered thee, yet will I not make a full end of thee, but I will correct thee
in measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished, Jer. 30. therefore
come forth, come forth, O Israel, in the light and glory and strength of thy
Redeemer, and let thy Tabernacle be set up for Nations to come to; and let thy
tents be set up, and increased among the heathen, and let them bow to thy
Standard and Ensign, and enlarge thy dwelling places and thy borders over the
desert and waste places, where thou may find a way for thy seed and rivers of
living waters may issue forth unto thee, for thy thirsty ones to drink at, that
thou may be nourished, and thy children satisfied in a fruitful land, that
thou may possess a goodly heritage, and thy seed shall be known among the
Gentiles, and thy offspring among the people, and all that see them shall
acknowledge them that they are the seed which the Lord has blessed; for these
are they who walk in the ways and keep the judgments, and obey the commands
of the Lord God; whom he calls, and Redeemeth and justifies by his
righteousness which he reveals in them, whom he finds out in a day of
salvation, and whom he gathers in an accepted time; who do answer his call in
due season, and are willing to keep his Covenant, and such a seed and a people
will the Lord God find out in many Nations, where his word shall be heard, and
unto whom his standard shall be listed up. And ye scattered Jews, this know,
that now as the everlasting Covenant of light and life is freely given and
tendered to all Nations, and none are hindered from having a privilege or
interest in it, but they who are hindered and kept from it by their iniquities
and unbelief: so you cannot justly challenge an interest in the Covenant
because of any outward line or succession you are of, since many of your
fathers did provoke the Lord God to wrath who were cut off for their grievous
abominations, whose feed was mixed with the uncircumcised, neither can you
attain unto this Covenant (wherein God presents his seed faultless) by all your
willworships, and carnal observations pertaining to the first Covenant, where
neither Priests nor people are without fault, so are all short of the promise
in the second Covenant, which now the Lord God is fulfilling even among many
who have been strangers, and many of Israel after the flesh did seek after the
righteousness of the Law, but attained not to it because they sought it not by
faith, and stumbled at the holy one who is a stumbling stone in Zion and a Rock
of offense, Psa. 118. Isai. 28. which if you stumble at, and seek after the
righteousness of the law by the works of the law, then your expectations will
fail you, and you will be broken to pieces and scattered in Gods wrath, and perish
among the uncircumcised and Rebellious if you continue in hardness of heart and
Rebellion against the Redeemer who comes to turn away iniquity from them that
receive him, and though many of Israel after the flesh did not, or do not
attain to the everlasting righteousness in Gods Covenant; yet his Covenant
shall not be disanulled, neither will he fail thereof, neither shall his City
lie waste, nor his habitation desolate, for as a City may be builded in a
Barren wilderness or desert place, and the Elect one may spring up as a root
out of a dry ground that grows up as a tender plant, and increases till it
bring forth precious fruit, even so can the Lord God raise up seed unto Jacob
(who is called Israel) from among the heathen, and outcasts who have been
accounted as the barren places, and as the dry ground that does not bring forth
fruit; And as that which was planted a noble vine and wholly a right seed, did
become a degenerate Plant of a strange vine unto the Lord; even so can the Lord
take plants of a wild vine, and plant them into the true vine, that they may
receive nourishment from the true root, and grow into the nature and become
branches of the true vine, and said the Prophet David, thou have brought a vine
out of Egypt, thou have cast out the heathen and planted it, thou preparedst
room before it, and did cause it to take deep root, and it filled the land,
Ps. 80. and now are the last days come, and now is the accepted time wherein
God is causing the light of Israel to break forth as a flame that shall burn up
the stuble, and the Briars and the thorns (which the wicked are compared unto)
and now behold the light appears to lead many thousands into the path of life
and the way of peace, that Israel may now remember his resting place, and the
people that are weary and deeply laden under the burden of their iniquities,
who does seek unto the holy One of Israel may come to find rest for their
souls, and in the light of the holy One, they may come to learn doctrine who
have murmured; and they that have Erred in spirit may come to understanding,
Isa. 29. and again it shall come to pass in the last days that the mountain
of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall
be exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it, and many people
shall go and say, come ye and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to
the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will
walk in his paths, O house of Jacob come ye and let us walk in the light of
the Lord, Isai. 2. Mich. the fourth chapter. Now in these last days is the Lord
God bringing this to pass: that his holy mountain may be exalted, and many may
have a true desire to walk and come to walk in the light of the Lord which now
he causes to be Preached and published, which Light many do oppose, and many
hates it and rejects it, even many who make a professing of God in words, but
in practices deny him, though they do build themselves up in their own
imaginations and sets up their own knowledge, but in resisting the light of the
Lord, these builders do reject the chief corner stone, as it is written of
them, but he that believes on him shall never be confounded nor ashamed: for
he shall be counted among the remnant that God has chosen and gathered
according to his promise, as he has promised; Therefore behold the days come
says the Lord that they shall no more say the Lord lives which brought the
children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, but the Lord lives which brought
up and which led the seed of the house of Israel out of the North Country, and
from all Countries whether I had driven them, and they shall dwell in their own
land. Read Ier. 16. and chap. 23. Now this in a great measure has the Lord
fulfilled, and has gathered and is gathering his seed in the North Country,
and he has made his Arm and power so far manifest in many there, that he has
made them able to War against Babylon who has long oppressed the seed of
Israel; but spoilers, and men of War comes forth of the North that shall fight
against and spoil Babylon, whose weapons are the weapons of indignation, which
God has given them to fight withal, Isai. 13. and Ier. 50. Chapters, and the
heathen that do resist the spirit and the powerful truth of the Lord, who have
laid desolate the habitation of Jacob and devoured him; they shall dread before
the Lord of hosts who goes before his host, and overturneth the wicked and
casts out the heathen that his vine may take deep root, and spread forth her
branches even as far as the Sea, and the Lord God is pouring forth his spirit
upon all flesh, that both Sons and Daughters may prophecy, as he has
promised, which already is come to pass both among Sons and Daughters, Joel 2.
cha therefore O ye dispersed ones, consider these things and lay them to heart,
for the Lord is bringing them surely to pass, and he is not slack concerning
his promises, he that believes them and waits in the light, to see them
fulfilled, shall partake therein, and his soul shall live and be satisfied, and
he shall come to praise the Lord God in his fruitful hill, and rejoice in his
salvation, in the land of the living; But they that live in pride and
stifneckednesse, and hardens their hearts against the counsel of the Lord, and
shuts their eyes in their unbelief against the light of his countenance, and
against his promises: Surely the Lord will cut them down in his vengeance and
fury, and they shall be cast out of his sight, and become an abhorring unto all
flesh, and their worm shall never dye, their plague shall never cease, and the
fire that shall scorch and burn them shall never be quenched, Consider this ye
stif necked ones who make mention of the name of God in words, but not in
righteousness, whether you be Jews or Gentiles, you are as degenerate plants
of a strange vine that brings not forth fruit unto the Lord God; Consider
the vine tree that grows up wild in the forest, what is it more then any
other tree, or then a branch which is among the trees of the forest? shall wood
be taken thereof to do any work, or will men take a pin off it, to hang any
vessel thereon? Behold it is cast into the fire for fuel, Eze. 15. Even so will
all they be counted as fuel for the fire who brings not forth fruit unto God
in righteousness, how many leaves and blossoms so ever they bring forth, or
what ever they profess in words theyl wither, and their glory will fall; And
the fire of the Lords jealousy and anger will take hold upon them, and devour
them; So fe^r the Lord God of glory and power, and let all flesh dread his name
and power, and worship him that made heaven and Earth and the Sea, and all
things that therein is, whose worship is in the spirit and in the truth; and
humble thy self before him, thou that have been a stranger, and a foreigner,
who yet art not come to know the Redeemer of Israel; but have been as a sheep
without a shepherd, seeking rest, but could find none, who have been
wandering upon the mountains, and in the desert places, where thou could
find no satisfaction, nor resting place for thy soul: Look toward the Sun of
Righteousness who does arise with healing in his wings upon him that fears
the Lord, and who puts forth his beams and gives light unto such as sit in
darkness, and in the land of the shadow of death, that they may come forth and
receive life, and walk in his light, that his everlasting Salvation may be
their reward, and this is the everlasting foundation, and Rock of refuge to all
that truly look unto him for help and Salvation; whom I do freely publish, both
to Jew and Genti^e, that whosoever be a thirst may come freely, and receive of
the water of life which comes from the rock, and is to be drunk of freely, and
bought without money and without price, and this is the living water, which
issues forth from the rock unto the waters to heal them, and the waters are
the peoples, kindreds, and Nations, which the living water flows forth unto
to heal them; glory to our King and keeper, who is the Rock of ages, whose
righteousness has appeared in this our age and time, and whose faithfulness
endures throughout all ages and generations, and who is making known his glory,
and eternal Salvation as in the days of old, and his righteousness as in
former days, to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever: Let Sion awake
and put on strength, and let Jerusalem shine forth in her beautiful garments,
and lie no longer in the dust, but be renowned and dignified in beauty and
glory, instead of sorrowing in dust and ashes; Let her that was desolate be
glad, and let her that was barren bring forth and her seed multiply, and the
Gentiles shall bring children unto her, the Lord shall nourish her little ones,
and lead gently her that is with young, and carry his babes and lambs in his
arms: Let the barren wilderness become a fruitful field, and the desolate and
waste places rejoice, for behold the Lord omnipotent reigns, whose voice
sounds through the Earth, who is at work in his vineyard, and sends forth
laborers into his vineyard, fit for his own purpose, and reapers to cut down
the tares and fruitless plants, and to gather his seed from the ends of the
earth. Let the heathen and all Nations fear dread and tremble, at the presence
of the God of Jacob, for his standard is lifted up, and his banner is spread
forth, and his trumpet he is causing to be heard in the land, and the day of
his appearance is dawned, wherein he is gone forth before his army, to make war
with his enemies, to get himself a name among them that have not been called
by his name, and to conquer, where his dominion has not been known, that his
Kingdom may reach over all the Earth, the heavens shall tremble and the earth
shall quake, and the hills shall melt at the presence of the Lord God of
Israel, who has a way in the clouds, and rides upon the wings of the wind,
and has his footsteps in the deep, and whose works and wonders are seen in the
deep, where his trumpet is heard, tremble, tremble and quake O ye inhabitance
of the Earth, for the Lord is come to reign, and his anointed shall have the
pre-eminence, and Rule the Nations with a Rod of iron, the Lord God of power
and glory, who is the only wise and infinite God, whose presence fills
heaven and earth, Heaven is his Throne and earth is his footstool, for all
these things has he made, and he inhabiteth eternity: yet he dwells with him
also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the
humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones, and to this man will I
look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my
word says the Lord, read, Psa. 34. Isa. 57. and chapter 66.

Certain reasons according to the Scriptures of truth, proving that Christ the
Messiah is come and made manifest, (and the word that made all things became
flesh) according as it was prophesied of him, by the true Prophets of God
formerly, that the stumbling block that lies in the way of the Jews or others,
they may see and come out of the stumbling touching Christ's coming, who do not
believe that he is come, but looks for his coming as the Jews did, when they
persecuted him, and put him to death nigh Jerusalem, but did not believe that
was he, because he came not according to their carnal expectations, and now his
coming and knowledge is to be felt, and in the spirit and glory of his Father,
as he was known among the Saints, who after they had known Christ after the
flesh, knew him so no more, but after the spirit, etc.

1 Of the conception and birth of Jesus who is called Christ.
THere was in the City of Galilee named Nazareth a certain virgin named Mary,
who was espoused to a just man named Joseph of the house of David: this Virgin
was found with child of the Holy Ghost, (or spirit) before that Joseph knew her
by the outward relation, but she was encouraged by an Angel, who told her that
that holy thing in her was of the holy Ghost, and also Joseph was encouraged by
the Lord in a dream, concerning his virgin that was with child by the holy
Ghost; and the child was born in Bethlehem a City of Judea and his name was
called Jesus, according to the direction of the Angel unto Joseph, and the
Virgin and Immanuel, that is to say, a Savior of the people from their sins,
and God with us, and this was according to the prophecy of the Prophet Isay,
who said therefore the Lord shall give you a sign, behold a Virgin shall
conceive, and bear a Son and shall call his name Immanuel, Isa. 7, 14. And the
Prophet Micah prophesied saying, but thou Bethlehem Ephratah though thou be
little among the thousands of Juda, yet out of thee shall come forth unto me,
that is, to be Ruler in Israel, whose going forth have been from of old, from
everlasting, Mica 5.2. and that there was such a child born in Bethlehem, as
declared, we have the evidences of several true witnesses, Mat 1.18. and Chap.
2.5, 6. Luke 1, 27. to the 35. ver. Now by the Law of Moses at the mouth of two
or three witnesses every word is to be established: And we have the Testimonies
of many witnesses touching this same Jesus, whose outgoings have been of old;
for this was the word which was made flesh, and which grew in the spirit and
power of his heavenly Father, though he took part of flesh and blood, and
according to the flesh he was the seed of Abraham and David, as the Scriptures
do testify, this I speak to them that are without, for we are satisfied by the
spirit of truth, touching this man.

2. Touching the life of Jesus.
In him was life, and the life was the light of men, who walked in innocence
and blamlesness, and was without fault before his heavenly Father from the
womb, and he was tempted of the Devil, yet he entered not into temptation, but
was kept clear and innocent, for God gave his Angels charge over him, as the
Scripture declares, Psa. 91.11. and to this we have several testimonies as in
the book of Matthew the 4. chap. and of Mark the first cha. and of Luke the 4.
cha. And several others did bear witness of his innocence and humility, and he
having come of a woman made under the Law, he was circumcised at 8. days old
according to the law: And when the days of his mothers purification were
accomplished, he was presented unto the Lord, and a pair of turtle Doves and
two young pigions was then offered, as a Sacrifice unto the Lord according to
the command, Genesis 17.12. Exodus 13.2 Numb. 18.16 Levit. 12.2.6 and Luke 2.21, 22,
23. Moreover this Jesus was baptized in the river of Jordan, by one John
Baptist, who was a prophet; And so he came to fulfill the righteousness,
passing through the shadows, Mat. 3.13. Mark 1.9. Luke 3.21. Also this Jesus
found buyers and sellers in the Temple, (which God commanded under the first
covenant) who bought and sold in the Temple, and Jesus reproved them, and drove
them out, and the sheep and the Oxen which they had there, and poured out, the
changers money, and overthrew the tables, and said unto them that sold doves,
Take these thing hence, make not my house an house of merchandise, John 2.15.
And he said unto them it is written, my house shall be called the house of
prayer, but ye have made it a Den of thieves, Isa. 56.7. Jer. 7.11. Mat. 21.12.
Mark 11.17 Luke 19.46. These things were thus confirmed at the mouth of several
witnesses, and thus Christ did reprove many, who professed the law and outward
Ordinances, for profaning the holy things, and thus he set the figures or
shadows in their order and place, according to the Law, and passed thus under
the shadows which were but in force, until he suffered and nailed them to the
cross, and so fulfilled the law and righteousness, in many things before he
was glorified, that others might come out of the shadows, into his glory and
righteousness, and have the righteousness of the law fulfilled in them, yet
he that has defiled their bodies which are the temples of the holy Ghost (or
house of God) may be driven forth and destroyed, and the house of God may be
made pure and clean; for holiness becomes his house for ever.

Thirdly touching Christ's Ministry.
ANd at the was Law given by Moses, so grace and truth came by Jesus Christ,
whom Moses prophesied of, John 1.17 Acts 3.22. and chap. 7.37. Deuteronomy. 18.15. and
upon this Christ, did rest the spirit of grace, and of wisdom and might, and
the fear of the Lord, as was foretold of him; for he was full of grace and
truth, Isa. 11.2. John 1.14. And from this Jesus did proceed the words of grace
and wisdom, who often preached the truth in his everlasting Fathers name, in
so much that many people were astonished, and thousands convinced, and many
converted with the truth of his doctrine, and he disputed with the Doctors or
learned men in the Temple at Jerusalem. when he was but about twelve years old
Luke 2.46. and chap. 4.22, 32. Also he often with his wisdom and power stopped
the mouths of gainsayers, and put the Jews, Priests, Pharisees and learned men
to silence, when they sought to entrap him in his words, to get accusations
against him; so they could not justly accuse him, and thus he dealt prudently
as was prophesied of him, Isa. 52.13. Mat. 19.3. to the 10. ver. and chap,
21.23. to the 27. ver. Mar. 11.27. Luke 20.1. Mat. 22 46. Moreover he spoke
many parables, and uttered things that had been kept secret from the foundation
of the world; Psa. 78.2. Mat. 13.35.

Fourthly, Touching the works of Christ.
HE opened the blind eyes, he caused the Lame to walk, he cleansed the Leapers,
caused the deaf to hear, and raised the dead, and cast out Devils, and unclean
spirits, and cured many that were infected with grievous maladies, and
sicknesses, and restored them into perfect health and strength, and so he
wrought such wonders in Israel, and showed such miracles, that his fame went
forth throughout all the countries, he having done such works as none before
him ever did; In so much that many believed on him that were heathens, and many
of the Rulers in Israel, and the poor received the Gospel; yet for all these
his mighty works, (which was more then was done in the time of the Prophets,
Ellezeus when there was none cleansed from their l^^^osie but Naaman, the
Syrian 2 Ki. 5.14.) There w^^e many of the Pharisees chief Priests and Rulers
which did not believe in Christ, but were filled with wrath against him, and
sought to bring him within the compass of their Law, that they might take away
his life, though by his wisdom and power, he often overcame them, and stopped
their mouths, and his power and truth spread daily, and overcame the world,
and through him was more way made for his powerful truth and for the spreading
of his fathers name, that many more came to believe then ever did in the former
ages, when they slew and killed the holy Prophets, though he was despised by
Rulers, and rejected of men, yet all these things were fore-known of God, and
were done that the Scriptures were fulfilled, Read, Isa. 35.5. chap. 52.15.
Mat, 8. and chap. 9. Luke 4.

5. Touching the suffering and death of Christ.
NOw after the Jews had long laid wait against Christ, but could not put him
to death, until his testimony was fulfilled, though often they sought to have
taken away his life, but had not power till his time was come, that these
things that were written of him might be fulfilled, one Judas Iscariot, who for
a time followed and owned Christ, who was numbered among the eleaven other
disciples, he betrayed Christ, and sold him into the hands of them that sought
to take away his life, (for 30. pieces of silver, Mat. 26.14. Mark 14.10. Luke
22.) thus the prophets words were fulfilled; He that eats bread with (...)
has lift up his heel against me, Psalm. 41.10. and they weighed for my price
30. pieces of silver, and the Lord said unto me, Cast it unto the potter,
Zachariah 11.12. and they bought with this price the potters field call led the
field of blood; and Judas the traitor was so smitten for what he had done, that
he hanged himself, and there came two false witnesses against Christ, and the
people did spit in Christ's face, and buffetted him and others smote him with
the palms of their hands; thus came the Prophets words to pass, I gave my
back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, I hid not
my face from shame and spitting, Isai. 50.6. And the chief Priests and Elders
of the people took council together against Jesus to put him to death, Mat. 27.
Mar. 15. Luke 22 Joh 18. Psalm 2.2. and afterward had him forth unto a place
called Golvotha, or Caluary nigh unto Jerusalem, and they gave him vinegar to
drink mingled with gall which he did but taste off, and then they crucified
him; and thus came the Prophets words to pass, they gave me also gall for my
meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink, Ps. 79.21. and when they
had crucified him they parted his garment, casting lots upon them what every
man should take, and this was according to the Prophets words, Ps. 22.18. and
when Jesus had said, I thirst (knowing that all things were now accomplished
that the Scripture might be fulfilled) they filled a sponge with vinegar, and
put it upon hysop: and put it to his mouth, and when he had received it, he
said, It is finished (or done) and he bowed his head and gave up the Ghost,
Ioh. 19.29. thus he finished his Testimony faithfully through his deep
suffering) and gave his life into his Fathers hands a ransom for as many as
believed in him, through whom faith is offered unto all men; and moreover he
was numbered among transgressors, for he suffered on the Cross between two
Malefactors, who then suffered on each side of him, Isai. 53.12. and one
Pilate put a Title over Christ's head in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, (where he
suffered) the title was ( Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews) and the
soldiers brake the legs of those that were crucified with Christ, but did not
break his legs; and this was according to the Scripture, touching the typical
Passover ( Exodus 12.46. Number. 9.12. Joh. 19.) Now when Christ was crucified
there was darkness over all the Land, from the sixth hour to the ninth hour:
and behold the vail of the Temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom,
and the earth did quake, and the Rocks rent, and the graves were opened, and
many bodies of the Saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves after
his Resurrection, and went into the holy City, a dappeared unto many, (of this
there are the Testimonies of several) and one Joseph who was a Disciple of
Jesus took his body and wrapped it in a linen cloth, and laid his body in a new
Tomb which he had hewn out in a Rock, and he rolled a great stone to the door
of the Sepulcher, and Pilate and the chief Priests and the Pharisees caused the
stone of the Sepulcher to be sealed, and the Sepulcher to be made sure, and a
watch to be set least that his Disciples should have stolen the body of Jesus
away by night, as they said, thus was the just pierced, afflicted and put to
death by them of his own-generation, of the Jews, who rejected him in the
days of his flesh, when he witnessed forth the power and the righteousness of
his Heavenly Father both in life, in works and in doctrine, and now the Priests
were so envious against him, that they would have had him kept in the grave;
thus the just suffered by the unjust, and came unto his own and his own
received him not, who had gotten the Prophets words which foretold of Christ,
and had gotten Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, as many of the Priests have now, but
they set it above the just whom they have pierced and crucified, as the false
Priests and traitors do now; thus the just has suffered for the unjust, and
his life is afflicted by the wickedness of people.

Sixthly, Touching the Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus Christ.
MOreover as Christ prophesied often while he was in the flesh of his
suffering, and of his resurrection, and ascending into glory to the right hand
of the Father, It came to pass that nigh the first day of the week which was
the third day after Jesus was crucified, when about the day began to dawn there
was a great earthquake, and the Angel of the Lord descended from heaven and
rolled back the stone from the door of the Sepulcher where Jesus his body was
laid, and Jesus was raised again from the dead, and the Angel smote the keepers
with fear whom the chief Priests and the Pharisees had set to watch the
Sepulcher where Jesus was laid, in so much that the keepers did shake and
became as dead men; And Jesus afterward appeared unto two women, and he
appeared in a form to some Disciples that then knew him not, also he appeared
to the eleven Disciples at one time and spoke unto them; and he appeared in the
midst of his disciples and brethren when thy were assembled and met together in
an house where the doors were shut, and he was seen of above five hundred
brethren at once the greater part of whom was remaining until the Apostle Paul
wrote unto the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15. and to verify these things we have
certain evidences, and Christ himself said, after I am risen again I will go
before you into Galilee (which thing was fulfilled) Mat. 26.32. Mar. 14.28.
Mat. 28. Mar. 16. Joh. 20.19.

As also, that this Christ was immediately taken from the Disciples into
heaven, which while some men of Galilee stood gazing, they saw Jesus taken, out
of their sight, and that this Christ who, was and is the word which made all
things, which became flesh, as is declared, who descended from the Father of
spirits and life, is now ascended and is on the right hand of power and of God
who is the All power, we have the testimonies both of faithful men and Angels;
and the life of Jesus in us, which is the light of men, which bears witness
to these things; And all these things concerning Jesus came to pass according
to the determinate Council of God that the Scriptures might be fulfilled;
though wicked Priests and professors, who had the Prophets words and were shut
up in the unbelief, were fitted in their iniquity, as instruments of cruelty,
to fulfill their iniquity in these hard proceedings against Christ, And that
these things were true, that Christ is ascended and is on the right hand of
power, Read Ps 68.18. and Psalm. 110.1. Mar. 16.19. Luke 24.51. Acts 1.9. Ephesians 4.

And whereas after the watchers that were set to watch the Sepulcher where the
body of Jesus lay, were smitten by the Angel of the Lord, and Jesus raised from
the dead, some of the watch went afterward and told the chief Priests what was
done concerning Jesus; the chief Priests with the Elders took council, and gave
large money unto the soldiers (that were of the watch) saying unto them; say
ye his Disciples came by night and stole him away while we slept; and if this
come to the governors ears we will persuade him and secure you; so they took
the money, and did as they were taught; and this saying is commonly reported
among the Jews until this day, Mat 28.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And it is very likely
that through that report are the Jews now perverted, who do not believe that
Christ is come, as the Scriptures have foretold concerning him; and for their
sakes, and the truths I chiefly write these things whether they believe them or
not; Let that lie upon their own heads: but to prove these truths, that all
aspersions that have been cast upon us, touching the denying Christ, by the
Priests and others have been cast upon us falsely, and without a cause; I say
that all power in heaven and in earth is given unto Christ, in whom dwells
the fullness of the Godhead, who is ascended up on high, yea far above all
heavens that he might fill all things; and he is God over all, God blessed for
ever; the Judge of quick and dead; and moreover his Resurrection was confirmed
unto his disciples in this manner, when he was risen, he gave Commission unto
his Disciples to go into all the world, and Preach the Gospel in every
creature, and he said unto them, he that believes and is baptized shall be
saved, but he that believes not shall be damned, and these signs shall follow
them that believe, in my name they shall cast out devils, they shall speak with
new tongues, they shall take up serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing it
shall not hurt them, they shall lay hands on the sick and they shall recover,
Mar 16.15. and this his promise was fulfilled and confirmed to several that
believed, who had power given them by Christ to work these things, Acts 16.18.
Acts 2.4 Acts 28.5.8. these things do testify that Jesus was risen, and that
his promise was made manifest, who promised to come again, and to manifest
himself unto them that believed, and to send the spirit which was the
Comforter, and to indue them, that waited upon him with power, who said he that
is with you shall be in you; and so the sheep of Christ were scattered to their
own, to wit, his gift which was in them; they came to receive and feel his
power and spirit to lead them into all truth; and this many thousands do and
shall witness that the spirit of truth is their leader into all truth, and thus
though Christ be exalted far above the heavens, yet he does so far condescend
unto them that believe in his name, that he becomes their leader, a light to
them that have sat in darkness, to lead them out of darkness, and a seed to
such as have been barren that they may bring forth fruit in him, to the praise
of his everlasting Name in whom is the life, which life is the light of men
that does enlighten every man that comes into the world; and Christ said unto
his Disciples, verily, verily I say unto you, he that believes on me, the
works that I do shall he do also, and greater works then these shall he do
because I go unto my Father, Joh. 14.12. and Christ said unto his Father
concerning them that he sent forth, as thou have sent me into world, so I send
them into the world, and thus he made manifest his power and gifts in his
people, as he does in this day in these that believe in him, for the same power
that he gave unto his Disciples, the same he gives unto his servants now;
according to the several gifts and manifestations committed unto them, that
they may come to the measure of the stature of his fullness, and to a perfect
man in him, and that they may feel, handle, taste of and enjoy Christ who is
glorified in that glory which he had with the Father before the world was, and
now by his power many do withess, that the power of the Serpent the prince of
the world is overcome, and the sick are healed, and the blind are brought to
see, and the deaf to hear, and the lame to walk, and even such as have been
dead in trespasses and sins are quickened and raised up and brought to live
with Christ in newness of life, and such have an interest in the death of
Christ being made conformable thereto, in that they are crucified with Christ;
and dead with him to the world, and to the evil ways, fashions, customs,
rudiments and conformities of the world, so as the the vail of the Temple was
rent, and the dead was raised, when Christ suffered; they that feel his power
made manifest, and with it are brought to suffer with Christ, they feel the
vail that has separated them from his glory, rent; and in his light are come
to see light, and in his blood which is his life, they are brought to feel
life, and his witnesss is raised and his seed is come to live, as he has
promised the hour is coming and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of
the Son of God, and they that hear shall live, John 5.25. and this is truly
witnessed among many that have believed in the light of the Lord Jesus,
praises, praises to his holy name for ever and ever; But they that deny the
light of Christ within people to be sufficient to lead them to Christ, and will
not own Christ within them, according to his promise to his, but are looking
and gazing abroad in their imaginations, imagining a Christ like themselves,
and for salvation afar off, and Justification afar off, and yet they are in
their sins, and believe not that they shall be otherwise so long as they live
upon earth, they are strangers to the true Christ, and to his righteousness,
and their minds are from that which Justifies, and comes not to see these
things which Christ did in his own person, fulfilled in his Kingdom, as the
Saints did, who were translated into the Kingdom of Christ, which stood in his
power, who knew Christ in them and his Kingdom in them, and so they whose minds
are out from the light, who are gazing from it, and will not own the coming of
Christ within, nor a justifying by his righteousness within, the cloud of
darkness is over them; that they cannot see Christ in his power, as they who
were gazing when Jesus was taken from them they could see no further then the
cloud which received him out of their sight, but Stephen who was full of the
holy Ghost he saw the heaven open, and the glory of God, and the Son of man on
the right hand of God; and John who witnessed the light within him, and the
spirit of God and Christ, who is the light the quickening spirit revealed in
him, he saw the heaven open, and they that walked in the light, of Christ in
them, they witnessed his righteousness revealed in them, and thereby are
Justified from their sins, and not in their sins; for no further are any
sanctified nor justified then they feel themselves made holy and just by Christ
in his righteousness in them, and no further are they justified by Christ then
they are made partakers of the life of Christ in them; for Justification is a
real work of God in that creature that feels a sanctifying or cleansing from
sin; so ve that say ye are justified by Christ's suffering without you above
1600. years since, and yet you continue in sin and would lay all your
iniquities upon Christ's back, you are of them that cause Christ to suffer by
your sins, and are condemned by his light in you for your sins; and know that
while you are condemned for your sins, you are neither sanctified nor
justified, for as Christ the just suffered for the unjust; and was grieved and
burdened by their sins, it comes to pass that the unjust must come under his
judgments and wrath, for their iniquities, and they must bear their own
burdens; and he that denies the light or gift of Christ within, to be his
leader, he has no share in the death and refurrection of Christ; for no
further are any justified by Christ then they are brought to live with him in
his life which is the light of men, and no further are any justified and made
free and restored by Christ then they are brought to have a share in the death
and resurrection of Christ, knowing his spirit in them which raised up Jesus
from the dead to quicken their mortal bodies which have been dead in trespasses
and sins, for Christ rose again for our justification (mark) he does not say
that though men live in their sins all their life time that they are justified
by what Christ suffered so long since without, but he rose again for our
justification, as much as to say, he rose again and gave gifts unto us, of his
spirit and grace which we have in us, and so we are justified by his grace; for
since Christ is risen, we have received the Comforter, and Christ is in us, and
he shall abide with us for ever according to his promise. Consider these things
you blind guides and professors that say there are two righteousnesses, one
that sanctifies and another that Justifies, when as the righteousness of
Christ is but one, who is the righteousness of God, and who is made wisdom,
righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption to the Saints; who also are
justified by Christ (which is, but one) as they are brought to live unto him,
who gave his life a ransom for many, which life is his light, (the light of
men) and he dyed for all, that as many as live, should not live unto
themthemselves but unto him who dyed and rose again, and they who are dead unto
sin are healed by his stripes; But they who live to sin are enemies to the
Cross of Christ, (which is the power of God unto salvation, to the true
believers) and these that are enemies to the Cross are they by whom Christ
suffers, and these who diswade people from heeding or following the light
within, which Christ has enlightened them withal, they are even such as keeps
Christ in prison, and such watchmen as are blind, and ignorant, such as they
were that watched the Tomb where the body of Jesus laid (that he might not
rise) yea, these Priests now are worse then they were then whom the chief
Priests hired to lie touching Jesus, that people might not believe that he was
risen; for these were not such hypocrites as these Priests are now, for people
blindly hires them to Preach Christ now, and they profess to do it, but
directs them from the light within, so that they are still in death, having no
part in his life or Resurrection whilst their minds are kept from his life,
which is the light of men, and such Priests were always enemies to Christ, and
Judas that turned to the Priests betrayed and sold the innocent into the hands
of the Priests and murderers, for thirty pieces of silver, and with it they
bought but one field; but these Priests now who teach for hire, do make a trade
of these Scriptures, and sells the Letter of the Scriptures, and with much
money, they have thus unjustly gotten, many of them have bought many fields or
Lands; so their wickedness does in this exceed the wickedness of Judas, and
them who purchased but one field to bury strangers in; and this ground they
thus bought was not to live upon, but to bury strangers in, but these Priests
now many of them do live of the earth or fields they purchase with the money
they get for their preaching Christ, (as they pretend) and they that crucified
Christ, they took his garments and parted them; and so these coveteous Priests,
they get Christ's words and make a Trade upon them, but him they crucify a
fresh through these their horrible crimes and wickedness, and so betrays the
just and watches to keep his life in the prison and in the grave, for as much
as they labor to keep people from following his light within them, for they
are afraid that it should discover their deceits, for the light makes manifest
things that are reproved, and the Apostle called the proud and the covetous
teachers Traitors, 2 Timothy 3.2 3.4. So let these Traitors (and all that turn
from the life of Christ within) to the deceitful Priests without who makes a
trade on Christ's words, and keeps the seed of God in bondage, and his life,
which is the light, they watch the graves to keep it in; remember Judas his end
how he hanged himself, how he thus fell into disparation, and remember that the
Angel of the Lord smote them that watched to keep Jesus in the grave or tomb,
that these watchmen were made to shake for fear, and became as dead men, and
these watchmen who thus watch against the light of Christ (which enlighteneth
every man that comes into the world) the Lord God will smite them, that they
will be made to shake and quake for all their filthy crimes one day, though now
they despise Quaking, and despises him that God regards who trembles at his
word; And remember that Christ he called them graves that appeared not, and
painted Sepulchers, who had gotten the true Prophets words, but were out of the
Prophets life, in the pride and hypocrifie; and may we not call these teachers
graves now who profefesse the Scriptures to be their rule, but are in the
pride, coverousness and hypocrisy. And let people that follow them and seek
for help among them, note, that they are but seeking the living among the dead;
and are but seeking life among the graves, and whited Sepulchers; who have
gotten the words of the Scripture, but the life lies buried in them; and know
that that man that kept among the dead men's tombs, or graves, was not led by
the spirit of truth, but was possessed with an unclean spirit; and is it not an
unclean spirit of error that makes so many people keep among these filthy
graves and tombs, whose outside is whited with an empty profeshion, but their
inside is full of rottenness and ravening? Consider these things vee people
and Priests.

It is written in the book of John, that many other signs truly did Jesus in
the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book, but these
are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,
that believing ye might have life through his Name, John 20.30, 31. Also it is
written that there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if
they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world it self could
not contain the books that should be written, Amen, John 21.25. Indeed the
whole world lies in wickedness, and are reproved by the spirit of truth,
because they believe not in Christ whom the Scripture does testify of; So
that, If all things that Christ did, and spoke, were written, the world it self
could not contain them, for they truly do not contain these things that are
already written of Christ; for as much as they are ignorant of Christ, and his
light; and many hypocrites had the Prophets words that prophesied of Christ,
but knew not Christ; but persecuted him when he came; and many there are now,
who are both ignorant of the power of God, and of the Scriptures. Nevertheless
the example of Christ is known (in his light and by his power) which he has
left to be walked after, and his steps to be followed, who did not sin, neither
was there guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.21 22. which example comes to be
followed and fulfiled in the power of God, by such as receive Christ, and walk
in him, who is the wisdom of God and the power of God, to him be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

The difference between the first and the second Covenants, and between the
first and the second Priesthoods plainly described. And the end of the things
abolished, discovered according to the scriptures of truth, for their sakes who
desire to have the vail taken from off their hearts, and to see (to the end of
the figures and shadows that were under the first Covenant, and Priesthood)
into the life of the everlasting Priesthood. And here they may see who deny
Christ come in the flesh, and who are strangers to the Covenant of life, (both
among the Jews and the professors of of the world) as follows, etc.
AS the Law was added because of transgression, which all men by nature are
guilty of, who are aliens and strangers to the righteousness of the Law, being
in the degeneration falen in the first man Adam who is of the earth earthly,
and no man in that state can fulfill the righteous Law of God, nor come into
the Bighteousness of the Law, without the drawings and assistance of God, by
his Son Christ who lights every man that comes into the world; which light
does answer the Righteous Law of God in every man; So Christ Jesus is come to
fulfill the Law, and he is the end of the Law for Righteousness, and not that
men should say or conceit, that they are no more under the law, when da^ly they
do transgress the law; but for righteousness is Christ come, that the
righteousness of the law may be fulfilled in as many as walk not after the
flesh, but after the spirit. And so none knows any sure freedom from under
the Law, but who witness in themselves, a sure freedom from under the
transgression which the law takes hold of, and has power over the
transgressors; and many did and may seek to attain unto the righteousness of
the Law, but cannot so long as they believe not in Christ, who is come a light
into the World that whosoever believes in him might not perish, but have
everlasting life; and to this righteousness of the Law in Christ, many have
desir^d to come, but never could so long as they stumbled at Christ the true
light, and believed not in his Light; and in this st^te was Israel after the
flesh when they had the vail over their hearts, and stumbled at the stumbling
stone (which was Christ) so that they c^uld not see into Christ the everlasting
salvation of God, and the end of things abolished, which none sees, while the
vail is over their hearts, and the shadow or earthly part is standing in them,
which many shadows without had a resemblance of, and the types and figures
without, which were in the shadow did signify a greater thing to come, and to
be manifest, which was, Christ, the end of the figure, Types and shadows that
were upheld in the first Covenant and Priesthood; for in him dwells the
fullness of the Godhead, and the fullness of all things; And indeed though the
Law had a shadow of heavenly things, which are known in Christ, yet it had not
the very image of the heavenly things, much less could the heavenly things or
the fullness of Christ, be contained or comprehended in the shadows, for they
did but shadow or figure forth the life of the heavenly things, which are a
mystery for ever sealed and hid from that part which is cloudie and
elementarie, and earthly, by which the Types in the first Covenant were upheld:
But now is the true light manifest, and his Righteousness declared, that all
men through the light may believe and see Christ the everlasting
righteousness, and the salvation of God by whom all the ends of the earth that
do look unto God may be saved, and see that salvation and those things, which
many prophets and wise men have desired to see, and have not seen it; So
blessed is he that beliveth and waits in the light of the Lord Jesus, which
he is enlightened withal, which appears in the inward parts, (to wit) the
heart, mind, conscience, and understanding, that he may see the vail rent, and
taken from off his heart, and the end of the thing abolished, and feel and see
the salvation of God, and the Son of his righteousness revealed and risen in
the inward parts, by whose power and brightness, the darkness comes to be
expelled, which has covered the people, the Earth comes to be shaken, and
removed, and the clouds comes to be scattered, so the shadowy part may be
taken from off the seed of promise, and the seed raised; he that feels this
fulfilled in himself, sees the day dawned, and the Sun risen, and the shadows
fled away, and his mind turned out of all the shadows and earthly things, and
is a witness of a Mediator of a better covenant then that which had the
figures and shadows which the Israelites or Jews transgressed and brake. And
blessed is he that has an ear to hear, and a heart that understands, whose
eyes are open, that he sees, perceives and reads with understanding, who
hardneth not his heart, nor stops his ear, nor shuts his eye against the
truth, for God is revealing his secrets, and bringing forth his hidden
Mysteries to light; for his Angel is come, which shows unto his children
these things which are noted in the Scriptures of truth, that they see through
the first Covenant, which had the changeable Priesthood, and the changeable
ordinances into the everlasting Covenant and unchangeable priesthood, which
has the ordinances that are not shadowy; but pertaining unto the life of
Righteousness which is manifest in the upright conversation of the godly.

1 Something touching the giving forth of the outward Law, and the establiing of
the first Covenant, and of the state of the people at that time.
AT the giving forth and establishing the first Covenant God was in the pillar
of a cloud that the Israelites could not see him, and in mount Sinai in the
thick darkness, that none of the Israelites then might come nigh him, nor
commune with him, save Moses who received the Law at the mouth of God, and gave
it forth to the people; but they stood a far off the mountain where the Law was
received, and they might not touch nor come nigh the mountain, for it was set
about with bounds; and when the Lord descended upon the mountain, there was
Thundrings, and Lightning, and the sound of a Trumpet proceeding from the
presence of the Lord, and the mountain was all on a smoke, and the whole mount
quaked greatly, Exodus 13, 21.22. chap. 14.19.20. chap. 19. and chap. 20.18.
Deuteronomy. 4.11. and 5.24. Exodus 19.28.

In the second Covenant the spirit of the Lord God is put into the inward parts
of his people who are Israelites according to the spirit, and his Law is
written in their hearts, and his holy mountain is raised wherein he is exalted,
and the vail or covering of darkness is taken from off their hearts, as he has
promised, that God who is invisible is known, and his presence enjoyed among
his people, and by faith they see him who is invisible, being brought into the
knowledge of his glory, and to see it with open face as in a glass, and this
knowledge has God given them by his light, which he caused to shine in their
hearts, before they were brought out of darkness; And we are not come to mount
Sinai that might be touched, and that burned with fire, nor unto blackness and
darkness, and tempests, but unto Mount Sion out of which the Lord has uttered
forth his voice, and sounded his trumpet which we have heard and given his Law
forth of Sion which we have received, and the Lord has chosen the Tribe of
Judah the mount Sion which he loves, out of which the deliverer is come, and
he that believes in his light, and trusts in him shall be as mount Sion which
cannot be removed, Isa. 54.13. Jer. 31.33. Joel 2.28. John 6.45. Isa. 7.14.
Isa. 25 7. Heb. 11.27. ^ Cor. 3.18. and 4.6. Heb. 12.18, 22. Joel 2.1. Isai.
^.3. Mica 4.2. Psa. 78.68. Isa 59.20. Romans 11.26.

2 Of Moses his making intercession for the people when they had transgressed.
WHen the first Covenant was in force, the people often brake it and
transgressed the Law, which cause the anger of the Lord to be hot against them;
and then Moses stood in the gap, between Gods wrath and them, and made
intercession for the people, to the Lord, and then his wrath was sometime
appeased, and he repented of the evil that was in his heart against them; but
they often transgressed, and made the ordinances and commands of none effect
through their Rebellions, whereby they caused the anger of the Lord to arise
against them. Exodus 32.9, 10, 11, 12.13. chap. 33.3. Deuteronomy. 9.8. 13 Numb. 14.13.
Psalm. 106.25.

In the second Covenant the seed (is revealed in the children of light) which
is Christ, and he is their Intercessor, who is a quickening spirit, who makes
intercession according to the will of God, in them who believe in his light, by
whom the anger of God is appeased through his righteous judgment which he does
execute upon the oflendets; that the transgressors thereby comes to be redeemed
from iniquity which has caused the wrath of God to arise; So that in the
righteous seed, is God well pleased, and this Covenant is not according to the
covenant of God made with the children of Israel, when he led them out of
Egypt, which they break; for in this is the sin taken away, and he in whom the
Father is well pleased abides with the Saints for ever; but Moses did not
always abide with the Israelites, Rom 8.26, 27. 1 Cor. 15.45. Jo. 3.36, Romans
1.18. 1 These 1.10. Jer. 33.8. Mat 17.5. Io. 14 17.

3 Of the outward Circumcision.
THe first covenant had a command for circumcision, to Circumcise the males of
every man child at eight days old, which was a token of Gods Covenant to them;
and every soul that had not the flesh of his foreskin cut off, was to be cut
off, for that soul was uncircumcised, and no uncircumcised person might dwell
in Abraham's house, nor with the seed that God delivered out of Egypt, and that
command was in force, until Christ was crucified, for he came under it, Lev.
12.3. Genesis 17.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. cha. 12.4. Luke 2.21. Ioh. 7.22. Acts. 7.8.

They who are in the second Covenant do witness the circumcision, (with the
spirit in the heart) which is made without hands, and such are circumcised to
the Lord, being circumcised with the spirit, by the putting off the body of the
sins of the flesh, which circumcision the outward was a figure of; So that is
not now circumcision which is of the flesh, but that is the circumcision, which
is inward, known by the spirit; and we are the circumcision in Christ who
worship God in the spirit, and have no confidence in the flesh; and who are
circumcised outwardly, they are bound to keep the whole Law, which none of the
Jews could do, who had circumcision outwardly; but who are of faith are of
Abrabraham, unto whom the promise was, when he was in the uncircumcision, or
before he was circumcised; so that neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new Creature, Jer 4.3. Colos. 2.11. Romans 2.25.28, 29.
Phil. 3.3. 1 Cor. 7.19. Gal. 5.2. Ioh. 7.19. Romans 4.10.

4 Of the outward Passover.
THe Lord God commanded the Passover to be observed, (in the first Covenant)
which was a Lamb without blemish, a male of the first year, which was to be
roasted with fire, and they were not to carry the flesh of it abroad, but to
eat it with their loins girded and their shoos on their feet; and they did
strike the blood of this lamb on the posts of the door of the house where they
did eat it, which was for a token unto them, that the Lord seeing it, he would
not smite them, when he smote the Egyptians, but his plague did pass over
them, and did not hurt them that eat the passover and they kept the feast of
it seven days, with unleavened bread. But no uncircumcised person might eat
of the pasover; now the ordinance of the passover was in force until Christ
fulfilled it, that night he was betrayed he eat the passover with his
disciples. Exo. 12. Lev. 23.5. Number. 9.12. and 28.16. Mat. 26. Mark 14.12. Luke
22.

In the second Covenant is Christ received, and his life made manifest in the
Saints, and he is our passover, who has offered himself a lamb without spot
to God; having laid down his life for the ransom of many, and he is the bread
of life, and his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed, which
except a man eat and drink he has no life in him, and with him is the Saints
feast and solemnity kept of unleavened bread, of sincerity and truth, having
their hearts circumcised, (and purified) unto God by his spirit, and the old
leaven of iniquity and corruption purged our, and the loins of their minds
girded up in the spirit and life of Christ, which brings to see him the bread
of life, which came down from God, and in this feast must none be partakers but
who come to have their minds joined unto God, and their hearts circumcised from
unrighteousness by his spirit, and they who are come to Christ the Saints
passover, they are kept in remembrance of him, and do witness him come, that
they need not observe the taking of outward bread and wine and elementary
things, (to keep them in remembrance of him, or to signify the crucifying of
his body, and shedding of his blood) as many in the world do 6. Io. 3.36, and 5
24. Mat. 20.28. 1 Pet. 1.19. John 6.53. 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. 1 Pet. 1.13.

5 Of the outward Sabbaths.
THe first Covenant and priesthood had a command to keep the Sabbath, which was
the seven days of the weeks, and in the Sabbath to rest from all their labors
and works; For the Lord rested from his work on the seventh day, and was
refreshed; so that none of the Israelites was to travel, nor bear any burden
on the Sabbath day, seeing God had sanctified it, neither might they gather
sticks, nor kindle a fire within all their families on the Sabbath days.
Moreover they had a command to keep every seventh year for a Sabbath of rest
unto the Lord, which was called the year of Jubelee, wherein every debtor was
to be freed from his servitude or bondage, wherein he had served toward the
satisfaction of his Creditors. And every creditor was to release the debts
owing them, and they that had their lands or estates morgaged for debt were to
have them released, that every man might possess his own in the year of the
Sabbath; but the everlasting Sabbath they were not then come to; For they had
often fightings and war with their enemies, who sought to oppress them, Genesis
2.2. Exo. 16.23. and 20.8.11. and 31.15. and 35.2. Levit. 23.3. and 35.3. Number.
15 Deuteronomy: 5.14. Neh: 10.31. Jer. 17.21. Exo. 21.2. and 23.10, 11. Levit. 25.
Deuteronomy. 15.2.12. Jer. 34.14.

They who are come into the second Covenant have received Christ who is the
Lord of the Sabbath, and the end of the Sabbaths without; for meats, and
drinks, and new Moons, and holy days and Sabbaths were but a shadow of things
to come, which they who do observe the shadow, they neglect the substance, even
the body of Christ. And the Jews, who observed the Sabboths without, they
accused Christ because he healed the sick on the Sabbothday, and because his
disciples had plucked the ears of Corn on the Sabbath day, but these knew not
him who was Lord of the Sabbath. And the Jews said unto one (that had been an
Impotent man that Christ had cured on the Sabbath day) it is the Sabbath day,
it is not Lawful for thee to carry thy bed; he Answerred them, he that made me
whole, the same said unto me, take up thy bed and walk, and the Jews sought the
more to kill Jesus, not only because he had broken the Sabbath, but said also
that God was his Father; and in Acts 1.12. it is written, then returned they
unto Jerusalem, from the mount called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem, a
Sabbath days Journey. And according to one Greek translation in the 6 Chap. of
Luke, next after the 5 verse. it is written, Jesus seeing a certain man working
on the Sabbath Day, said unto him, O man, if thou did know indeed what thou
do, thou were happy but if thou know not, thou art accursed, and a
transgressor of the Law. And the saints who were come to Christ the end of the
outward Sabboths they met on the first days of the weeks, not in observation
to the days, but in obedience to Christ in whom is the everlasting Sabbath of
rest remaining, where the burdens must not be, for the people of God, who
continue in his Faith and love, whereby the rest comes to be obtained. And the
year or time of release or restoration comes to be witnessed, and the
Bedemption from under the bondages and the burdens known, and the Iniquity
which has caused burdens is there taken away by the Lord of the Sabbath, who
is the foundation of many Generations, who is raised up to him that makes the
Sabbath his delight, and does not his own pleasure, nor speaks his own words,
on the holy day he shall delight himself in the Lord; but unto this Sabbath are
all strangers who are following their own pleasures, and lusts (from whence the
Wars and the strifes do arise) and speaking their own words. And none comes to
the true rest, but they who receive the true light which brings man to deny his
own will, thoughts words and actions and to be given up in the will of the Lord
God in singleness to wait upon him to be refreshed in his holy and everlasting
day, and to know and witness the acceptable year which the Redeemer of Israel
has proclaimed, and is come to make manifest; and he that is entered into his
rest, he also has ceased from his own works as God did from his. But all that
continue in sin and Rebellion against God, and the murmurers and unbelievers
are shut out of the true rest, Mat. 12.8. Luke 6.5. Col. 2.16, 17.23. Mat.
12.1. Mar. 2.23. Luke 6.1. Joh. 5.9.10.11.18. Joh 20.19 Acts 20.7 1 Cor. 16.2.
Romans 8.21. Isai. 58.13. Heb. 4.10. Romans 2, 8, 9. Rev. 21.8.

6. Of the brazen serpent that Moses made.
WHen the people in the time of the first Covenant had murmured against God, so
that he caused Serpents to come among them, and bite them, that many of the
people died, then he caused Moses to make a fiery, Serpent of brass, which he
set upon a pole, and behold every man that was bitten with a Serpent, if he
beheld the brazen Serpent, he was cured that he lived, but afterward the people
idolized this Serpent, and it was broken down as the Lord commanded, because of
their Idolatry, Number. 21.6.7.8. 2 King. 18.4.

In the second Covenant is the power of Christ the righteous seed known, which
bruiseth the Serpents head, and takes away and destroys the enmity of the
dragon that old Serpent which deceives the Nations, and this seed gives power
over Serpents, that they who are in him may tread upon Scorpions and not be
stung and the wicked one cannot touch him that abides in Christ, who is
revealed in his people, and is the saving health and salvation of his people,
whose virtue and life has been manifest of old, accompanying the commands of
God, without which the Israelites could not have been cured when they looked on
the Brazen Serpent, without which as Moses lifted up the Brazen Serpent in the
wilderness so is the Son of man lifted up, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish but have eternal life. But they who continue in their
hardness of heart, in impenitency and unbelief, they reject the saving health
of Christ, and must be plagued for their iniquities and their torment will be
as the torment of a Scorpion when he strikes a man, Genesis 3.15. Isai. 27.1.
Luke 10.9. 1 John 5.18. Joh. 3.14. Rev. 9.4.5.

7. Of oaths and swearing.
IN the first Covenant there was oaths and swearing between man and man, for
the deciding of controversies; and they were to perform unto the Lord their
oaths, and not forswear themselves, and men were to fulfill their vows also
which they made unto the Lord, (and as appears) swearing was not used in all
cases of controversies, nor by both the parties between whom the controversy
was, but by the party accused or impeached where they had not witnesses to
decide the controversy without oaths, for at the mouth of two or three
witnesses shall every word be established, Exodus 22.11. Levit. 19.12. Number 30.2.
Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.20. Number. 35.30. Deuteronomy. 17.6. and 19.15.

But Christ Jesus who is the everlasting Covenant of God, and the life and
fullness of the New Testament said, ye have heard that it has been said by them
of old time, thou shall not forswear thy self but shall perform unto the Lord
thy oaths; But I say unto you, swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is
Gods throne, nor by the earth, for it is his footstool, nor by Jerusalem, for
it is the City of the great King, neither shall thou swear by the head, because
thou can not make one hair white or b^ack; But let your communication be yea,
yea, and nay, nay for whatsoever is more then these comes of evil. And said
the Apostle James above all things my Brethren swear nor, neither by heaven,
neither by earth, neither by any other oath, but let your yea be yea, and your
nay, nay, least you fall into condemnation: So that all swearers, and all
swearing is out of Christ and the Apostles doctrine, and every one that
swears shall be cut off, and he that transgresses and abides not in the
doctrine of Christ has not God, and all that profess a love to Christ ought
to abide in his doctrine and keep his sayings. And they that love Christ are
come out of all the strife and the enmity (which causes the controversies and
the swearing) unto Christ in whom the Godhead dwells, and unto whom all power
is given over Angels, Thrones, and Dominions, principalities, and powers. And
if Rulers come to the light of Christ in them, they will receive wisdom and
power to see an end put to the strifes and controversies without swearing
either by the mouths of witnesses or otherwise by diligent inquisition
touching the controversies, and by true judgment, according to the righteous
Law of God, Mat. 5.34.35.36, 37. J^m. 5.12. Zech. 5.3. 2 John 9. Phil. 2.3.
prove. 17.14. Mat. 28.18. Col. 1.16.17. Heb. 1.6. chap. 2.5.

8. Of the outward anointing of the Priests.
IN the first Covenant neither Aaron nor his sons, the Priests, were to
Minister before the Lord in the Priests office without being anointed and
consecrated; And the ointment they were anointed with, was the principal of
spices composed after the art of Apothecary of pure mi^he, of sweet Cinnamon,
and of sweet Callamous, and of sweet Cassia, and of oil Olive, etc. Exodus 30.2.
to the 30. verse.

In the second Covenant God has a royal Priest and a peculiar people, who have
received a spiritual and inward anointing from God, whereby they are fitted for
the Lords service, and have dominion over the earth; for Christ is their
anointing who teaches them all things (that they need noman to teach them)
which the the outward anointing of Priests was a figure of; but none are
fitted for the service of God, neither are any come to have dominion over sin,
but who have received the inward unction (from the Father of life) whereby they
become a sweet smelling savor unto God, even as a garden of spices, knowing
the Name of the Lord which is as ointment powered forth; and because of the
savor of his good ointments; therefore the virgins love him, and a bundle of
mirhe is my beloved unto me. 1 Pet. 25.9. Rev. 1.6. 2 Cor. 1.21. 1 John 2.27.
Cant. 1.3.13.

9. Of the Tithes the Priests received.
IN the first Covenant the Priests had a command to receive Tithes, or the
tenths of men's increase, only of their brethren, and the people was to give
them freely, were they more or lefs; and the Priests did not take them, nor
force them from the people by compulsion, for the Tithes were the Lords
portion; And every man was to bring his tenths or the value of them unto a
house which the Lord appointed for them to bring the tithes, unto which was the
storehouse, and the fatherless, widows and strangers was received and relieved
out of the Tithes as well as the Priests, taht there might be no beggar in
Israel. And the Priests did offer an heave offering unto the Lord of the tenth
part of the Tithes as God commanded, which command was in force until Christ
was crucified, as other Ordinances were; the Jews and Pharisees they paid
Tithes in the days of Christ in the flesh, but neglected the weightier matters
of the Law, Number. 18 26. Deuteronomy. 10.9. and 12.12. and 14.29. Mala. 3.10. Mat.
23.23. Luke 11.42.

But now is Christ come and made manifest through suffering, who is became an
everlasting high Priest over the household of God, who was not made a Priest
after the Law of a carnal commandment as the Priests without were, but by the
power of an endless life, and he is the end of that Priesthood which had the
Tithes and offerings which could not continue by reason of death, though tithes
and offerings were Ordinances in the changeable Priesthood, they did but
continue by the law until Christ the one offering suffered on the Cross, who
took away the hand writing of Ordinances, and blotted it out, nailing it to his
cross, and he abolished in the flesh the emnity that was against us, even the
Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances. So that in stead of a Priesthood
that dyed, a Priesthood is witnessed in Christ the everlasting covenant of God;
so the priesthood being changed that had the tithes, and offerings, there is
made of necessity a change of the law which upheld these outward things also.
And then certanly they that either take or maintain the taking of Tithes,
either Priests or others, they deny Christ come in the flesh, and are enemies
to his Cross, minding earthly things in their taking or upholding tithes, and
he that denies Christ come in the flesh, the same is Antichrist. But they who
own Christ's coming and do receive him, he becomes their friend, their husband
and father; and leads them into his Fathers house which is an everlasting
storehouse of many mansions, and bread enough, and so sees the life and
substance of that which the storehouse without was but a figure of, in which
no strangers comes to be entertained, but such as receive the truth in the love
of it. Heb. 10.21. and chap. 7. Colos. 2.14. Ephesians. 2.15. 2 John 7. Phil. 3.18,
19.

10. Of the outward Tabernacle under the Law and the instruments thereof; and
the Lords forsaking thereof.
THe first Covenant and Priesthood had a Tabernacle of the Congregation which
was made according to the pattern which God showed unto Moses in the mount, and
made known unto him how to make the Tabernacle, and instruments thereof, and
there was the Ordinances of Divine Service, and this Tabernacle had the worldly
sanctuary or outward Court called the sanctuary wherein the Priests did daily
service, as offering sacrifices, and offerings for the sins and trespasses of
the people; And there was seven Lamps continually burning, and within the
Tabernacle was there a second vail hung up; and within that vail was the the
Tabernacle called the most holy, wherein was the Cherubims mercy-seat, and the
Ark of the Testimony that God gave to Moses, the Testimony was in the Ark; the
mercy-seat was over the Ark, and the Cherubims, stood over the mercy seat on
each end of it, with their wings stretched forth overshadowing the mercy-seat,
and none was to go into the most holy place within the vail, save the high
Priest once a year, but he went not without blood which he offered for his own
sins, and for the errors of the people; and the Lord communed with the Priest
from between the Cherubims of glory, and yet neither the Priest nor the people
were made pure as pertaining to the conscience, by these offerings and
Ordinances which they offered and upheld in that Covenant which had a shadow of
heavenly things; so that there was need of a second Covenant, and of the blood
of the heavenly Mediator whereby a cleansing from sin and error is witnessed by
such as have received the end of these outward shadows, which in their time was
glorious. But now (mark) this figure in the first covenant, the Ark of the
Testimony was under the mercy-seat which was over shadowed with the Cheribins;
And both the Ark and the mercy-seat was within the vail; whether the people
that was in the error and hardness of heart might not come, save the Priest
that was anointed with precious ointment; for in this holy place was the
golden censer, also the golden pot which had the Manna, and Aarons rod which
budded, and the Tables of the Covenant; And thus this Tabernacle where God was
heard, was furnished with more instruments then I need mention at present. And
no stranger nor uncircumcised person might come nigh the Tabernacle least he
was cut off, Exodus 25.9.16, 20.21.22, 37.40. and 27.20. Number. 7 89. Acts 7.44.
Heb, 8.5, and 9. chap. Heb. 9.1.2, 3, 4, 5.

And moreover when the Israelites had forsaken the Lord, and were turned into I
dolatry and had set up high places and images, the Lord forsook the Tabernacle
in Shilo which before he was heard in, and the Israelites sell into the hands
of their enemies who did make slaughter and spoil both among them, and their
consecrated things that Gods presence in some measure had been found in, till
they had provoked him. And when the Israelites sell into the hands of the
Philistines, that the Philistines got the upper hand of them, they took away
the Ark of the Covenant from the Israelites, but they were fain to send it back
unto them again, for the Lord smote and plagued the Philistines for it (and
their Idol Dagon fell before the Ark) and he smote the heathen men of
Bethshemesh with a great slaughter because they looked into the Ark of the
Lord, (Mark) the uncircumcised heathen were not to look into the holy things,
And this Ark was of such a great account in the eyes of many in Israel seeing
that it was a consecrated precious thing, and the hand of the Lord was known
with it, that some counted that the glory of Israel was departed when the Ark
was taken, Deuteronomy. 32.21. Psalm. 78.58, 59. Judge. 2.11. and 3.7. and 4.1. and 6.1.
and 10.6. and 13.1. 1 Samuel 4.10, 11.16.17. and 5.3.4. and 6 chap.

Now Christ Jesus being come, he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which is
established upon better promises then that Covenant which had the Tabernacle
and Sanctuary without, and the Cherubims and mercy seat, Ark and Testimony
without, for that Tabernacle without did man pitch, and the Priests and the
people did God often find fault with, and then there was a veil over the
peoples hearts, that they could not see into the holiest of all, while the
first Tabernacle was standing, but Christ the everlasting high Priest is a
Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched
and not man; and according to his promises, his Tabernacle is with men who have
received his Laws in their hearts, and in their minds, and his spirit in their
inward parts, that they are taught of God as he has promised, behold the days
come says the Lord that I will make a new covenant, with the house of Israel,
and with the house of Judah, not according to the Covenant that I made with
their Fathers, in the day wherein I took them by the hand, to lead them out of
the Land of Egypt, because they continued not in my Covenant, etc. for this is
my Covenant that I will make with the house of Jsrael, after those days says
the Lord, I will put my Laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts,
and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people, and they shall
not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, know the
Lord, but they shall all know me from the least of them even unto the greatest
says the Lord; Now this is the Covenant which Christ is the Meditator of. And
which he makes known, and performs with his people who receive his Testimony,
which is the spirit of prophecy within them, and witness his witness, his Law
and Judgments within, and here they feel the mercy seat in the heavenly
Tabernacle set open, and the Veil taken from off their hearts, and in stead of
hardness and stoney hearts he gives them an heart of flesh, an heart to know
the Lord according to his promise, and this was more then many knew, while the
Tabernacle of man's pitching was standing; for what was upheld in that
Tabernacle was but a figure or shadow of the heavenly Tabernacle, wherein the
Lord is heard by all his people, and his worship in the spirit is known, which
his Light leads them to which gives them understanding, and causes their
Lamps to burn, and fitteth them for the Lord, that he makes his abode with
them, whose foundation stands sure, and Tabernacle shall not be removed. For it
is builded upon the Rock of ages, and the Lord has a pure people to dwell
among, who are become Inhabitants of his holy City, into which he will gather
the outcasts of Israel, and they shall not say, the Ark of the Covenant of the
Lord, neither shall it come to mind, but they shall call Jerusalem the Throne
of the Lord. Let him that can, receive this, Heb. 8. Heb 9. Rev. 21.3. 2 Cor.
6.16. Levit. 26.12. Ezekiel. 37.26. Heb. 8. Jer. 31.32. Rev. 19.10. Ezekiel. 36.26.
Jer. 3.16, 17.

11 Of the outward sacrifices and burnt offerings.
Moreover in the first covenant there was sacrifices and burnt offerings
commanded of the Lord to be offered by the Priests, both for the sins of the
Priests, and the sins of the people, offerings of diverse sorts, the Bullock,
the Heifer, the Ram, and the Goat were sometimes offered and burnt for the sins
of ignorance, and for the trespass offerings, and sometimes a pair of Turtle
Doves, and two young Pigeons were offered, and for Peace offerings sometimes a
Lamb without blemish, of the Male, of the first year of the dock, and this
being taken and slain at the door of the Tabernacle, the blood of the offering
was sprinkled on the Altar, and on the people for their Consecration after they
had trespassed. And the offerings that were made by fire, were for a sweet
Savor unto God, and thereby his command for a time was fulfilled, and his
wrath appeased; but these things did not purify the people, nor the blood of
Bulls and Goats, nor the Ashes of an Heifer cleanse the people, as pertaining
to the conscience, for as there was daily offerings made for sin, there was
daily a conscience remaining of their sin, and almost all things by the Law was
purged with blood; so all the many offerings and the diverse washings, and
cleansings that were in the first Covenant, did neither bring the people into
inward cleanness, nor to persection as pertaining to their inward state, Exodus
19.10, 18. Levit. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Chap. Number. 15.19.3, 4. Heb. 9.

But now in the fullness of time according to the promises of God whereon the
second Covenant is established, God has made manifest his own begotten Son,
who has offered himself a Lamb without fault to God, and by his blood he
cleanses them that believe in him from all sin, and he is the propitiation for
the sins of the whole world, through faith in his blood, which is his life,
which he has laid down and revealed in the saints. And his righteousness being
revealed, his power and spirit is felt in the hearts of his people, which is as
a fire which consumes the nature of the Bull, the nature of the Heifer and the
Goat, and the Ignorance of the Ram, which many are in, who are brutish in
their knowledge, and as natural bruit beasts, then they are like unto the fat
Bulls, of Bashan, and the wild heisers, and as the rough Goots that are on the
lest hand of God; so it is the one offering, Christ Jesus who redeemeth out of
the brutish and the sensual state that God is pleased in, by which God has
for ever perfected them that are sanctified, which could never be done by the
offerings which were offered year by year, according to the first covenant; so
the blood of Bulls and Goats, and slain Beasts the Lord takes no delight in,
for the Cattle upon a thousand hills are his, but a broken and a contrite
spirit is a sacrifice to God, and to him he looks, who is poor and of a
contrite spirit, and trembles at his word, and he that kills an Ox, is as if
he slew a man, he that sacrifices a Lamb as if he cut off a Dogs neck, and he
that offers a Lamb as if he offered swines blood. So these things without
became an abhorring to the Lord, because of the Abominations of the people,
but God in his Son, who is the true and undefiled propitiation is forever well
pleased, for he is a good Savor to his Father, and so are all who are made
conformable to his Image, who are partakers of his Life and Divine nature. So
in the second priesthood the heavenly Tabernacle is manifest, and the life of
Christ is felt and shed abroad, which sanctifies his people, who being an high
Priest, of good things to come, by a great and more perfect Tabernacle, not
made with hands, that is to say, not of this building, neither by the blood of
Goats, and Calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place,
having obtained eternal Redemption for us, 1 John, 1.7. and 2, 2. Jer. 10.14.
Jude, 10. 2 Pet. (...) 12. Heb. 10.4. Psalm. 50.10. Psalm. 51.17. Isai. 66.3.
Heb. 9.11.12.

12 Of the Ephod and consecrated garments which Aaron and the Priests had.
ANd moreover in the first Covenant there was an Ephod of gold, blue, and
purple, and Scarlet, and fine twined linen, and a robe of the Ephod, and about
the hem of the robe was put Pomegranates and bells, that their sound might be
heard, when Aaron went in, and came forth of the tabernacle; and upon the Ephod
was put a breast plate of curious work, wherein was the names and the
Judgments of the people Israel, and these things were made for Aaron that he
might do the priests office in, the holy place; and upon the Mitre was put a
plate of gold on Aarons forehead wherein was graved Holiness to the Lord And
Aaron his sons had consecrated clothes and holy garments, as Coats and
Breetches, and other curious ornaments of fine linen, and in these they did the
service of the Tabernacle before the Lord in offering sacrifices as God had
commanded Aaron, who was a Levite, and the Levites, and no man was to take unto
himself that honor, but he that was called of God as Aaron was, Exodus 39.2.
and 31.10. and 35.10. and 28.29.12.33.36.42. verses, Heb. 5.4.

Now in the second Priesthood which Christ is the Minister and lise and beauty
of, the adorning is within where the covering is of the spirit, and the Armor
is of the light of the Lord and their Breastplate is of righteousness, and this
the children of light are witnesses of, who are come to know Christ their high
Priest in whom is witnessed Holiness to the Lord; in the life and righteousness
of God alone which is more then the words of it without, Engraven in gold or
silver; and their names are written in the book of the life of the Lamb; his
seal of righteousness being on their fore, heads and this shall never be taken
from them, whose delight is in Holiness and righteousness, without which no man
shall see the Lord. And the Saints adorning wherein they serve the Lord is not
of diverse colors as the adorning of the Priests without was, for they are
clothed in innocence with the robe and Ephod of righteousness and their
garments are washed white by the blood of the Lamb of God, who have passed
through many tribulations, who are clothed in white linen, which is the
righteousness of the Saints. And our high Priest is not heard by a company of
carnal Bells, neither are the Saints brought to their worship by the sound of
carnal Bells, as the world and its proprosessors are, but by the spirit of
truth in the inward parts, thereby they are brought to hear the voice of God,
and to worship him in the spirit, and in the truth; for it is such that he
seeks to worship him; but woe is unto them who are covered, but not with the
spirit of the Lord, for they are covered with iniquity. Ephesians. 6. Rev. 5.3. Heb.
12, 14, Rev. 7.14. Rev 3, 4.5, 18, and 4, 4, and 6, 11, and 7, 9, 14, and 9, 8,
14. Psalm. 51, 6 John 4, Isai. 30, 1.

13. Of the outward washing of of the Priests.
ANd moreover Aaron and his sons washed their hands, and their feet with water
at the door of the Tabernacle before they offered offerings to the Lord, which
was his command to them least that they had died, Exodus 30.18, 19.

But now in the second Covenant and royal Priesthood of God the Saints are
washed with living water, by the living word of life, their feet is shod with
the preparation of the Gospel (which is the power of God) and so made
beautiful, and their hands are washed in innocence; that by the power of God
many are come, and coming to offer the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving to
the Lord in righteousness, that holiness may be known to the Lord in all their
ways within them and without; but they whose feet are in the steps and ways
of the ungodly, and whose hearts are polluted with unrighteousness, and fingers
defiled with iniquity, cannot offer nor present any sacrifice acceptable to the
Lord God, but are abominable in all their own righteousness and sin, in the
best of their performances, John 13, 3, 1 Corinthians 6, 11. Ephesians 5 26. Titus 3.5
Heb. 10.22 Ephesians. 6, 15, Romans 1, 16. Ps. 50.23. Isai. 1.15 and 59, 3.

14. of meats, and drinks, and days in the first Priesthood.
ANd in the first Covenant there was Ordinances made touching meats and drinks
as there was also for the keeping of certain days holy, there were several
creatures that were esteemed common and unclean which they might not eat of, as
the flesh of swine, and ravenous birds with several others, neither were they
to eat the blood of any thing, but to keep from blood, Levit. 19, 26, Deuteronomy. 12,
22, 23. and chap 14. Heb. 9, 10.

Now in the second Covenant is the holy place and habitation known (where there
is no curse) and purity witnessed in the life, and to the pure all things are
pure; for it was the swinish ravenous cursed nature which the law took hold
upon, and which the creatures are not clean unto; and there were some after
Christ was manifest that made their abstaining from some meats a matter of
conscience, and scrupled the eating of blood as some do at this day, and the
Apostles for a time suffered some to abstain from blood and things strangled,
but that is the weak conscience and the defiled mind that scruples meats; for
Christ bad his eat such things that was set before them. And when Peter the
Apostle saw the vision of all manner of four footed beasts of the earth, and
wild beasts and creeping things and fouls of the Air. And there came a voice
from heaven unto him, saying, rise Peter, kill and eat, but Peter said not so
Lord, for I have never eaten any thing that is common or unclean: and the voice
spoke unto him again the second time, what God has cleansed, that call not
thou common. And the Apostle Paul said whatsoever is sold in the shambles that
eat, asking no question for conscience sake and he called them seducing spirits
that would forbid to marry, and command to abstain from meats which God has
created to be received with thanksgiving of them that believe and know the
truth; so with the light we see an end put to the first Tabernacle, and the
gifts, and sacrifices that were offered in it, which could not make perfect as
pertaining to the conscience, which stood only in meats, and drinks, diverse
washings and carnal Ordinances imposed on them, until the time of Reformation;
but now Christ being come and revealed in whom is the fullness and sum of all,
he works the Reformation in all them that believe in his light, and makes
manifest his Kingdom in his people which stands not in meats nor drinks, but in
joy and peace in the holy Ghost, and so let no man Judge you in meats or in
drinks, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath
days, which are as shadows of things to come, but the body is of Christ, Rev
22, 3. Titus 1, 15. Acts 15, 19. Romans 14, 14. Luke 10, 7, 8. Acts 10, 10. Acts
11. 1 Cor. 10, 25. 1 Timothy 4 3.4. Heb 9, 10, Romans 14.17, Colos. 2.16, 17.

15. Of the tribe that the first Priesthood were of, and their appointment.
ANd this we note that in the first Covenant Aaron and his sons, who were in
the Priests office were of Levi. And there were Priests under the first
Covenant made or appointed by the law of a carnal or changeable Commandment
without, to do their office, Exodus 4.14. Number. 18.12.

But Christ Jesus sprang up of the tribe of Judah, and having finished his
testimony through suffering, and offered himself freely unto God an
offeringwithout blemish for the sins of the people, that his life or blood may
be made known in them, he is become an high Priest over his people by the power
of an endless life, and not by the law of a carnal Commandment; so that such as
are made Priests now by the carnal Commandments of men and do uphold or take
tithes which was a thing pertaining to the changeable Priesthood of Levi, they
deny Christ the true Minister of the heavenly Sanctuary, and such are not of
Christ, Heb. 19, 14. Rev. 5, 5.

16. Of the reading of the Law, and of the pulpit of wood.
IN the time of the first Covenant and the law of Commandments contained in
carnal Ordinances the Israelites and Jews had the law read among them every
Sabbath day to put them in mind of it, and Ezra the Priest or scribe stood up
upon a Pulpit of wood (as it is recorded in the English Translation; but
according to the Hebrew, it is a Tower of wood;) And there he read in the Book
of the law (in the street that was before the water gate, which was in the
sight and audience of the people) from morning till midday, and the Priests
gave the sense of the law, and caused the people to understand the Reading. But
here is not a telling that a Minister of the Gospel is to stand up in a Pulpit
in a Steeplehouse, and preach half a day from a Text of Scripture, as many now
do who profess themselves to be Ministers of the Gospel, and say they are not
under the Law, and yet are pleading for pulpits and giving their senses to the
Scriptures, Nehe. 8, 3, 4.5, 6, 7, 8, Ezra. 3, 1, and 7, 6. Deuteronomy. 17, 19, and
31, 11.

And moreover the reading of the Law was continued among the Jews every
Sabbath day in their Synagogues; when they were in Rebellion and envy against
Christ in the days of his flesh; nevertheless, their reading of the law being
before Christ was crucified, people were to do these things they commanded
(according to the law) but not after their wicked works, for they were enemies
to Christ, though they had the law and sat in Moses seat, Acts 13, 27, and 15,
21. Mat. 23, 1, 2, 3.

Now in the second Covenant and Priesthood he is not a Jew that's one outward,
but he is a Jew that's one inward, whose praise is not of men, but of God,
neither are they all Israel which are of Israel according to the flesh, but
they are true Israelites who have received the Covenant of God within, and his
law within; who are come to know the Ministration of the spirit which in glory
exceeds the ministration of death written (or the law without which was read
to the people) though in its time it was glorious: but the Ministration of the
spirit (which the true Ministers are Ministers of) exceeds the other in
glory. And we are not Ministers of the letter but of the spirit, and of the New
Testament which Christ is the Mediator of, that people may come to see and hear
the righteous law of God and and his light within them, and they may not be
forgetful thereof any more, but know Christ the Mediator, in whose hand the
law is held, and by whose power it is executed upon the ground of the offenses
within; and it must come in Judgment upon the head of all them that are
wresting the Scriptures and pleading now for their own senses upon the
Scriptures, and prophesies of the Scriptures, who also are pleading for the
chiefest places in the Assemblies, as the pulpits, and high places such did
Christ cry often woe against; But we have learned the example of Christ Jesus
who was meek and lowly in heart, and taught meekness and lowliness, and he that
would be the greatest among his, was to be servant to all. Therefore away with
the Idolatrous high places wherein proud men are exalted. And away with their
imagined meanings, senses and private interpretations which they give to the
prophecies of the Scriptures; for they came not by man's will neither are they
of any private interpretations, Romans 2, 28, 29. 2 Cor. 3.6, 7.8.9.10, 11. Gal.
3, 19. Mat. 23. Mat. 11, 29. and 20, 27. 2 Pet. 1, 21.

17. Of Jewels of silver and gold, and costly ornaments.
IN the time of the first Covenant some did wear Jewels of silver, and gold,
and Bracelets, and costly ornaments and attire, and the Israelites borrowed of
the Egyptians Jewels of silver, and Jewels of gold, and raiment; (but this was
in Egypt) but after they were come out of Egypt, when the Lord was angry with
them for their transgression by the mount Horeb, they mourned and stripped
themselves of their ornaments according to the command of God, Exodus 3.2, and
11.2, and 12 35. and 33. chap.

But now in the second Covenant God has a plain people whose moderation may be
known unto all men both in apparel and other things, for they are come to deny
the strange apparel and the gaudy attire, and the bravery, and the bracelets
and the Jewels, and the superstitious ornaments which they had whom the true
Prophets bare witness against, Isa. 3. cha. and the Harlot which John saw was
arraied in purple, and Scarlet Color, and decked with gold, and precious
stone, and pearls, read, Rev. 17.4. And see now how that many professors are
attaied in costly superstitious and gaudy attire like the Harlot. And let the
women be adorned in modest apparel, and their adorning, let it not be that
outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or putting on of
apparel, but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit which is in the fight
of God of great price; mark this, ye proud professors and people; And know that
the day is coming wherein God will punish them that are clothed in strange
apparel, And in the day of their visitation they shall monrn and be stripped
of all their deceitful covers, 1 Timothy 2.9. 1 Pet. 3, 3, 4. Zeph. 1.8.

18. Of Solomon's Temple.
MOreover after the Tabernacle of the first Covenant was forsaken of the Lord
in Shilo when Israel had violated the Covenant of God, and after they were made
a prey upon by the heathen, King Solomon builded a glorious Temple for the
Lords service according to the Law to be done, in which there was neither
hammer, nor Ax, nor any Iron tool heard while it was a building and this temple
was furnished with golden vessels and diverse instruments according to the
command of God which command was given to Solomon's father David, who as God had
showed him, directed Solomon for the building of it in Jerusalem. But now in
the everlasting Covenant of God he dwells and walks in his people, and
their bodies are his Temple, and he dwells not in Temples made with hands
seeing that he gives to all life, and being the heaven of heavens cannot
contain him much less could the Temple which Solomon built him: and so the
time is come wherein God is worshipped in spirit, and in truth, and not at
Jerusalem as Christ said for that Temple was but a figure for the time, then
present of a Temple not made with hands so all that receive the spirit of the
Lord walk in it; they become a fit habitation for God through the spirit, who
dwells with the contrite, with the meek and lowly in heart, who are led by
his spirit. And in the holy City, where the Lord makes his people Citizens
there is no Temple, but the Lord God is the Temple thereof, and he is all, and
in all his Saints; so seeing that that form of worship is ceased which was in
the Jews Temple, which God commanded, and the Lord has forsaken that Temple,
much more is that worship and these Temples without to be denied which God
never commanded, as the Gentiles Temples; and these Temples that are builded by
the Papists, and in the idolatry, which many calls Gods houses, or Temples: but
be not deceived with their vain words who cry the Temple of the Lord the Temple
of the Lord, who know not the Lord, whose dwelling is on high, and also in his
own people, 1 King. 6.2 Chro. 28.2 Chro. 3 and 4. and 5. chapters, 1 Cor. 3,
16.2 Cor. 6.16. 1 Cor. 6, 19. Acts 7.48. and 17.24. 1 King. 8.27. Joh. 4, 21,
22. Ephesians. 2, 22. Isai. 57.15. Psalm. 34.18. Rev, 21, 22. Jer. 7.4.

19. Of the singing and praising upon outward Instruments which was used in the
outward Temple.
MOreover there was several men of Israel appointed for officers, and overseers
in the temple that Solomon built; and then there was singing songs of praises,
and praising God, with Cymbals, psalteries, and harps, and such instruments
used David in his time, with Organs and other instruments of Music, which was
in the time of the first Covenant which stood only in the figures, but they
that were officers is in the house of the Lord had portions given them by his
institution, according to every man's servitude in the house, but it was only
the priests of the tribe of Levi that had the Tithes ordered them to dispose of
according to the law of God, who offered sacrifices and burnt offerings in the
house of the Lord, 1 Chro. 24. and 15. chapters, Psalm. 150.1 Chro. 9, 29.
Levit. 6, 21, 1 Chro. 23, 28, 29. 2 Chro. 31, 19: Ezra 2.62. Nehe. 12.46. Number.
18.26.

But that worship without had an end and ceased, and the songs of the Temple
without was turned into Howling, as the Prophets of God foretold, and woe was
unto them that invented to themselves Instruments of Music like David for
deceit; and wicked men are gotten into that Music which is used on carnal
instruments, and carnal people to sing in idols temples without, as they
pretend praises to God when their hearts are filled with unrighteousness;
singing David's prayers, praises and prophesies, complaints, lamentations in
Rhyme and Meeter, which the Lord never required of them, whose singing will be
turned into weeping as theirs was who invented Instruments of Music like
David, who were nearer in the form to David then these are now in their
singing, who now sing David's conditions, but do neither praise God upon the
harp nor other instruments as David did; so that such worships neither with the
spirit, nor with understanding; For by the spirit of the Lord are many brought
to worship God according to his own will, who being gathered into God who is
the Temple, in his holy place, they are come to pray, to sing, and to praise
him with the spirit. And I saw harpers harping with their harps, which are the
prayers of the Saints; so that he that is led by the Spirit of God, with it
knows when to pray, and how to pray, and worship according to the mind of the
spirit which is acceptable to the Lord: but all praying and worshipping that is
out of the spirit of truth (in men's own wills and their own appointed times, by
carnal observation) is neither regarded nor accepted of the Lord, and the
prayers of the wicked are abomination unto the Lord, who often pray, but never
truly waits for, nor receives an answer from the Lord; but still remains in
wickedness and sensuality while their minds are estranged from the light and
spirit of Christ; for want of following and minding his spirit they pine away
in their wickedness which dries up their souls, Amos 8.3 and 5.23. and 6.5.
Romans 7.6. Romans 8.15.26. 1 Cor. 14, 15. Rev. 5.8. Ps. 109.7. Prove. 28.9. Jer.
7.12.14. and 26.6.

20. Of the overthrow and destruction of Solomon's Temple, and the building it
again, and its destruction the second time.
BUt after Solomon had built the Temple, Israel forsook the Lord God and
defiled his house, and served other gods, committing Idolatry against the
commands of the Lord God, in so much that God did with them, as he did with
them and the Tabernacle in Shilo, for he forsook them, and they were taken
captives by Nebuchad-nezzar King of Babylon who destroyed that house which God
had commanded, and it and all the houses of Jerusalem were burnt with fire; and
the Israelites were captives in Babylon, as the Prophets had prophesied. But
after this the Temple was builded again, according to the command of the God of
Israel, which came by his Prophets Haggai and Zechariah unto the Jews and unto
Zerubabel and King Cyrus; and after, unto King Darius, who fulfilled the
command of the Lord in causing the Temple to be built again; and in setting the
officers and things pertaining to it in order, as the Lord God had commanded.
And after these things Christ prophesied of the overthrow of the Temple, and
said, there should not be left one stone upon another that should not be thrown
down.

1 Samuel 4.12. Ps. 78.60. 2 King. 24.2. and 25.8. Ezra 5.12. Hag. 1.1 Zech. 1.1.
Ezra 6. Mat. 24.1, 2. Mark 13.1. Luke 19.44. and 21.5.

So now the sum and fullness of all things in the Covenant of life being made
manifest, which is the Covenant wherein God establishes his own seed and
remnant; let all that hunger and thirst after God for their souls health come
unto Christ the light, the fountain of life and wisdom, in whom the treasures
of life are set open to them that fear the Lord and wait in his light, whose
fullness cannot be contained nor comprehend in any carnal or visible things; for
they are changeable, and the earth, and the things thereof waxes old, and they
are corruptible, and some have abused and Idolized many things without, and
corrupted the first Covenant which upheld the carnal things, that in their time
some upheld in obedience to God; but they did but signify or figure forth
greater things which are comprehended in the everlasting Covenant of life and
light, which cannot be comprehended nor discerned by the carnal mind, nor by
natural men. And things unutterable does the Lord reveal to them that walk in
his way, the light of his Covenant, which the world cannot Idolize or corrupt,
though outward things they may corrupt, and in no other way can the presence of
the Lord God be known, nor the life of his law and Covenant be revealed and
made known, but by the light of his own Son which shines in the hearts, which
he that believes and walks in is blessed; for he feels a living way an
acceptable sacrifice and offering which is offered by the eternal spirit. And
now the light and spirit of the Lord Christ is Gods way wherein he will be
obeyed, worshipped and honored; and this is the way to the everlasting
righteousness and salvation of God, who is the everlasting Temple in his City,
in whom his seed shall find rest, and solemnity. And this is the life, the
wisdom and power which brings to see over all the world, and over all temporal
things; and no way will please the Lord but his own way, which is his light,
which does enlighten every man that comes into the world; and thus God has
given his Son for a way for a light, for his salvation, for his Covenant to his
people, that his glory may be known and his Name may be published and known to
the ends of the earth, both among Jews and Genti^es, who thirst after his
righteousness which never has an end. Thus I have according to truth discribed
unto the Jews and professors, the end of the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances, and the end of the figures and the shadows (as the Apostle Paul
did to the Hebrews or Jews of old) that were upheld in the first Covenant,
that they that would receive life and salvation may see the way to the heavenly
treasury, and to the good things of God that will minister to the soul. But the
way into new Jerusalem (the City of the living God the mother of the righteous)
all the workers of iniquity are out of it, and nothing that works abomination
or makes a lie; must enter into the City of the living God, and no unclean
thing must dwell there; for the Lord God and the Lamb is the Temple, the light
and the glory thereof, from whose wrath, mountains and hills cannot cover the
wicked, for he is the fullness, and the sum of all, whose presence fills
heaven and earth, and he is infinite, incomprehensible, invisible, eternal, the
heaven of heavens cannot contain him, who can receive or discern any of the
secret council of our great God? But he that fears his name and walks in
his light who is led by the spirit of light and truth, which leads into all
truth. Holiness to the Lord our God for ever; for he is in his Son Christ, and
Christ is the light that enlighteneth all men and women; and Christ is God over
all, through all, and in all, God blessed for ever; he is the Alpha, and Omega,
the beginning and the End, the first and the last, Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in
through the gates into the holy City, for without are dogs, sorcerers, and
Whore-mongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a
lie; and no such can enter into the City of God; but the upright, and the
faithful who are clothed in righteousness; and walk in their integrity, they
have access into the City of God, and they shall praise him in the light of
his countenance among the living, who have right unto the Mysteries of life and
salvation, who know, that worthy is the Lord our God to be glorified, and to
Reign; Allelujah to the most high for ever and ever. Amen.

This was written from the spirit of the Lord God. G. W.

THE END.
ERRTA.
IN page 14. line 16. for yea r. ye. l. 32. f. pray. r. prey. p. 15. l. 20. f.
commands, r. commanded. p. 16. l. 18. f. say, r. lay. p. 24. l. 25. for he. r.
the, p. 29. l. 7. f. whether. r. whither. p. 34. l. 6. f. going. r. goings. f.
from of old, put out (from) p. 35. (line the last save one) f. yet, r. that, p.
72. l. 16. put out, and the Levites, p. 80. l. 28. a add and.


