THREE SPEECHES MADE To the Right Honorable the Lord MAYOR, ALDERMEN, and
COMMON COUNCIL of LONDON, BY The Lord Whitlock, Lord Fleetwood, Lord Disbrowe.
At Guild Hall, on Tuesday November the 8th. 1659.

London, Printed in the Year, 1659.

The Lord Whitlock's Speech.
My Lord, and worthy Gentlemen,
THe Committee of Safety, which are at present entrusted with the Preservation
of the Peace of this Commonwealth, are informed of several matters, that relate
particularly to the peace of this City and Commonwealth. Some passages whereof
were lately delivered particularly to the Court of Aldermen: But other matters
since coming to their knowledge, they thought it requisite to communicate it to
the Representative of this Honorable and Worthy City for their advice, and to
show the Affections they particularly have thereunto, which I shall impart with
plainness. I shall say nothing in commendation of that Blessing, Peace, which
you all know, being sensible of the calamities and troubles of a Civil War: You
were once pleased to make use of the Army, and with thankfulness acknowledge
the good and benefit received by them, and this Honorable City contributed to
that Work, for rescuing of their Liberties, as Men and Christians. It pleased
God to give us Peace; but the old Enemy, when he could not appear in his own
strength, sought then by disguise and underhand means to interrupt it. The
Insurrection of Sir George Booth pretended specious matters, which are since
made plain, and their intentions discovered, which were only to reduce us to
slavery under Tyranny; but they were lately defeated: Now others are sprung up
of the like nature. The Rancour of the old Enemy is such, that he uses all
means imaginable to interrupt our Peace, and particularly in the City, knowing
the Greatness, Populousness, and Wealth of it; all of you may be sensible of
the great Calamities that will follow, if your peace be disturbed, which
hitherto has been preserved, and you have been free from acts of hostility. I
shall propound somewhat for prevention. What man of sober Principles, or
fearing God, will hazard his Peace upon specious groundless pretenses? in Sir
George Booths business there was a design to cause a Rising in the City, that
upon a division among your selves, men of desperate fortunes, joining with your
Enemies might have the rifling of your City; as it was their chief design to
raise division, so the same is now on foot The Committee of Safety have
Intelligence to that purpose; (but alas! those happy days, and blessings we
have received have not been so improved by us, that we should have any hope of
the continuance of that blessing, Peace!) It is evident by letters taken from
private messengers, that General Monk did send to several Parties to rise at
this time, and that in this City he should have a Party to declare for him; but
if it should please God, that such a thing should be, the dreadful consequences
thereof are unexpressible. The Committee desires you would take care of the
preservation of the peace and safety of the City, wherein the safety of the
Commonwealth is greatly concerned; you have been sufficiently informed of the
misery that follows such disturbances; there is nothing that concerns the
Committee shall be omitted, but that they will contribute the utmost of their
endeavors to prevent such disturbances; and are resolved not willingly to be
deficient in what they may do for the preservation of your Peace and Safety;
for they have a particular respect and affection to this worthy City, and
desire, where any ground or occasion is given of dissension, it may be laid
aside: And what ever people may censure of what is past, let us look forward,
and it will be made appear, that their aim is, That Magistracy, and a Godly
Ministry may be encouraged and supported. The Committee therefore desires, That
you would take special care to forbid any Meetings that tend to the setting on
foot the Design of the Enemy. There are several Letters from the North read
yesterday, which certify, That those which are coming in hostile manner
thought to have taken Newcastle, but were prevented. A diligent care is taken
about these things in other places. I will only instance that of a Divine, That
where a great City is divided, great miseries may be expected: Therefore hazard
not your safety, whatever specious pretenses may be offered to you. I desire
that these things may be taken into consideration, and that you would not be
wanting to the Cause, and your own safety, which you have so long owned.

The Lord Fleetwoods Speech.
WE are once more to wait upon you; truly with desire and sincere Intentions,
that there may be a right understanding between those in Authority in this
City, and the Armies of these Nations, as has formerly been, and that they may
still remain an united Body: For the Common Enemy labors all he can to ruin
and destroy both; and their only means to accomplish their design is Division,
and there is nothing so much as that can disunite Old Friends. The City and
Army had once the happiness to esteem one another as Friends; but now if any
thing give occasion of distrust it will prejudice the Cause. You know this poor
Army the Lord has been pleased to make use of as an Instrument to preserve our
Peace, so often attempted against: And we should render our selves to be
unworthy of the name of Friends if we should seek our selves, and not the good
of this poor Nation, and to get Rule and Dominion to our selves, and stand not
to our Principles; these things are frequent discourses: but if we had that
Guilt which is cast upon us, we would not appear in so Honorable an Assembly. I
dare say, Our design is Gods Glory: we have gone in untrodden paths, but God
has led us into ways, which, if we know our own hearts, we have no base or
unworthy design in. Turnings and Changes are not pleasing to us; we have a Love
to this Cause, and God has blessed us in it. It may appear that we have no
design to Rule over others; we have been raised and preserved to this day upon
Common account, and that your and our Liberty may not be Violated, although we
have been censured, it has been the design of our hearts (if we appear
designing) to be no other then for the good of this Nation. We shall not want
Enemies, but God will fight with us; let our Friends bear with us, and observe
the event. Nothing has been more dear to us, then when God has appeared to
us, to continue Friendship and Peace, that so we may be helpful one to another.
Our Enemies know the City has more love to this Cause, then to comply with
their specious pretenses. And whereas it is laid to our charge, That we are
Enemies to parliaments; God he knows our design is to preserve the Ends of all
Parliaments and Authority; and, we hope, shall never appear to take away the
Rights we have so long contended for. The great end of the Common Enemy, is to
ruin the City, yet, by the help of God, we shall study your preservation. We
hope that there may be a right understanding betwixt the Forces in the Northern
Expedition; it shall not be wanting in us that the same may so be. Although it
is our portion, that we cannot be more odious to our Friends then we are
rendered, concerning the Nations Peace, yet there shall be nothing wanting in us
for the settlement thereof; I would not have you to believe us so unworthy
persons, for we have no design but that Peace, Holiness and Justice may prosper
in this City and Nation.

The Lord Disbrow's Speech.
I Was unwilling to speak any thing; so much having been spoken by those
Honorable Persons; but somewhat I must speak in Relation to what was hinted,
and touching the Commands of the Committee of Safety: A great sense there is
upon the Committee of the difficulties this Nation struggles under; which are
the greater, because the common Enemy is in forwardness to a Birth, and
bringing forth. It is the duty of all men as Christians, and as Englishmen, to
value Peace the greatest of outward enjoyments; what I said may be looked upon
as strange, from one brought up for several years in martial Affairs; it being
conceived of us, as of some in the beginning of these Troubles, that they
feared nothing more, then that the Wars would end too soon; it was the
wickedness of those men that had such Principles, rather to gratify filthy
lusts in their hearts, then for any good to the Commonwealth. I hope I may say
of the generality of the Officers entrusted in this Nation, that there is no
outward thing more desired by them, then to live to see those blessed
foundations laid, so as to secure the Civil and Spiritual Rights of this
Nation; nor is there any greater dread in them thereof (notwithstanding that
Bloodshed and expense they have undergone) then that they shall not see a
settlement; yet we hope to God, (in despite of the Cunning of men) we shall
see such a blessed Peace, as the Inhabitants of this Nation may bless his name.
There is none ignorant, but that men (not wanting upon various accounts) make
it their business to hinder this so good a work; and their design is to oppose
or interrupt a work the Providence of God is carrying on, to accomplish their
own designs. It is a mercy, whatever others judge, God has born us witness,
that we have not falsified that Trust which has been reposed in our hands. Our
difficulties have been such, that the wealth of the City, should not hire us to
under go them a year longer; but we may say, we are not without a
misrepresentation. Some say we are setting up Sectaries, this party and that
party; but if we have guile in our hearts, and have not a love to the Godly
People of this Nation, yea, to all the People, God will find us out: God has
blessed some of us with a Spirit of Integrity, and there is nothing upon our
hearts, but the good of the whole. There is a twofold party in this Common
wealth, whom God has again and again made bow down before his People, yet are
still laboring to heighten their spirits: We have not made them slaves, (which
in some places is practiced in the like case) nor is it upon our spirits so to
do; yet I think it our duty not to suffer them to give Laws to us, if God gives
us leave to prevent it, and though we have it not in our hearts to do any thing
to distinguish, yet we are resolved never to put our hands under the feet of
those we have vanqusht: Some say we shall not have settlement, till the Old
Family comes in, which if it should enter into any of our hearts, we should be
like the Dog returning to his Vomit, and the Sow to her wallowing in the Mire.
Many, by the actings of the Army, by a forcible Providence they have been put
upon, may think we go about to do something unworthy to this Nation: This Army
has been blessed 17. years wonderfully, we have not gone about to make our
selves great, or masters of what is our Neighbors, but that which the Power in
being has allowed us. Some give out as if we were returning to a single
Person, and intended to debase Magistracy, and trample down Ministry; but God
will bear us witness to the contrary; The Truth of it is, we are so far from
undervaluing of a Government, that we always thought a bad one with Peace,
better then none at all. If Peace be a great and choice blessing to be valued
by all, we desire that you (with us) will take care to preserve it; we come not
to Court you, but only to let you know, we have no design in it: It Was no
prepared business, that of Dissolving the Parliament, We hope that God stood by
us in it, notwithstanding there has been many gloomy days since. The strength
of an Army is the Unity of it; and it will be your safety and advantage to keep
Unity; a City divided cannot stand: You will not want assistance from the Army,
if interruptions come in this place; whatever calamities may be elsewhere, they
will not be so great here. Your Interest as Christians, your Religion, your
Estates, are great engagements to preserve the Peace: If you go about, or
others Countenanced by you, to disturb it, an Inconvenience may fall upon you;
but our desire is you would not fling dirt on the Army, but as you see the
issue of their actions, so to judge of them. Many Opinions may run, touching
our dark Actions in the late alteration and disturbance: As to the first it is
evident, they had no design of their own; and in the last, if they would have
complied with a few men to set them up, they needed not to have wanted Respect.
It is said, it was only to keep eight or nine in their places; it is very well
known, some of us have labored an opportunity to be quit of our Commands. Now
it is my desire, that you would follow after Peace, and meddle not with Affairs
beyond your Spheres, follow Peace and Holiness, and the God of Peace will bless
you.

FINIS.

