THE Just Devil OF WOODSTOCK.

Or, A True Narrative OF THE Several Apparitions, the Frights and Punishments,
inflicted upon the RUMPISH Commissioners Sent thither, to Survey the MANORS
and HOUSES belonging to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1660.

The Names of the Persons in the ensuing NARRATIVE mentioned, with others.
Capt. Cockaine Capt. Heart. Capt. Crook. Capt. Careless. Capt. Roe. Mr. Crook
the Lawyer Mr. Brown the Surveyor.
Their three Servants. Their Ordinary Keeper, and others. The Gate-Keeper, with
the Wife and Servants.
Besides, many more, who each night heard the noise; as Sir Gerrard Fleetwood
and his Lady, with his Family, Mr. Hyans with his Family; And several others,
who lodged in the outer Courts, and during the three last nights, the
Inhabitants of Woodstock town, and other Neighbor-villages.

And there were many more, both Divines and others, who came out of the
Country, and from Oxford, to see the Glass and Stones, and other stuff, the
Devil had brought, wherewith to beat out the Commissioners; the marks upon some
vvalls remain, And many, this to testify.

The Preface to the ensuing Narrative.
SInce it has pleased the Almighty God, out of his infinite mercy, so to make
us happy, by restoring of our native King to us; and us unto our native liberty
through him, that now the good may say, magna temporum felicitas ubi sentire
quae velis, and dicere licet quae sentias, We cannot but esteem our selves
engaged in the highest of degrees, to render unto him the highest thanks we can
express. Although, surprised with joy we become as lost in the performance:
when gladness and admiration strikes us silent, as we look back; upon the
precipice of our late condition, and those miraculous deliverances beyond
expression. Freed from the slavery, and those desperate perils, we daily lived
in fear of, during the tyrannical times of that detestable usurper Oliver
Cromwell: he who had raked up such Judges, as would wrest the most innocent
language into high Treason, when he had the cruel conscience, to take away our
lives, upon no other ground of Justice or Reason (the stones of London streets
would rise to witness it, if all their Citizens were silent.) And with these
Judges had such Counselors, as could advise him unto worse, which will less
want of witness, For should the many Auditors be silent. The press, (as God
would have it) has given it us in print; where Mr. Nathanie^ Fines his speech
bfore Oliver Cromwe^ and his two Houses of Parliament, the 20. of Januar^ 1657.
He being Cromwels Sea Keeper.
one of them (and his conscience keeper too) speaks out, What shall we do with
these men? says he: Aeger intemperans crudelem facit medicum, and immedicabile
vulnus ense recidendum, Who these men are that should be brought to such
Sicilian vespers, the former page sets forth: Those which conceit Vtopia's, And
have their day dreams, of the return of I know not what golden age with the old
line. What usage when such a privy Councellor had power, could he expect, who
then had published this Narrative, This which so plainly shows, the Devil
himself dislikt their doings, (so much more bad were they then he would have
them be) severer sure then was the Devil to their Commissioners at Woodstock;
for he warned them with dreadful noises, to drive them from their work: This
Councellor without more ado, would have all who retained conceits of Allegiance
to their Sovereign, to be absolutely cut off, by the usurpers sword. A sad
sentence for a Loyal party, to a lawful King; But Heaven is always just, the
party is repriv'd, and do acknowledge the hand of God in it, as is rightly
applied, and as justly sensible of their deliverance: in that, the foundation
which this Councellor says was already so well laid, is now turned up, and
what he calls day-dreams, are come to pass. That old line which (as with him)
there 11. line 17. Mr. Nathaniel ^ines p. 12 line ^4. and 25.
seemed, aliquid divini, to the contrary is now restored. And that rock which
as he says the Prelates and all their Adherents, Nay, and their Master and
Supporter too, with all his posterity, have split themselves upon, is no where
to be heard of. And that posterity are safely arrived in their Ports, and
Masters of that mighty Navy, their enemies so much increased to keep them out
with. The Eldest sits upon the Throne, his place by birthright and descent.

Facatumque regit Patriis virtutibus orbem. Upon which Throne long may he sit,
and reign in peace: That by his just government, the enemies of ours, the true
Protestant Church, of that glorious Martyr, our late Sovereign, and of his
Royal posterity, may be either absolutely converted or utterly confounded.

If any shall now ask, the Why, this Narrative was not sooner published as
nearer to the times wherein the things were acted, he has the reason for it,
in the former lines; which will the more clearly appear unto his apprehension,
if he shall perpend, how much cruelty is requisite to the maintenance of
Rebellion; And how great care is necessary in the supporters, to obviate and
divert the smallest things that tend to the unblinding of the people. So that
it needs will follow, that they must have accounted this, amongst the great
obstructions, to their sales of his Majesty's Lands, the Devil not joining with
them in the security. And greater to the pulling down the Royal Palaces, when
their chapmen should conceit the Devil would haunt them in their houses, for
building with so ill got materials; As no doubt but that he has, so numerous
and confident are the relations made of the same, though scarce any so totally
remarkable as this, (if it be not, that others have been more conceald) in
regard of the strange circumstances, as long continuances, but especially the
number of the persons together, to whom all things were so visibly both seen
and done, so that surely it exceeds any other; for the Devils thus manifesting
themselves it appears evidently, that there are such things as Devils, to
persecute the wicked in this world as in the next.

Now if to these were added the diverse real Phantasms seen at White Hall in
Cromwells time, which caused him to keep such nightly guards in and about his
bedchamber, and yet so often to change his Lodgings. If those things done at
Saint James, where the Devil so joal'd the Sentinels against the sides of the
Queens Chapel doors: that some of them fell sick upon it, and others not
taking warning by it, killed one outright, whom they buried in the place; And all
other such dreadful things, those that inhabited the Royal houses have been
affrighted with.

And if to these were likewise added, a relation of all those Regicides and
their Abettors, the Devil has entered into, as he did the Gadarenes swine S.
Math c. 8. 28, S. Luke c. 8. 26.
with so many more of them, who have fallen mad, and dyed in hydeous forms of
such distractions. That which has been of this within these 12 last years in
England (should all of this nature our Chronicles do tell, with all the
superstitious Monks have writ, be put together,) would make the greater volume,
and of more strange occur ents.

And now as to the Penman of this Narrative, know, that he was a Divine and at
the time of those things acted, which are here related, the Minister and
Schoolmaster of Woodstock, a person learned and discreet, not biased with
factious humors, his name Widows, who each day put in writing what he heard
from their mouths (and such things as they told to have befallen them the
night before) therein keeping to their own words; And never thinking that what
he had writ, should happen to be made public, gave it no better dress to set
it forth. And because to do it now, shall not be construed to change the story,
The reader has it here accordingly exposed.

The Just Devil of WOODSTOCK.
THe 16 day of October in the year of our Lord, 1649. The Commissioners for
surveying and valuing his Majesty's Manor House, Parks, Woods, Deer, Demesnes,
and all things thereunto belonging, by Name Captain Crook, Capt. Heart, Capt
Cockaine, Capt. Careless, and Capt. Roe their Messenger, with Mr Brown their
Secretary, and two or three servants went from Woodstock town, (where they had
lain some nights before) and took up their lodgings in his Majesty's House
after this manner: The Bedchamber and withdrawing room, they both lodged in,
and made their Kitchen; the Presence Chamber their room for dispatch of their
business with all comers; of the Council Hall, their Brewhouse, as of the
Dining room their Woodhouse, where they laid in the clefts of that ancient
Standard in the High-Park, for many ages beyond memory, known by the Name of
the Kings Oak, which they had chosen out, and caused to be dug up by the Roots.

October. 17. About the middle of the night, these new guests were first awaked,
by a knocking at the Presence Chamber door, which they also conceived did open,
and something to enter, which came through the room, and also walked through the
withdrawing room into the Bedchamber, and there walked about that room with a
heavy step during half an hour; then crept under the bed where Captain Heart,
and Capt. Careless lay, where it did seem (as it were) to bite and gnaw the
Mat, and Bedcoards, as if it would tear and rend the featherbeds, which having
done a while, then would heave a while, and rest; then heave them up again in
the bed more high then it did before, sometime on the one side, sometime on the
other, as if it had tried which Captain was heaviest; thus having heaved some
half an hour, from thence it walked out, and went under the servants bed, and
did the like to them; thence it walked into a withdrawing room, and there did
the same to all who lodged there: Thus having welcomed them for more then two
hours space, it walked out as it came in, and shut the outer door again, but
with a clap of some mighty force; these guests were in a sweat all this while,
but out of it falling into a sleep again, it became morning first before they
spoke their minds, then would they have it to be a Dog, yet they described it
more to the likeness of a great Bear, so fell to the examining under the Beds,
where finding only the Mats scracht, but the Bed-coards whole, and the quarter
of Beef which lay on the floor untoucht, they entertained other thoughts.

October. 18. They were all awaked, as the night before, and now conceived that
they heard all the great clefts of the Kings Oak brought into the Presence
Chamber, and there thumpt down, and after roll about the room, they could hear
their chairs and stools tossed from one side of the room unto the other; and
then; as it were) altogether josled: Thus having done an hour together, it
walked into the withdrawing room, where lodged the two Captains, the Secretary,
and two servants; here stopped the thing a while, as if it did take breath, but
raised a hideous one, then walked into the Bedchamber, where lay those as
before, and under the Bed it went, where it did heave, and heave again, that
now they in bed were put to catch hold upon Bed-posts, and sometimes one of the
other, to prevent their being tumbled out upon the ground; then coming out as
from under the bed, and taking hold upon the bedposts, it would shake the whole
bed, almost as if a cradle rocked: Thus having done here for half an hour, it
went into the withdrawing room, where first it came and stood at the beds feet,
and heaving up the beds feet flopt down again a while, until at last it heaved
the feet so high that those in bed thought to have been set upon their heads;
and having thus for two hours entertained them, went out as in the night
before, but with a great noise.

October. 19. This night they awaked, not until the midst of the night, they
perceived the room to shake, with something that walked about the bedchamber,
which having done so a while, it walked into a withdrawing room, where it took
up a Brass warming-pan, and returning with it into the bedchamber, therein
made so loud a noise, in these Captains own words, it was as loud and scurvie,
as a ring of five untuned Bells rang backward, but the Captains, not to seem
afraid, next day made mirth of what had past, and jested at the Devil in the
pan.

October. 20. These Captains and their company, still lodging as before, were
wakened in this night with some things flying about the rooms, and out of one
room into the other, as thrown with some great force: Captain Heart being in a
slumber, was taken by the shoulder and shaked until he did sit up in his bed,
thinking that it had been by one of his fellows, when suddenly he was taken on
the Pate with a Trencher, that it made him shrink down into the bed-clothes,
and all of them in both rooms kept their heads at least within their sheets, so
fiercely did three dozen of Trenchers fly about the rooms; yet Captain Heart
ventured again to peep out to see what was the matter, and what it was that
threw, but then the Trenchers came so fast and near about his ears, that he was
fain quickly to couch again: In the morning they found all their Trenchers,
Pots and Spits, upon and about their beds, and all such things as were of
common use scattered about the rooms; this night there was also in several
parts of the room, and outer-rooms, such noises of beating at door^, and on the
Walls, as if that several Smiths had been at work; and yet our Captain shrunk
not from their work, but went on in that and lodged as they had done before.

October. 21. About midnight they heard great knocking at every door, after a
while the doors flew open, and into the withdrawing room entered something, as
of a m^^^ty proportion, the figure of it they knew not how to describe; this
walked a while about the room shaking the floor at every step, then came it up
close to the bed side, where lay Captain Crook and Careless; and after a
little pause, as it were, The bed-curtains both at sides and feet were drawn up
and down slowly, then faster again for a quarter of an hour, then from end to
end as fast as imagination can fancy the running of the rings, then shaked it
the beds, as if the joints thereof had cracked; then, walked the thing into the
bedchamber, and so played with those beds there: Then took up eight
Peuter-dishes, and bouled them about the room, and over the servants in the
truckle beds; then sometimes were the dishes taken up and thrown cross the
high-beds and against the walls, and so much batteted; but there were more
dishes wherein was meat in the same room, that werenot at all removed: During
this, in the Presence Chamber there was stranger noise of weighty things
thrown down, and as they supposed, the clefts of the Kings Oak did roll about
the room, yet at the wonted hour went away, and left them to take rest, such as
they could.

October 22. Has mist of being set down, the Officers employed in their work
farther off, came not that day to Woodstock.

October 23. Those that lodged in the withdrawing room, in the midst of the
night were awakened with the cracking of fire, as if it had been with thorns
and sparks of fire burning, whereupon they supposed that the bed chamber had
taken fire, and listening to it farther, they heard their fellows in bed sadly
groan, which gave them to suppose they might be suffocated, wherefore they
called upon their servants to make all possible have to help them, when the two
servants were come in, they found all asleep, and so brought back word, but
that there were no bed clothes upon them, wherefore they were sent back to
cover them, and to stir up and mend the fire; when the servants had covered
them, and were come to the Chimney, in the corners they found their wearing
apparel, boots, and stockings, but they had no sooner touched the Embers, when
the firebrands flew about their ears so fast, that away ran they into the other
room, for the shelter of their cover-lids, then after them walked something that
stamped about the room, as if it had been exceeding angry, and likewise threw
about the Trenchers, Platters, and all such things in the room, after two hours
went out, yet stamped again over their heads.

October 24. They lodged all abroad.

October 25. This afternoon was come unto them Mr. Richard Crook the Lawyer,
brother to Captain Crook, and now Deputy-Steward of the Manor, unto Captain
Parsons and Major Butler, who had put out Mr Hyans his Majesty's Officer: To
entertain this new guest, the Commissioners caused a very great fire to be
made, of near the chimney full of wood, of the Kings Oak, and he was lodged in
the withdrawing room with his brother, and his servant in the same room; about
the midst of the night a wonderful knocking was heard and into the room
something did rush, which coming to the chimney-side, dashed out the fire, as
with the stamp of some prodigious foot, then threw down such weighty stuff,
what ere it was (they took it to be the residue of the clefts and roots of the
Kings Oak) close by the bedside, that the house and bed shook with it: Captain
Cockain and his fellow arose, and took their swords to go unto the Crooks, the
noise ceased at their rising, so that they came to the door and called the two
brothers, though fully awaked, and heard them call, were so amazed, that they
made no answer until Captain Cockaine had recovered the boldness to call very
loud, and came unto their bedside; then faintly first, after some more
assurance, they came to understand one another, and comforted the Lawyer:
whilst this was thus, no noise was heard, which made them think the time was
past of that nights troubles, so that after some little conference they applied
themselves to take some rest, when Captain Cockaine was come to his own bed,
which he had left open, he found it closely covered, which he much wondered at,
but turning the clothes down, and opening it to get in, he found the lower
sheet strewed over with trenchers, their whole three dozens of trenchers were
orderly disposed between his sheets, which he and his fellow endeavoring to
cast out, such noise arose about the room, that they were glad to get into bed
with some of the trenchers: the noise lasted a full half hour after this; This
entertainment so ill did like the Lawyer, and being not so well studied in the
point, as to resolve this the Devils Law-case, that he next day resolved to
begone, but having not dispatched all that he came for, profit and persuasions
prevailed with him to stay the other hearing, so that he lodged as he did the
night before.

October. 26. This night each room was better furnished with fire and candle then
before; yet about twelve at night came something in, that dashed all out, then
did walk about the room; making a noise, not to be set forth by the comparison
with any other thing, some times came it to the bed-sides, and drew the
Curtains to and fro, then twerle them, then walk about again, and return to the
bed-posts, shake them with all the bed, so that they in bed were put to hold
one upon the other, then walk about the room again, and come to the servants
bed, and gnaw and the wainscot head; and shake altogether in that room, at the
time of this being in doing, they in the bedchamber heard such strange
dropping down from the roof of the room, that they supposed it was like the fall
of money by the sound. Captain Cockaine not frighted with so small a noise, (and
lying near the chimney) stepped out, and made shift to light a candle, by the
light of which he perceived the room strewed over with broken glass, green, and
some as it were pieces of broken bottles, he had not long been considering what
it was, when ^uddainly his candle was hit out, and glass flew about the room;
that he made haste to the protection of the Coverlets, the noise of thundering
rose more hideous then at any time before; yet at a certain time all vanished
into calmness. The morning after was the glass about the room, which the maid,
that was to make clean the rooms swept up into a corner, and many came to see
it: But Mr. Richard Crook would stay no longer, yet as he stopped going through
Woodstock Town, he was there heard to say, that he would not lodge amongst them
another night for a Fee of 500. l.

October. 27. The Commissioners had not yet done their work wherefore they must
stay, and being all men of the sword, they must not seem afraid to encounter
with any thing though it be the Devil, therefore with pistols charged, and
drawn swords laid by their bed sides, they applied themselves to take some
rest, when something in the midst of night, so opened and shut the window
casements, with such claps, that it awakened all that slept; some of them
peeping out to look what was the matter with the windows, stones flew about the
rooms as if hurled with many hands, some hit the walls, and some the beds heads
close above the pillows; the dints of which were then, and yet (it is
conceived) are to be seen; thus sometime throwing stones; and sometime making
thundering noise, for two hours space it ceast, and all was quiet till the
morn; after their rising and the maid come in to make the fire they looked
about the rooms: they found fourscore stones brought in that night, and going
to lay them together, in the corner where the glass (before mentioned) had been
swept up, they found that every piece of glass had been carried away that
night: many people came next day to see the stones, and all observed, that they
were not of such kind of stones as are natural in the country thereabout,
with these were noise like claps of thunder, or report of Cannon planted
against the rooms; heard by all that lodged in the outer courts, to their
astonishment, And at Woodstock Town, taken to be thunder.

October. 28. This night, both strange and differing noise from the former, first
wakened Captain Heart who lodged in the bed chamber, who hearing Roe and Brown
to groan, called out to Cookaine and Cocka to come and help them, for Heart
could not now stir himself; Cockaine would feign have answered, but he could
not, or look about, something he thought, stopped both his breath and held down
his eye lids. Amazed thus he struggles and kicked about, till he had awaked
Captain Crook who half asleep grew very angry at his kicks, and multiplied
words it grew to an appointment in the field; but this fully recovered Cockaine
to remember, that Captain Heart had called for help, wherefore to them he ran in
the other room, whom he found sadly groaning: where scraping in the chimney he
both found a candle and fire to light it; but had not gone two steps when
something blew the candle out, and threw him in the chair by the bed side, when
presently cried out Captain Careless, with a most pitiful voice, come hither,
O come hither brother Cockaine, the things gone of me, Cockaine scarce yet
himself; helped to set him up in his bed, and after Captain Heart, and having
scarce done that to them, and also to the other two they heard Captain Crook
crying out, as if something had been killing him; Cockaine snacht up the sword,
that lay by their bed and ran into the room to save Crook but was in much more
likelihood to kill him, for at his coming the thing that pressed Crook went of
him, at which Crook started out of his bed, whom Cockaine thought a spirit made
at him, at which Crook cried out Lord help, Lord save me, Cockaine let fall his
hand, and Crook embracing Cockaine desired his reconcilement; giving him many
thanks for his deliverance, then rose they all and came together, discoursed
sometimes godly and sometimes prayed, for all this while was there such
stamping over the roof of the house, as if 1000. horse had there been trotting,
this night all the stones brought in the night before, and laid up in the
withdrawing room: were all carried again away by that which brought them in,
which at the wonted time left of, and as it were went out, and so away.

October. 29. Their business having now received so much forwardness, as to be
near dispatched they encouraged one the other and resolved to try further,
therefore they provided more lights and fires, and further for their assistance
prevailed with their Ordinary keeper; to lodge amongst them and bring his
Mastive Bitch, and it was so this night with them, that they had no disturbance
at all.

October 30 So well they had past the night before, that this night they went to
bed confident, and careless until about 12 of the clock; something knocked at
the door as with a smiths great hammer, but with such force as if it had cleft
the door: then entered something like a Bear, but seemed to swell more big and
walked about the room, and out of one room into the other; treading so heavily
as the floare had not been strong enough to bear it, when it came into the bed
chamber it dashed against the beds heads some kind of glass vessel, that broke
in sundry pieces, and sometimes would take up those pieces, and hutle them
about the room, and into the other room; and when it did not hurl the glass
at their heads, it did strike upon the tables as if many smiths with their
greatest hammers had been laying on as upon an anvill: sometimes it thumpt
against the walls, as if it would beat a hole through; then upon their heads
such stamping, as if the roof of the house were beating down upon their heads,
and having done thus, during the space (as was conjectured) of two hours, it
ceased and vanished, but with a more fierce shutting of the doors then at any
time before; in the morning they found the pieces of glass about the room, and
observed that it was much differing from that glass, brought in three nights
before, this being of a much thicker substance, which several persons which
came in carried away some pieces of; The Commissioners were in debate of
lodging there no more, but all their business was not done, and some of them
were so conceited as to believe, and to attribute the rest they enjoyed the
night before this last unto the Mastive bitch; wherefore they resolved to get
more company, and the Mastive bitch, and try another night.

October. 31. This night the fires and lights prepared, the Ordinary keeper and
his bitch, with another man persuaded by him, they all took their beds and fell
asleep; But about 12 at night such rapping was on all sides of them that it
wakened all of them, as the doors did seem to open; the Mastive bitch fell
fearfully a yelling, and presently ran fiercely into the bed to them in the
truckle bed; as the thing came by the table, it struck so fierce a blow on
that, as that it made the frame to crack, then took the warming-pan from off
the table and stroke it against the walls with so much force as that it was
beat flat together lid and bottom; now were they hit as they lay covered over
head and care within the bed clothes; Captain Careless was taken a sound blow
on the head with the shoulder blade bone of a dead Horse, (before they had been
but thrown at when they peept up and mist,) Brown had a shrewd blow on the leg,
with the backbone, and another on the head, and every one of them felt several
blows of bones and stones through the bed clothes, for now these things were
thrown as from an angry hand, that meant further mischief: the stones flew in
at window as shot out of a Gun, nor was the bursts less (as from without) then
of a Cannon, and all the windows broken down; now as the hurling of the things
did cease, and the thing walk up and down, Captain Cockaine and Heart cried
out, In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, What are you? what would
you have? what have we done that you disturb us thus? No voice replied (as the
Captains said, yet some of their servants have said otherwise) and the noise
ceast. Hereupon Captain Heart and Cockain rose, who lay in the Bedchamber,
renewed the fire and lights, and one great candle in a candlestick they placed
in the door, that might be seen by them in both the rooms; no sooner were they
got to bed, but the noise arose on all sides more loud and hideous then at any
time before, insomuch (as to use the Captains own words) it returned and
brought seven Devils worse then it self, and presently they saw the candle and
candlestick in the passage of the door, dashed up to the roof of the room, by a
kick of the hinder parts of a Horse, and after with the Hoof trod out the
snuff, and so dashed out the Fire in the Chimnies; as this was done, there fell
as from the sieling, upon them in the Trucklebeds such quantities of water, as
if it had been poured out of Buckets, which stunk worse then any earthly stink
could make; And as this was in doing, something crept under the High beds, tossed
them up to the roof of the House, with the Commissioners in them, until the
Testers of the beds were beaten down upon them, and the Bedsted-frames broke
under them; and here some pause being made, they all as if with one consent,
started up, and ran down the stairs until they came into the Councel-Hall,
where two sat up a Brewing, but now were fallen asleep, those they scared much
with wakening of them, having been much perplexed before with the strange noise,
which commonly was taken by them abroad for thunder, sometimes for rumbling
wind; here the Captains and their company got fire and candle, and every one
carrying something of either, they returned into the Presence Chamber, where
some applied themselves to make the fire, whilst others fell to Prayers, and
having got some clothes about them, they spent the residue of the night in
singing Psalms and Prayers; During which, no noise was in that room, but most
hideously round about, as at some distance.

It should have been told before, how that when Captain Heart first rose this
night, (who lay in the Bedchamber next the fire) he found their Book of
valuations cross the embers smoking, which he snacht up and cast upon the
Table there, which the night before was left upon the Table in the presence
amongst their other Papers: This Book was in the morning found a handful burnt,
and had burnt the Table where it lay; Brown the Clerk said, he would not for a
100 and a 100 l. that it had been burnt a handful further.

This night it happened that there were six Cony-stealers, who were come with
their Nets and Ferrets to the Cony-burrows by Rosamonds Well; but with the
noise this night from the Mannor-house, they were so terrified that like men
distracted away they ran, and left their Haies all ready pitched, ready up, and
the Ferrets in the Cony-burrows.

Now the Commissioners more sensible of their danger, considered more seriously
of their safety; and agreed to go and confer with Mr. Hoffman, the Minister of
Wotton, (a man not of the meanest note for life or learning, by some esteemed
more high) to desire his advice together with his company and prayers. Mr.
Hoffman held it too high a point to resolve on suddenly and by himself,
wherefore desired time to consider upon it, which being agreed unto, he
forthwith rode to Mr. Jenkinson and Mr. Wheat, the two next Justices of Peace
to try what Warrant they could give him for it. They both (as it is said from
themselves) encouraged him to be assisting to the Commissioners, according to
his calling.

But certain it is, that when they came to fetch him to go with them, By which
is to be noted, that a Presbyterian Minister dares not encounter an Independent
Devil.
Mr Hoffman answered, That he would not lodge there one night, for 500 l. and
being asked to pray with them, he held up his hands and said, That he would not
meddle upon any terms.

Mr Hoffman refusing to undertake the quarrel, the Commissioners held it not
safe to lodge where they had been thus entertained any longer, but caused all
things to be removed into the Chambers over the Gatehouse, where they staid but
one night, and what rest they enjoyed there, we have but an uncertain relation
of, for they went away early the next morning; but if it may be held fit to set
down what has been delivered by the report of others, they were also the same
night much affrighted with dreadful apparitions, but observing that these
passages spread much in discourse, to be also in particulars taken notice of,
and that the nature of it made not for their cause, they agreed to the
concealing of things for the future; yet this is well known and certain, that
the Gate-keepers wife was in so strange an agony in her bed, and in her
bedchamber such noise (whilst her husband was above with the Commissioners)
that two maids in the next room to her, durst not venture to assist her, but
affrighted ran out to call company, and their Master, and found the woman (at
their coming in) gasping for breath: And the next day said that she saw and
suffered that, which for all the world she would not b^ hired to again.

From Woodstock the Commissioners removed unto Euelme, and some of them
returned to Woodstock the Sunday sennight after (the Book of Valvations wanting
something that was for haste, left imperfect) but lodged not in any of those
rooms where they had lain before, and yet were not unvisited, (as they consess
themselves) by the Devil whom they called their nightly guest, Captain Crook
came not until Tuesday night, and how he sped that night the gate keepers wife
can tell if she dares, but what she has whispered to her gossips, shall not
be made a part of this our Narrative, nor many more particulars which have
fallen from the Commissioners themselves and their servants to other persons;
they are all or most of them alive, and may add to it when they please, and
surely have not a better way to be revenged of him who troubled them, then
according to the Proverb, tell truth and shame the Devil.

There remains this observation to be added, that on a Wednesday morning all
these Officers went away; And that since them diverse persons of several
qualities, have lodged often and sometimes long in the same rooms, both in the
presence with drawing room and bed chamber, belonging unto his Sacred Majesty
yet none have had the least disturbance, or heard the smallest noise for which
the cause was not as Ordinary as apparent; except the Commissioners and their
company who came in Order to the alienating and pulling down the house, which
is well nigh performd.

A short Survey of Woodstock, not taken by any of the before mentioned
Commissioners.
THis Noble seat called W^odstock is one of the ancient honors belonging to
the Crown. Several Manors owe suite and service to the place; But the custom
of the Country giving it, but the title of a Manor we shall err with them to
be the better understood.

The Manor House, has been a large Fabric, and accounted amongst his
Majesty's standing houses, because there was always kept a standing furniture;
This great house was built by King Henry the first, but amplyfied with the gate
house and out sides of the outercourt, by King Henry the seventh, the stables
by King James.

About a bow shoot from the gate Southwest, remain foundation signs of that
structure erected by King Henry the second, for the security of Lady Rosamond,
daughter of Walter Lord Clifford, which some Poets have compared to the
Dedalian Labyrinth, but the form and circuit both of the place and ruins, show
it to have been a house and of one pile; perhaps of strength according to the
fashion of those times, and probably was fitted with secret places of recess
and avenews to hide or convey away such persons as wete not willing to be found
if narrowly sought after. About the midst of the place arises a spring called
at present Rosamonds Well; It is but shallow and shows to have been paved and
walled about likely contrived for the use of them within the house, when it
should be of danger to go out.

A quarter of a mile distant from the King house, is seated Woodstock Town new
and old: This new Woodstock did arise by some buildings which Henry the second
gave leave to be erected, (as received by tradition) at the suite of the Lady
Rosamond, for the use of out servants upon the wastes of the Manor of Bladon
where is the Mother Church, this is a Hamlet belonging to it, though increased
to a market Town by the advantage of the Court residing sometime near, which of
late years they have been sensible of the want of; this Town was made a
Corporation in the 11. year of Henry the sixth, by Charter with power to send
two Burgesses to Parliament or not, as they will themselves.

Old Woodstock is scated on the Westside of the brook named Glyme which also
runs through the Park, the Town consists not of above four or five houses,
but it is to be conceived, that it has been much larger, (but very anciently
so) for in some old Law Historians there is mention of the Assise at Woodstock,
for a Law made in a Micelgemote (the name of Parliaments before the coming of
the Norman) in the days of King Etheldred. And in like manner that thereabout
was a Kings House, if not in the same place where Hen. the first built the late
standing pile before his; for in such days those great Councels were commonly
held in the Kings Palaces. Some of those Lands have belonged to the Orders of
the Knights Templers there being Records which call them, Terras quas Rex
excambiavit cum Templariis.

But now this late large Manor House is in a manner almost turned into heaps
of Rubbish: Some seven or eight rooms left for the accommodation of a Tenant
that should rent the Kings medows, (of those who had no power to let them) with
several high uncovered Walls standing, the prodigious Spectacles of malice unto
Monarchy, which ruins still bear semblance of their State, and yet aspire in
spite of envy, or of weather, to show, What Kings do build, Subjects may
sometime shake, but utterly can never overthrow.

That part of the Park called the High-Park has been lately subdivided by Sir
Arthur Haselrig to make pastures for his breed of Colts, and other parts plowed
up. Of the whole says Roffus Warwicensis in Ms. Hen. 1. page 122. Fecit iste
Rex Parcum de Woodstock, cum Palatio infra praedictum Parcum qui Parcus erat
primus Parcus Angliae and continet in circuitu septem Miliaria, constructus
erat Anno 14. bujus Regis, aut parum post. Without the Park the Kings Demesne
Woods were, it cannot well be said now are, The Timber being all sold off, and
underwoods so cropped and spoiled by that Beast the Lord Munson and other greedy
Cattle, that they are hardly recoverable: Beyond which lies Stone-field and
other Manors that hold of Woodstock, with other Woods, that have been aliened
by former Kings, but with reservation of Liberty for his Majesty's Deer, and
other beasts of Forest to harbor in at pleasure, as in due place is to be
showed.

FINIS:

