A Wonderful Pleasant and Profitable LETTER Written by Mris SARAH WIGHT, To a
Friend, EXPRESSING The joy is to be had in God IN Great, Deep, Long, and Sore
AFFLICTIONS.

Occasioned by the Death of her Brother, the Troubles of her Mother; but
especially the workings of God in her own heart.

Published for the Use of the AFFLICTED.

LONDON, Printed by James Cottrel, for Ri. Moon, at the seven Stars in Paul's
Churchyard. 1656.

To the Right Honorable, The Lady FLEETWOOD.
Madam,
I So esteem you, upon the account, especially of God, not this World, that
passes away; I am bold to present this little piece, not mine own, to your
view, as suitable (in some sort) to your former, and present state; having
drank (in a degree) as of the same Cup of inward sorrow and suffering, so
likewise of joy and salvation, herein mentioned; it being the portion of all,
as says the Head of all, Ye shall indeed drink of the Cup that I drink of.
Your Ladyships Sympathy, together with your Dear and Noble Lord's, with the
afflicted of all sorts, as I have largely, and multitudes of others (I believe)
found, and this Author (I suppose) in particular; has occasioned this,
presented for a looking-Glass of solace and delight, to your inward Man, by

Your Ladyships, humbly devoted to GOD on your behalf, R. B.

Some Apology to Mrs. Sarah Wight, Touching the printing of her Letter without
her knowledge or consent.
Chosen of God (in affliction) and precious,

HAVing sundry times read over your Letter, and found in it what my heart
longed after, and in God rejoiced greatly in; I judged with others, in the
Light of him, the printing of it might be of exceeding use, especially now, to
the many bewildernessed ones, to whom it might serve as a VVitness, they having
none left them (as to Man) in this cloudy and dark day, to lean upon, save only
their dearly beloved Lord; and he neither not always manifest, and yet
manifest too, in a measure, in the true and alone Messiah in them, the Rock of
Ages, and the only Hope. This I have done without consulting you about it, it
being judged by others, (your Friends) and by me also, it might have prevented
the publishing it, through a temptation perhaps of modesty in you; but thus
making you public was (I know) divinely urged of God in many, as in order to
his own immortal glory and praise, appearing in your most most low estate; so
to the profit and consolation of many the like minded, but especially the like
afflicted, (in any degree) with you; among whom, I leave you, and my self with
you, bowing continually (as is most meet) at the feet of God most holy, Amen.

A Wonderful Pleasant and Profitable LETTER.
Dear Sir,
PRecious Christian friend, much beloved in the Lord of all love; in him I
kindly salute you, wishing you and your dear Relation, with my self and all
Saints, an heavenly increase of knowledge in the mystery of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ: not doubting, but as ye have received some of the Spirit,
so you enjoy daily fresh supplies, and at last shall be perfected in the
Spirit; to the glory of God, who has formed you to show forth his noble praise.

Sir, in our winter-season of affliction, I find it a Christians crown of
rejoicing, to retire in the Spirit, to hear what God speaks: for none speaks or
teaches like him; never man spoke like Christ. In this retirement of spirit, or
silent waiting upon God, we shall be able to see, and say with the Prophet
David, that God is good of a truth, to his purified, sincere, single-hearted
Israelites, in the midst of all troubles; under Pharaohs bondage, at the
Red Sea, in the wilderness, in the fiery furnace, doing them unexpected good: at
all times, he is a present help to us, and an Ark or hiding place for us, from
all storms and tempests.

I find, there is no condition so sad, but there is balm enough in Gilead,
suitable comfort of supplies in Isreal's God, to revive and raise up a fainting
spirit. The depths of misery, we find, are never beyond the depthless depths
of mercies. When the Lord is pleased to make bare his holy Arm for the
deliverance of his people out of troubles, he first lays them very low, that
his work may be more admirable: he many times, for this very end, strips us
naked and bare, and deprives us of all helps and props below, that we may
thereby learn to make the Lord alone our stay and trust; who styles himself, A
God that comfort those that are cast down, poor helpless nothings: this is
the very time a soul may expect great appearances and deliverances from God,
when its help stands only in the Name of the Lord.

That soul that finds a special presence of God with it in trouble, as the
children in the fiery furnace, has ample cause to bless his Name. This gracious
presence has been much with us, in moderating the measure of our cross, though
not in taking it away; which I desire to wait the Lords time for, in praising
him, who has not hitherto suffered it to be above our strength. As he
moderates the measure, so the time: it is but a moment of affliction, and light,
in comparison of the greatness and weightiness of the glory in eternity. O what
cause have we to bless the Lord, who limits both measure and time, and is also
present in mixing some comfortable Cordial, which sweetly allays the bitterness
of our heavy crosses, and strengthens us to bear it patiently, in some
measure! As the Lord is present in sanctifying a cross; so when he has
perfected his noble work in us, he will be a present and perfect deliverer of
us. O what a comfort is it to know we dwell in the especial love of God under
the cross, as those who are free from it! And though a Saint may be cast out of
a happy state in the world, yet never, never out of their dear God's favor. O
what joy does this administer to us, to know, That however it goes with us,
yet our Father will deal kindly with us, and continually accompany us with his
presence; seasoning our hearts with grace, and mounting our spirits high,
carrying them forth with pure respects to advance his glory.

The true-divine soul, you know, is never satisfied, till it is as near God as
is attainable. Truly, the nearer we come to him, the more we are emptied of
sin, and all selfishness. A Christian's happiness lies in being emptied of all
self, self refined, as well as gross self; and in being filled with a full God,
and the glorious emptying, satisfying incomes of his free spirit. Certainly,
that soul that denies it self most, seeks it self most: for the more it
endeavors to advance the Lord in all, above all enjoyments, experiences,
gifts, graces, relations, or any creature, or creature comforts; the more we
exalt our condition in him. It Is sweet, and but meet, upon the revelation of
any mercy, to yield our God all the praise, saying, Lord, as the benefit and
comfort shall be mine; so shall all the praises and glory be thine: Not unto
me, nor unto any thing acted or done by me; but to thee be the whole glory of
all, who art the author of every good and perfect gift we enjoy. It Is an
excellent thing, to know, own, and love the Lord above all, even in the time of
adversity. As prosperity should not lift up, so adversity should not daunt a
Christian. When we find our estate here, like a web woven with interminglings
of wants and favors, crosses and blessings, standings and fallings, combats
and victories, and the like, which has and does accompany a poor soul in its
pilgrimage, as it did the Israelites of old in theirs; Every condition is
beautiful in its season.

Christianity has its several Offices, at several seasons: it has a
sorrowful, mourning, praying time; and its rejoicing, praising, triumphing
time, when it is warmed with the glorious sunshine of Gods favor, in which
consists our eternal life and joy. The seasons, varieties, and changes in the
outward world, lively represent the seasons, varieties and changes that are in
the inward world of mankind. I daily behold things here below, true according
to Solomon's description; living, and dying; coming into the world, and going
out of it; planting, and plucking up; killing, and quickening; wounding, and
healing; breaking down, and building up; weeping, and laughing; mourning, and
rejoicing.

I know, you, and many of the precious sons and daughters of Sion, can
experimentally witness the truth of this, not only outwardly, but inwardly:
they by an enlightened eye behold mutability written in every thing of the first
man Adams state, even in the height of his first glory: which glory must and
shall daily, yea does pass away; and will, till it shall cease to be what it
is, mixed, and fading. When this glory shall be abolished, then will a more
pure and lasting glory disclose it self: the decreasing of the one, makes clear
way for the increasing of the other. The Lord suffers his poor creature for a
season to take quite contrary ways, and to fetch contrary steps; to throw down
all he builds up, and another while build up all he throws down: yea, its
appointed to him to Run through so many degrees of death, as he has gone
degrees of life; and to run through so many passages in the dark world, as he
has done in the light world; one while to make himself an universal
transgressor, and anon to justify himself in all his transgression; showing
himself to be as he is in all he does as man; a fool, an unwise one, in all he
does; in living, dying, planting, plucking up; in weeping and rejoicing: a
fool, in making himself a sinner; a Saint, till God make him what he will have
him to be; this or that, here and there, when and what he pleases: not what we
will, but what he will, this our Potter may do with us; for we are the clay: he
is our father, and we his children, at his dispose; more his then our own: we
are his children, I say, though he may withdraw from us, and because of our
weakness hide from us for a season the true color and original of things, and
those various workings by which he does those things: the great Jehovah may put
what paint he will upon things, and what Die he pleases into us: and we with
beholding the present color subject to change, with the present eye, may be
confident in what we see, both in judging it, and other things by it, not
rightly knowing him that judges it, nor considering what various changes both
the eye and color are subject to undergo.

That which had a time to be born, planted and built up, has a change
accompanied to it; it has also a time to die, to be plucked up, and thrown
down; like the glory of old Jerusalem or the old first world: and there is
nothing so deaded, or trodden under foot, plucked up, or rased out, but shall
have a gladsome season, a time of quickening, glorifying, and planting, and
writing in again by the finger of God. All things are at first brought forth
in weakness in the inward world, as well as in the outward world: says the
Wiseman, All things under the Sun are vanity, or to have a vain course a while:
the Lord is perfect in every motion of his, both in the inward and outward
world; whatever he does shall be for ever; nothing can be added to it, or taken
from it: but poor silly man, like the wild Asses colt, is weak and vain, the
outward and inward man vain; yea, every motion of his, as he is only man,
comes to nothing, he may seem to be wondrous wise, to have notions of great
weight, even of eternity upon him; and yet he cannot reach eternity as man;
being but a vain empty nothing, the purposes he has in him, are but poor low,
shallow things: yet he has his season to take his pleasure in his vain
inventions: but when these seasons are blown over, he is then stripped of all,
of inside and outside, as I have often been; and so made naked to divine
purpose. One breath of the Almighty blasts all the creaturely perfection which
we have been acquainted with; one appearance of love, dissolves the soul to
nothing, as the Sun does wax: some boast, I see, of their selfish seeming
glory, Riches, honor, parts and abilities, and such like; which I poor empty
nothing cannot do: yet I am not troubled at it, now I consider what a moth is
in these garments, and how subject these treasures are to be corrupted, and
creature-fulness exhausted: one grain of that precious faith, and one dram of
love which the Lord gives his hidden ones, is far beyond all other things, that
we can act or do; it is all of God, without our mixtures.

The Lord having shown me some of his glory in this particular, I beseech him
to show me more; for it does content me, and it will suffice my soul more then
hid treasures: the sensible and full enjoyment of thy Spirit, will cause my
soul to return satisfied to her rest, praising the God of all our mercies; not
caring what others boast of, when thou art become the Crown of my glory, the
top of all Royalties to me; my spirit now breaths out this language, and says,
Holy God, let who will treasure up to themselves, yet will not I: that which
some love and store up besides thy self, of their own excellency; I cannot but
abhor, and cast away, as filthy rags of no value: every thing that is in me,
that springs up out of my dry ground, that springs not from the sap of thy Holy
Spirit.

If I know my own heart, I would not glory in any thing below my Maker, and
what is of him, and conveyed by his Spirit alone into me: it rejoices my soul
much, to see the Lord at work, gathering all, as he has given me as his own,
and saving me for his own Name sake, and not for any worth, or worthyness in
me, Justifying me, or any unworthyness condemning me: O how admirable is it for
to find God thus freely and fully loving and saving his poor people, and owning
all that is his, as he has been and appeared in them; and causing all that
has been and sprung from us to pass away for evermore: My soul shouts forth
with the true spiritualized Christian, this voice: Dear God, as I am a selfish
corrupt creature, so let there be no profit of all my labor and travel; but
thou who alone art the Author of every good and perfect gift we enjoy, do thou
reap the travels of thy soul, for its high time for thee to enjoy thy own: for
my part, I cannot but turn from all the fruitless works of my hands, all the
motions and delights of my Spirit, in the inward world of my heart, and with as
much irksomness and great tiredness of spirit, as ever Solomon did in the
outward world: yet I know every thing is beautiful in its season, time and
place, though nothing is lovely out of it: there is a beauty in living, when
the spring of life is come: O how lovely is it! thee is also a beauty in death,
when that season is come: it is as beautyful to see things in Winter, as to see
them live in the Spring of Summer: there is nothing so deformed, but, when we
look upon God in it, we see much beauty written in it; nor nothing so evil, but
it has good on it: there is nothing so bad, but it is good in its own order,
place, and season, and course; nor nothing so good, but it is bad and uncomely
out of its place, order, and season. There is a beauty in killing, healing,
weeping; in Rejoicing, and triumphing: but this beauty shines not so glorious
out of their seasons, as it does in: There is the very nature and exellency of
God in every thing that he does; which makes it beautyful: for every thing that
springs from him, savours and tastes of his life and perfection.

The outward and inward man has but a poor, low, dark, shallow knowledge of
the things of God, whatever they may pretend to have. There is no soul able of
it self to reach these things; they are only spiritually discerned, and known
by the sight of the Spirit: it is by this Spirit only, that the soul comes to
know, observe, and understand the ways and wonders of God in the deeps, and his
various motions and operations in things which he does. There is nothing seen
in the Root by the sense of the creature, as it lies or springs from thence, or
as it returns thither. Man, as man, you know, has only a brutish
understanding of every thing; so of God: I had not (says one) the understanding
of a Beast, as of God himself, so of all his motions, thoughts, actions and
intentions, in and about things, times, places and persons; seeing only a
present appearance of this or that, not knowing what it is, whence it came,
what it means, or whither it tends. So he judges according to a present outward
appearance, and shows himself to be what he is, and what God will have him to
be, A fool in himself, that the pride of his glory may be stained, and God
alone exalted.

Though this be a dark obscure dispensation, yet because God will have it so
with us, this is beautiful in its season: as darkness is proper for the natural
night, so is spiritual darkness for the spiritual night as proper for it: as
light becomes the day, and as truth and substance is proper for it; so are
shadows and lies for the night: and while the night remains, it is as suitable
they should remain, as when the day dawns the shadows fly away: O how clearly
does herein the excellency of Christ, of Sion, the holy seed, appear! though
they are not exempted from any varieties or changes in the inward or outward
world running through them; yet they still sweetly remain the same: being one
with the Father, they are as he is; like him, as Seth was like Adam: what ever
their clothes, their appearances be; yet their life and substance is still the
same. For a season, the inward man I find, is so benighted, and bewildered, yea
all his life so deaded, and his light so put out, and his glory darkened, that
he is made to see and confess, that he knows nothing as he ought to know, nor
has nothing to boast of, no more then the outward man; and that it is only the
spiritual man that shall grow up to perfection, and live and flourish, whether
in the seed, or grown up.

For the coming of this full enjoyment of all blessedness and happiness,
longs my poor waiting soul, in a daily expectation, upon the God of all our
mercies, who is coming to fulfill our desires, to complete our glory: he comes
not with a thought to tarry or go back; he comes swiftly with speed, leaping to
meet his beloved waiting Jacobs, to revive their spirits with his loves, his
wisdom, power, grace, goodness, yea all his Riches of grace and glory; that
they may sing sweetly, strongly, thoroughly, fervent, and frequent, the new songs
of Hosanna, Hallelujahs, blessing and glory, power and praise to our God for
ever, who is the Author of all our present good, and the Omega of our perfect
happiness, in that heaven of heavens where Just men made perfect take up
Sanctuary and assured Rest for ever, solacing their souls with their Beloveds
loves; the riches, honors, pleasures and soul-delights of eternity that are in
the bosom of our dear and precious father: in the full fruition of this rest
and glory, longs my waiting soul to be, where time shall be no more; the time
of sin, sorrow, pain, death, any weakness or imperfection: when that which is
perfect is come, I know all this which is imperfect will be done away: yea then
there will be no complaining or cause of complaining within or without, because
all sin, and so all sorrow and sighing shall certainly be done away, as being
momentary; and the pure language, the new melodious tune of Joy and gladness
from the Spirit, shall be only sung, heard, and known to be for ever in the
Saints, to their Savior, who is our choice, our chief, our only and dearly
beloved One in all, without and above all in himself.

Worthy Sir, because Honorable in the Lambs clothing, having put pen to paper
with an intent to salute you and your near relation with a few broken fragments
gathered up from my Masters table, I shall take leave, having a little freedom,
to communicate a few more lines to you; hoping it will not be too burdensome to
you. Sir, I cannot but Christian-like thank you for your Remembrances of us at
all times; though I know you are in covenant with that God, who will recompense
sevenfold into your bosom, for all your labor of undeserved, unexpected love:
your sympathizing, from a fellow-feeling of our affliction, and others, plainly
demonstrate you to be a fellow-member of that mystical body whereof Christ is
the Head: O what a mercy is it to be heartily affected with the afflicted! to
have the same mind which was in Christ in us! to have the same love one to
another, as Christ has to us, in quality, though not in quantity! The love of
the Lord in his people, is many times made out to them in an unexpected way, to
wonderment, when they think least of it: as Hagar said, the Lord looked after
her, when she looked not after him; so does he to many of his people
oftentimes, provide and protect them in a way and manner which they cannot but
wonder and bless his Name. It Is a wonder to me sometimes, to see how sensible
one Christian is of another sufferings, because it is so rare: but when I
consider that all the Saints have but one God, one Father, one Faith, one
Baptism, one Love, one Spirit, who dwells in them all, and runs through them
all, and conveys it self to all as it pleases, whether absent or present, afar
off or near at hand, known or unknown by face: Although the Saints are
scattered abroad in this wide, wild world, and distinct in the flesh from one
another; yet are they one in the Lord, and so love, sympathize, sorrow, and
rejoice together, as members in truth of Christ's body: Christ was of a
sympathizing suffering Spirit; and such hearts, qualities, and dispositions, he
would that we should have: therefore he puts his Law of love and kindness into
us: he takes our humane nature, and infuses his divine nature into us: Christ
bears all our griefs, and carries our sorrows, and in all our afflictions is
afflicted with us, and for us.

O how good is it, in our wilderness of trouble, to lean upon this our Beloved,
who can bring us out of them all! we are very apt to stumble at the way and
manner of Gods dispensations, when we have little cause for it, if we did but
consider that he has glorious ends in all he does and suffers, for the
exaltation of his Name and our sole comfort*

Though the Lord may cross his people in the way of his providence, so that all
things may fall alike to all in this World before men; yet not in his account
hereafter: for he may give us to look unto him in his word of Promise, and
there behold him by an enlightened eye, doing all things after the counsel of
his own good will and pleasure, for his glory, and our everlasting comfort,
beyond and above all outward sense and external hopes; as he did to Abraham,
calling things that are not, as though they were: I am not so much a worder, as
an admirer, and a little writer of the wonders of God in the deep of
affliction; to some of my fellow sufferers, who have been bewildered in their
spirits as I have been, though now through rich mercy in some measure refreshed
with the crumbs of Canaans comfort, and drops of honey and milk, grace and love,
that flows from our good spiritual land. Much of Gods fatherly Dealings, and
Refreshings, I might relate unto you, which my hungry, thirsty weary Restless
soul has known, seen, and felt, in the day of trouble, the hour of sad
temptations, if I had freedom.

Sir, the sharp exercise which has been upon my spirit, since that little
unknown book was made, of Gods glorious Displayings of light and love upon a
poor, dark, forlorn, nothing-creature in an unexpected time, I was not then
capable of the publishing of it: if I had, I could not be free, fearing how it
might be with me afterward. Truly, since then, I have had a sharp
Winter-season, mourning for the loss of all that comfort: I have been stripped
so bare of seeming comfort since, that I cannot boast of that, nor of any
comforts, but of the God of comforts; not of enjoyments, or experiences; not of
any gifts or graces; but of the giver alone, and of my infirmities; and in that
Power of Christ which hereby is made more manifest in us: the Lord alone is the
boast and glory of his people; in his Name we set up our Banners, and upon him
alone shall our mind be fixed, and our soul-affections set, and not on things
below: this is to have our hearts above, on things remaining; not shadowy, but
substance; and our conversation in heaven, though we tabernacle in houses of
clay in the world. When Christ is our only object, then, but not till then,
will all below be our abject, in comparison of a full God, a naked Christ, a
free Spirit. O that it might be all our aims and ambitions, to take up our
crosses and follow Christ fully; even through fire and water: for here our God
has promised to be with his people; and when we are purged and purified enough
he will lead us out into a wealthy place, of peace and Joy.

O that we could walk in our Masters steps without stumbling, and do as he did,
run our race with joy; knowing if we run, we shall obtain the Crown, which is
not to be had on this side the end of it: Surely this prize is worth the
running, waiting for, and longing after, till we enjoy it. Our suffering and
Cross is but a little while, for a small moment; but our glory is for
everlasting, our reigning for ever. Thrice-happy is that soul, whom God chooses
for his own in his furnace, and chastens in his school: happy entering, happy
in it, and for ever happy afterward. Blessedness and Happyness is annexed to
Gods chastning: Blessed and happy is the man God corrects, and teaches new
lessons thereby: therefore not to be despised: Our loving Father, even smiles,
when we think he frowns upon us: when he seems to strike us, he strokes us. He
does to us, sometimes, as he did to Adam, convey a precious promise, with a sad
threatening; saying, The seed of the woman, etc. Mercies oftentimes come veiled
to us; and a sentence of death may pass upon our choicest mercies, as did upon
Abraham, for the trial of our graces; which would not shine so bright, if not
fire-tryed, with Abraham's; whose faith, love, and holy obedience to God, after
thus tried, shined more eminent and glorious.

I find our sad visitation known to you, Sir, was not so much a Punishment, as
some may call it; but rather a strict trial, to try our faith, love, patience,
and pure good will to God; whether it be simply and entirely to him, without
by-ends, as Satan would have accused Job to God, saying, Does Job love, or
serve God for nothing? and also to try our strength, what we can do or suffer
for God; and also to try our wisdom, how prudent and patient we could behave
our selves like true Christians, in the loss of all outward enjoyments, though
dear and precious to us; not only in flesh, but in Spirit.

O what an unspeakable mercy is it, to find and feel God enabling of us to
hold out in these fiery trials! speaking well of the Name of our dear God,
owning him in giving mercies to us, and not friends; and owning him to take
them from us, and not enemies: the Lord gives and takes also. Truly the Lords
trial in these things, is a fiery strict trial: God tries our Faith and love,
as he did Abraham's, by causing him to offer up his only son Isaac, the son of
promise: Now I know, said God to him, in doing this, that thou love me: and
thou shall know it; for in Blessing I will multiply Blessings upon thee and thy
seed; This ascending spark of love in Abraham, from God to God, did as I may
say engage the Lord to descend showers of blessings upon him, and his seed. Our
God in wisdom does all things: he tries and proves us, to do us unexpected good
in the latter end: he tries whether we can live in the practical part of
Christianity, what we can do and suffer in truth for Christ; whether we can be
content to leave all for him; be content with Christ alone, without friends, or
the world, gifts, graces, qualities, and conditions, and suchlike in one hand,
and Christ in the other; whether we can be content to resign up all to God, all
outward, and inward, things; all Relations, Ordinances, Gifts, Graces, Desires,
Hopes, all that can be named or desired of Heaven and Earth; that nothing of
self may Remain; none of our wills, desires, ends, hopes, but all crossed and
destroyed in us, which is contrary to the Lords will: the Creatures will being
so contrary to Gods will in all things, it is well to have it crossed, though it
be in that which may be most for its seeming comfort. Surely they who are
acquainted with the excellency of Gods hidden Divine will, would not have it
crossed, but rather its own will in any thing, though it may seem hurtful to
it; sure it is thus.

Sir, I shall acquaint you a little what a hard thing it was for me to submit
to this will of God, though easy to him to make me quietly submit, and resign
up all to him, in the departure of my dear Brother. Though the dispensation was
dark and dismal, yet I dare say from a full persuasion, after many doubts,
that though it might seem in Judgment, yet God has received him to everlasting
mercy: for being weak, I find he was suddenly overcome by the strong man, not
willingly, but by constraint; meeting with many unnamed inward and outward
fears and troubles. Certainly, what is not done in despite, willingly, against
God, but the violent hurrying of Temptation, through weakness, not willingly,
shall never be laid to any poor tempted souls charge. The Lord does not look
so much to the weakness of his creature, and temptation, as to his own rich
mercy and free love. Surely thus the God of love has looked upon my dear
departed Brother; for I had experience of him in his lifetime, that when he
was himself, he served the Lord with many Tears, and Temptations oftentimes;
and did endeavor to walk as exact as a Christian, to that light of knowledge
God was pleased to measure out to him. Much I might say of this nature, had I
opportunity, and thought it convenient: which causes me to Believe the Lord
has not looked upon him to take advantage of his weakness, to destroy; but to
save him, according to the multitude of his tender mercies; and being a God of
love, patience and long Suffering, has, I am now persuaded, though one while I
was much troubled with doubts and fears, has taken him from sin and sorrow,
to bliss and blessedness: He was of a very weak Constitution of body. Truly,
dear friend, the great loss of such a comfortable staff, such a hopeful son,
and brother, the manner and unexpectedness of his going from us, has been a
sword in our bones, first pierced through our soul; which has cut us to the
heart: First, from a serious consideration of Gods dishonor, by opening the
mouths of the ungodly, to cause them to stumble at the way of God, saying, What
profit is it to serve God? and are these they that made the Lord their trust?
and suchlike things. And secondly, the Saints discouragement, besides our own
great discomfort in the middle of our supposed comfort. I hope the effect of
the sword I mention, will prove the Lords severing sword, to separate more
between flesh and Spirit, Christ and the creature.

I find, all that God does, is to try us whether we can love God as well in the
way of his Judgments, as in the way of his mercies; love him in casting us
down, as raising us up: in smiting as healing, in Winter as Summer, for all, in
all changes and conditions, above all: many are the troubles of the holy seed
of God; and truly did we not suffer something, the remaining part of Christ's
sufferings would be unfulfilled; which trial and proof he endures in us: as he
suffered in the pattern, so we in truth: O there is a necessity of our
suffering something, if we would be feelingly sensible of what Christ has
suffered in the flesh for us, to crown us with glory in the Spirit, and be
sympathizing with others in affliction, and really magnifying that free grace
of God which ends in full glory; causing us always to extol the Lord, blessing
him with a triumphant song of praise. I am sure the Saints have cause to bless
the Lord at all times, even in the wilderness, because this is the place where
God usually speaks comfortably to his people. Though he lead them this solitary
way, yet it is the right way; the way of the Lord is an unknown strange way,
even in the whirlwind. O what a happyness is it to find, afflictions come not
out of the dust, but as we may say, they are the finger, the providence of God,
for our good: he makes them antidotes to us, to expel poison: the more we have
of them Sanctified to us, the more pure, like Christ: we have no cause to say
when we are under the rod, therefore not beloved of our Father, because so and
so afflicted; but the rather loved of our Father, because chastned: hereby we
are made more conformable to Christ, by being buried with him in the Baptism
of his sufferings: The Cup of affliction, which the sanctified ones drink of,
is a Fathers Cup; which they cannot but drink, handed to them for their good
from himself; whose ways are all mercy and truth, whose paths drop fatness,
whose outgoings and in-comings are all sweet and precious to us. The poor
creature in trouble, is very apt to cry out and say, Is this and this a
pleasant way? is this a comfortable condition? and can God indeed bring good
out of such great evils? O it is impossible.

Thus I have thought often: Can any good come out of sinful Nazareth, out of
my confusion, and darkness? O it is impossible: with us it is, but not with God,
who at first commanded light to shine out of darkness. O what cause have we to
exalt Gods power and love in the fiery furnace! to glorify him in the fires, is
most excellent: O they cannot but do it, when they see him keep them alive in
the midst of that fire which consumes only the dross, preserving the Gold pure
for his Use: That enlightening honey which is in the top of our Gods Rod, does
enlighten us to behold this great and glorious sight, why the Bush burns, and
is not consumed. O this honey out of the rock, Gods love-manifestations, will
sweeten, and does, all conditions and changes to us and all Christians. some
are afflicted for the trial of faith and patience, that they may have their
perfect work by exercise. Sometimes, that the handiwork of God may be made
more manifest upon us, the Lord may take away our corn, Wine, Wool, and Oil
which he gives us, when we do not prize him above all; that hereby we may
learn to love our giver more then gifts, and to know the worth and sweetness of
them more by the want of them a while: We may be Deprived of any comforts, yet
not of the God of comforts; and sadly cast down, yea seemingly forsaken, and
overwhelmed with sorrows like unto David, and weary of life with Job,
distracted as Heman, and yet belong to, and dearly beloved of God, as they
were: therefore it is good to take up this Holy Resolution, to wait on God in
the way of his seeming Judgments, and in meditation of his loving kindness,
till he shall make hard things easy, and crooked things strait, rough places
plain, and bring to light the hidden things of darkness, making darkness light
before us. Said good Jacob, (who found it good to wait upon God) I have waited
for thy Salvation; and I will wait: and David, In waiting I waited: and Job,
All my appointed time will I wait till my change come. O how desirable a thing
is it to see Christians have such patient, believing, submitting hearts to the
Lords will: Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him: and, I am thine, save
me: This is a sweet rolling on God in a day of trouble; and saying with Christ,
The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? it is a Cup, not a
Sea; and a Fathers Cup, not an enemies; and a Fathers gift.

By considering these things, the Lord pleased to work comfort, renew his love
to my soul when much troubled at my dear brothers death, by which I hope the
Lord will gradually crucify all that he would have crucified, and blast all of
creature-props and helps, that he alone may be our only stay and blessedness.
The nearer a soul comes to God its haven of happiness, the more it meets with
sad storms and tempests: Which makes our port of glory more desired, and
gladsome to us when we come unto it: The bitterness of misery sets off the
sweetness of mercy, as the blackness of the night the glory of the day: I am
sure my brothers afflictions here, were sharp before he went hence; which
causes me to believe he is now for ever comforted: Some comfort came from this
word to me; Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thy eyes from tears, when my
soul was in bitterness; for thy work shall be rewarded of the Lord, and thou
shall see him again with greater Joy: though thy desire was crossed here in
some things, as David's was and others; Yet ye shall rejoice together in my
Kingdom. I find this was of God coming in power to the satisfying of my
troubled soul in an agony of sorrow. I answered this voice, Lord, it is enough
if thou make thy word good: thy will, thy unknown will, by any but thy self be
done, O Father. And further it was said, That nothing should separate him and
Christ, nor estrange his love from him.

Till God appeared in this manner to me, Quieting my heart in some measure, I
was much troubled touching his honor, to think how he would suffer by some,
till he told me he knew what was most for his glory, far better then silly I.
Truly I may say, How had it been unless the Lord had been on our side! we had
almost fainted, and dwelt in silence; had not Jehovah our Mighty God been seen
in the mount wonderfully for our preservation and deliverance; for which I
desire to Bless his Name for ever, who comforts me much from these words,
bidding me look to Jesus the Author and finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy
that was set before him, endured the cross, despised the shame, and is now set
down on the Right hand of the Majesty on High. He was oppressed and afflicted,
yet he opened not his mouth; learn of him, for he is meek and lowly, which
makes him so unspeakable lovely. Patient was Christ when he suffered: he
overcame by patience, as well as by power. As Christ was patient, so was his
members; and so should they be like David in their suffering seasons: says
David, I was dumb, and opened not my mouth: and let the Righteous smite me,
and it shall be an excellent Oil; it will be for my profit; his correction.

This our loving friend, Christ, will not wound us, but heal us; when he
smites, he smiles upon us: for he even then refreshes us with his brook, and
wellspring of life, in our waylesse wilderness, under all our sorrows and
smitings; and hereby God makes us to lift up our heads with Joy and praise. O
what cause have We to bless the Lord under our crosses, for his supporting
hand of love! truly, as great cause, as if he took them away from us. It Is a
desirable thing to own God to be Just, when he shows mercy; and when he gives
grace, to be still exalting the Riches of his glory. O the happyness, the
heavenlyness of those spiritualized souls, whose wills are subdued to the Lords
will in all things; so to acknowledge him Righteous in all he does, and our
selves vile! O what a blessed state are they in, who have no will to be guided
by, but the Fathers will in all things; which easily learns them to deny and
defy self fully, in all they do and say; and to esteem only of God and the
workings of his Spirit above all. O that we might be as Christ was, lovely in
all conditions, by our Holy submission to our Father! Christ we know learned
obedience by the things which he suffered. O how lovely was he when he lay in a
Manger, when he lay on the ground, and sweat Water and Blood; when he was
scourged, and crowned with Thorns; when he hung on the Cross between two
Thieves; when he lay in the grave! even now Christ appeared most lovely, by how
much he abased himself thus low. O how desirable a thing is it to see goodness
and greatness kiss each other in one noble person! O what a great condescension
of love was this in such agreat person as Christ, who is King of Kings! O that
such a glorious Majesty should so low condescend to such poor, weak unworthy
worms, to teach sinners in his way, to do as he has done, to suffer patiently
and willingly without the least gainsaying or resistance, such grievous things!
Christ was as a sheep before the slaughter: David under afflictions was dumb
also, because he saw the Lord did it, and not man: so Aaron when he lost his
sons suddenly, held his peace: And good old Eli said, It Is the Lord, let him do
as he pleases. In this sweet spiritual frame was Job, when he said it was the
Lord that took from him in the flesh, who could give him much more in the
Spirit. All that they suffered, was not so much from an enemy as a Father, for
their good; who seeing how apt the current of their affections was to run more
to them then to him, their heart being not so fixed upon him as he would have
them, but very apt to be divided, and to wander from him, like ours as we are
creatures; therefore he sends afflictions as messengers to fetch them home to
his Sheepfold.

Once this word came in Power to me when I was very sad: O soul, grieve not,
grieve not for thy Brother: precious in my sight is thy Brothers death, though
grievous to thee and others: was not Christ's sufferings much more terrible? and
think not strange your fiery trials; for what is befallen you, is common to all
in this life: and the same afflictions are accompanied to your fellow members
in the world. Think of Samsons death, a good man, who died among the
Philistines, and seemingly in anger to be revenged on them for his two eyes.
Consider these things, and lay them to heart; and sorrow no more as one without
hope; but know, all things shall work together for good, even this, unto ye:
therefore be still, and know I am God, doing whatever I please, in heaven, and
earth, and all places: his time was not in thy hands, or friends, or his own,
but in my hands: A sparrow cannot fall to the ground, nor a hair off the head,
without my knowledge. When these things was spoken to me, I was very restless
in my spirit, even resolving to spend my few days in silent sorrow, not
expecting any more Sunshine days of joy: and suddenly the glory of the Lord
broke forth through some thick darkness, bidding me lift up my head; and the
Lord was pleased to speak to me as sweet as ever; telling me he would wipe all
tears from my eyes, and the rebuke or reproach of his people he would take
from off all the earth: he had spoken it who would do it, Jehovah, a fulfiller
of Promises: therefore let not thy troubled fearful heart be disquieted or
afraid: Peace, Peace be unto thee. I found Christ reasoned with me, as once he
did with his disciples when they were sad; Why are ye troubled? and why do such
fears and doubts arise in thy heart? am not I and my favor more to thee, then
enjoyments or Relations, or any thing thou can desire? though I chasten thee
sharply, to draw thee near me; yet my favor will I not take from you, nor
alter my love: is not this, O soul, more then all, to give thee my self, Who am
the Desire of Desires, the Beauty of all Blessedness, the top of all Royalties;
even the fullness that silleth all in all; who has made thee beautiful through
my comlyness: though black in thy self under the bondage of coruption, yet
Lovely as Redeemed, Justified, and Sanctified? my soul was even melted with in
me, at this sweet and powerful manifestation of love, that I cried out, None
but a naked Christ: and who would not sell all, for this Precious Pearl, and
willingly resign up all even life it self, to Christ, who became poor, and
despised in the worlds eye, that we though his poverty might be dignified in
the Spirit, and made rich in Faith, in grace, in humility, and goodness? this
is to be heavenly rich in God, in love.

O who would not leave all, to follow Chrst for his treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, and all good things which he gives to his close followers? This was
one word which was spoken to me also: Love thou me more then these; more then
Gold, Silver, Lands, Livings, any relations, Golden gifts and Graces, men or
means? and love not the world, nor the things of it: love nothing, I say,
equal or above me: for he or she that loves any thing more then me, is not
worthy of me: set not thy affections on things below, on earthly, sensitive
things; but on Heavenly things above, invisible glories. If riches increase,
set not thy heart upon them.

My Dear brother was such riches to me, that if I could have but enjoyed his
life, and him spiritually restored to a comfortable state in this life,
according to my earnest and constant souls desire, and the desire of many
precious Saints; that our God might have been more glorified in his life on
earth; O what riches, what a portion of great joy would this have been to my
soul, none knows: but now seeing by this, uncertainty and emptyness in all
things below the Lord, I am forced to say, What is riches, or the increase or
sweet enjoyment of any creature comforts, to the lifting up of Gods lovely
countenance upon us! I can say now more feelingly, Whom have I in Heaven or in
Earth to glory in, or stay my self upon, but God alone, from whom flows all our
fresh springs of comfort, joy, life, love, and sweetness? The Lord, I hope, by
our late chastisements, will make us more holy, humble, thankful and fruitful
in every good work of God; and cause the sword not only to pierce into our
souls, but even to divide and sever more between soul and body, flesh and
spirit, Christ and the Creature; That nothing may remain in us, but what
loves, admires, and blesses our God alone above all.

Sir, this is all my desire, to know more, and do, and patiently submit to the
holy will of our Dear God in all things; and to have more single affections to
him, and his naked glory.

Christian friend, I have written in these papers some poor stamerings, or what
the Lord has communicated to me with comfort in weakness, through which I have
written this to you, that you with me may bless the Lord for his precious
loving kindness to his unworthy handmaid. I cannot tell whether I may be
troublesome to you, because so tedious at one time. When I begin to write to a
Christian friend in this kind, I am always much enlarged; the more, because but
slow of speech. In these few lines you may perceive a little, that many are the
troubles of the Righteous, and also that the Righteous Lord supports sweetly
under them all; and in his own best time graciously delivering them out of all.
These troubles of ours may well be compared to waters, even a flood of waters,
as David said, that has wave upon wave: which though it be our Fathers
pleasure, and our portion to wade through; yet this is our comfort, We shall
not sink in them: they may pierce our body, but cannot run through our souls, to
the destroying of our life which is hid with Christ in God, who is our Head,
which shall never perish: and you know that member can never fear drowning,
whose head is still above water. Whilst Peter's Faith was anchored in Christ the
Rock of his Salvation, the water to sense did so far give back, that they
miraculously became a solid path to lead him to his Lord: so I hope our late,
as well as former troubles will tend to lead us nearer to our desired haven of
rest: for certainly, all the waters of affliction are to those whose faith is
exercised in their God, but a short Compendious way to Communion and fellowship
with the Father and the Son in the Spirit, which is best of all; better then
life, as David said; who had, as we have, fresh troubles often, and fresh
mercies; fresh Temptations, and fresh deliverances: what said good David, when
he had deviated and gone astray like a lost sheep? Before I was afflicted I
went astray; but now have I kept thy Word. Here he sweetly acknowledges
tribulations to be messengers sent from God, to lead him to the Shepherd of his
soul: said he, Now have I kept thy word: now do I know by this thy sanctified
visitation, of a truth, that I am thine: before, I was a lost sheep of the
house of Israel. All our afflictions, inward and outward, in our selves or in
the world, 'twill appear to be only but the corrections of an indulgent
Father, for our profit, in the end; to make us rich in God, though poor in our
selves. In the mean time, the good Lord endue us with Power from on High,
whereby we may possess our souls with Patience, till the time of refreshing
from on High shall Visit us; till he who changes times and seasons, changes
hearts and conditions with us. Truly if the Poor Creature could change, or any
ways help it self, or have any relief or help from any broken reed, or
cisterne, besides the Lord the living Fountain: how would it do, as Israel of
old did, run from God to them, adoring it self, and Idolizing the creature, men
and means, more then admiring the Lord in them, above them? Truly our natures
are too apt to this: for let the Lord but open a little of himself to us in any
thing or way, we are Readyer to be taken with it then him; like some, who look
more at the Dish, then the Meat in it. How apt (let experience speak) are we
to take up our rest in something below our rest, and not look up higher to the
Fountain from whence all our fresh springs of comfort flows? therefore our
God seeing this not good for us, in wisdom and love dries up all Cisternes and
Pools when it is thus with us, that nothing we run to the creature for in need,
may yield us satisfaction, below himself; lest We should rob him of his glory,
and give it to something below himself, which is not worthy of our heart-love:
and his jealousy is such, that he will not give his glory to another, nor his
praise to any thing or Idol, but himself. To this end therefore he imbitters
every thing in the world to us, to wean us from her shadowy delights; like
loving mothers, who wean their children from the breast, which is so sweet and
dear to them: even thus (as I may say) does God our loving Father with his
beloved children, make every thing vile to them, that he alone may be the
preciousness of his Saints, and all things nothing in comparison, that he alone
may be their All in all, above all; their only boast and glory.

Before this glorious discovery of love, I was like another creature, running
like Israel of old, from Mountain to Hill, and Hill to Mountain; from men to
means, from means to men: I was, like the Spouse, restless in my spirit; which
made me to send my spiritual senses all abroad to seek Christ, as I thought;
but truly I found him not in any thing or place, save in denying me that
soul-comfort which I sought for: all my seeking was like Mary's at the
Sepulcher, forsaking all things for him, as I thought; whom if I could but have
found, in my way and time, I should have thought I had found enough; being led
forth to seek The true God in an Ignorant way; being blinded with Ignorance; I
asked every thing below him, sensitive things: I asked the Earth, the Sea, and
the great Deeps, and the Windy Air, with the Dwellers therein; also the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, lesser and greater; knowing and unknowing creatures; and I
found they all answered me with one voice, We be not thy God; seek him, O
seeker, above us: Thou art but deceived in us; we are only by him made and
upheld; he is Lord over us: this was without. Then I went home, and said to all
that were about the doors of my flesh, Tell ye, my familiars, what ye know of
God; O tell me somewhat of him whom my soul longs after: and they cried out
also to me, We be not thy God; it is he has made us, not we our selves.
Notwithstanding all these denyals, being soul-restless still, I asked further,
even the whole world in general, if it were not my Savior, and could deliver
me from the bondage of corruption; and it answered me very powerfully, I am
not, but I am by him: he whom thou seek for in me, even he made me: above me
must thou seek to him that made me, and rules all things, to new make thee.

Being, as you may perceive, Sir, a wandering bird, and soul-disquieted within
me, I sought to every Idol which I made an Idol below the true God for
soul-rest, peace of conscience and joy in the Holy Ghost: but like Noah's dove,
found this not in any thing to refresh my weary soul. Now I find, that though
every thing be beautiful in its season, place and station; yet in this respect
it must deny it self, and be nothing, as it did to me; and acknowledge this is
not to be had in any created glory on this side the Creator himself. Every
thing spoke the same to me in this; We be not the Lord thou look for; but
from him, and by him, for his glory. I have found the Apostles words true, that
many times we may understand him by his visible works in the creation of the
world.

In my former Creaturely seeking of the Lord, as I have a little mentioned, I
found a vast emptyness in all things: but when God was pleased to show me this,
he turned me to himself, and then gave me rest and satisfaction in his love,
which is better then life; whereby my hungry thirsty spiritual starved soul
was satisfied with that fullness that fills empty nothings with good things. O
it is the sweet incomes of this Divine fullness that makes The dry land a Pool,
and our thirsty lands springs of Water. O when the Lord shall thus appear to
us, showing us by his light the vileness and vanity of every thing which is
Excellent within or without us; then indeed the soul cries out, What have I to
do any more with Idols, to seek after Bethel, after any thing that will not
profit; but the True, Living, Immortal God, who dwells in everlasting,
unutterable, and unsearchable light and glory, without beginning or end? Truly
when we seek the true God aright, we shall find him to be a certain Light
above all Lights, which no carnal eye can comprehend; and a certain Voice which
none in their creaturely state can conceive of: and such a sweet perfume is
Christ, which no nose of sense can attain unto: He is a certain Sweetness above
all Sweetness; no perfumes, Ointments, Spices, Milk, Honey, or Manna, is
comparable to this sweetness, though ever so desirable; for this is
incomparable, above and beyond all, for ravishing, pleasant, and satisfying:
and such an imbraceing is Christ, our soul lover, which no sensitive feeling
can take hold of; this pure light of life shines where no place is to hold it;
and the Voice of Christ sounds free where no air is to help it; and his
sweet savor yeildeth sweetness and life where there is no feeding on
creature comforts; and Christ's embracing is such an embracing, where no arms
are ever plucked asunder.

Now when the poor soul has thus found and enjoyed Christ in the inmost Holy
Places of its new heart, whom it so earnestly sought for, and now entirely
loves; now it cries out, None, none but Christ: it now makes account of
nothing in comparison of him, in whose favor consists its life: this is it a
soul seeks when it seeks God; this is it we love and desire, Even a
manifestation of that Jesus love who has saved us from our sins, and is
Emanuel, God with us, in all our troubles, sorrows, trials, and temptations;
This blessed man Christ Jesus is our joy and Crown of rejoicing; which causes
us to break forth into songs of praises and Hallelujahs; glory for evermore to
our God. Finding all things dead, and empty to me, when I sought Christ
sorrowing as I have mentioned; I was afterward comforted in some measure,
being made willing to wait in silence; in which silence my soul with Hannah
poured out my complaint to him, whom I know when all fails us, does help us;
being mighty to save, keep and deliver, even then: for the Lord never leaves
his in trouble, but supports and delivers out in his appointed time. He that
sets our faces to Zion, will undoubtedly bring us hither in his own time, to
possess our prepared mansions of glory in his kingdom, to live there in
praising him to all eternity; singing continually form our God to our God, whom
we have been seeking, like the Spouse, abroad, When he was at home in the
secret closet of the heart; to which when we return in peace, we here find him
in our souls by his Spirit, sitting as only Lord and King in his Throne,
ruling over all the Powers of darkness in us. O for ever happy are they whom
God is thus nigh unto in all things; filling them with all joy in himself,
through believing: O can any soul that has or does taste or enjoy but ever so
little of the Lord, say his consolations are small, but very great, and
precious; full of life, love, Power, like himself; and full of virtue and
streaming sweetness, like Jonathans honey, which revives the drooping spirits of
sad hearts, in their dry, barren, sad, solitary wilderness-condition? Though
this is the Fathers will, to have us pass through this state in such harsh and
difficult ways to the eye of sense and reason, which would much terrify and
perplex a carnal heart; yet our God has such sweetness to mingle with them,
which makes them very passable to his Beloved, whom he leads through: for the
bondage of Egypt, he can make tolerable; and the wilderness, with all the
intricacies thereof, he can make easy; who makes rough places a plain way for
us to go through our Journeys end: Canaan also, with the high walls and strong
enemies thereof, even the children of Anak, whose very sight struck terror;
even these our God did and does make Conquerable to his Christ, and anointed
ones.

Christ by his death has made his people Conquerors over all enemies, and
oppositions; by his death he has brought to light life, strength, joy, glory,
and immortality: though he was, as we are oftentimes, put to death in the
flesh; yet he was quickened in the spirit: it is this Spirit alone that
satisfies, quiets, and composeth a poor troubled soul, when none nor nothing
can: and it is this holy Spirits work to lead us out of one truth into another,
out of one dispensation into a higher; and at last possess us of perfect rest
and happiness: out of which rest I have been much bewildered and perplexed in
my spirit, from the sense of a dead lost condition, not knowing what to do, or
which way to turn my self for comfort. About four years ago, I was very sick
and weak; in which weakness the enemy took advantage to show his power, and set
upon me strongly, tempting and troubling me, by raising new fears and doubts
in my heart; which caused me to conclude that all former discoveries of love
which the Lord had communicated to me, was but lying vanities, and delusions:
this trouble was beyond all my former childish troubles; for my old life was
not so much captivated, as my new one, my spirit: and truly this temptation
lay with some confidence upon me, that I knew not what to say, or do: I thought
sure the smoking flax, that little spark of grace was now extinguished wholly:
but I can through rich mercy say, Blessed and for ever praised be Jehovah, who
has so sweetly unbosomed himself, and unboweled his precious love to his
unworthy handmaid; telling me, that all my creaturely mutability should not,
nor could not alter his unchangable love: for whom he loved once, he loved for
ever, to the end, and in the end, endless, ever; out of sin into grace, and out
of grace into glory: neither should any of the water which I had cast upon the
smoking flax, quench it, by disowning and doubting of the realitie of my
state, and the truth of those precious appearances I had enjoyed from the Lord:
this smoking flax, was God beginning a good work in my soul, who would perfect
it for his praise. O how strongly does the renewings of the Lords love to us,
engage our hearts to honor him all our days, in righteousness and holiness!
who notwithstanding all our unworthyness, and greatness of sins, sins after
conversion, as well as before; sins often reapeated, as well as once only
committed; yet is our loving friend, who loves us freely, faithfully and
constant, even in the height of our unconstancy to him; as he was pleased to
show me, by not leaving me destitute of his mercy and his Truth, in my sad
sorrovvs.

By this fiery contest, I find, that what is of God shall and will stand, all
vvindes and vveather, against all the many tempests and violent storms of all
principalities and powers of spiritual wickedness in High places; all this
has been in vain: for this fire, though a little while it did but Smoke; Yet
it will Blaze, and that with fervent heat: it will never go out; it is God
Everlasting; it is God beginning a good work in the soul, who will undoubtedly
perfect it; it is God in darkness, or glimmerings, who will be a Shining light
to us, and fullness of Heavens Glory in us.

Precious friend, I find, all that a poor soul can do against the smoking
flax, or Day-breaking of God, shall never prevail against it, for it overcomes
all, and can be overcome of nothing. O that I could more praise and exalt the
Lord for his unspeakable loving kindness to me; whose compassions fail not to
his unworthy servant, though once and often she thought they had, under her
spirits captivity. Now I can through mercy say, That Jehovah the infinite and
glorious being, shows wonders to the dead, and makes the desolate arise out of
the grave of sin and silence, as Lazarus did, and praise him who preaches
loving kindness to such; and puts an end to death and destruction, by his own
life and salvation: I find the Lord makes known his faithfulness and loving
kindness in the land of forgetfulness, to souls that know not him, nor his
wonders in the deeps; which causes me to wait with joy for the further
manifestations of the goodness and glory of God: Our God of love, whose
communications of love are very precious to our souls, strongly engaging our
hearts to praise him: O when, says my soul, shall we do this sufficiently! When
we confess God to be his own praise. Some say of Parents, That their Children
can never render to them their due: I am sure we may say so of God our Father,
and Wisdom our Mother, which is Christ: for let a soul give never so much to
God, it comes short of what is his due from us, for making us free, and joyful
in himself, from the bondage of corruption, by awaking and arising from under
the black dark veils of Ignorance and Unbeleife; saving us from our enemies
which are too strong for us; and so redeeming and gathering us to himself, who
can no ways be happy out of him.

Now that we may be made thus happy, Christ is a Refiners fire to us, to burn
and destroy all our dross, hay, and stubble; that we may be made a meet and fit
habitation for God through the Spirit. O how should we be content with this
purging fire, knowing it to be our Gods design of love, in sending his
bosom-Son to utterly abolish Mortality, and all that has Death in it, and then
cloth us with life, glory, and Immortality, according to his will; that we may
be fit Brides for the Marriage of the Lamb; appearing like those who are
begotten of the Immortal seed, and so changed from glory to glory by love;
Whose irradiant beams, and sweet shinings forth, makes the Lion a Lamb, the
vile precious, and ravening ones meek and lovely. These experienced souls, I
find, can more admire, then speak forth the exceeding riches of Gods grace and
free-love, and of his strange and mighty acts in renew making of us, by
destroying the old creation in us, and transfiguring his new one in spirit.
When this new life and glory, or new creation, is come down into us, or we
taken up into it; then may a Christian be called A new Jerusalem, a heaven, and
earth, wherein dwells righteousness, or the righteous Lord, who makes all
things new, and glorious; by whose in dwelling presence in our hearts, we come
to see what all the mists and fogs of darkness were, which hindered the
Revelation of Christ in the Gospel, and his sweet discoveries of love from us;
which was only our proud, vile, vain, corrupt self; this is the obscuring
veil; which veil for our comfort the Lord Jesus puts aside, as he said he
would do, in the appointed time: this veil of darkness I find also to be that
vile woman which Solomon speaks of: her specious pretenses to man in his lost
condition, to bewitch us from the true knowledge of our dear God and his ways,
and spiritual Worship: but he who is our wisdom and Power, our all, is
stronger then all enemies, to save and keep us for ever from them. Christ is
our over-topping Mountain, in and by whom God has promised to destroy the
veil of the covering of the flesh, sin, or self-righteousness, which is cast
over all people: this our spiritual eyes shall see with joyful heart, when
Christ shall be established above all other Mountains in the souls of his
people; above every high thought and proud vain imagination, which offers to
exalt it self above God, where it ought not to be, in our hearts; till the Holy
Child Jesus is born and brought forth thence, our beloved Isaac, heir of all
things, with the Government of life and Peace upon his shoulder, to rule all,
as only Lord and King, King of Salem, Prince of Peace; who has, does, and will
bring all things in us into Obedience to his Holy Scepter; even our corrupt
averse wills, to subject to his Holy Divine will in all things: this great work
Christ accomplishes by degrees, when he takes up his abode in our hearts.

Ah what a joy to the spirit, but what a sorrow to the flesh, is this
indwelling presence in the hearts of his sanctified ones! it is a sorrow to the
flesh or old man in us, because it is death; and it is very joyous to the new man
or second creation, because the life and glory of it: the indwelling presence
of Christ is a death to all that is evil in us, and a Quickening spirit to that
which is good: the first work our King Jesus does when he enters into our
hearts; he shows us the falsness, foulness, Ignorance, and darkness, and all
manner of evil in them; and afterward he shows us the reality and purity of
his own native beauty, and Supernatural Glory. When the Sun of righteousness
arises in our dark hearts, we then immediately see the gross darkness in us;
and are then able to discern aright between darkness and light, good and evil,
truth and Error, by the Spirit of God which searches all things, even the deeps
of Gods Counsels, and the deeps of our hearts: showing us the weakness and
unworthyness of our selves, and also the Power, Glory, and Omnipotence of God
above them, who can turn and change them how and when he pleases, for his own
glory and our sole comfort; and make us, of vile, precious and beautyful,
through his comeliness. O what could God do more for his vineyard, his people,
then he has done? he has invested them with his own glorious Image, and
married them to Himself, or Son, which is all one, who is Heir of all things,
King of Kings; and also dignified them with the graces of his Spirit, and
clothed them with the Glistering Spangles of his Holiness, the Angels Glory;
and cull and choose them from the common part of Gods earth, to be the chief or
precious part of his earth: his choice Golden Mine, his peculiar treasure.

O may we not say, who have but seen, heard, or tasted ever so little a glimpse
of this free rich grace, and precious love of God; what, O what shall we render
unto the Lord for these unspeakable special mercies! for certainly God looks
for some return of his own from us; he looks for some thing present from us,
as we do present and future from him. He looks we should live answerable to our
enjoyments and hopes. Says Peter, What manner of persons ought we professors to
be in practice, in all holy conversation! O how excellent a thing is it to see
all the Saints adorn the Gospel of Christ in walking, as well as talking!
Noah is recorded for a walker with God: O to walk holy as Christ did, when he
was upon earth in the days of his flesh, is excellent: we know his life was a
life of Sanctity, an holy life; for, said he, Which of you convinces me of
sin? and he who had no sin nor guile found in his mouth: nay more, the Devil
confessed him the Holy one of God. O what a precious life was this holy life! as
Christ walked holy, so humble: O that all Saints might walk in humility, as
their Lord and Head did; who though he were Lord and Heir of all, yet he washed
his Disciples feet; and humbled himself to death, even the death of the cross.
The humble soul looks likest Christ; humility is the veil of Christ's Bride: O
how beautiful does she look in Christ's eye, when this veil of Rebekkah is
upon her! be ye clothed with humility, says God, to us. As this veil hides
another faults, so its own graces, as Rebekkah did her beauty: true grace, you
know, shines most irradiant through the mask of humility. O what are all
Christian duties, without heavenly humility! Incense smells most sweet when
beaten small; then it sends forth its fragrant perfume. As Divine humility
studies Gods goodness, so its own unworthiness: Better is that sin which
thoroughly humbles the soul, like David, then that duty which lifts up
Pharisee-like. In this the grace of humility is precious; it gives all to God;
as Joab when he had gotten the Victory, sent for King David to carry away the
Crown of it; so a believer, when he or she has gotten Victory over some
corruption or temptation, then they set the Crown upon Christ's head, and say
with David, By my God I have leaped over a Wall: and if they find strength to
go through duties, then they with Paul write Christ and free grace upon all: I
labored more a bundantly then them all: yet not I, but the grace of God in me.
To walk in love and amity, as Christ did, to the glory of God, is very
desirable: he breathed forth nothing but love; he was full of this perfume; as
his person was lovely, so was his disposition; he was composed all of love: he
was so full of love within, that it broke forth without: his lips dropped
honey, his hands Myrrh, his sides blood, his heart Love: love! O how ought all
Saints, who look for glorious things, to come to live in love, as Christ did
upon earth! O that this sweet spice might send out its fragrant smell more
among Christians, that all things by them might be done in love! We know, says
John, we who live in love and amity, That we are passed from death to life:
surely none can love the Person of Christ really, but they will love his
Picture, though very contemptible to the world. O how might the Saints highly
honor God, if they were more united in love, and quite dispossessed of these
two evil spirits, that of self-conceitedness or vain glory, and
uncharitableness! O why should this be? why should not we love as brethren?
have we not all one Father? indeed that is a blessed strife, when the Saints
contend for the faith; this consists in unity. O it is good indeed, when simply
out of love, the Saints shall be willing to suffer patiently for Christ, as he
did, with a Lamb-like spirit: considering all our many and great sufferings are
but one dram to his.

To think of Christ's sufferings, and of his faithful ones, David's, Jobs,
Jeremiahs, Sions, and many others, that we are not alone in troubles, sorrows,
and sufferings, has administered much comfort to me, under all our sad changes.
The Lord give us to submit, and subscribe more to our Gods will in all
troubles, and changes, that we may swim in the laver of his Love: Glorifying
Him in the fires.

Sir, having these scattered Meditations upon my spirit at present, I was moved
to communicate them to you by way of writing, being deprived of another
opportunity. I hope you will accept my poor mite out of my scanty store, into
you full treasury, with love, as I have done yours formerly in your lines. I
remember a saying of yours which stirred me up a little to this communicating:
you said, As the rich ones of the World Visit one another, opening their
treasures to each other; so much more should the Saints declare the goodness of
God to each other. Fearing my many lines at present may weary you, and being
somewhat weak in body through sharp exercises, I shall now leave you, with all
Saints, in the Everlasting embraces of our dear Lord Jesus, whose delight is to
make his beloved the bosom of his rest, the bed of Spices; whose precious
graces does perfume all our tribulations: through which we enter into the
Kingdom: and this love of the Lord also makes the world, and evil of it, a
sweet savor of good, Peace, and rest to us in the end. The good Lord cause us
more to indulge and honor the spirit of these graces above them, for the sweet
incomes of them; this will demonstrate to the world, that We enjoy more Within,
then we make sound of Without; which my spirit covets after; and live not only
in the form, but in the Power of Godliness; and so cannot be led away with the
Error of the wicked, or fall from our own stedfastness; but grow in grace, and
in the pure, perfect knowledge of our dear God alone. Now the God of love and
peace be with ye, making ye perfect in every good work of faith and love;
working in you, and all Saints, and us, that which is well pleasing in his
sight, causing us all to walk as Angels among Men, as the Powers and glory of
Heaven upon Earth, like the children of the day in practice, as burning and
shining lights in this dark world. As the Saints believing heart, and undaunted
spirit is their glory before God; so is their unspotted life, their holy
walking, their Glory before men; for when they see their good work, they will
glorify their God. Sir, having no further freedom to write more to you now, I
shall take leave, and rest, Remaining

Your engaged friend to love and serve you, as a member of Christ, an heir of
Heaven, and one anointed of the Father, SARAH WIGHT, An empty nothing, whose
fullness is all in that Fountain that fills all in all.
I am unskilled in Apologies and excellent expressions; and if I were not, I
had not whereof to glory of the excellency of man's wisdom.

Sir, my dear mother is still tossed with many tempests of temptations; but the
Lord graciously supports her, and gives her a little hopes sometimes of a
gracious Issue. The Lord cast her into your heart to beg patience for her, to
wait silently for a fresh manifestation of the Lords love to her sad soul; that
she may with joyful lips set forth his praise: she sees so much evil in her,
and no good, which makes her often doubt whether it will go well with her in
the end: and I tell her this is a token for good; for the more vile in our own
eyes, the more precious in the sight of the Lord: this is a terrible sight to
flesh and blood, To see our selves as we are, and God as he is.

Sir, your kind acceptance of my former lines, encouraged me to present these
to your view at your leisure in spare hours.

Sir, I desire you to give my cordial respects to Mr. T. though unknown by
face, with thanks for his Christian care and love to us in an unthought-of way:
it is not he, but the Lord in him and by him, who will not leave a cup of cold
water unrewarded, to him, and you, and all his.



FINIS.

