A Supplement to his Majesty's most Gracious SPEECH.
Directed to the Honorable House of Commons, by the Commons of England.
TO add to the Works of the greatest Men, if the Nature of the Subject permits
or requires it, has never yet been thought an immodest Undertaking, nor
prejudicial to the Honor of the first Author. You are now most about the Ardua
Regni, and indeed more Arduous Matters never yet came before your Honorable
Body. It is not therefore to be conceived that Things of such a great and
various Nature should be all summed up in a short Speech; nor is there reason
to expect that the King should charge his Memory by a long recital of
Particulars how important soever they may be, and necessary for your
Inspection. We therefore in all humility, in the Name of all the Commons of
England, make bold to lay before you such Additional Matters which seem to us
to be of the greatest Weight, and absolutely require your Consideration, and
your grave Wisdoms to apply some speedy and effectual Remedy, and which are
either but slightly touched, or wholly pretermitted by the King.

We confess indeed that the King has laid the Scene very large, and wide, when
he reckons our Misfortunes, and the Miscarriages that have been this last year,
according to this Division, Such as have been upon Land, and such as have been
at Sea. This Division is comprehensive, extends to all the Calamities we groan
under, and if you please to examine what has been acted, or what has been
defective for want of acting, on these Two Elements according to the full
Latitude of these Expressions, you will not fail to discharge the Trust reposed
in you, and to see the Cause and Occasion of all our Miseries.

But however the King has been so large in the General, we conceive he is not
so express in Particulars; which therefore we humbly crave leave to supply and
lay before you, by a just and impartial Representation of such Instances, which
nothing in the World can obscure, palliate, or excuse; And out of Deference and
Reverence to his Majesty, we shall do it according to the same Division. And we
shall begin with the latter.

Such Miscarriages as have been at Sea. These have been so terrible that they
make all our Hearts ache; the Merchant feels the immediate stroke, but the
influence extends all over the Kingdom. The Loss of the Effects (how great and
considerable soever) is the least of the Evils; The whole Trade is in danger to
be lost, or mightily diminished. The industrious Merchant is exhausted, and
discouraged; many have not the Ability, and many not the Will, to venture any
more their Interests under that unfortunate and impolitick Conduct, they have
already so often, and so dreadfully miscarried. The King calls this a Disgrace,
and indeed it is so, but if that was all it was no great Matter; the Merchants
we suppose could bear the Shame well enough, if they had but their Effects: And
if such prodigious Losses affect only the Modesty of the Nation, we are pretty
well yet; we may blush, or so, and the harm is over. If the Merchants interpret
that which has sucked out their very Hearts blood, to be only some Disgrace to
them, we presume they are the modestest Men living. However, let the Disgrace
be what it will, that might be repaired again, by an honorable Action; But as
the case stands this is irreparable, our Honor and Interest are both sunk
together. The most beneficial Trade we have is almost, if not altogether,
ruined; and that apparently by ill Management. The Winds and the Storms the
Merchant bears patiently, and his Losses redouble his Vigor and Industry: But
when he is ruined by his Guard, when he is convoyed into Destruction, this
admits of neither Remedy, nor Hope; and there is not so much as Chance or
Contingency to encourage him: And every Man will conclude it is time to give
over, and to sit still, rather than to freight his Ships for the Benefit of
Enemies, and run the Risque of such desperate Adventures. The King tells you,
That Trade is Essential to the Welfare of this Kingdom: Then our Welfare is
lost with our Trade, as being Essential to it, and the most flourishing Kingdom
in Europe is reduced to Barrenness and Penury. Our Money is gone abroad
already, and if our Trade, which should supply us with more, is gone after it
too, we have nothing left but to lament our Miseries, and with that stinging
Aggravation, that they are irrecoverable. The Commodiousness of our Ports, the
Skill of our Merchants, the Expertness of our Seamen, (all the Cost in the
World) will stand us in no stead, but to make us more unhappy. All the
Advantages are poisoned in the Conduct, and made the Instruments of our
Misfortunes.

But here the King tells you, That he has Resented it extremely, and that he
will take Care that those who have not done their Duty shall be Punished. It
may be so; but here we crave leave to add this Supplement, That we hope this
will not hinder, nor abate the Resentments, nor take off the Care, from
bringing the Offenders to condign Punishment. The King's Resentments and Cares
ought to be a spur to yours, and thereby by yours will do two great things at
once, both imitate the King, and consult the Safety of the Nation; and in order
to this, we humbly propose these following things as highly deserving your
Enquiry.

1. How it came to pass, and by whose means, that the Merchants, after so many
Petitions and Addresses, were for some Months detained, and no importunity
could obtain either Convoy or Leave to prosecute their Voyage. And they were
reserved to that Critical Time, when the French Fleet were just ready and
prepared to receive them. If the French themselves had had the Conduct of our
Fleet, they could never have timed it better; they are no sooner got into the
Streights, but our Smirna Fleet is sent into their Mouths. Put these together,
that the Merchants were ready many Months before, and all the Application they
could make could never procure Liberty, but they must go then, just then, when
nothing could hinder them from falling into the French hands. And we shall
leave it with any considering Man, whether it be possible to believe but there
was Treachery in the case, at whose door soever it will lie. And it is not for
nothing, that our Fleet was scarcely out of sight, bur there was a general
Report about the Town, that it was in danger to be taken by the French. Which
evidently proves, that the Contrivers of their going out were privy to te
Secret, and knew well enough what would become of them. To this may be added.

2. What was the Reason, and who was in the Fault, that our Grand Fleet which
set out with them, did not see them out of danger? Was the Grand Fleet designed
only to Complement Sir George Rook, and the Merchantmen, and to bring them so
far on their way, and wish them a good Voyage? If this were all indeed, they
did their Parts, and a Gun at parting would fully execute their Commission. But
if it was to protect them from the French Fleet, what fair Reason can be given
that they left them so soon, or that they left them at all, till they were sure
they were clear of danger? Was it upon supposition the French Fleet was not
out? This is a fine Conduct indeed, to leave matters of this Consequence to
Ghesses, and Suppositions. The Merchants had staid long enough, and there were
Frigets enough and to spare, to have sent to Breast, if the matter had been
doubted. And we are in a fine Condition, when matters of such importance must
be managed by uncertain Conjectures; and when our prime Ministers neither have
good Intelligence, nor will give such Orders, whereby they cannot fail of it.
But we believe this is not the Fault; and any Rational Man, who impartially
considers this Conduct, will conclude, That the Supposition was on the contrary
hand, and it was so fatally managed, upon the Supposition the French were out,
rather than upon Supposition that they were not.

3. Another Miscarriage deserving your Enquiry, is, That after this woeful Loss,
and the exact Knowledge of it, our Grand Fleet again set sail; Who was in the
Fault that they did not directly sail to the Streights, and repair our lost
Honor upon our Enemies? The French Fleet was then foul with their long Voyage,
some of their Ships disabled, and the Fleet certainly weakened, so as they were
in no good Condition to resist the force of our Fleet, which was fresh, and so
well prepared. This might have redeemed our Loss, at least have compensated it.
But instead of this, we do nothing but sail some Leagues to Sea, and then
return; as if the Business of our Grand Fleet was for nothing else but to make
a Flourish, to ride in triumph over the Waves, but not to fight with our
Enemies. And surely it is matter of Enquiry whose Fault was it that this
promising Opportunity was lost? Was it for want of Orders? Or for not executing
them? Or for want of necessary Stores and Provisions? Each of these are
unpardonable Miscarriages, and will lie some where, and we hope your Wisdoms
will search this to the bottom. For it is a lamentable thing, that the Treasure
of the Nation must be thus lavished away; that our Navy must be rigged at
incredible Expense, and all for nothing else but to furl their Sails,; if the
Business of the Fleet be only Show, and not Action, we think a Past-board Ship
at my Lord Major's Show might do as well as any in the Ports, and save the
Nation a great deal of Money in their Pockets.

4. Notwithstanding all this, and that our Fleet has hardly been from home,
the French Privateers have been more busy and bold than ever; they lie
perpetually on our Coasts, take our Vessels out of our Harbors, and sometimes
in the very Sight of the Fleet. And what does our Fleet signify that can secure
us neither at home nor abroad? Heretofore we used to boast of our Wooden
Castles, as the Strength and Defense of our Country. And the Truth is, our
Ships and our Seamen are as good as ever, but if they are made unserviceable
and useless by ill Conduct, it is all one to have no Fleet at all, as none to
defend us.

For the Close of this, the King tells you, It will deserve your Consideration
whether we are not defective in the Number of our Shipping. And intimates his
desires that you would supply that defect; but except you supply the defect of
Conduct, you may provide as many Ships as will bridle the Ocean, and just to as
much purpose as those you have already. And the Truth is, we have Ships and Men
enough, but our want is more honest and able Ministers: And if we must lay out
our Money to supply the Defects of the Navy, let us do it where the need lies,
and purchase wise and faithful Managers. And we know no Reason why Our Money
may not buy faithful Counselors, as well as the French Money can buy
treacherous. ones. In short, if you make Provisions for the Navy, we beseech
you to begin at the right end, to provide us just and skilful Ministers of
State: For let the Ships and Commanders be what they will, while they must act
under the direction of corrupt and selfish Ministers, we can never hope to be
better. This is an Error in the first Concoction, and can never be rectified;
in vain therefore do you provide Ships and Supplies if you do not take care of
the Helm, and see that such honest Guides are set up who will mind their
Country more than themselves, and the public Interest more than their own.

The next Branch of the Division is the Miscarriages (the King calls them the
Disadvantages) at Land. And these indeed are by no means equal to, because they
are sar greater than these at Sea. The Loss of Heydelberg and Reses, of Huy and
Charleroy; besides the terrible Defeats in Two pitched Battles, the one in
Flanders, the other in Piedmont: In all which, besides the Towns and Castles,
the Artillery and Baggage, the Confederates lost very few less than Fifty
thousand Men. But to come to that in which have we were more immediately
concerned, and that is the Battle at Landen; of which the King tells you. That
it was only occasioned by the great Number of our Enemies, which exceeded ours.
Now we cannot deny the Truth of this; for it is unaccountable, that an equal or
less Number of Men should storm a Camp, and make such terrible Havoc and
Slaughter, and take most of the heavy Cannon and Baggage. But this
notwithstanding, there are Two things to be added by way of Supplement.

1. How it came to pass, that at that Battle, the French came to exceed ours in
Number? The Confederate Army were 80000 Men, and if they had been kept in a
Body, or near together, they would have equalled, if not exceeded, the French.
But by a new Martial Policy, a great Detachment was sent away under the Duke of
Wirtemberg, and another greater to cover Liege and Maestricht; and then, when
our Army was weakened, the French sought and beat us. And what better could be
expected? It Is in vain here to say, we did not think the French would attack
us, but that they would direct their Course toward Liege or Maestricht; for
that instead of mending the Matter makes it worse, and the Miscarriages
greater. For it is inexcusable in a General to say, he did not think of his
Enemies; Non licet in belio his peccare. And it is a greater Dishonor to a
General to be surpised and taken unawares, than to be beaten: For Victory is
an Act of Providence, but the other is his own Negligence, or want of Prudence.
The English of this is, Luxemburg outwitted us. And we are like to have a fair
Account, when our Enemies are stronger in their Heads and Arms. The King tells
you, it is necessary to augment our Forces, and hopes you will accordingly
supply him; but according to the Measures of the last Summers Campaign, it is
impossible to know what Numbers are necessary. For you must not only provide a
sufficient Number to fight, but a sufficient Number also to be sent away. And
what Number or Purse is sufficient for both these Purposes, we doubt will
puzzle your Arithmetic as well as ours.

2. The other thing we crave leave to add, is, The unaccountable Conduct of
removing our Camp, in such a Juncture, from a strong and well fortified Place,
to pitch it in a Plain; one would have imagined, when our Army was so much
weakened, a little foresight would have taught us to keep in the strongest
Hold; had we continud in our Camp at Park Abbey, the French would have found it
a tough piece of Work to have forced it: And Luxemburg knew it, and therefore
enticed us out, and made his Advantage of it. But this is not all; We are not
only contented to relinquish a Place of Strength, but we must encamp so
awkardly as to place a River behind us; whereas any Man, who had the
experience, but of one years Campaign, would easily have seen the
incommodiousness of such an Encampment. And that the River ought to have been
before and not behind us; both to hinder the Approaches of the Enemy, and, in
case of Defeat, to secure a safer Retreat; and the Event plainly proved it, to
our Cost. For the Situation of our Camp gave far easier access to the French
than they could have had, if they had been to approach us over a River; and
upon the Victory the River served not only to bar a regular Retreat, but made
even the confused Flight far more desperate. And it had these Two fatal
Effects; to keep us longer under our Enemies Swords, and to drown our Men when
they fled from them. And in truth, the River destroyed far more of our Army
than the French did, or could do. There is great Reason therefore that you
should augment our Forces, that you may be sure to have enough to make Bridges,
to secure the Retreat of the rest.

And thus much we thought good humbly to add, with respect to the Martial
Miscarriages: But there are others of a Civil Nature, and God knows these are
not less Fatal to the Welfare of our Nation; it destroys us at home, as these
do abroad. We need not go into Flanders for our Destruction. We have Cankers
and Moths in our own Bowels, which consume us as effectually as our Enemies
Swords. There is no doubt but you will have Complaints enough from all
Quarters, and the Miseries this poor Nation labors under will reach your Ears
from all parts of the Land, and we hope you will relieve them. We shall
therefore select a very few, out of that great Number, to represent unto you.

And the First is, The misimployment of our Treasure: Our Money is spent
contrary to the Ends for which you gave it. This is plain to a Demonstration,
you gave last year Five Millions to desray the Expense of this years War; a Sum
indeed sufficient, and to spare, and more than ever this Kingdom before paid in
one year; and yet neither our Seamen, nor our Land Forces are paid. A
Proclamation was issued ont to continue the Seamen in pay all the Winter,
which is only to multiply an unnecessary Charge, and without the least
Advantage; but this was only to prevent the Murmurings and Complaints of the
Seamen, but this will not do; for the Cries of their Families, and their own
want of Bread, makes them desperate, and their Complaints fill the Ears of the
Government, and of all Men besides. Their Wives and Children live upon Trust,
in hopes of Repayment when the Summers Expedition is over; but now their
Creditors are weary of Trusting, and will give them no more Credit, as having
no prospect when they shall be paid. And this is the state of most of our
Seamen, and it is dismally sad that they must venture their Lives, and
themselves and their Families be starved for their Pains. The Case is not one
jot better with the Land Forces: They have neither pay nor subsistence Money.
And to give you one Instance for all; in the Tower Hamlets some hundreds and
Quartered, and they lived so long upon their Hosts that they both Grumbled, and
upon the same Reason, for want of Pay, one from the Government, the other from
the Soldier; insomuch that a Fortnight since, my Lord Lucas, (no doubt by
superior Direction) sent the Officers of the respective Parishes to all the
Public Houses, acquainting them, That if they would Trust each Soldier as far
as 35. a Week, he would be responsable, and see them paid.

This is Demonstration that our Forces are not paid; and they must either
subsist upon Trust, or upon Freequarter, or Perish.

This is not only the Case of the Soldiers, but of all other Persons concerned
relative to the War. Those who have furnished Naval Stores, and Arms; the
Workmen who belong to the respective Yards, etc. they are all in the same
Condition; and have no hopes, but the Expectation of what you will give. And
now let us ask, If any mortal Man can believe that Five Millions was not
abundantly sufficient to defray the whole Expense of this year? nay, Whether
the one half of it be not more than sufficient? And yet the public Debts still
increase upon us, and by a strange State Paradox, the more you give, the more
you owe. By this Rule, your Supplies will but set us further behind hand; for
if Five Millions have run us so much in Debt, what will Ten Millions do? In
short, you may give what you will, but without some effectual Care, and more
than has hitherto been taken, the Issue will be always the same; for if when
you have given more than enough, the Forces, etc. are not paid, neither will
they, if you give Ten times more. For when our Money is once diverted into a
wrong Channel, the same Stream will carry away all we have, and with the same
ease and security. This therefore is an unsufferable Grievance, in whose hands
soever it lies; and is no less than robbing the Nation, and abusing your
Supplies. Give us leave to speak a sad but a plain Truth; if any Pentioner
Pockets up any of the Public Moneys, he does not only betray his Trust, and
his Country, but he devours the Blood of the Soldiers and Seamen, and feeds
upon the Spoils of the People. The Eyes of all the Nation are upon you in this
particular: And if you do not make a strict and impartial Enquiry into this
last years Expense, they will be tempted to think, what some do not stick to
say, not only that you do not care what becomes of our Money, but that you dare
not dive too deep into the Accounts, least your own Names be found there; and
you are forced to connive at other Men's Guilts, least you discover your own. We
therefore earnestly pray you, for your own sakes as well as ours, that before
you give any more Money you will carefully examine the Public Accounts, and
see first what is become of the last. That you will diligently inspect through
whose hands it passed, to whom disposed, and for what uses? And we do not doubt
but you will find at the least the one half of it imbezled, or misapplied; and
we hope you will not only detect and punish whom you shall find Guilty, but
make them refund, and restore also, what in plain English they have stolen from
the Nation.

2. The Exportation of Corn in a time of Scarcity, or (which is all one) to
make a time of Scarcity. Wheaten Bread is now in London 12 s. 8 d. a Bushel,
and White Bread 18 s. and Corn all over the Kingdom bears some Proportion to
this, and rises in the Price, respectively to the different Places; and is
Three times dearer than usual, especially considering the seasonable Harvest.
And this is plainly the Effect of Exportation; and we have Dutch Factors all
over the Nation, raising the Markets, and starving the Poor. And we cannot but
take notice of a late Proclamation, both here and in Ireland, forbidding under
strict Penalties to transport Corn to France; which is a pleasant Business,
when it is already, by Act of Parliament, made Treason to correspond there. But
this Proclamation has two Edges; the one was to lay the Odium of the Dearth
upon we know not who, Jacobites; as if all the Corn had been by their means
transported into France. And this has been Artificially and Industrioufly
spread through the Countries; but this had like to have spoiled the Project,
for the Country took the Alarm, and was glad of any occasion to keep their
Corn at home, and rose unanimously to defend their Corn from French Harpies.
But upon second thoughts, it was judged convenient to send some Soldiers to
the Ports, and other Places, to keep the People in order, and patiently to see
their Corn carried away before their Eyes. From whence it is notorious enough,
that our Corn goes to Holland, and not to France.

And accordingly the other End of the Proclamation is plainly to encourage the
Transporting it to Holland. A Prohibition to France is a tacit Direction to
Holland. It had not been very plausible, nor perhaps safe, to have sent out
Orders for the Transporting Corn to the Low Countries, but this might be done
as well by a side Wind; it is but proclaiming that none must be sent to France,
and then the Inference is obvious, there is no danger in carrying it to
Holland; nay, not to leave the matter to Inference and Collection, there are
positive and direct Orders, in the Ports of England and Ireland, not only to
permit the Factors for Corn to Buy and Ship it, but are ordered Convoys to
guard them to Holland. From whence we plainly see from what Quarter our
Scarcity comes, and what great Compassion we bear to the Poor of England. Let
the Dutch have but Plenty, and it is no matter if our Poor be Starved. We need
say very little in this particular to awaken your Diligence in examining it;
nor what great Care our Laws have taken to preserve equal the Prizes of Corn,
by the Provisions they make against Restrators, Forestallers, and Monopolizers.
For if you do not take some Care, and that speedily too, the Poor will carve
for themselves, as they have already in some Places: Hunger breaks through
Stone Walls; and if Famine comes on us, by your neglect, you must thank your
selves, if the Poor fill their Bellys at your Cost, and eat up what you had
provided for your own Meals.

3. The Corrupt Administration of Justice. This is the worst Crime in a
Commonwealth: A Murderer, or Thief, breaks the Laws; but a Corrupt Judge both
breaks and debauches it, and poisons the Fountains of Justice. Do we not daily
see the Judges acting under the Directions of the Ministers of State, as if a
Judge was sworn not be guided by the Laws, but by the Secretaries. The poor and
scandalous Acts of picking up, and cherishing the most profligate Villains to
make Evidences of; as in the Case of Fuller, Holland, etc. The intolerable and
illegal Fines; when a Man not worth a Farthing shall be Fined Two or Three
hundred Pounds, contrary to the direction of Law, which always limits Fines to
Men's Abilities, and with a Salvo contenemento of this every Sessions gives
notorious Instances; and particularly the last, when one Mr. Cook, upon the
single Evidence of a Beggar, and vagabond Papist, and that Evidence not direct
to the Fact neither, but only by hearsay; for she swears she saw him set a
Seal, and heard Mrs. M. say, it was the Seal of my Lord N. and this is all that
came up to the Indictment; and yet upon such an Evidence the Man was found
Guilty, and Fined 200 l. and Mr. Recorder, by wonderul Eloquence, made him
believe the Court did him a favor in not setting him in the Pillory. And is
not this, think you, an admirable Course of Justice, when an Evidence by
hearsay shall be sufficient to convict a Man? And if you please to consult the
Records of the Sessions, you will find a great Number of such shameless Cases.
Perhaps it may be said here, that the Persons convicted either were, or were
suspected to be Jacobites, and so no Friends to the Government, and no matter
what became of them: But we are not Pleading for the Jacobites, but for
Justice; and Justice is blind, and knows no Parties. And we presume under
former Governments (when these things were complained of) the respective
Persons under such Sentences were not thought to be Friends to the respective
Governments. If the Administration of Justice is limited to Persons and
Parties, and not to Things and legal Proofs, it is partial, and corrupt; and we
are not governed by the plain Rules of Law, but by Faction and Passion.

But if this was the worst, and such partial distributing of Justice concerned
only the Subjects Liberty and Property, it might be the better borne. But in
the Case of Life it is just the same; these Men make no more to Hang a Man
contrary to Law, than to Fine him. The Case of Capt. Ashton you all know, and
there has long since an Opinion been given of it in the House of Peers: But
there is a fresh Instance of one Anderton, a Printer, who was Murdered by the
Bench against the plain Words, and express Direction, of the Law in that very
Case made and provided. The whole is very well worthy your Notice; but we shall
not take up your time with mentioning the want of One, much less of Two, direct
Evidences to the Fact charged upon him (which the Law expressly requires in the
Case of Treason) nor the indirect means to induce the Jury to find him Guilty,
by Brow beating, Threatening, and such like; which so overawed the Jury, that
most of them brought in a Verdict directly contrary to their Judgments. To omit
these, which deserve your Enquiry; the single Question is, Whether Printing be
Treason, according to the Laws of England? He was indicted on the Statute of
Treasons, 25 Ed. 3. Now it is as plain as the Sun that Printing could not be
Treason, by the express Words of that Act; for Printing was not in use, nor
known, when that Act was made: And it is to be remembered that that Act limits
Treasons, and expressly declares, that there shall be no Treasons for the future
but what are there expressed, but what shall be declared in Parliament. If it
be said, though it be not there expressly, it is vertually, and by
interpretation: But pray what kind of Treasons are those which are virtual, and
interpretative Treasons? Our Laws know no Treasons by inference and
consequence, but what are plain and express in the Law. But whose
Interpretation is this? The Interpretation of the Judge, or of the Law? The
Judge has interpreted it so indeed, and has hanged a Man upon it, but the Law
has interpreted it quite otherwife; and the Law is so far from interpreting
Printing to be Treason, that it has plainly declared that it is not so, and
consequently not within that Act. The statute 14 Car. 2. has made Provision
for the very Case, has taken notice of and assigned Punishments for the
Printing Seditious Libels, and some of them has left to the Discretion of the
Bench; but with this negtive Clause expressly, not extending to Life. This is a
plain Case, that Printing Seditious Libels is not interpreted Treason by the
Law, but the contrary; and if it be not Treason by the Construction of Law,
then by the same Construction it is not Treason within the Statute of Treasons.
For the Fact is not express in that Statute, nor could be; the Question is only
concerning the Constructon of it, and the Law has already construed it not to
be Treason, as not extending to Life. So that the Construction of Law, is in
direct opposition to the Construction of Judge Treby; and he has hanged a Man
in downright contradiction to the very Words of the Law. Now it is to be
remembered, That this is Law, of Printing, is your own; and you have made it
your own Act, by reviving it; and to have your own Laws invaded openly before
your Faces, is such an unparalled Boldness, that no Words can sufficiently
express; and in the Case of Life, it is Murder besides. We are no Patrons of
Seditous Libels; Let the Printers of them be punished, but then let them be
punished according to Law, and not by Arbitrary Constructions and Wrestings,
which will serve (if the Judge be so disposed) to hang any Man in the World:
For if he construe one thing to be Treason, contrary to the express Words of
Law, he may by the same Reason construe another thing to be so; and so at
length our Lives and Properties shall not be judged by just Laws, but by unjust
Men.

Upon the whole; If the Current of Justice be suffered to run in the same
Channel, no Man is safe, your selves are as obnoxious as others; for when once
you come to be out of Parliament, and the Sessions is over, you are equally
liable to the Lash of these Men with our selves. You may make what Laws you
please, but if you do not take care that they are more honestly Exccuted, your
good Laws will stand you in as little stead as they do us. The English Laws
indeed are the best in the World, but if they are administered by the worst of
Men, we re never the better; there is nothing more merciful and tender, in the
Case of Life, than our Laws, allowing all the favorable Construction and
Latitude that the Case can admit of; but if they shall be crampt and pincht by
a corrupt Judge, to the destruction of a Prisoner, what good does the Equity and
Favor of the Laws do him? Our Laws are so very averse to Cruelty and Blood,
that they will not permit a Butcher as a Jury-man to pass upon Life and Death;
but what does that signify, if Butchers shall be permitted to sit upon the
Bench.

4. The Posture of Foreigners within this Kingdom. This is a matter of high
Consequence and requires a strict and cautious Eye, not only of your selves,
but of every Englishman besides. Foreigners have always a separate Interest
from that of the Nation; and if for Numbers, or upon any other Consideration,
they become formidable, it is high time for the Natives to look to themselves,
and to provde for their own Safety and Security. This Kingdom has already
smarted under Two fatal Instances; the one of the Saxons, the other of the
Danes; who being respectively called in, upon the pretense of Assistance, so
soon as opportunity was ripe, made themselves Masters of the Country, killed
our Princes and Nobles, and made the rest their Slaves and Vassals. The Memory
of this continues fresh among us, and is proverbially transmitted to Posterity;
and so long as the Name of Lord Dane remains, will never be forgotten. And our
own dear bought Experience, one would think, should teach us Wisdom in this
Case, and make us beware of Foreigners, and careful how we trust them. Now we
need not remind you, that a great part of the Military Force of this Kingdom is
in the hands of Foreigners; most of the Commanders of the Army are Strangers to
us, know not our Laws and Constitution, nor have any kindness for them, but
have, must have Ends of their own divided from that of the public Welfare of
the Nation, and People. Give us leave here to wonder, and let all the World
wonder with us, That the Ecclesiastical Bench in the House of Lords should not
only Vote for this, but make Speeches in defense of it. It was a smart Reply
made by a noble Lord, That he might in a short time see Dutch Bishops in that
Bench as well as Dutch Officers in the Army: That our Souls might as safely be
committed to their care, as our Lives, Liberties, and Estates. And in truth if
we give the Sword into their hands, which governs all things, we may soon have
not only Dutch Bishops, Dutch Presbyters, and Dutch Commanders; but Dutch
Lords, Dutch Commons, and Dutch every Thing; and Lord Dutch may become as
formidable to us, as Lord Dane was to our Ancestors. For it is as clear as the
Light, give them Power to defend us, and they have Power to ruin us; and those
who will Fight for us only for their Interests, will Fight against us upon the
same Inducement; and if they can find their Account in it, we may soon feel the
effects of their Valor, in subduing us, when they are not able to master our
Enemies. A fat Morsel is good prey to a Soldier of Fortune: And if he can make
his Fortune at our Cost, we must own our selves beholding to him, if he does
not carve liberally for himself, though it be upon our Bones and Carcases.

And if you please to consider the Posture of Foreigners amongst us, you will
find not only that most of our Troops are composed of our old Taskmasters the
Danes, and of the Dutch, and the French Refugees: But, (which extremely
sharpens this Consideration) that there are also a great Party of Foreigners in
the heart of the Nation, who may soon be, if they are not already, prepared to
second any Attempt, if not to act in conjunction with them. This Inference is
so natural, that nothing but the utmost Forgetfulness of our selves can make us
careless on that hand: But if there be violent Presumptions, nay, apparent
Evidences, that some great Matter is brewing among them, it is no less than
desperate Infatuation to lie secure and negligent under such treatning Dangers
in our own Bowels. It is not unkown to you how great a Number there are of
French Refugees in and about this City, who are in full Union with their
Brethren in the Army; nor what Military Authority and Power the Duke of
Lemster, their Countryman, has in this Kingdom; nor can it be doubted but he
has great Authority and Influence over them, and manages them according to
such Methods and Councils as may best answer the Ends which are driven at. That
accordingly most of the French Refugees, who are able to bear Arms, are
actually Armed and Listed under distinct Officers, and of whom the said Duke is
Chief. That there have been several Sums of Money distributed to them, and some
in particular by the said Duke, in all probability to supply themselves with
Weapons, to use upon such Occasions as they shall be called to when Opportunity
serves. That, in pursuance of this, several thousands of Arms have been made
and bought up by them; and that in particular one Gunsmith in the Minories
contracted with some of the French Refugees for 500 Case of Pistols, of a size
shorter than Holster Pistols, and which he accordingly made, and half of the
Money was paid him before hand, and the rest at the delivery of the Pistols.
And that other Gunsmiths in the Minories had full Employment from the same
hands, in the same Work; and it is said they have not bought up less than 8000
of these Cases of Pistols. It is here matter of your serious Consideration,
what use these kind of Pistols are to be put to? It is certain they are not for
Employment in the Field. And it is as certain they are sitted for the Work they
drive at; and we shall leave it with you, whether it does not portend some
sudden and secret Execution, of a barbarous Nature? That accordingly several
threatening Speeches have been given out, That some Persons at a certain time
should have their Throats Cut; and some of them are grown to that Confidence,
as to make particular Threatenings; which shows they are almost sure of their
Design. A French Minister sent several Letters to a very considerable
Clergyman, threatening him, That he was a dead Man; That he was to buy a Halter
for himself; That there was a Gallows prepared for him, which he must first
ascend and mount. Further yet, That there have been not long since 700 Tickets,
of mysterious Figures and Characters, scattered about St. Anns Parish among the
Habitations of the French Refugees, and thrown into several Houses, which
plainly import some secret and mysterious Design. And, to close up all, there
are almost every Week great Numbers of French Refugees, and other Foreigners,
brought over hither from beyond the Seas, on pretense to go and inhabit in
Ireland, who notwithstanding are kept in England, and no doubt to augmet their
Forces, and strengthen the Consederacy.

And now, Gentlemen, you that are the Trustees and Representatives of your
Country, we entreat you impartially to reflect what these things mean? Is it
not apparent that a Design is hatching, and a great Storm gathering; which,
when it breaks, may overwhelm you and your Posterities, if not prevented? Is it
possible for you to believe your Lives, Liberties, and Estates, safe in such
Circumstances? Did ever a wise Nation suffer Foreigners to become formidable in
their own Country? Look into the Records of Time, and see if there be one
single Instance in the whole World, where Strangers had gained Power and Force
enough, they did not make use of it to advance themselves, and ruin the
Natives? Was there no visible ground of Jealousy, the very Nature of the thing
would alarm your uttermost Caution: And you have besides that the Experience of
all Ages, to quicken your Councils in this Case. But when Men of separate
Councils, Measures, and Interests from yours, when they are armed with Power
and Number too; when there is apparently a bold Design actually sorm'd, and run
through the whole Party, in such a Case, the Danger is brought home to your own
Doors; and it is high time to awake out of Sleep, and to apply your utmost
Wisdoms to the providing a speedy and effectual Remedy.

5. We have but one thing more to trouble you with, though it may not seem
Grievous in the Nature of it, yet in the Consequence it may be a more dreadful
Miscarriage than any of the rest; and if you do not Remedy this, you can Remedy
none of the other; and that is, The Post-poning the Redress of Grievances, to
the giving Supplies. This is lodged in your own House, and you have hitherto
fatally labored under it; you your selves know, by the Experience of your
former Sessions, and all the Kingdom knows, that so soon as you have given our
Money, the Court has done with you; and our Grievances remain the same, or
grow greater, and you rise re infecta; you have done the Business of the Court
indeed, but not that of the Country; and so your great Trust is but half
executed, and the least half too. The Question therefore here is not concerning
the Nature of Things, or the Preference of one before the other, (though yet we
believe the Redressing our Grievances is every way as necessary to our Welfare
as, if not preferable to, the giving Supplies) but concerning the Order of
Time. We pray you let that be done first, which otherwise will not be done at
all. We are sure the Court will permit you to sit to give Money: And we are as
sure you will not sit to Redress our Evils, if you give that first. Money will
be welcome first, or last; but our Grievances must be remedied first, or never.
Let your Time therefore be suited to the Occasions. First examine the State of
the Nation; consider the Miscarriages at Sea, and Land; and apply effectual
remedies to the respective Miseries we groan under; and then we shall more
cheerfully part with our Money.

And thus we have presumed to lay before you some part of those manifold
Miscarriages our unhappy Nation has lately felt, and still feels the smart of;
and which we humbly conceive highly require your Consideration. We hope this
humble Address will not be unacceptable to you: And we are sure we have herein
done our duty to God, to your Selves, and to our Country. However, if our
humble Supplication will not deserve the Thanks of the House, we persuade our
selves the subject Matter of it will deserve your Care; which is the utmost Aim
of

Your humble Petitioners, THE COMMONS of ENGLAND.

FINIS.

