His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT On Friday the
28th of June, 1689.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of the
Parliament, Anno Dom. 1689.

His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe time of the Year being so far Advanced, and there being several Acts yet
to be Passed for the Safety and Settlement of the Nation, I desire you would
Expedite them as soon as you can, it being necessary there should shortly be a
Recess, both that I may be at Liberty to Pursue the Business of Ireland with
all possible Vigor, and that the Members of both Houses may repair to their
several Counties; to Secure the Peace, and to put the Militia into some better
Posture.

I am very sensible of the Zeal and good Affection which you, Gentlemen, of the
House of Commons have showed to the Public, in giving those Supplies you have
done already; And I do not doubt but from the same Inducements you will be
ready to give more as the Occasions Require, which I must let you know will be
sooner then perhaps you may Expect, because the necessary Expense of this Year
will much exceed the Sums you have provided for it. And that you may make the
truer Judgment in that Matter, I am very willing you should see how all the
Moneys have been hitherto laid out; And to that End I have Commanded those
Accounts to be speedily brought to you, by which you will see how very little
of the Revenue has been applied to any other Use then that of the Navy and Land
Forces.

I must Remind you of making an Effectual and Timely Provision of the Money for
the States of Holland; And I doubt not but you will take Care to see a fitting
Revenue Settled for My Self.

My Lords and Gentlemen.

FINIS.

