By the King, A PROCLAMATION, For Preventing and Punishing Immorality and
Profaneness.
WILLIAM R.
WHereas We cannot but be deeply Sensible of the great Goodness and Mercy of
Almighty God, in putting an End to a Long, Bloody and Expensive War, by the
Conclusion of an Honorable Peace, so We are not less touched with a
Resentment, that notwithstanding this and many other great Blessings and
Deliverances, Impiety, Profaneness and Immorality do still abound in this our
Kingdom: And whereas nothing can prove a greater Dishonor to a well ordered
Government, where the Christian Faith is professed, nor is likelier to provoke
God to withdraw His Mercy and Blessings from us, and instead thereof, to
inflict heavy and severe Judgments upon this Kingdom, than the open and avowed
Practice of Vice, Immorality and Profaneness, which amongst many Men has too
much prevailed in this Our Kingdom of late Years, to the high Displeasure of
Almighty God, the great Scandal of Christianity, and the ill and fatal Example
of the rest of Our Loving Subjects, who have been Soberly Educated, and whose
Inclimations would lead them to the Exercise of Piety and Virtue, did they not
daily find such frequent and repeated Instances of Dissolute Living,
Profaneness and Impiety, which has in a great Measure been occasioned by the
Neglect of the Magistrates not putting in Execution those good Laws which have
been made for Suppressing and Punishing thereof, and by the ill Example of many
in Authority, to the great Dishonor of God, and Reproach of Our Religion:
Wherefore, and for that We cannot expect Increase or Continuance of the
Blessings We and Our Subjects Enjoy, without Providing Remedies to prevent the
like evils for the future, We think Our Selves bound by the Duty We owe to God,
and the Care We have of the People committed to Our Charge, to proceed in
taking effectual Course, that Religion, Piety and Good Manners may, according
to Our hearty Desire, Flourish and Increase under Our Administration and
Government; and being thereunto moved by the Pious Address of the Commons in
Parliament Assembled, We have thought fit, by the Advice of Our Privy Council,
to Issue this Our Royal Proclamation, and do Declare Our Royal Purpose and
Resolution to Discountenance and Punish all manner of Vice, Immorality and
Profaneness in all Persons from the highest to the lowest Degree within this
Our Realm, and particularly in such who are Employed near Our Royal Person; and
that for the greater Encouragement of Religion and Morality, We will, upon all
occasions, Distinguish Men of Piety and Virtue by Marks of Our Royal Favor.
And We do expect that all Persons of Honor or in Place of Authority, will to
their utmost contribute to the Discountenancing Men of Dissolute and Debauched
Lives, that they being reduced to Shame and Contempt may be enforced the sooner
to Reform their ill Habits and Practices, that the Displeasure of Good Men
toward them may supply what the Laws (it may be) cannot wholly Prevent. And
for the more Effectual Reforming these Men, who are a Discredit to Our Kingdom,
Our further Pleasure is, and We do hereby strictly Charge and Command all Our
Judges, Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and all other Our Officers and
Ministers, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, and other Our Subjects, whom it may
Concern, to be very Vigilant and Strict in the Discovery and the Effectual
Prosecution and Punishment of all Persons who shall be Guilty of Excessive
Drinking, Blasphemy, Profane Swearing and Cursing, Lewdness, Profanation of
the Lords Day, or other Dissolute, Immoral or Disorderly Practices, as they
will answer it to Almighty God, and upon Pain of Our Highest Displeasure. And
for the more Effectual Proceedings herein, We do hereby Direct and Command Our
Judges of Assizes and Justices of Peace, to give strict Charges at the
respective Assizes and Sessions, for the due Prosecution and Punishment of all
Persons that shall presume to Offend in any the Kinds aforesaid, and also of
all Persons that, contrary to their Duty, shall be Remiss or Negligent in
Putting the said Laws in Execution, and that they do at their respective
Assizes and Quarter Sessions of the Peace, cause this Our Proclamation to be
publicly Read in Open Court immediately before the Charge is given. And We do
hereby further Charge and Command every Minister in his respective Parish or
Chapel, to Read or cause to be Read this Our Proclamation, at least Four times
in every Year, immediately after Divine Service, and to incite and stir up
their respective Auditories to the Practice of Piety and Virtue, and the
Avoiding of all Immorality and Profaneness. And to the end that all Vice and
Debauchery may be prevented, and Religion and Virtue Practiced by all Officers,
Private Soldiers, Mariners or others, who are Employed in Our Service, either
by Sea or Land, We do hereby strictly Charge and Command all Our Commanders and
Officers whatsoever, That they do take Care to Avoid all Profaneness,
Debauchery and other Immoralities, and that by the Piety and Virtue of their
own Lives and Conversations they do set good Examples to all such as are under
their Authority, and likewise to take Care and Inspect the Behavior and
Manners of all such as are under them, and to Punish all those who shall be
Guilty of any the Offenses aforesaid. And whereas several Wicked and Profane
Persons have presumed to Print and Publish several Pernicious Books and
Pamphlets, which contain in them Impious Doctrines against the Holy Trinity and
other Fundamental Articles of Our Faith, tending to the Subversion of the
Christian Religion, therefore for the Punishing the Authors and Publishers
thereof, and for the Preventing such Impious Books and Pamphlets being
Published or Printed for the future, We do hereby strictly Charge and Prohibit
all Persons that they do not presume to Write, Print or Publish any such
Pernicious Books or Pamphlets under the Pain of Incurring Our High Displeasure,
and of being Punished according to the utmost Severity of the Law. And We do
hereby strictly Charge and Require all Our Loving Subjects to Discover and
Apprehend such Person and Persons whom they shall know to be the Authors or
Publishers of any such Books or Pamphlets, and to bring them before some
Justice of Peace or Chief Magistrate, in order that they may be Proceeded
against according to Law.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the Four and twentieth Day of February, 1697.
In the Tenth Year of Our Reign. God save the King.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1697.


