His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT, On Tuesday
the Eleventh Day of February, 1700.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1700.

His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
OUR great Misfortune in the Loss of the Duke of Gloucester, has made it
absolutely Necessary, that there should be a further Provision for the
Succession to the Crown in the Protestant Line after Me and the Princess. The
Happiness of the Nation, and the Security of Our Religion, which is Our
chiefest Concern, seems so much to depend upon this, that I cannot Doubt but it
will meet with a general Concurrence, and I earnestly Recommend it to your
early and effectual Consideration.

The Death of the late King of Spain, with the Declaration of his Successor to
that Monarchy, has made so great an Alteration in the Affairs Abroad, That I
must desire you very maturely to Consider their present State; and I make no
Doubt but your Resolutions thereupon will be such, as shall be most conducing
to the Interest and Safety of England, the Preservation of the Protestant
Religion in general, and the Peace of all Europe.

These things are of such Weight, that I have thought them most proper for the
Consideration of a new Parliament, to have the more immediate Sense of the
Kingdom in so great a Conjuncture.

I must Desire of you, Gentlemen of the House of Commons, such Supplies as you
shall judge necessary for the Service of the Current Year, and I must
particularly put you in mind of the Deficiencies and Public Debts occasioned
by the late War, that are yet unprovided for.

I am obliged further to Recommend to you, That you would Inspect the Condition
of the Fleet, and Consider what Repairs or Augmentations may be requisite for
the Navy, which is the great Bulwark of the English Nation, and ought most
especially in this Conjuncture to be put in a good Condition; and that you
would also Consider what is proper for the better Security of those Places
where the Ships are laid up in Winter.

The Regulation and Improvement of Our Trade is of so Public Concern, that I
hope it will ever have your serious Thoughts; And if you can find proper Means
of setting the Poor at work, you will ease your selves of a very great Burden;
And at the same time add so many useful Hands to be employed in Our
Manufactures and other Public Occasions.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I hope there will be such an Agreement and Vigor in the Resolutions you shall
take upon the Important Matters now before you, as may make it appear We are
firmly United among Our Selves, and in My Opinion nothing can contribute more
to Our safety at Home, or to Our being considerable Abroad.

FINIS.

