His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS LETTER TO THE PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND.

TOGETHER WITH The Lord high Commissioner and Lord high Chancellors Speeches.

W R
HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE

royal English blazon or coat of arms

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno Dom. 1700.

His Majesty's most Gracious Letter to the Parliament of Scotland.
WILLIAM R.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe State of Our Affairs Abroad, requiring Our going beyond Seas, was the
Cause of Our Adjourning your Meeting till this time; When we ordered the last
Adjournment by Our Letter then published, We fully expressed Our good Intentions
toward that Our Ancient Kingdom, which We are now ready to make good in this
Session of Parliament.

We have considered the Address you made to Us in the Session of Parliament
School, in behalf of the African Company, representing the same as a National
Concern, and do assure you, that We are very willing to assent to what shall be
reasonably proposed for repairing the Losses, and Supporting and Promoting the
Interest of that COMPANY: And having ever reckoned the Ease and Prosperity of
Our good Subjects Our greatest Honor and Happiness; We are likewise most
willing to agree to all that can be demanded, for maintaining and advancing the
Peace and Welfare of the Kingdom.

And that you and all Our good Subjects may have full and satisfying Assurance
of this Our good Mind; We again Declare, That We are resolved to give Our Royal
Assent to all Acts that shall be offered for the better establishing the true
Protestant Religion, and the Presbyterian Government of the Church, which you
enjoy, for the more effectual preventing the grouth of Popery, for the
repressing of Vice and Immorality, and the Encouragement of Piety and Virtue,
for the preserving and securing of personal Liberty, for the regulating and
advanceing of Trade; And more especially for making up the Losses, and
promoting the Concerns of the African and Indian COMPANY, for the setting
forward and improving Manufactories, and generally, We are ready to give Our
Assent to all other Laws that shall be brought in for the farther clearing and
securing Property and Civil Rights, strengthening and facilitating the
Administration of Justice, restraining and punishing of Crimes, and the
preserving the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom, so that nothing shall be wanting
on Our part to make Our People both Happy and Contented.

It is truly Our Regrate, that We could not agree to the Asserting of the Right
of the COMPANIES Collony in Darien, and you may be very confident, if it had
not been for invincible Reasons, the pressing Desires of all Our Ministers,
with the Inclination of Our good Subjects therein concerned, had undoubtedly
prevailed, but since We were, and are fully satisfied, that Our yiedling in
that Matter, had infallibly disturbed the general Peace of Christendom, and
brought inevitably upon that Our Ancient Kingdom a heavy War, wherein We could
expect no Assistance; And that now the state of that Affair is quite altered,
We doubt not but you will rest satisfied with these plain Reasons.

We are heartily sorry for the COMPANIES Loss in what has happned, but We
being most willing that the COMPANIES Losses be repaired, and ready to concur
in any new Projects or Design that shall be reasonably proposed for the Good
and Advantage of the Kingdom, We are most confident, the Wisdom of the
Parliament will no longer Stop upon this Obstruction, Having then this happy
Opportunity for the promoving of the Good and Welfare of the Kingdom, you will
certainly lay hold upon it; And seeing you cannot but notice the Designs and
Practices of Persons disaffected both to Our Government and your Peace, and how
Watchful and Ready Our Enemies are, alse well at Home as Abroad, and desireous
of nothing more as that Differences may fall in amongst Us; We are persuaded
you will be no less careful to avoid them. All that We demand is, that you
would provide proper and competent Supplies for such Forces as shall be
necessary for the Kingdoms Security, and to maintain it in it is present happy
Settlement.

We have continued the Duke of Queensberry to be Our Commissioner for
representing Us in this Session of Parliament, as a Person of whose Ability and
Fidelity We have made full Proof, and are assured will be to you acceptable;
And therefore you are to give him full Credit: And We expect that in all things
you will proceed with that Wisdom, Calmness and Unanimity, as that this Session
may be concluded to Our mutual Satisfaction, and to the Joy of all Our good
Subjects: And so We bid you heartily Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Loo the 4th of October 1700. and of Our Reign the 12
Years By His Majesty's Command, Sic subscribitur, TO. PRINGLE.

THE SPEECH OF JAMES Duke of Queensberry, etc. His Majesty's high Commissioner
to the PARLIAMENT of SCOTLAND. On Tuesday the Twenty Ninth Day of October, 1700.
MY LORDS AND GENTLEMEN,
AT our last Meeting, I told you that I was instructed by His Majesty in every
thing that could appear necessary or convenient for the interest of this
Kingdom, and of solid use to the Indian and African Company.

You have ample assurances renewed to you since that time, that His Majesty
retracts nothing that was then designed for the welfare and satisfaction of His
People, as He has plainly expressed, in a Letter to His Privy Council, published
by His special Order, that all His Majesty's good Subjects might have the
advantage to understand, and leisure to reflect and consider on the present
state of Affairs, and that you might come together with a cheerful disposition,
to give His Majesty just and full Concurrance in what is laid before you.

I wish the Kingdom had sooner received the benefit of His Majesty's good
intentions, but you have it now in your power to repair that loss.

His Majesty's most gracious Letter which you have heard read, does clearly
confirm all that was formerly offered, or can be reasonably proposed to make
you happy

It is with regrate the King tells you that He cannot agree to assert the Right
of the Indian and African Company's Collony in Darien, He perfectly knows the
earnest desire of these concerned in it, and of many others of His good
Subjects, and does His Servants Justice in that matter.

His Majesty would certainly have granted what was so pressingly desired, had
he not known that his yielding that point must have disturbed the peace of
Europe, and engaged us is a War, in which he could expect no support.

The circumstances of that Affair are so much altered, that you cannot but be
convinced it is unnecessary at present to assert that Right; and the insisting
upon it may obstruct things of more value, both to the Nation, and Company.

It may be the endeavor of some in the Nation, who are disaffected to the
Government of the Church and State, to influence you to press the asserting the
Right of the Collony; and the more they see His Majesty straightened betwixt his
inclinations to satisfy the Company, and His care to preserve the Peace of
Christendom, the more they will urge you to it.

It must therefore be highly suitable to the Wisdom of this Parliament, to be a
war of such Artifices, and to apply themselves to disappoint any advantage our
Enemies at home or abroad may make of the least appearance of difference
amongst us.

For this reason I cannot doubt but you will unanimously proceed to these
things that are more valuable, and entirely in your power.

For His Majesty is willing to concur with you in maintaining and securing the
Protestant Religion, and Presbyterian Government of the Church; in putting a
stop to the grouth of Popery, repressing Vice and Immorality, in providing for
the liberty of your Persons by a clear and perpetual Law.

And His Majesty is also willing that you proceed to such Laws as may advance
the Trade and welfare of the Kingdom particularly the true interest of the
Indian and African Company, and Erect and Improve Manufactories, employ and
provide for the Poor, and clear and secure private Rights and Property,
strengthen and facilitat the Administration of Justice, restrain and punish
Crimes, and generally to do all that may secure the Peace, and promote the
Welfare of the Kingdom.

My instructions are full in relation to these matters; So His Majesty has done
every thing that can be desired on His part.

The King on the other hand demands nothing of you, but competent Supplies for
maintaining such Forces as are necessary for the Security of the Nation, in
which I assure my self of your ready compliance.

I know and do heartily regrate that the Nation is brought low by the Scarcity
which has continued for several years, and by other misfortunes. And I should
be as tender as any Man to have heavy Burdens laid upon it: But I think no good
Subject will grudge to contribute what is necessary to support the Government,
and secure our selves from the Insults and Rapine of ill Men, which cannot be
done without new Supplies.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
IT has pleased His Majesty to continue me in the great Honor and Trust of
representing His Royal Person. And I consider it as the highest mark of his
Favor and the happiest occasion of my Life to be employed by him, when so many
valuable Concessions are made for the good of the Kingdom, and by your Prudence
and Conduct, I am persuaded that this Session shall come to an happy issue.

FINIS.
The Speech of Patrick Earl of Marchmont, etc. Lord High Chancellor, to the
Parliament of SCOTLAND, On Tuesday 29. October 1700.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
NOW We see the Estates of this Kingdom again met in Parliament, so soon as the
Kings other weighty Affairs, and his absence from Britain could allow it;
whereby all may be satisfied that the Suspicions which have been vented, as if
their Meeting would be delayed and put off, were altogether groundless.

His Majesty in his Letter to you when you last met, told you of His firm
Resolution to make it the chief design of His Reign to do every thing that may
tend to the Advantage and Good of His Subjects, and the Commissioners Grace
acquainted you in that Meeting that he had full power and Instructions for
every thing that appeared necessary or convenient for the Good and Advantage of
the Nation, as to Religion, Property, Liberty, Trade, and particularly what
could be of most solid use to the African and Indian Company.

Since that time, His Majesty by a Letter to His Privy Council, published by
his Order, for the Satisfaction of His Good Subjects, has repeated the same
Assurances which were formerly given you, and has expressed his good Intentions
toward this Kingdom.

Now again His Majesty by His most Gracious Letter Read in your Audience, is
pleased fully and kindly to certify you, that he continues firm in the same
good Intentions, still reckoning the Ease and Prosperity of His good Subjects
to be His greatest Honor and Happiness.

These ample and full Assurances which His Majesty has in His Letter given you,
are so distinctly expressed in it, and in the Discourse the Commissioners Grace
has had to you, that it were superfluous to me to add much to what you have
heard. Only I must much take notice, and I wish that you may do so too, of the
large extent of His Majesty's good Intentions toward his Subjects of this
Kingdom.

His Majesty is resolved to give the Royal Assent to all Acts for the better
establishing the true Protestant Religion and the Presbyterian Government of
the Church which we Enjoy. For the more effectual preventing the grouth of
Popery, for the repressing of Vice and Immorality, and Encouragement of Piety
and Virtue, for the preserving and securing of personal Liberty, for the
Regulating and Advancing of Trade, for making up the Losses, and promoting the
Concerns of the African and Indian Company, and for the setting forward and
Improving of Manufactories.

By these seven Channels, His Majesty is disposed and ready to let out unto
this Nation a Stream of most valuable Advantages, which cannot miss (by the
Blessing of GOD) to make it happy.

Yet least these Heads might come short of importing the extent of His
Majesty's good meaning, He is pleased to add, that generally he is ready to
give the Royal Assent to all other Laws for the further clearing and securing
Property and Civil Rights, for strengthening and facilitating the Administration
of Justice, for restraining and punishing Crimes, and for settling the Peace and
Quiet of the Kingdom, so that nothing shall be wanting upon His Majesty's part
to make his people both Happy and Contented; What more can we reasonably Hope,
what more can we reasonably Wish.

Upon the other hand, all that His Majesty demands of us, is, that we will
provide proper and competent Supplies for such Forces as shall be necessary for
the Kingdoms Security, and to maintain it in its present happy Settlement.

And here I must say, what less can reasonably be demanded, what less can
reasonably be expected.

The many cross Providence which the African and Indian Company has met with
in the prosecution of its Designs, with the great Loss both of Men and
Treasure, which has been the event of the Companies attempt, for settling a
Colony in the Province of Darien, have much disturbed and perplexed the minds
of many, and it is too evident, that there are not wanting some who would raise
and foment Jealousies in well-meaning People of Our Sovereign the King, as if
he were not enough concerned to protect and assist this Nation in what relates
to its Trade.

I would entreat you to take heed how you harbor so bad a guest as Jealousy
is, it is apt to darken the Understanding, and to disturb the motion of the
Mind, it will create Fear where no Fear is, and no ground for it, I pray you
beware of it.

This is undeniable, that the Scots Nation never had a King, whom it had better
reason to trust and confide in, never had a Parliament which it had better
reason to trust and confide in; Seeing it is so, we have all the reason in the
World to do what is possible to us for maintaining a good Understanding betwixt
this King and this Parliament, even as we wish the Prosperity and Peace of this
Kingdom.

There is one thing which has made a difference of Opinion amongst us, some
would have an Act asserting the Right of the Company to the Colony, which it
planted upon Darien. In this matter the King has been much straightened, and has
declared to you with regrate, that he cannot agree to the asserting a Right to
that Colony, and that for invincible reasons, which His Majesty is pleased to
communicate to you.

That it would infallibly disturb the general Peace of Christendom, and bring
inevitably upon this Kingdom a heavy War, wherein we could expect no
assistance. This is very evident, for the power of the Spanish Monarchy, and of
those concerned in the Support of it, would be united against us, and we in all
appearance left to our own strength, without expectation of any Assistants.

Besides we are to consider, that the Company has not now the Colony in
Possession to support and maintain, but to recover by force of Arms, and we
have good Reason, this Kingdom having so lately come off from a great and long
War, to take notice in what Condition and Preparation the Nation is to engage
in a new one, and what Assistance we may expect.

These plain Reasons, I do not doubt, will satisfy all these who are
satisfiable, and not too indifferent of keeping up a mutual Trust and
Confidence betwixt His Majesty and his People and Parliament.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
As you have great Assurances and Kind offers from your Sovereign at this time,
whereby this Nation may be made very happy, its most important Interests further
secured, its Peace preserved, and its Trade advanced. Let not the humor or
jealousy of any who have access to the doing Business in this Juncture, hinder
or obstruct so great a Blessing as we have in prospect.

But seeing our King is so ready to concur with us, let us not be backward or
slow to concur with Him for the good of our Nation, that the people now living,
and the posterity which shall come after us, may have this Session of Parliament
in Veneration, and for a Pattern worthy to be regarded, and fit to be imitated.

FINIS.

